 
 SUMMER SHOWERS
IN
BRINDAVAN
2000
 
Discourses of
Bhagavan Sri Sathya Sai Baba
SRI SATHYA SAI BOOKS & PUBLICATIONS TRUST
Prasanthi Nilayam, Anantapur District
Andhra Pradesh - 515 134.
Phone: 87375/87236 STD: 08555 ISD 0091-8555
Fax: 87236 Grams BOOK TRUSTPrasanthi NilayamInternational Standard Book No. 81-7208-285-1
             81-7208-113-8 (set)© Sri Sathya Sai Books and Publications Trust, Prasanthi Nilayam                      
P.O.,  515 134,  Anantapur  District,  (A.P.)  India.
All Rights Reserved.
The copyright and the rights of translation in any language are reserved by 
the publishers.  No part, para, passage, text or photographs or art work of this 
book should be reproduced, transmitted or utilised, in original language or by 
translation, in any form, or by any means electronic, mechanical, photocopying, 
recording or by any information, storage and retrieval system, except with the 
express and prior permission, in writing from the Convener, Sri Sathya Sai 
Books and Publications Trust, Prasanthi Nilayam (Andhra Pradesh), India - 
Pin Code 515 134 except for brief passages quoted in book review.  This book 
can be exported from India only by the Publishers - Sri Sathya Sai Books and 
Publications Trust, Prasanthi Nilayam.
First Edition:
Price: Rupees 42/-
Published by:
The Convener, Sri Sathya Sai Books and Publications Trust,
Prasanthi Nilayam, India - Pin Code 515 134
Grams: BOOKTRUST 
STD: 08555 ISD: 0091-8555
Telephones: 87375, 87236
Fax: 87236-87390
Printed at: foreword
The Summer Course is an event eagerly looked forward to by the 
students of the Sri Sathya Sai Institute of Higher Learning and 
Bhagavan’s devotees alike. The Institute was fortunate to have 
been blessed by Bhagavan to organise the course at the beginning 
of this academic year. It looked as if it was heralding the 75th 
year of the Advent and highlighting the major theme of the year 
— spiritual unfoldment of the Sai Mission. The Summer Course 
centred on Indian culture and spirituality.  
	 Bhagavan,	in	his	infinite	compassion,	delivered	as	many	
as	fifteen	discourses	which	formed	the	bulk	of		teaching	material	
for this course. The subjects were dealt with in great depth and 
related to the pancha bhuthas , pancha kosas , sacredness of the 
human body, the concept of dharma , preyas , and sreyas , the 
states of bliss, the need for disciplined life on the part of the 
students, and, most importantly, the need to place the interests 
of the motherland above everything else and serve the society 
in	a	selfless	manner.	Studded	with	powerful	anecdotes	drawn	
from Indian mythology and cultural history and reinforced by 
profound spiritual truths expressed in the most lucid and elegant 
language, they had a remarkable impact. Understandably, the 
Vision of the Revered Chancellor of the Institute – true education 
meant	to	impart	self	awareness,	self	confidence,	self	satisfaction,	
self	sacrifice	and	self	realisation	–	came	to	be	grasped	far	better	
by everyone, more particularly the students of the Institute. The grama seva  undertaken soon after Dasara was a practical 
demonstration of these Vedantic truths in action.
Conventionally, the divine discourses get translated into 
English	for	the	benefit	of	the	devotees	all	over	the	globe.		The	
English rendering of the discourses this year is marked by 
clarity and elegance.  The exercise is entirely the labour of love 
and devotion of Prof. G. Venkataraman, my predecessor Vice 
Chancellor of the Sri Sathya Sai Institute of Higher Learning.  
The spiritual insights that the English rendering provide are too 
many to be listed here.  A turn of the phrase here, a syntax there or 
transposition of an idea at an appropriate place have all made an 
enormous	difference	to	our	understanding	of	the	torrential	flow	
of Bhagavan’s discourses.  The Institute is profoundly grateful 
to him. 
 It is our earnest hope that this compilation will be of 
lasting	benefit	to	all	seekers	of	Truth,	young	and	old.  
S.V . Giri
Vice-Chancellor
Sri Sathya Sai Institute of
Higher LearningPrasanthi Nilayam (A.P.)
August, 2001contents
01.	 Seek	educare	instead	of	just	education		1		
02.	 The	sanctity	of	the	five	elements	 ..	 21
03.	 The	Trinity	within	..	 43
04.	 The	human	body	and	its	importance	..	 59
05.	 Subtle	is	the	Lord	..	 77
06.	 The	exalted	nature	of	devotion	 ..	 95	
07.	 God	is	the	only	true	friend	 ..	 115
08.	 Buddha’s	message	..	 133
09.	Preyas 	and	 sreyas 	-	What	we	seek	
	 and	what	we	ought	to	seek	 ..	 153
10.	 God	is	pure	Bliss		..	 	175
11.	 How	to	become	dear	to	the	Lord	 ..		 		201
12.	 Kshama ,	the	grandest	and	
	 noblest	virtue	..		 		221
13.	 Always	chant	the	name	of	the	Lord	 ..		 	24114.	 My	life	is	My	Message		..	 	265
15.	 The	ideal	student	..		 	 	2951. SEEK EDUCARE INSTEAD OF JUST 
EDUCATION
Vidya nama narasya rupamadhikam pracchannaguptam 
dhanam
Vidya bhogakari yasah sukhakari
Vidya bandhujano videsa gamane, vidya gurunam guruh
Vidya rajasu pujyate na hi dhanm,, vidya vihinah pasuh.
True education is grand,
A rare beauty,
A hidden Treasure,
And an unfailing companion.
It is the supreme teacher
And that which commands real respect. 
Fool is he that spurns such knowledge. 
Students, Boys and Girls, Teachers, and Patrons of 
Education!
To begin with, students must appreciate the greatness and the 
grandeur of True Education. Such education alone is real beauty, 
a hidden treasure of mankind, and an unfailing companion when 
one travels overseas. It is also the Teacher of all teachers. In the 
Court of Kings, it is knowledge and not wealth that commands respect. He is a pitiable fool, who does not aspire for such Eternal 
Knowledge. 
Embodiments of Love! You have no idea of the anguish your 
parents feel if you are backward in your studies. In the same way, 
Bharat Mata, the mother of this land, will feel very sad if you do 
not make progress in the fields of morality and spirituality. 
Janani janmabhumisca svargadapi gariyasi.
One’s mother and motherland are greater than the very Heavens. 
Students must firmly resolve to spare the motherland of Bharat 
from the pain and the agony caused by spiritual backwardness. 
Students of today are not making any efforts to understand the 
sanctity of education. What precisely is the type of education 
that students must acquire? What is it that contributes to true 
progress and the real prosperity of mankind? What is it that one 
expects from educational establishments? It is the foremost duty 
of students to enquire into all such questions and share their 
findings with others. 
Mere bookish learning and the acquisition of information cannot 
by themselves earn for you respect and esteem in society. For 
that, culture and the associated refinement are also needed. 
Routine scholarship is negative, whereas culture is positive; both 
are required. Whereas bookish knowledge equips you with facts, 
culture refines and transforms your inner being (for the better). 
Education bereft of culture is like a field without water, a wire without current, a house without a lamp, and a temple without a 
deity. Pursuit of such education makes youth totally rudderless. 
In the past, several committees were appointed to suggest various 
reforms in our educational system. However, the recommenda-
tions of these committees were not implemented. Under the 
circumstances, youth must follow the examples set by noble  
elders. After deep enquiry, rishis  of yore discovered sacred Truths, 
abided by them and derived Bliss therefrom, which they then 
shared with others. Students must emulate the glorious example 
of our ancients and not be content with learning by rote; mere 
bookish knowledge is of little value.
What is Educare*?
The word Education, especially as used today, is related to 
bookish knowledge. It is derived from the root word Educare. 
What is Educare? It is that type of learning that brings out the 
purity latent in the Heart, confers Bliss, and allows one to spread 
joy and happiness among others. Education is associated with 
knowledge pertaining to the ephemeral world, and can at best lead 
only to worldly pleasure that is invariably transient. Educare, on 
the other hand, confers inward Bliss, which is eternal in nature. 
* According to Oxford Dictionary, the word ‘educate’ has its origin from the Latin word ‘educare’ 
which is related to ‘educere’ or ‘educe’ meaning: bring out or develop from latent or potential 
existence.  Bhagavan desires that the process of education must bring out the human values 
latent in every individual.  He calls this act of transformation ‘educare’. Hence what is needed is 
‘educare’ and not education, He elucidates.The (spiritual) Heart is the fountainhead of all Bliss. All the 
powers and the potentialities present in the external world are 
already present in your heart. Unaware of the immense power 
within, man today is preoccupied with exploring the outer world. 
However, all that is seen in the external world is merely a reflection 
of the Inner Being. Therefore, man must direct his vision inward, 
experience the unbounded joy within, and then radiate that joy 
to the outer world. Instead, man is frittering away his time in 
acquiring worldly knowledge, and in exploring the outer world. 
Secular knowledge is no doubt necessary, but its acquisition must 
have a fundamental (spiritual) basis. Investigations and enquiries 
lacking a fundamental outlook are totally meaningless. 
Here is a silver tumbler. Besidesthis, there are other objects here 
like the spoon, the plate etc., also made of silver. The metal silver 
has been used to make all these objects. Silver can be used to make 
other objects as well. Further, one can convert a silver plate into a 
silver tumbler and so forth. In this example, silver is fundamental 
and the objects made of it are secondary. Likewise, there is a 
Fundamental Knowledge, which is the fountainhead of all other 
forms of knowledge. Called Atma Vidya , this Fundamental 
Knowledge is latent in the Heart. It is the Knowledge of the Self. 
Our ancients said,
Vidyanam  jnanasaktih.
meaning that Atma Vidya  is synonymous with power. Acquiring 
Atma Vidya  confers the power of wisdom. You must try to 
comprehend the tremendous power that lies behind the Knowledge of the Self and not waste your life by merely hankering after 
worldly knowledge all the time. 
The Real Purpose of Education
There are crores of highly educated people in this country. But 
what is it they have contributed to the world and to human 
welfare? In what way are they helping the community? In no 
way at all! Instead, they are totally preoccupied with the pursuit 
of their own selfish interests; no one works for the benefit of the 
comm unity. This should not be; you should work for the welfare 
of Society.  You should be guided by three cardinal principles:
Sarve loka hite ratsh
Sarve samudita gunaih.
Sarve jnana sampannah..
All must enjoy prosperity. All virtues must be cultivated. All 
Knowledge must be acquired. 
Your first objective must be to work for the welfare of society. 
Next, you must try to make others happy. Last comes the 
acquisition of the wealth of spiritual wisdom. Therefore, first and 
foremost, you must strive relentlessly for the progress of society. 
You must work hard and incessantly to promote the welfare of 
the community. You are a part of society, and your individual 
welfare is intimately tied up with the welfare of society as a 
whole.  Hence, you must study not for m aking money but for 
the sake of serving society. Unfortunately, these days education has been reduced to business, greedy business in fact. What you 
have received from society must be returned back to society, 
and in greater measure. You are able to study because of the 
infrastructure provided by society. Having been benefited thus, 
is  it proper to forget what you have received and focus only on 
making money? To do so would be immoral, indecent, and totally 
against man’s basic nature. As the Vedas  emphatically declare, 
sacrifice is man’s principal characteristic:
Na karmana na prajaya dhanena tyaganaike amrtatva-
manasuh.
Neither action, nor progeny, nor wealth, but sacrifice alone can 
lead to immortality. The Vedas further assert:
Sahasrasirsa Purusah.
God pervades the universe in diverse forms, providing thereby 
an undercurrent of unity to apparent diversity of the phenomenal 
world. 
Eko’ ham bahusyam.
There is only One, but the deluded mind perceives it as many. In 
other words, the apparent plurality of creation is really an aspect 
of unity. The Vedas also say:
Saha Na-vavatu. Saha nau bhunaktu. Saha viryam karavavahai.
It means that we must live together, work collectively and in  
unison, be in harmony with each other, have understanding for  each other, and thus attain illumination. These declarations are 
the corner stones of Bharatiya (Indian) culture. You must absorb 
the lessons they convey, follow the dicta, experience the Truth 
they imply, and share that experience with others. 
See God in all, and the Universe as one Family
Students! While studying, you should set aside all thoughts of 
jobs and income. What is so great about income? Even a beggar 
is able to get money. Do you think that making money is a great 
achievement? 
Money has become God,
Pomp has become a creed,
Selfishness has become a fashion,
While righteousness has declined.
Money power has become mighty.
Selfishness has become a fashion, and everyone is after it. 
Students! Give up selfishness; instead, foster unity, develop Love, 
and go through life with a spirit of sacrifice. Your life would then 
be on an even keel, and you would automatically enjoy happiness. 
Do not make creature comforts the goal of your life. What is so 
great about these comforts that everyone is craving for? They are 
all transient—today’s comfort becomes tomorrow’s discomfort. 
Food appears very tasty when you are hungry but once hunger 
is satiated, you no longer feel like eating that very same food. 
Ask yourself what is it that is responsible for desire, craving, 
frustration, and failure? Mana eva manusyanam karanam bandha moksayoh.
All feelings spring from the mind, which alone is responsible 
both for bondage as well as liberation. In fact, the mind is the 
cause for everything. Where exactly is this mind? You think it is 
within you. No! 
Mano mulam idam jagat.
The mind  pervades the whole world, encompassing you also. 
There are many bulbs here, and every one of them gives light. 
The bulbs may be different but the same current flows through 
them all. The individual bodies are like the various bulbs, and the 
Atma  is like the current and is all-pervasive.  It is present in all.
The Governor (Smt. Rama Devi, the chief guest on the occasion) 
said earlier that God resides in all. 
Ìsavasyam idam jagat.
Isvarassarvabhutanam.
God is present in all beings, but are you experiencing this all-
pervasive divinity? Swami has told you on many occasions:
Deho Devalayah prokto, Jivo Devah sanatanah.
The body is the temple, and God is the Indweller. If this body 
is a temple, so is that body and every other body. All bodies are temples, and the same God resides in every one of them. 
Therefore, does it make any sense to say that you like so and so 
and do not like so and so? The same God is present in all. Hence, 
regard the entire universe as one big family and love all without 
exception. If you hate anyone, it amounts to hating your own self. 
So, hurt never and help ever. There is no God beyond Love. God 
is Love and Love is God; live in Love. 
Love alone is important and not Degrees
Students! Do not give room for undesirable traits like hatred, 
jealousy, and anger. Instead, assiduously cultivate the feeling of 
Love in su ch a manner that you radiate its effulgence all around 
you. 
Start the day with Love!
Fill the day with Love!
Spend the day with Love!
End the day with Love!
This is the way to God!
You must develop this Love Principle. Education must transform 
you into an embodiment of compassion. What is the use of 
education if it does not foster compassion? Once, Gandhi was 
feeling very depressed. When an Englishman asked about the 
reason for his gloom, Gandhi replied, “I am disturbed by the fact 
that education today is making people hard-hearted.” That is the 
problem; instead of breeding compassion, education these days is 
making people stonehearted. True education must touch the heart, 0release a torrent of selfless love, make a person compassionate, 
and foster divine feelings. Such education alone is the need of 
the hour. 
People are proud about their educational attainments, but degrees 
are not that important.
Do the skills of reading and writing alone make one educated?
Do mere degrees confer education?
How does one become learned without goodness and wisdom?
If making a living is the hallmark of education,
Then what about the birds and the beasts?
Wha t degrees have the birds and the beasts received? Nothing! 
Education must not be for making a living but for guiding your 
life along the right path. However, people these days think of edu-
cation as a passport to jobs and comfort. This is a colossal mis-
take. The unholy connection between learning and employment 
must be totally eliminated. Everyone is clamouring for work. 
Work, work, work! Does anyone understand the real meaning of 
the word work? All activity including household chores can be 
described as work. Therefore do not think of employment alone 
as work that you have to do.  Hold a job by all means, but at 
the same time, do not forget to serve your parents and society.  
Remember, your welfare is intimately tied to that of society. 
Hence, do not think you are studying merely to get a good job; 
you must study so that you may discharge various responsibilities 
in an effective manner. True education is that which helps you 
to transform all work into worship. Duty is God. You may be engaged in any activity but you can transform it into worship by 
regarding that work as action performed for the pleasure of God 
and as an offering to God. 
Love and serve your Motherland
These days, students rush to the passport office even before they 
have their degree on hand! They are all so crazy about going 
abroad. Going abroad has become the fashion of the day. What is 
it that you find abroad that you cannot find here? 
Yanna Bharate tanna Bharata.
What cannot be found in India cannot be found anywhere else 
in the world. People have become blind to the glory and the 
sanctity of Bharat. This country Bharat is  tyaga bhumi (land of 
sacrifice), yoga bhumi (land of yoga ), and karma bhumi  (land of 
sacred action). But today, people are trying to convert this sacred 
land into a bhoga bhumi (land of trivial pleasure). Bhoga  is not 
pleasure as people imagine but roga or disease! Therefore, do not 
get swept by this craze to go abroad. Instead, stay back and serve 
as well as protect your country. 
This is my motherland,
This is my mother tongue,
This is my religion;
Is there a man without a soul to fail to proclaim thus? 
There is no country greater than your Motherland Bharat. What a 
sacred land it is! There was a time when  India was a beacon to the whole world. It was foremost in all spheres of human activity 
– political, ethical, moral, and spiritual. How can you think of 
abandoning a country with such a glorious heritage? If you do 
not have love for the land of your birth, how do you think you 
are going to love the land you wish to migrate to? This being the 
land of your birth, you must love it, serve it, and strive hard to 
improve it. This is the way you must find fulfilment in life. 
Cultivate Proper Discrimination
Students! Secular education is no doubt necessary; but along 
with that, you must also imbibe spiritual learning. A community 
or society bereft of moral and spiritual values will never have 
peace. Secular and spiritual learning are complimentary; one is 
negative and the other is positive. But, unfortunately, students of 
today are quite content with just the negative part alone. This is 
not good; if you neglect spiritual learning, you will be like a kite 
that has snapped; no one can say where the kite will fall. Hence, 
you must approach education in a balanced manner and with a 
total perspective. 
Students! You are all good. Youth is a sacred period of life, and 
all of you are filled with sacred feelings. But before you do 
anything, pause, take time, think, and reflect on what you are 
about to do. Never be in a hurry. Remember, haste makes waste. 
Avoid impulsive actions; instead, pause and ponder. Whenever a 
thought arises in you to do something, take time and ask yourself: 
“Is it good or is it bad?” It is very important to exercise your 
discrimination properly. It is fundamental discrimination that you 
should apply, not individual discrimination. Your action should benefit oth ers —that is what fundamental discrimination is all 
about. Avoid haste, be patient, decide carefully on the basis of 
fundamental discrimination, and then only act. 
The ‘I’ Principle
The governor gave you a lot of sound and good advice, based 
on her rich and varied experience. Among other things, she 
referred to self-confidence. You must all have self-confidence. 
Self-confidence will lead to self-sacrifice, which in turn will 
lead to self-satisfaction. Capping it all will be self-realisation. 
Self-confidence is the foundation, self-sacrifice is the wall, self-
satisfaction is the roof, and self-realisation is the living being in 
the room. Is it possible to have a room with just walls and a roof 
alone, and without any foundation? Not possible. Therefore, you 
must first build up Self-confidence.
Now what is this Self in the word self-confidence? The Self denotes 
God [Swami often uses the word Atma Viswasam to denote Self-
confidence]. Self also means I. I, I, I —everyone uses the word ‘I’ 
while introducing oneself. Vedanta  gives a clear explanation of 
what precisely this ‘I’ means. Vedanta  says, “Know thyself first”. 
There is not much point in knowing about other things without 
first knowing something about one’s own self. People say: “This 
is my body, this is my mind, this is my hand, this is my leg, my 
eye, ” and so on. When you say “my”, it clearly implies that you 
are distinct and separate from the object referred to. This brings 
one to the fundamental question of Vedanta : “Who am I?” You 
say, “My hand”; who is it that is associated with the word “m y”? You must appreciate the difference here; when I say, “This is My 
kerchief,” it means that the kerchief is separate from Me.  “This 
is my tumbler,” —it means that the tumbler is separate from Me. 
In the same way, when you say, “My body,” it means that you are 
not the body but distinct from it. Then who exactly is the “Me”? 
If in this manner you investigate in depth, you will ultimately 
realise the answer to the question, “Who am I”? 
Let us say you address the following question to the audience: 
“Who is Ramayya?” One person will get up and say, “I”. Similarly, 
if you were to ask, “Who is Venkayya?”, “Who is Lakshmam-
ma?”, etc., the concerned person would rise and say, “I”. Every-
one says “I”. The names are different and the people also vary 
but everyone says “I”. The answer “I” is common and therefore 
fundamental. Therefore, if you know the answer to the question, 
“Who am I?” you will know about all others as well and in fact 
about the whole world. This is because everything is contained 
within the “I-Principle”. This is the essence of advaitam , the 
philosophy of non-dualism. The scriptures declare:
Ekam sat viprah bahudha vadanti.
Truth is only One but scholars refer to it with varied names. 
Education must ennoble the Mind
Who is a man? One endowed with a mind is a man. A person 
without the thinking faculty can never feel kind or compassionate. 
He alone is  a true human being who impulsively assists those who are in distress and cry for help, and who is eager to wipe the 
tears of others. Therefore, you must always endeavour to help 
and give relief to those who are suffering. 
Students! All of you are eager to study and acquire advanced 
degrees. Irrespective of the formal qualifications that you may 
acquire, never forget your motherland and its glorious culture. 
Bharatiya culture is based on the noble and exalted principle of 
seeking Unity in diversity; it has no room for fragmentation or 
divisive tendencies. No matter what walk of life you enter, make 
sure that your education benefits others. The knowledge you have 
acquired must be offered in servic e to the world at large. 
Thes e days, engineering and medical education have become 
roaring business. To secure a seat in a medical college, one has 
to shell out a hefty capitation fee of twenty lakh rupees. What  
do you get by spending twenty lakhs and earning a degree? It is 
far better to invest that amount in a fixed deposit and live com-
fortably on the interest accrued! If one spends a huge amount 
to get a medical degree, then all the subsequent attention would 
be on recovering the investment by any means, fair or foul. 
Exorbitant fees are the main reason for the deterioration of values 
in education. 
One should not spend huge amounts in search of degrees. It 
does not matter if one does not secure admission to the course 
one wants to study. Students in the villages when asked, “What 
are you doing?” reply, “ Nenu chaduvukontunnanu ,” (I am pur-
chasing education) instead of saying, as they ought to, “ Nenu chaduvukuntunnanu ” (I am studying). These days, even primary 
school education has become very expensive and one has to 
deposit twenty thousand rupees in advance. Education is sold 
for money at all levels, from the KG (Kindergarten) to the PG 
(postgraduate), and indeed even to the Ph.D. level. How can one 
expect people who have thus bought learning at enormous price 
to ever think of using their learning for the benefit of society? 
Such people invariably argue that having spent huge sums of 
money and having placed heavy financial burden on their parents, 
they perforce have to make all the money they can to recoup the  
original investment on education. It is  neither necessary to spend 
like this in the first place nor to indulge in undesirable practices 
later, using the excuse of recovering the money spent. No matter 
how limited your education, can you not feed yourself? God 
has given you one stomach but two hands. Can ot one stomach 
be filled by w orking with two hands? Is human birth necessary 
for filling the stomach? Do not the birds and the beasts get their 
food without the benefit of education? Make not the stomach an 
excuse for seeking education! You must study so that your mind 
becomes sacred and your thoughts become noble.
Realisation must be the Goal of Life.
All this is just the beginning, and there are fifteen more days in 
this summer course! Many scholars will be addressing you and 
sharing their experiences, just as the Governor did this morning. 
Experience is what you must learn from; you must digest them 
and put the lessons learnt into practice. You must be careful and 
exercise discretion as well as proper discrimination before doing anything; otherwise, vidya (education) runs the risk of becoming 
avidya (ignorance). 
Modern education is highly artificial. What you need is not this 
type of education but educare. The latter is what addresses the 
heart whereas education [as presently imparted] pertains solely 
to the head. From the heart alone spring human values that are 
everlasting — compassion, forbearance, tolerance, truth, sacr i -
fice; all these flow only from the heart. Modern education deals 
almost exclusively with worldly matters and entities, and its 
content and nature both change with the passage of time. But the 
values associated with the Heart are eternal. 
The heart is referred to as hrudaya (hrud + daya = hrudaya), 
meaning that the heart is the seat of daya  or compassion. The 
head, on  the other hand, can be the source of conflict and 
confusion.  Real education is that which fosters virtue, morality, 
truth, compassion, discipline, and duty. It is not enough to be 
merely intelligent. You may be very clever but so is the fox! Has 
the fox received any education? So, just becoming clever is not 
the purpose of education. What education must confer is wisdom 
that flows from the heart and not just knack or cunningness. Let 
your heart alone be your guide, especially while dealing with 
others, no matter where or when. 
You all know very well about the system of education adopted in 
our Institute. Education in Swami’s institutions is totally free, all 
the way from KG to PG and even beyond. What is expe cted of 
you in return? Simply this: When you go out into the wide world, conduct yourself as an ideal citizen. Share with others freely 
and with joy, whatever you have learnt here. Having acquired 
learning here free of cost, it would be improper for you to later 
cash on it and market it. Such an act would be most unethical and 
not expected of you. Do not stray into such improper paths. Share 
what you have with love, not just occasionally but all the time. It 
is only when you do so that you can claim to have received real 
education. 
Do not become a mere bookworm and remain immersed in studies 
all the time. When you return to the hostel from the college, 
relax for a while, play some games or sing. Also, set apart some 
time for service. But be balanced; you should neither study all 
the time, nor play all the time. And, after your studies are over, 
don’t pack your books and set them aside or throw them away! 
Preserve them and continue to derive benefit from them. In short, 
maintain balance. 
Swami has on an earlier occasion drawn your attention to the 
example of Napoleon, a perfect model of strict discipline. 
Napoleon had complete mastery over both hunger and sleep. 
You too should be like that. Do not slide into lazy habits, the 
moment you leave the Institute. Laziness must be avoided at all 
cost. Laziness is rust and dust while Realisation is best and rest! 
Realisation must be your goal in life, and laziness can make that 
goal elusive. 
Excessive talking must also be avoided. Too much talk diminishes 
memory and dulls intelligence. Therefore, do not talk much. Others may try to drag you into pointless conversation but deftly 
dodge them. You cannot always oblige but you can always speak 
obligingly! Talk only when you must, speak sweetly when you 
do, be ever courteous, and never fail to respect your parents. It 
is only when you conduct yourself in this manner and base your 
actions on love that you can truly be called an educated person.
Embodiments of Love! In the days to come, Swami will tell 
you many more things. You must listen carefully and absorb the 
lessons taught. Later, you must recall and reflect on the teachings 
imparted. Just as the cow after first grazing withdraws to a quiet 
spot and then chews the cud, you too, once you are back in your 
room, must ruminate over what you have heard. What you take 
in with your ears is education; but it is only when you absorb and 
put into practice what you have heard that education transforms 
into educare. Therefore, education here and educare in your 
room! Only when you digest the lessons and practise them can 
you enjoy  pushti (health) and santhushti (happiness). 
At the end of the divine discourse, the National Anthem was sung 
as per Bhagavan’s command. 
Inaugural Discourse, Morning of  May 000.0
2. THE SANCTITY OF THE FIVE 
ELEMENTS
Present in the smallest of the small,
As also in the largest of the large,
And, shining as the all-pervading Witness,
Is the Immortal Self.
Known as the Atma in the individual,
And as Brahman in the Cosmos,
Atma is Brahman and Brahman is Atma.
Embodiments of Love!
The five elements of which the entire cosmos is built up, are 
present also in the human being. These five elements, namely, 
pruthvi (earth),  jala (water), agni (fire), vayu (wind), and akasa  
(ether) are cognised by us through the sensations of sabda (sound),  
sparsha  (touch), rupa (sight or the perception of the form), rasa  
(taste) and gandha (smell). Krishna addressed Arjuna as Partha 
since the latter was the very son of Mother Earth. Indeed, every 
man can be called Partha, being the son of Mother Earth. The nature of the Elements
The first element earth, can be cognised by all the five sensations 
of sound, touch, etc. Every one of the five elements of which 
Nature is constituted, is very powerful. Thus, the earth has the 
capacity to move very fast in space [around the Sun] and also to 
rotate rapidly about an axis. It has various qualities and attributes. 
On its surface, the earth supports numerous objects and entities 
like mountains, forests, cities, villages, oceans, rivers, and so on. 
Ignorant people wonder: “When the earth rotates, why do not these 
objects slide and move?” The answer to this apparent paradox 
lies in the fact that the earth is not independent but subservient 
to the latent divine power within. Mountains, cities, forests, and 
all the rest of them are held firm and secure by that unseen power 
and not allowed to slide, not withstanding the rapid rotation of 
the earth. Trains speed on railway tracks. Imagine the fate of 
passengers in the train if the tracks also were to move fast like t he 
train! The tracks do not move because they have been secured. 
All the objects on the surface of the earth, from mountains to the 
oceans, are firmly anchored by the unseen force of gravity. This 
gravity is the result of the will of God. The earth thus provides a 
good example of the subtle aspects of the Master Plan of God. 
Since the earth is suffused with divine power, it is nothing but 
an anga or limb, of God. In our body, we have many limbs and 
organs like the hands, the feet, the nose, the eyes, the ears, etc. 
Likewise, every individual is a limb of society or community. The 
different communities are all various limbs of mankind, which is 
a limb of nature or creation, which in turn is a limb of God. That is why it is often said that God pervades the entire universe in a 
subtle form. 
The earth is very big but God who is infinite and the subtlest of 
all, suffuses the entire earth with His divine power. Since the earth 
has gunas (attributes), it is not independent. As long as gunas 
exist, one cannot talk of independence. As the attributes diminish 
one by one, the subtlety of the entity concerned and its vastness 
increase. Earth has all the qualities of sound, touch, form, taste 
and smell. It is therefore finite. Moreover, the attributes together 
produce a binding effect that makes mobility difficult (one cannot 
move mountains, for example). 
Water is the next among the five elements. It is present everywhere 
on earth, though its presence (especially as vapour or moisture) 
is not always visible or directly evident. Compared to the earth, 
water lacks smell; it therefore has one attribute less, making it 
both light and mobile — water can flow easily. 
The third element is fire. It has two attributes less compared to 
the earth (taste and smell) and is therefore capable of spreading 
in all directions, including the vertical. Fire in a subtle aspect, is 
present in humans and even in water. In humans it is known as 
Jataragni  – this is the name for the ‘fire’ of digestion.  In water 
it is known as badabagni . Fire is latent in wood and stones also, 
which is why sparks are produced when wood is rubbed against 
wood and stone is struck with stone. 
Air ,the fourth element, has only two attributes, sound and touch. 
Air is present everywhere, and is most essential for life. Last in the list of elements is akasa  or ether, which is truly all-
pervasive; it extends far beyond the earth. It has this capacity 
to spread everywhere because it possesses only one attribute, 
namely that of sound. Many think that akasa  means the sky; this 
is wrong. Akasa  means ether, and it is present even here (Swami 
taps the table before Him) and also here (shows the mike). Sound 
is the sole characteristic of akasa , and wherever there is sound 
there akasa  exists. It is said:
Akasam gaganam sunyam.
It means that akasa  is the emptiness of space. Though present 
everywhere, it cannot be seen. 
Reverence for God and Nature
Far beyond all the five elements and completely devoid of any 
attributes whatsoever, is Paramatma  (God Almighty). Being 
totally attributeless, Paramatma  is more subtle than anything 
we can imagine; and He exists beyond space and time also. The 
Vedas  say: 
Sarvatah panipadam Tat sarvatoksi siromukham.
His hands and feet are everywhere in Creation. Though God is 
beyond everything, He nevertheless suffuses all the five elements, 
investing them with appropriate aspects of His divine power. He 
Himself is without attributes; but He is immanent in all entities 
with suitable attributes. Thus it is that the Gita declares:Mamaivamso Jivaloke Jivabhutah sanatanah.
(All beings in Creation have originated from Me and are nothing 
but aspects of Me.)  Hence, all the five elements are aspects of 
God, His Divinity, and His supreme power. It is for this reason 
that our ancients worshipped the five elements, revering them as 
aspects of God Almighty. They worshipped the earth as Mother 
Goddess, the rivers as various goddesses, and the elements as 
various deities. 
The earth has always been worshipped by the ancients of Bharat 
as Mother Earth, since it is the earth that, in some form or the 
other, provides food and sustains life. Most gratefully the ancients 
said: “O Mother Earth, I am able to have food on account of 
your kindness.” Without the earth, we cannot have grain, and 
that is why earth was given so much respect and was accorded 
the position of a mother. However, scientists regard worship of 
the elements as superstitious behaviour, and those who worship 
thus to be fools. Those who worship the elements are not fools 
but those who criticise are. These critics have no idea of the inner 
significance of such reverence. Modern scientists are concerned 
only with the material and inanimate aspects of nature, being 
completely ignorant about the principle of reflection, reaction, 
and resound. If you strike the table, your hand feels hurt. Why? 
Because of reaction. You act, and the table reacts! There should 
be no surprise in this. Reflection, reaction, and resound form the 
three cardinal principles guiding the functioning of Creation. 
Man is born of the earth and therefore these principles are built 
into him also. When you stand before a hill and shout, you get an 
echo – that is resound. The Divine Principle is latent in a subtle form in every entity and 
every being in Creation; however, it is very difficult to cognise. 
Everything is divine, and no one can assert that this is divine and 
that is not. Sunlight exists because the Sun exists. In the same 
way, we have Creation because there is a Creator. Just imagine: 
If the five elements in the universe have so much power latent 
within them, how much more powerful the Creator must be! 
Fire is powerful, the mind is very powerful, and so on. If every 
component of Creation is endowed with so much power, then is 
it not evident that the Creator must be infinitely more powerful? 
But man is not able to see this obvious truth. People are afraid of 
bombs but not of the individual who makes them. In fact, they 
generally do not even know who designs and manufactures such 
deadly weapons. The object instils fear but not the person who 
created the object. So it is with nature and God. Man is petrified 
by the powerful forces of nature but has no fear of God. 
The Subtlety of God
 Wonderous are the glories of the Lord,
For they sanctify all the three worlds;
Like the sickle, they sever worldly bondage;
They are also noble companions,
And like the temples 
Where sages worship.
It is impossible to describe completely the glory of God. All 
the praise one can sing would be far from adequate. In fact, it 
is pointless to try and describe something that is indescribable. 
Instead, one must, to start with, try to understand the lessons that 
nature teaches. What a tremendous load the earth carries! Some people say: “Swami, I do not wish to be a burden to Mother Earth. 
Please grant me death.” Will the burden of the earth decrease 
just because you die? Your death will not make any difference 
to it. The burden carried by the earth will diminish only when 
you lessen your own burden. What is the true burden you bear? 
Desires are your burden! If you put a ceiling on desires, you 
become lighter and come closer to God. That is why Swami often 
says: Less luggage, more comfort, make travel a pleasure. You 
must therefore sincerely try to decrease the burden of desires. If 
you do so, you will also cease to be a burden to God. Increase 
in your burden means more work for God! However, God being 
subtle, He does not directly carry your burden. Instead, He makes 
each person to carry their weight in such a manner that the person 
believes that it is actually God who is carrying! This is the subtlety 
of God. Though present in the five elements, He makes it appear 
as if the elements carry on all by themselves. 
The gopikas  (cowherd maids) have sung beautifully about the 
subtlety of the Lord. They said:
O Krishna! Can we ever know You?!
Subtler than an atom and mightier than the mightiest,
You are the One that sustains all the eighty-four lakh species!
Can we ever know You, O Krishna?!
It is impossible for anyone to fathom the depths of Divinity. 
The Deeper Significance of the Elements
Arvind [the student who spoke before Bhagavan’s discourse] 
prayed to Swami to explain the nature of the five elements. In this universe there is nothing apart from the five elements, 
because every entity is composed only of them and them alone. 
There is no place where the elements are not present; they are 
all-pervasive. The h uman body too is one particular combination 
of the five elements. The almanac is called panchangam  because 
it gives information about the heavenly bodies, all of which are 
made of the five elements.  It is therefore important to grasp the 
meaning and the full significance of the five elements.   
Consider first the ether, which has sound as its only attribute. 
Although an innumerable variety of sounds are possible, the 
basic one is the primal sound AUM . This sound Omkara  is what 
you must really concentrate on. There are three syllables here 
– A (akaaram ), U (ukaaram ), and M (makaaram ), which together 
fuse into AUM. The human being is an embodiment of the three 
constituent symbols of AUM. The primal sound Omkara  is the 
very form of akasa , and man must resonate with it. 
Vayu or wind/air that comes next, sustains life. Without air, 
life is impossible. The breathing process consists of inhalation 
and exhalation, symbolised by SOHAM.  SO is associated with 
inhalation and HAM  with exhalation. Since we take in oxygen 
and give out carbon dioxide, SO is associated with the life-giving 
oxygen and HAM  with the contaminant carbon dioxide. What is 
the inner meaning of the breathing process? Simply that we have 
to take in what is good and give up what is bad. This is the lesson 
that the element air conveys to us ,00 times a day, through 
the SOHAM  principle. The body also takes in food and expels 
excreta or faeces. God has blessed us with limbs and organs so that we may accept 
what is good and reject what is undesirable. However, no one 
is making any effort to comprehend this basic truth. Even if the 
principle is understood, it is being treated rather casually and is 
often ig nored. This is not correct; summary rejection of all that is 
harmful must become a priority. 
Consider trees. We seldom appreciate that they are living entities. 
They not only live but also teach us a noble and important lesson 
about sacrifice. They take in carbon dioxide (which we reject) 
and willingly part with oxygen for our benefit. Does man have 
the intelligence or the sensitivity of the trees? Though born a 
human, man is inferior to trees in the matter of sacrifice and 
in returning good for bad. This will not do. Man who has been 
blessed with so much skill, intelligence, and diverse capabilities, 
must scrupulously practise sacrifice. He must ever remain pure, 
firmly rejecting what is bad and accepting only what is good.
After the ether and the air comes fire. It has the capacity to 
burn anything that comes in its way, without any distinction 
whatsoever. This characteristic of strict impartiality is the basis 
of jnanagni or the fire of wisdom, which burns away all worldly 
attachments. No one is making any attempt to under-stand the 
various manifestations of fire, including jataragni, praanagni , and 
badabagni. Latent in man are various treasures but he is totally 
unaware of them because he lacks the Knowledge of the Self. 
This Atmajnana  is True Knowledge, and it is sorely needed today. 
Man has mastered worldly knowledge, secular knowledge, and 
material knowledge, but is totally ignorant about the Knowledge 0of the Self. With its brilliant blaze, agni proclaims the virtues of 
Atmajnana . The scriptures say:
Tamaso ma jyotirgamaya.
From darkness, lead me to Light. Agni  teaches us that the fire of 
wisdom will lead us to Light. 
The sacred name Rama has the potency to lead us from darkness 
to Light. The word Rama is made up of three syllables: Ra, Aa, 
and Ma. Ra  signifies the fire principle. Aa represents the moon, 
and Ma represents the sun. The fire principle Ra destroys all evil 
and sin. The moon principle Aa stills passions and brings peace. 
The sun principle Ma confers effulgence when evil is destroyed 
and peace reigns. Thus, the name Rama compactly embodies 
the whole of wisdom. It has the power to destroy evil, to bring 
peace, and to confer effulgence. This is the inner significance 
of the name given by Vasishta to the first-born son of Emperor 
Dasaratha. The fire principle thus has deep meaning. 
After fire comes water. It is most sacred and vital for life; there is 
life giving force in it. That is why water is sprinkled on a person 
who has swooned. Before eating, you offer the food to God by 
chanting Brahmaarpanam. What happens to the food you eat? 
Who is present within that extracts vitality from the food you eat 
and distributes it to the various organs of the body? That deity is 
Vaishvanara who says, “O man! Realise that I am the force within 
that attends to digestion and assimilation.” This is the “ Aham 
Vaishvanara ” Sloka.
As for t he earth, it helps us in innumerable ways. It is the basis for 
the bricks we use and it provides the platform for the mansions that we build. It supports trees and supplies grain. And it gives 
us a place to rest. There is nothing that it does not give. Despite 
providing so many bounties, it expects nothing. But man is not 
learning the lesson.
External pollution is a reflection of internal pollution
It is said that the  Kali  Age provides the easiest path to liberation. 
However, man is ignoring the golden opportunity offered to him. 
Man today has become very clever or intelligent (in a purely 
worldly sense). Secular education has become widespread and 
schools are to be found in every street corner. A million ways 
have been discovered for making money. A cunning fellow 
once inserted an advertisement in papers, announcing that for 
a payment of just one rupee he would disclose a sure method 
for eliminating mosquitoes from the house. Lots of people were 
taken in by the advertisement, and he collected plenty of money. 
When these people asked him for the promised remedy, he simply 
said, “Take a stone and crush every mosquito you see, wherever 
it is!” Is this a meaningful solution to the mosquito problem? Yet, 
the trickster was able to hoodwink a lot of people. Numerous 
strategies of this kind have been devised to cheat gullible people 
and to extract money from them.
Man has no doubt mastered many ways of accumulating wealth 
and amassing fortune. Yet, happiness eludes him. Why? Because 
his conduct is not proper. For good conduct, virtues are most 
essential. A virtuous person can accomplish anything. A son 
lacking in virtues and a life without a meaningful goal are of no value. Without virtues, life ceases to have any meaning. 
Good conduct should be the real basis for life. However, modern 
man is totally lacking in character and virtues. No wonder both 
peace and happiness elude him. Because of man’s misconduct 
and immoral behaviour, there is pollution everywhere – in air, 
water, land, and food. All the five elements have been severely 
contaminated, consequent to man’s unbecoming behaviour. If 
man beh aves properly, is pollution of the elements conceivable? 
It is all due to the extensive prevalence of immoral feelings 
and improper behaviour. The sharp decline of virtues like love, 
compassion, and forbearance is directly responsible for the wide-
spread pollution that one sees today. In fact, one might even say 
that the five elements are afraid of man! The five elements as God 
created them are all pure and sacred. There is nothing wrong with 
them whatsoever. It is man’s misconduct that has caused them all 
to become polluted. Impurity within gets reflected as pollution 
without. Here is an example.
The water of  river Ganges is pure. However, if you fill a coloured 
bottle with the water of Ganges, it would appear coloured. If the 
bottle is red the water would seem red while if the bottle is blue 
the water too would appear blue. Where does the colour come 
from? From the water or the bottle? Ganges water is intrinsically 
pure; the colour is therefore due to the bottle holding the water. 
The human being is like a bottle. If evil thoughts dominate, 
the body indulges in bad actions; if good thoughts prevail, the 
body performs good actions. The body is not responsible for the 
actions; the thoughts that propel the body are. Bad feelings, bad 
thoughts and bad company provide the stimulus for bad actions. You must understand this basic fact.
You should have good thoughts and aim at purity in character. 
Recognising the five elements as God’s gifts, their sanctity must 
be preserved. They must be made use of in a proper and befitting 
manner. Why do you sing bhajans ? Enquire deeply into the 
meaning of this practice. Bhajan  singing provides an opportunity 
to chant the Lord’s name in a sweet and pleasant manner. The 
vibrations associated with the divine Name then suffuse into the 
atmosphere and cleanse it; the pollution present is wiped out. 
Thus, the basic purpose of bhajans  is to convert bad into good. 
Students!
As is the flame, so is the smoke.
As is the smoke, so is the cloud.
As is the cloud, so is the rain.
As is the rain, so is the crop.
As is the crop, so is the food.
Therefore, if the food has to be pure, then smoke must be the 
starting point, i.e., the flame. When trash is burnt, the polluted 
smoke percolates all the way to food. And when such food is 
consumed, diseases result. Contaminated food is thus responsible 
for most of the bad thoughts and actions one sees today. Seawater 
is salty but when it evaporates, the vapour is free from salt. 
Subsequently, the vapour becomes a cloud, which too contains 
pure and sweet water. The rain that comes down brings this pure 
water to the earth. This is God’s Love manifesting as rain, bearing water as pure as that of Ganges. In a similar manner, buddhi  
(intellect) the blazing sun must distil away all bad feelings. What 
results w ould be the vapour of good qualities. When sufficient 
vapour accumulates, there results the rain of love. The cloud 
from which the rain comes is truth. Thus, truth is the source of 
the love drops. The rain of love ultimately gives you the crop of 
divine Grace. Therefore, all your thoughts and actions must be 
pure and sacred. 
If you constantly chant the name of God, the polluted atmosphere 
would automatically get purified. The divine vibrations 
originating from the chant of the divine Name mix with the 
atmosphere and spread everywhere, indeed throughout the world. 
A radio programme is broadcast from Delhi but in a fraction of a 
second you can hear it here. How? Because of the propagation of 
vibrations. Therefore, good sounds and holy vibrations generated 
by bhajan  singing will propagate, purify the atmosphere, and help 
in the production of good food. In addition, when you breathe 
purified air, it also helps to keep out bad thoughts. 
God’s Love is Omnipresent
Embodiments of Love! You should all live in Love. If everyone 
does so, the whole world would be enveloped in Love. Swami is 
the living proof of this statement. Swami is ever the embodiment 
of Love, and there is never any trace of anger whatsoever. At times 
Swami may appear to “hiss” but even this springs from Swami’s 
Love! Sometimes, hailstones fall when it rains. The ice pieces 
may be hard, but they too are made of water. In the same manner, Swami’s reprimands also form a part of the incessant shower of 
Love. Never forget that even if Swami appears to scold you, it 
is only a part of His Love and it is for your own good. Swami 
is nothing but Love from top to toe. It is so always. Follow the 
principle of Love. Look upon the five elements as being saturated 
with Love. Always do your duty and perform sacred acts. Your 
spiritual evolution is your own responsibility.
Uddharedatmanatmanam.
One has to work for one’s own upliftment. This should be your 
approach to understanding spiritual philosophy. 
In the Vedas,  there are many references to the root word vid. This 
root word is common to all forms of learning. The Vedas represent 
a comprehensive consolidation of all Truths, as discerned by 
the ancient rishis  and as practised by them. The Vedas  confer 
bliss and happiness to those who follow the teachings contained 
therein. There is not even an iota of anything bad in the Vedas. 
Their teachings, if followed, lead only to good. 
God is everywhere, though He may not be directly visible to the 
eye. God is present even in air, but you cannot see Him there. 
Syrup is sweet; why? Because it contains sugar. Can you see 
the sugar in the syrup? No. Just because you cannot see it, can 
you deny the fact that there is sugar in syrup? To do so would 
be stupid. How then do you know there is sugar in the syrup? 
Through experience. Just as sugar is the basis for sweetness of 
syrup, God is the basis for Love, which is omnipresent. God is all-pervasive, and His presence is nectarine. If your heart is full 
of Love, then you will unfailingly experience His nectarine pres-
ence and sweetness everywhere. Life will be ever sweet for you 
and you will always be able to share that sweetness with others. 
The child drinks mother’s milk and finds it to be sweet. Did the 
mother add sugar to the milk? No; mother’s milk is sweet by 
nature; that is the way God made it. In the same way, God’s Love 
is sweet and is present everywhere. It is up to you to extract that 
sweetness and enjoy it, just as a baby sucks milk from its mother 
and even as bees suck honey from flowers. Do the flowers invite 
the bees? No, the bees go to the flowers spontaneously. In the 
same manner, you too should seek noble souls and absorb good 
things from them. 
Satsangatve nissangatvam,nissangatve nirmohatvam,
Nirmohatve niscalatatvam, niscalatatve jivanmuktih.
Tyaja durjana samsargam, bhaja sadhusamagamam,
 Kuru punyamahoratram.
Give up bad company and join good company. Do good day in 
and day out. This is the way to sanctify human life. Although 
numerous opportunities exist for following the correct path, 
people miss them all and instead waste their time. People seem 
to revel in seeking bad company, even if they have to pay for it. 
Why do you have to go in search of bad thoughts and company? 
Instead, why don’t you receive the good that is offered to you 
free and at no charge? It is a grave mistake to reject the good and accept only the bad. Only a fool who is unable to distinguish 
between the bad and the good would behave in this manner.
Creation is Perfect
Embo diments of Love! You should always dwell in Love. Love 
has no form. It has no desires. It does not demand interest or 
give interest. It does not indulge in buying and selling or in any 
other kind of business transactions. Love stands all by itself as 
Love, and can be secured with Love alone. Therefore, you who 
are the embodiments of Love, must see everyone else also as the 
embodiment of Love. Man is made up of the five elements every 
one of which is divine in origin. They are all sacred and there 
is nothing bad in them. If they are polluted today, man alone is 
responsible for that foul act. 
There is a story that illustrates this point. Once, Narada went to 
have the darshan  of Lord Vishnu. The Lord smiled and asked, 
“Narada, where are you coming from?” The sage replied, “Swami, 
I have neither a home nor a family. I am all the time on the move. 
I wander over the three worlds, incessantly singing Your praise.” 
Vishnu said, “Is that so? Very good. Now tell me; have you 
understood the mystery of My Creation?” Narada replied, “Lord, 
are You suggesting that I do not? Of course I have understood 
it.” Vishnu then continued, “Then you must have appreciated that 
there is nothing bad in My Creation. Have you ever seen anything 
bad?” Narada thought for a while and replied, “Lord, forgive me 
but I have seen one thing that is bad.” Vishnu exclaimed, “What! 
Something bad in My Creation? Impossible! There is absolutely nothing bad in Creation.”   Narada hesitantly said, “Lord, there 
is one thing that is foul.” Vishnu then demanded, “What is it?” 
Narada whispered, “It is faecal matter. It is absolutely foul and 
no one can go near it. Why did You create such a thing?” Vishnu 
said, “Narada, you are wrong. Go and ask that faeca l matter 
who created it?” Narada resisted and protested that he could not 
go near that foul matter. But Vishnu was firm and commanded 
Narada to do as instructed. The Lord’s command cannot be 
disobeyed, and reluctantly Narada went toward the waste matter. 
Even as he was approaching, the faeces said, “Stop! Don’t come 
near me. Stay away.” Narada was utterly surprised and angrily 
demanded, “What? You foul object asking a sacred one like me 
to stay away?” The faeces replied, “Yesterday at this hour, I too 
was sacred. I was good food in the form of tasty dishes worthy of 
being offered to the Lord. Then I came into contact with a human 
being and this is what happened to me! Once bad is enough; I 
do not want your company again!” Evil is thus born of the bad 
company one keeps. This basic fact is not properly understood 
and appreciated these days. 
There was once a man whose only son was one day stung by 
a scorpion. The boy cried loudly with pain and the anguished 
father rushed for help to a doctor. He told the doctor, “Sir, my 
son is stung by a scorpion and is crying pitiably. Please give some 
pain-relieving medicine.” The doctor gave an ointment and said, 
“Apply this on the spot where the scorpion stung him.” The man 
ran back home and asked his son, “Where did the scorpion sting 
you?” Pointing to a corner of the room, the boy said, “Over there.” 
The stupid father then applied the ointment to the corner! This is the foolish manner in which most spiritual aspirants 
behave today. You have to carefully identify the source or the 
origin of evil and then take proper remedial action. Do not blame 
others. The fault lies in you, your gullibility, your susceptibility, 
and your willingne ss as well as eagerness to tread the evil path. 
Therefore concentrate on setting right your feelings, thoughts, and 
actions, instead of accusing others of spoiling you. Understand 
the spiritual basis of the five elements and the five life principles 
(pancha praanas ). A proper understanding of these alone will 
guide you to the right path and remove your miseries. The five 
elements are most precious and sacred, and have to be used as 
well as experienced reverentially. 
Embodiments of Love! There is nothing bad in Creation. If 
some things appear so, it is due entirely to faulty vision. The 
latent bad feelings within create the impression that certain 
things are bad. That is why it is important to develop pure and 
loving feelings. Always be immersed in the thought of God and 
constantly chant His Name. Be ever saturated with the divine 
feeling. If dutifully followed, such practices are guaranteed to 
remove all the contamination within you. Never indulge in bad 
actions, never criticise others, blame others, or accuse others. 
Bad thoughts pollute the air and also infect others; this is the way 
bad vibrations spread. Hence, scrupulously avoid bad company 
and bad behaviour. Don’t have bad looks; they will lead to harm. 
Keechaka entertained lustful looks and paid dearly for it; he was 
crushed by Bhima. Don’t ever heed to bad advice. Kaika listened 
to such word s from Manthara, and what happened to her later? 0No one ever thinks of Kaika in a pleasant manner. She has gained 
such notoriety that no girl is ever named Kaika! Bad advice also 
ruined Duryodhana and Dussasana. They incessantly abused the 
noble Pandavas, and in the end met their doom. Therefore, never 
listen to bad things.
Cultivate Equanimity and the Spirit of Sacrifice
Swami wants to give an important advice to students. People may 
tell you various things that cause pain to you. Forget them and do 
not repeat them to others. If they caused pain to you, they would 
do so to others also. Why then repeat? Let us suppose somebody 
accuses you of something you have not done. You feel hurt. If 
now you report this to your parents, they too would feel hurt. 
Therefore, learn to ignore bad and improper remarks by others. 
Sometimes, one cannot help overhearing what others say, but let 
it not register. Just let it pass and forget about it. Always avoid 
bad thoughts, bad looks, bad feelings, and bad actions. Instead, 
be ever sacred and do only good. 
Do you know why God has given you eyes? Is it for feasting 
them on everything and anything? No! God has given the gift of 
sight so that you may have His darshan and feel blissful seeing 
His beauty . Eyes are sacred; they must be used only for sacred 
purposes. 
All five elements and indeed the whole of Creation is sacred. You 
are a part of Creation, which is a limb of God. Therefore, you 
too are sacred. Everything in Creation is an aspect of the divine. Develop that feeling and awareness. You will then certainly 
experience God. Nothing is bad in Creation. Narada thought that 
faeces was bad. If the faeces remains for ever inside the body, 
will it be good for the body? Obviously not. That is why God has 
arranged for its expulsion – it is for your own good. Everything 
that God does is for good and good only.
Regard everything in Creation as good. Suffering and pain are 
also good! If you happen to experience pain or suffering, tell 
yourself: “This is good for me, this is good for me, ….” Treat 
praise and criticism the same way, and be calm even if people 
abuse you. This is the recommended yoga , and sacrifice is the 
recommended path. There is no yoga  superior to equanimity 
and there is no path better than sacrifice. This is the best way of 
achieving purity and sanctity.
Enquire deeply into the meaning of the five elements, and realise 
that you yourself are made of them. Make every possible effort 
to venerate and revere the elements in a suitable manner. Your 
breath must always resonate the chant of God’s Name. Always 
be singing His Glory.
Bhagavan concluded the discourse by singing the bhajan: Hari 
Bhajana Bina Sukha Shanti Nahi.
Evening of  May 000.
3. THE TRINITY WITHIN
Evil thoughts make a person ignoble,
Good thoughts make him noble.
But if thoughts are completely quelled,
Then the person secures peace.
This is the word of Sai.
Embodiments of Love, Boys and Girls!
Man is the crown jewel of this vast Creation. Among the living 
beings, he is the highest and the noblest. Human birth is the greatest 
of all. It is therefore imperative that life is lived properly. 
Wherefrom does human life derive its sanctity? Wherefrom does 
it derive its value? Is it the body or the human form that confers 
value to human life? No! The body is made of the [perishable] 
five elements. From this point of view, the body can be regarded 
as made up of flesh and bones, having within it foul, un-excreted 
faecal matter and urine. However, this very same body is also the 
residence of the Atma ; that is what makes it so valuable. The Three Principles represented by the Trinity
Embodiments of Love! Deepak Anand (a student who spoke 
earlier) asked the question: “Who are the parents of Brahma, 
Vishnu, and Maheshwara?” No one knows the answer to this 
question. Neither the Upanishads  nor the various other scriptures 
throw any light on the subject. Brahma, Vishnu, and Maheshwara 
have no physical form. However, they are Gunaswaroopa, that 
is, they represent specific qualities and attributes. Their presence 
within the body, along with the latent gunas  and intrinsic 
tendencies of the individual, motivates all feelings, thoughts,       
speech, and actions. Man today does not even understand the 
correct meaning of a human being. How then can he comprehend 
that he is divine in origin? Your first task should be to understand 
that Brahma, Vishnu, and Maheshwara are immanent in you. 
Ìsa vasyamidam jagat.
God pervades the entire universe and dwells in all beings. He 
is your Indweller. He is the Atma. Sruti  or the sacred texts have 
a special name for this Atma  that exists in all. It is hridaya .  
Hridaya  refers to the (spiritual) heart. The Atma  or the hridaya  is 
also known as Ishwara. The mind is born of the Atma  and is the 
embodiment of Vishnu. The Vedas  say:
Visvam visnumayam jagat.
Vishnu pervades the whole universe. The mind does likewise.Manomulam Idam jagat.
Since the mind also pervades the whole universe, it is identified 
with Vishnu. Thus, Ishwara and Vishnu are present in all 
individuals. 
Isvarassarvabhutanam.
Ishwara dwells in all beings. The Vishnu Principle is born of the 
Ishwara Principle. 
Next we have Brahma. Traditionally, Brahma is pictured as 
being seated in a lotus that emerges from the navel of Vishnu. 
In the individual, Brahma is associated with speech. He is Vaak-
swaroopa, i.e., He manifests as the spoken word. This is because 
the mind is the origin of  word. 
The scriptures describe God as follows:
Sabdabrahmamayi, Caracaramayi, Jyotirmaya, Vanmayi.
Nityanandamayi, Paratparamay, Mayamayi, Srimayi.
God Almighty is the Primordial Sound, the Immovable as well 
as the Movable, the Divine Light, the Word, Eternal Bliss, 
the Supreme, the Illusion, and Ultimate Wealth. This is a 
comprehensive description of God. This Divinity manifests in 
the individual as three Principles: The Principle of the Atma , the 
Principle of the Mind, and the Principle of the Word. Maheshwara, 
Vishnu, and Brahma are associated with these three inter-related  Principles. Brahma, Vishnu, and Ishwara have no specific form 
but manifest in the individual as the three Principles mentioned. 
Give expression to the divine principles through pure feelings, 
thoughts, and words
What is the form of the Atma ? What is the form of Ishwara? 
Atma  is Pure or Absolute Consciousness, and Consciousness does 
not have any form. In the individual, Absolute Consciousness 
functions as the conscience; its residence is the heart. From the 
Atma  is born the mind, which has cognitive power. It is the mind 
that enables us to cognise both the outside world as well as the 
world within. And mind in turn is the fountainhead of word and 
speech. On occasions, Swami reminds you that you are not one 
but three.
You are not the one you think you are.
You are not the one others think you are. 
You are the One you really are!
This basically implies that you are three principles, all rolled into 
one. You are a composite of the heart, the mind, and the body. 
And Ishwara, Vishnu, and Brahma provide the subtle basis for 
these three aspects of yourself. 
Swami told you earlier that Vishnu is all-pervasive. Thus, in one 
sense, Vishnu represents vastness. The mind too is vast and all-
pervasive; it pervades the entire world. 
Manomulam Idam jagat.The m ind is bound neither by space nor by time, and can go 
anywhere at any time. You know that at the cosmic level, Ishwara, 
Vishnu, and Brahma are not only all-pervasive but transcend 
time and space as well. They are present everywhere as Pure 
Consciousness, as the Universal Mind, and as the Primal Sound, 
respectively. This very same Cosmic Trinity are also immanent 
in the individual.
Anoraniyan Mahatomahiyan.
He who pervades the cosmos is present also in the tiny atom. The 
divine Power that animates the cosmos also controls the atom. It 
is not possible to directly see the Trinity in the cosmos. However, 
if one is able to understand the Trinity Principle within oneself, 
then it becomes easier to comprehend the Trinity in the cosmos. 
The (spiritual) heart symbolises Ishwara. One who regards 
the heart as Ishwara, will never entertain bad feelings. God is 
described as,
Nirgunam, Niranjanam, Sanatanam, Niketanam, Nitya, Suddha, 
Buddha, Mukta, Nirmala Svarupinam.
It means: He is beyond all forms, devoid of all attributes, Eternal, 
the very Essence, Primordial Intelligence, Pure, and Unsullied. 
How much man is misusing the divine Power latent in him! 
Though gifted with a pristine heart, like a fool he is behaving as if 
he is heartless. Man must remember that the heart is the very seat 
of God and live constantly immersed in the thought of God. God no doubt transcends thought but in a human being He 
manifests as thought and word also. What kind of word? Word 
that is sacred, auspicious, sweet, and kind. If our words are of this 
nature, how sweet would our talk and conversation be! 
Embodiments of Love! Just as God silently controls the world, 
we too must have total control over thought, word, and actions. 
Sweet words or Brahmavaak must come out of us. If we experience 
Ishwara in the heart, such words would automatically  flow from 
us. 
What about Vishnu? In what form is He present? Swami has 
already told you that He is embodied as the mind. The mind is 
extremely powerful and the most important instrument of man. 
It must therefore be unsullied and nectarine in nature. Vishnu is 
ever calm and smiling. Reflecting these aspects, the mind must 
be ever calm, serene, and radiate joy. 
God only wants that you think of Him
Once, a group of rishis  (Sanaka, Sanat Kumara, and others) went 
to have the darshan  of Lord Vishnu. The popular feeling is that 
on such occasions, one must go in sober and dignified attire. 
However, these sages went unclad and in the form of new-born 
babies. They did so because babies are pure and without body-
consciousness. What is the deeper meaning of what the sages 
did? It means that to experience the pure mind, one must shed all 
body-consciousness. Vishnu represents the pure mind, and that is 
why the sages went the way they did. Just as there are volunteers here, there were two guards at Vishnu’s 
doorstep, Jaya and Vijaya. Seeing that the sages were unclad, they 
protested strongly and denied entry. They said, “You cannot go to 
see God like this!” The Sages replied, “God is Pure, Unsullied, 
Pristine, and beyond all attributes. To have the darshan  of such 
a Lord, one must go in a pristine form, and that is precisely what 
we are doing.” The guards refused to accept the argument and 
the altercation became fierce. The sages cursed Jaya and Vijaya 
to be born as rakshasas (demons) on earth. “O Lord! We have 
no desire except to derive Bliss by seeing You. Your darshan  is 
our joy, Your sparshan  is our food, and Your sambhashan  is our 
very breath. We constantly yearn for Your  sarshan, sparshan , 
and sambhashan .”  What will be our fate now?” Vishnu replied, 
“You cannot escape the curse and must be born as demons. You 
must take nine births. However, you will be good and devoted to 
me in all your births. That will earn for you My Grace and in due 
course both of you will come back to Me.” The guards cried, “O 
Lord who moves in the minds of sages, this will keep us away 
from You for a very long time!” The Lord replied, “Well, I can 
give you a choice. Instead of nine births, you need take only 
three, but in these three births, you will hate me, constantly abuse 
Me, and be My enemies! Are you ready for that? The choice is 
yours.” Jaya and Vijaya said, “We do not care whether we have 
to praise You or abuse You. All we want is to get back here as 
early as possible.” 
Sarvada Sarvakalesu Sarvatra Hari Dusanam.
At all times, at all places, and on all occasions, God shall be 
abused! This is what Jaya and Vijaya did, and they did not hesitate 0to res ort to the path of abuse because that gave them a chance to 
get back faster to the Lord.  
If someone were to call Krishna a thief, devotees would instantly 
object and pounce on the person who speaks thus.  But when you 
sing with love and devotion, 
“Chitta Chora Yasodha ke Baal
Navaneeta Chora Gopal
(O one who steals the mind), everyone joins the singing and 
marks time by clapping.  Does it not mean calling Krishna a 
thief?  But the devotional music lends sweetness to the song and 
the abuse disappears.  
Subdue the mind and talk less
Vishnu is Manasswaroopa  or the One who manifests as the 
mind. He is not, as often imagined, the One bearing the shankha   
(conch), chakra  (discus), and gada  (mace). Such popular images 
are conjured up by painters, principally the famous Ravi Varma. 
Vishnu is embodied in the Pure Mind. That is why when Swami 
gives diamond rings, He sometimes says: “Diamond means DIE 
MIND!” It means that worldly thoughts must be annihilated. How? 
By withdrawing the human mind that is fickle and constantly 
wavering, and replacing it with the divine Mind, which is pure, 
always steady, and full of Love. 
Just as the human mind is the manifestation of Vishnu, word or 
speech is the manifestation of Brahma. Therefore, be very careful  
not to slip into improper talk. The best way of being careful is to practise mounam  or silence. This precisely is what our ancient 
rishis did. Talk leads to more talk, and eventually one runs the 
danger of speaking falsehood. Excessive talk can also trigger 
undesirable actions. That is why our rishis  preferred to be silent 
most of the time. Silence does not mean mere cessation of talk or 
conversation. For the sages, it also meant cessation of the thought 
process. Thought is a ripple in the mind. A series of thoughts can 
become a wave, and many waves become a storm. Therefore, it 
is best to be in a quiescent stage, devoid of thoughts. This was 
the feeling in those days. Today, the mind is characterised by 
excessive thoughts. 
What is this? [Swami shows a kerchief to the audience]. You 
would say it is a piece of cloth. It is in fact a bundle of threads. 
If the threads are all removed, there would be no cloth left. In 
the same way, the control of speech and the removal of thoughts 
would help to subdue the mind. One must talk less in order to be 
able to experience Vishnu. 
You are capable of speech, thinking, and feeling. The word 
represents Brahma, the mind represents Vishnu, and the heart 
represents Ishwara. Thus you yourself represent the divine 
Trinity! 
Tridalam, Trigunakaram, Trinetram Ca Triyayudham,
Trijanma Papa Samharam Eka Bilvam Sivarpanam.
(Offer the trifoliate bilva leaf to Lord Siva, the Three-eyed One, 
who bears three weapons and has the power to wipe out the sins 
committed in three births. Forget the past, live in the present, and ensure a good future
It is said that Ishwara has three eyes.  People say, “How is that 
possible?” Here, the word eye does not refer to the physical eye 
but to the ability to perceive various periods of time. One eye 
refers to the past, the second eye to the present; and the third eye 
to the future. Every person knows the past as well as the present. 
So one can agree that man has two eyes. No one knows the future 
but God does; so it is said that God alone has three eyes whereas 
man has only two. However, if you have had full control over 
yourself in the past, and do have it at present also, then your 
future would be entirely in your hands. 
Man today is all the time thinking about the past and worrying 
about the future. Always it is:   Past, future; past, future; past, 
future; ….. Brooding over the past and worrying about the future, 
man loses track of the present. You must not forget that the present 
is a product of the past; it is also the seed for the future. The 
past and future are thus embedded in the present. Man does not 
seem to appreciate this basic truth. If you want a good and bright 
future, then make proper use of the present. The present is a tree 
that has sprung from a seed called the past. This tree also has the 
seed for the future. Thus, the future is already here! 
The best way to take care of the present is to ensure that your talk 
is always sacred. Where do the words originate? From the mind. 
Therefore, good talk implies that the mind also is good. The mind 
being the form of Vishnu, if you enjoy His Grace, your words 
would automatically be pure and sweet. God’s  Will always prevails
Embodime nts of Love! All of you are really the embodiments 
of the Trinity, the three attributes, the three eyes, and the three 
periods of time (the past, present, and future). You must be ever 
in harmony with God and always obey His command scrupu-
lously. Never go against it. There is a small story to illustrate the 
point that no matter what, God’s will always prevails.
Once, Parvathi said to Lord Siva, “You are all the time wandering 
across the worlds while I am but here. There is no place for me 
to stay. There is no place we can call our home. There is not 
even a shed where we can take shelter when it rains. Moreover, 
so many sages come for Your darshan . We do not have a place 
where we can receive and accommodate them. So let us build 
a house; it will serve many purposes.” This is the housewife 
asking for a house; such a desire is natural for all women! Siva 
replied, “Parvathi, building a house would mean the beginning of 
all problems. First, we will have the company of rats. To check 
the rats, we have to get a cat. To feed the cat we have to get a 
cow. Next, to look after the cow we have to engage a servant; 
and so on it will go! Can’t you see that our problems will simply 
multiply? I don’t think we need a house.” An argument followed, 
with Parvathi firm in her demand and Siva refusing with equal 
firmness. This is what happens in every house – yes, no! yes, 
no! Finally, in exasperation, Parvathi said, “Why are You so 
stubborn? After all, I am not asking for my sake but for the sake 
of Your devotees. How can we extend hospitality to the devotees 
without a house?” Siva replied, “Yes  I know you need a house but this is not an auspicious time to build one. If you build a house 
now, it is destined to get burnt down, no matter what. I know for 
sure that this is what Agni  the Fire God would do. I can see the 
future but you cannot.” Parvathi said, “Lord I follow what You 
are saying. But then, all powers are in You; moreover, You preside 
over all the deities including Agni . If You order Agni  not to burn 
our house, can he refuse to obey?” Siva now had no option but to 
agree to let Parvathi start the construction of the house. He also 
agreed to meet Agni  and tell him not to burn down Parvathi’s 
house. Just before Siva left, Parvathi said, “I will not allow Agni  
to burn down the house I have built. It would be a great insult 
for me. If by chance Agni  refuses to oblige You, give me a signal 
by sounding your damaru  (drum). I shall then immediately burn 
down the house myself, denying Agni  that pleasure.” Siva agreed 
and went on His way to meet Agni .
Agni  was delighted to see Siva. Welcoming Him said, “Lord, I 
am so happy You have come to see me. Pray, what can I do for 
You?” Siva replied, “I have no desires of My own. But Parvathi 
has built a house and she wants your promise that you will not 
burn down that house.” Agni  readily gave that promise and then 
said, “Lord, for a long time, I have been yearning to see Siva 
Thaandavam (Cosmic Dance). Please would You dance for me?” 
So, to please Agni , Siva commenced His Thaandavam.  In the 
process He necessarily had to play the damaru and, hearing the 
sound, Parvathi immediately set fire to the house she had built!*
*[At this point, Swami sang a most beautiful and lilting melody. Since it cannot be translated 
without spoiling the grandeur of the original, the song is not reproduced. The song was greeted 
with a thunderous applause. ] Siva retu rned and saw that the house that Parvathi had built was 
in smouldering ruins. He said, “Parvathi, what is all this? Agni  
had given me a promise not to burn down your house but I see 
it reduced to ashes.” Parvathi replied, “I set fire to this house; 
Agni  did not. If Agni  had given you the promise I wanted, why 
then did You play the damaru ?” Siva smiled and replied, “Oh 
that was because Agni, after giving the promise, prayed to Me to 
perform the Thaandavam. I had to oblige him. How could I say 
no? When I performed the Cosmic Dance, I forgot and played 
the drum. That is all.” After a pause He added, “Well, I told you 
in the first place that this was not an auspicious time and that the 
house would get burnt down. But you would not listen!” The 
message is clear: The will of God always prevails, and no one 
can come in the way.
Sanctify time
The will of God emanates from the heart and always finds 
fulfilment. When the heart is pure, the thoughts and the actions 
too would be sacred. Therefore, the heart must be kept ever pure; 
this is the essence of the Siva Principle. The heart is intrinsically 
pure, sacred, and auspicious and must never be allowed to get 
polluted. 
Embodiments of Love! Always maintain the purity of your heart. 
Don’t abuse any person, don’t criticise others, and don’t ever 
accuse any one. Then Siva will be seen in your heart. From the 
pure heart emerges a pure mind. Swami is not referring to the monkey mind but the unsullied mind that is symbolic of Vishnu.
Such a mind is saturated with Love, is filled with compassionate 
thoughts, is always blissful, and ever radiates joy. Thus, the 
effulgence of Vishnu can be seen in a pure mind. Likewise, 
Brahma shines as Truthful Words. There is nothing beyond 
Sathya  or Truth. 
Creation is born of Truth,
And it dissolves finally in Truth.
There is no place where Truth is not,
O man! Witness the glory of Truth!
True word is Brahma, pure mind is Vishnu, and pure heart is 
Ishwara. Brahma, Vishnu, and Maheshwara do not have specific 
forms but represent specific divine attributes, all of which are 
latent in you. 
God is Love but at times He appears to be angry. He does so in 
order to teach a lesson. The Vedas  speak of these two aspects in 
terms of Rudra (the angry One) and Bhadra (the One who saves). 
God fulfils those desires of yours that will result in good but if 
they spell harm, He will not grant them. Either way, He is doing 
only good to you. If you repose full faith in God, He is ever ready 
to help you in every possible way. 
You all know the story of Markandeya, the boy who was granted 
a life span of only sixteen years. Markandeya did not know about 
this but his parents did. They spent fifteen happy years in the 
company of their son. The sixteenth year started, and the day of doom approached. The mother and father were seized with 
gloom and began weeping bitterly. Puzzled, Markandeya asked, 
“Mother, why are you suddenly so sad?” Calling the boy near 
the parents said, “Son, today is the last day of your life. It is our 
misfortune”.  They then narrated the story that explained why 
his life span was curbed. Markandeya was shocked. He instantly 
understood the situation and declared, “Thus far I did not know 
this secret and I frittered away my time. From now on I shall not 
waste a single moment in unsacred action. Whatever is left of 
my life will be spent entirely in worshipping Ishwara.” So saying 
he ran to the local Siva temple, hugged the Lingam in a tight 
embrace and called upon the Lord in various names. Meanwhile, 
the hour of death approached, and Yama the Lord of Death came 
to the temple armed with the yamapaasa (noosed rope) he uses 
for dragging away life. He saw that Markandeya was locked in a 
tight embrace with Siva and began to wonder: “How am I to cast 
the noose of death on Markandeya alone?” It was not easy to bind 
the boy alone but the moment of death had arrived and something 
had to be done immediately. So Yama cast the noose and it circled 
both Markandeya and the Lingam. Siva manifested instantly and 
said, “O Yama! You have now dared to cast the noose of death 
on Me too?!” On the spot Yama was cursed and Markandeya was 
granted Immortality.  What does this story teach? It says that 
if you have full faith and are determined, then the Lord will be 
ready to even cancel pre-ordained destiny.  Grace received is in 
proportion to the intensity of one’s prayer.  
Recognise this truth and maintain the purity of your heart. Be firm 
in the faith that a pure heart is Ishwara, a pure mind is Vishnu, and pure speech is Brahma. Rooted in this faith, make proper 
use of your God-given faculties. Good results would inevitably 
follow, and in the end you are certain to merge with the Lord. The 
pleasure and pain that people experience in life are entirely the 
result of their good and  bad actions, respectively. 
Today, Deepak Anand provided you with the opportunity to 
hear Swami discuss the subject of Latent Trinity. This is the first 
occasion when Swami has revealed how the darshan of the Trinity 
can be had within one’s own self. Like this, there are so many 
subtle secrets not known to you. Unaware of the nuances of the 
divine Mystery, people waste their time in frivolous activities. 
Embodiments of Love! Time is highly sacred and most valuable. 
God is worshipped as Time with the words
Kalaya Namah, Kala Kalaya Namah,
 Kala Darpa Damanaya Namah, Kala Svarupaya Namah, 
Kala Niyamitaya Namah.
All these are descriptions of God in His aspect as Time. Even 
so, God also transcends time and space. Time is life, and it must 
therefore be sanctified with good words, good thoughts, and good 
feelings. 
Pure speech, pure mind, and pure heart are the true mani-festations 
of Selfless Love.
Bhagavan concluded the discourse by singing the bhajan: Prema 
muditha…
 May 000.4. THE HUMAN BODY AND ITS 
IMPORTANCE
Punarvittam, punarmitram, punarpatni, punar mahi.
Etat sarvam punar labhyam, na sariram punah punah.
Wealth lost can be regained;
If friends are lost, new friends can be acquired;
If wife is lost, one can marry again;
But the body once lost never comes back.
Embodiments of Love!
Wealth, friends, property, and even wife, if lost, can be acquired 
again, but the human body is not like that; once lost, it can 
never be got back, no matter how hard one may try. Human 
life is most precious, highly sacred, beautiful, and invaluable. 
It is, therefore, the prime duty of every individual to take the 
greatest possible care of the body. The body is an indispensable 0vehicle for expe riences. Without it nothing can be done, not even 
a simple task. The human body is, therefore, more precious than 
worldly wealth and such other material acquisitions. Life must 
be sanctified by making proper use of the body and engaging 
it in sacred actions. Time gone will never come back. Once the 
Ganges merges with the ocean, you cannot get back even a drop 
of its sacred water. Likewise, once life ebbs out and the body is 
gone, it cannot be recovered. 
Body is gifted for service
Men are more valuable than all the wealth in the world. How 
does money acquire value? Who is the one who confers value 
on money, diamond, gold, and land? It is man who is responsible 
for this. If man does not exist, wherefrom will all these get their 
value? From nowhere. Human life is very rare and precious. That 
is why the Vedas declare, 
Jantunam nara janma durlabham.
Human birth is a rare gift. Extraordinary things can be achieved 
with the human body.  Yet, there are times when one must be 
ready to sacrifice life itself, in order to achieve great goals. 
Embodiments of Love! It is most important to understand the 
role and the value of the human body. It is the body that shelters 
the Divinity within. The body is like an iron safe used for storing 
jewellery and other such valuables. In the case of the body, the 
valuables stored are good feelings, good thoughts, and virtues. If lost, th ey cannot be recovered easily. Only virtues lend value to 
human life, and it is qualities like compassion, forbearance, and 
sacrifice that make human life precious. But man today does not 
have the faintest idea of what is meant by human values. 
The human body is also a clock marking time and the passage of 
life. It ticks away the seconds, minutes, days, weeks, months, and 
years. Man knows that life is ticking away but he does not bother 
to enquire about the real purpose of life. No one can say when 
the clock will stop. It is, therefore, most essential to make proper 
use of life while it is still available. The body is the vehicle for 
the journey of life. If the vehicle is not properly maintained, then 
one would have to face serious problems on the way. 
Man must contemplate on the importance of virtues. He is ig-norant 
about the answers to questions like: “What is Divinity?”, “What 
is unity?”, “Steadiness?”, “Selfless-ness?”. Without knowing the 
answers to important and basic questions such as these, man, 
driven by greed and selfishness, is grossly misusing the body. 
God has not gifted the body for this. The Vedas  declare: 
Paropakarartham idam sariram.
The body is gifted to serve others. You must firmly resolve not 
only to take care of yourself but also others. Unfortunately, man 
today does not know what service means. The essence of all the 
eighteen Puranas  can be summarised in two short sentences: 
Help ever. Hurt never.Though God has given the body for service man does not seem to 
understand what ‘help’ means, being ever immersed in selfishness.  
Every thought, every word, and every action is driven by 
selfishness. Man has become a puppet in the hands of selfishness 
and self-interest. How can a puppet be ever called independent? 
Selfishness must, therefore, be totally rejected and selflessness 
must be whole-heartedly embraced. Then alone would the real 
purpose of the human body and human life be realised. 
The ‘I’ principle
In addition to the body, the mind too must be used properly in 
order to derive Bliss. There are three important entities in the 
body; the heart, the mind, and speech. The Vedas refer to the heart 
as Atma. Swami has already told you that Ishwara is represented 
by the heart. Likewise, the mind is the embodiment of Vishnu, 
and speech is the embodiment of Brahma. Man is therefore verily 
the form of the divine Trinity. One is not able to understand why 
man does not recognise his intrinsic value and the divinity latent 
in him. Only one who knows himself can know others. One must 
endeavour to understand the meaning of ‘I’. 
Everything is contained in the words that we speak. Once a 
devotee told Swami, “I want peace.” Swami replied, “Why are 
you suffering so much? Do you know the meaning of the word 
‘I’ in your prayer?  It means ego. Similarly, ‘want’ means desire. 
Remove ego and desire, and what remains is peace!” Every effort 
must be made to conquer ego. People think this is very difficult 
but it is a big mistake to think so. Actually, it is very easy to get rid of ego. Why at all should you have ego in the first place? There 
is an easy method to remove ego. You think that ‘I’ is associated 
with the name given to you at birth, and regard it as permanent. 
In the process, you have forgotten your original name. It is the 
original name that is permanent and not the name given to your 
body at birth. The given name serves only as long as the present 
body exists. When the body perishes, the given name ceases to 
be significant. How long will the body last?
Composed of the five elements and devoid of strength,
When this body will go no one knows.
Though a hundred years is said to be the life span,
One cannot be sure when death will overtake.
It may be in childhood, youth, middle age, or old age;
But certain it is that death will one day come.
He alone is intelligent who realises his true nature when alive.
This truth one must definitely know. 
Who is this ‘I’? Who am ‘I’? This ‘I’ is not the body ( deham ) nor 
the mind ( manas ) nor the intellect ( buddhi ) nor the inner senses 
(antahkarana ). I is just I! This primordial ‘I’ came along with the 
body; in fact, ‘I’ is your correct name. There are so many ‘I’s in 
this world. If you know yourself, then you will also know all the 
other ‘I’s. This is why the question “Who am I?” is important. 
Embodiments of Love! No one is making any effort to know about 
the mysteries of human life. There are many secrets associa ted 
with life. There are many treasures within you. All the power and 
potency found in nature are also latent in every human being. That which cannot be found within a human being cannot be 
found anywhere else in the universe. Our ancients said to those 
who went overseas, “O fool, why are you becoming a vagabond, 
wandering over various lands? What you are looking for outside 
is already within you. You are not able to recognise the treasures 
hidden within you.” 
The Vedas explained clearly the meaning of ‘I’. This ‘I’ is also 
known as vyakthi . Who is this vyakthi ? Vyakthi  is that individual 
who is able to cognise the subtle and the hidden. He is the one 
who has realised that Divinity is latent within him. He who does 
not know of the innate Divinity does not merit being called a 
man. You must understand the identity of the individual with 
God. Adherence to sathya  and dharma  alone would enable one 
to become a yakthi.  Hence the twin dicta of the scriptures:
Satyam vada, dharmam Cara.
Always speak the truth and always tread the path of righ-teousness. 
God has gifted you the human form to enable you to follow such 
a sacred path. Therefore, every effort must be made to bring out 
the latent human values. One does not become a scholar or a 
learned person as soon as one is born. These qualifications are 
acquired over many years and after much effort. Educare is the 
name given to this process that brings to the surface the latent 
virtues and values. The secular instruction that is currently offered 
everywhere is education. Dealing as it does exclusively with the 
phenomenal world, it is artificial. As Swami often says, “Art is 
outside while heart is inside.”  Therefore art is education while 
heart is educare. There is no person in the world today who can 
be said to be truly learned in the sense of educare. He has studied everything,
And mastered all;
Yet a fool he remains,
Not knowing about the Self.
No matter how advanced the learning,
Or how high the position held,
A mean person will ever remain mean.
Too much scholarship
Promotes only argumentation.
No matter what the attainments, 
The scholar too one day has to die.
Hence seek that Knowledge Supreme, 
Which alone leads to Immortality.
It is this Supreme Knowledge that you must really acquire. What 
is it that is deathless? The primordial ‘I’ alone is Eternal and 
Immortal. It has no death. Mind, the form of Vishnu, is born of 
‘I’, and it too has no death. The Trinity Brahma, Vishnu, and 
Maheshwara are all ensconced within the human body. They 
are the embodiment of Ttuth. Thus, when you say ‘I’, it refers 
really to the name of God, the God within you. It is therefore a 
mistake to identify ‘I’ with the body, as is invariably done. ‘I’ is 
that is within; it is the name of truth when it manifests in a human 
body.
Always think of God; do not put it off!
Man is conscious only of the inert body, which is just gross matter. 
All that you can physically see in the external world also consists 
only of gross matter. Yaddrsyam tannasyam.
All that can be experienced with the senses is ephemeral. We 
mistake the transient to be the truth. Indeed, the whole of creation 
would one day disappear; so, it also is temporary. Nevertheless, 
the body has a role to play. Sight, for example, has been given so 
that you may see the external world. True, but you should not stop 
with just seeing. Your vision must be sacred, which means being 
aware that God is immanent in all the things that you physically 
see. 
You must make an effort to realise that the body is just an instrument 
given to you for a specific purpose, and you must understand that 
purpose. Adi Shankara has highlighted this. Once when Shankara 
was going along with his disciples, he noticed a man vigorously 
committing to memory the rules of Panini’s grammar. Shankara 
went to that man and asked, “Why are you struggling so hard to 
master grammar?’ The man replied, “Because I wish to become 
a scholar.” Shankara’s next question was, “What will you gain by 
becoming a scholar?” The man said, “I can get appointed in a royal 
court and earn a lot of money.” Shankara continued, “What will 
you do with the money?” The man had a ready answer, “Oh, I can 
keep my family happy.” Shankara then said, what happens after 
that?” The man thought for a while and said, “Well, I suppose I 
will die.” Shankara pressed on, “What happens after death?” The 
man said, “I do not know.” Shankara then advised that man:
Bhaja Govindam Bhaja Govindam,
Govindam Bhaja Mudhamate.Samprapte Sannihite Kale.
Na Hi Na Hi Raksati Dukrn Karane.
“O foolish man, always be chanting the name of the Lord.  
Scholarship in grammar would be of no use when the call of death 
comes. It is God’s name alone that can secure redemption.” The 
body may live long but one day or the other it has to perish. 
When the end has come,
And death has arrived to take you away,
When relatives abandon hope and get ready for your demise,
When your wife and children are crying piteously,
Is it possible to suddenly think of God?
Is it of any use if you cry for help at the last moment? No! 
The proper thing is to prepare for the inevitable right from the 
beginning by constantly remembering God. He alone can liberate 
you. Besides singing the glory of God, you must also engage 
in proper action. What kind of action? Action that would bring 
out the latent human values. The body must be used only for 
performing good deeds. You must lead a virtuous life. In the end, 
you must give up the body with good thoughts. 
The human body is not eternal. It contains flesh that can decay, 
and foul excreta. At the same time, present in this very same body 
are sacred feelings. It is for safeguarding this hidden treasure 
that you must take proper care of the body. Once the treasure 
is tapped and duly made use of, the body can be given up. This 
is the proper way to go through life. You must plunge whole-
heartedly and most enthusiastically into service. Na tapamsi na tirthanam na sastranam japa na hi.
Samsara sagaroddhare sajjanam sevanam vina.
The ocean of life cannot be crossed either through penance, or 
pilgrimage, or the study of scriptures, or even the ritualistic chant 
of the name of the Lord. It is service rendered to noble souls 
alone that can set you free. In the Gita, Krishna says:
Anityam asukham lokam imam prapya bhajasva maam.
Realising that the world is ephemeral and full of misery, con -
stantly pray to me.
The real reason for protecting and safeguarding the body is 
that it is the repository of great powers and capabilities. You do 
meditation; how? Using your body. You transact business and 
make money; how? Using your body. You become a great scholar; 
how? Using the capabilities of your body. The body is, therefore, 
very important. It must be properly used and the virtues latent in 
it must be fully experienced. 
Preserve your purity and resist contamination
Do not make the mistake of imagining that the body has been 
given for enjoyment, comfort seeking, beautification, and useless 
pursuits of that nature. Indulgence in pleasure seeking, comfort, 
and luxury can be dangerous. In one of the wars between Germany 
and France, France suffered a crushing defeat. Reflecting on 
this, the then French Commander-in-Chief said, “We lost not because we lacked courage but because we had become soft 
by getting drowned in pleasure-seeking.” You can ruin yourself 
by pandering to the senses. What does one gain from sensual 
pleasures? Nothing, because these pleasures are all momentary. 
God has not given this body for indulgence. 
Dakshinamurthy was once walking along the seashore. He was 
the very embodiment of intellect, and always enquired deeply 
into the significance of what he observed. As he stood gazing at 
the ocean, he noticed that wind blew some trash into the water. 
However, the trash was soon swept back to the shore by the 
waves. This happened repeatedly. Dakshinamurthy then asked, “O 
mighty Ocean that art fathomless, why can you not accommodate 
these tiny pieces of matter that are being blown into you? Why 
do you repeatedly throw them back on the shore? Why are you so 
selfish? What do you lose by giving in a little?” Dakshinamurth y 
then sat in meditation, whereupon he heard the Ocean giving a 
reply. The Ocean said, “Within me there are innumerable treasures 
like pearls, corals, etc. If I permit this contamination, in course of 
time it will swamp and overwhelm me completely. I do not wish 
to become impure and ugly. Trash is not my ornamentation but 
waves are.” 
For a village, beauty lies in the houses,
For the ocean, the waves are the ornament,
For the sky, it is the moon that confers grandeur,
For a woman, character is true beauty,
And for a devotee of Siva, 
Beauty is the vibhuthi adorning the forehead.0One must acquire that which adds real beauty. For a human being, 
virtue is real beauty. Today, man is spurning virtue and is instead 
turning to jewellery for the enhancement of beauty. 
Dharma is the best protection
Embodiments of Love! You have a long journey ahead. You must 
certainly care for your body but this does not mean you must 
develop body-consciousness. Protect your body by all means and 
take full care of your health, but use your body mainly to perform 
good actions. 
Asthiram jivanam loke,
Asthiram yauvanam dhanam,
Asthiram Dara Putradi,
Satyam Kirti Dvayam sthiram.
In this world, life, youth, wealth, wife and children, etc. are 
impermanent. Truth and reputation alone are stable. You must, 
therefore, tread a truthful path, for that alone will earn for you 
a good reputation. You must protect truth, and without it you 
have no chance of becoming reputed. It has become fashionable 
for politicians to advise youth to protect the country. All this is 
hollow talk. What is it that confers real protection? Sathya  and 
dharma alone can provide true protection. If sathya  and dharma  
are upheld, they in turn will duly protect the country. 
Dharmo raksati raksitah.
Dharma eva hato hanti.The one who protects dharma will be protected by dharma , 
but if one tries to annihilate dharma , that person is sure to get 
destroyed. Does it make any sense to talk about protection of 
the country after abandoning sathya  and dharma ? The country 
can be protected only if dharma  is protected. People today have 
become indifferent to dharma . There is no trace of justice, and 
truth has gone into hiding. Under the circumstances, how can 
the country be protected? Instead of pompously uttering empty 
words, the speechmakers should, by their actions, demonstrate 
how the country ought to be protected. The words that one uses 
must reflect the situation and circumstances.
Words and behaviour must match one’s position
An actor once came to a King’s court to give performances. He 
came dressed as a sanyasi  (renunciant). The actor sang admirably 
and discoursed eloquently on spiritual matters. He also gave a 
scholarly exposition on the philosophy of Adi Shankara. The 
King was very pleased and offered a lot of gold. The actor said, 
“O King, a sanyasi  does not accept gold. I cannot accept this 
gift.” The next day the actor appeared as a dancer. He danced 
beautifully and pleased everyone present. At the end of the 
performance the King offered a small gift of just a few coins. 
The actor said, “O King, this gift is meagre and not enough.” The 
astonished King asked, “Yesterday you refused a substantial gift 
but today you are demanding more. What is the meaning of this 
strange behaviour?” The actor replied, “O King, an actor will not 
be true to his profession if his words do not match the costume 
he is wearing. Yesterday I played a renunciant and, therefore, spurned wealth. Today I am a dancer, and a dancer always expects 
a handsome reward! My conduct must be in consonance with my 
garb.” 
All of you are in the dress of students; you must therefore have 
the behaviour and conduct expected of students. You must earn 
the respect due to students. You should be models of humility, for 
humility is the hallmark of true learning. You must, therefore, be 
always humble, speak respectfully to elders, and ever adhere to the 
path of sathya  and dharma. Education is that which fosters noble 
qualities, keen intellect, truth, devotion, discipline, and a sense of 
duty. Students have to patiently cultivate all these qualities and 
attributes. If your behaviour is not in accordance with what one 
expects fro m the dress you wear, you will lose respect. 
See no evil; see only what is good!
Embodiments of Love!  Swami is aware that all of you are highly 
regarded. Even so, Swami has to say what needs to be told so that 
you do not become complacent. Proper vision is most essential 
for a student. You must see only what you are supposed to, and 
not other things. Do not gaze at everything in the street like a 
crow! Do you think eyes are given to you for seeing anything 
and everything? No, no, no! They are given so that you may see 
just the things a student ought to. Look at your books, and study 
them. See your parents; you may see your friends but not others. 
Regard all others of your age as your brothers and sisters, and all 
older women as your mother. In the ritualistic worship of the Sun 
(Surya namaskaram ), there is a passage to the effect that he who has evil looks would be blinded by the Sun God. Therefore, be 
warned; bad looks can be dangerous. When walking on the road, 
look ahead so that your safety is guaranteed. If, for example, you 
are cycling and your looks wander all over the place, you are 
more than likely to meet with an accident. Always concentrate 
on the traffic ahead. Control of looks is so important that Buddha 
gave special emphasis to it. He called for samyak drishti  or good 
looks. Bad looks would only lead you astray into the path of 
evil. 
Once, Socrates was walking, accompanied by his students. He 
walked with his head bent down, as he wanted to set an example 
to his students in the matter of looks. Suddenly, he bumped into 
a man coming from the opposite direction. This other person 
who was an officer of the State, angrily demanded, “Who are 
you?” With humility, Socrates replied, “Sir, that precisely is the 
question I am grappling with! Please can you tell me who exactly 
I am?” Socrates was strict not only in the matter of looks but 
also with respect to listening. He never listened to anything bad. 
You should not lend your ear to all that is being said. Similarly, 
thoughts too must be kept under tight check. Thoughts must 
centre around appropriate matters. The questions when , where , 
and what  you must think are all important. Excessive thought can 
lead to harm. Excessive thinking (plotting) is what the Kauravas 
did, and eventually paid dearly for it. They were always seized 
with evil thoughts, and spent all night devising mean and wicked 
ways of harming the noble Pandavas. The Kauravas came to 
ruin because they constantly harboured foul thoughts about the 
Pandavas who were the very embodiment of dharma. Therefore, always avoid bad looks, listening to bad words and talk, and also 
bad thoughts. Do not ever utter unbecoming words. Always say 
good things and speak pleasantly. You cannot always oblige but 
you can always speak obligingly! Students must cultivate such 
good qualities for they alone are the true ornaments. 
Students —boys and girls! In this phase of life, there are many 
virtues that you must acquire; later, you must make good and 
active use of them. Only if you accumulate wealth now, can you 
spend it later. If there are no ‘earnings’ now, what can you do 
later? You must, therefore, firmly resolve to develop right now, 
good intellect, good habits, and good speech. Buddha repeatedly 
stressed the need for samyak drishti  or sacred looks, and never 
tolerated any violation of this maxim by his disciples. Bad looks 
encourage bad thoughts, which ultimately lead to ruin. Looks 
must therefore be strictly controlled. 
Use the body for sacred actions and become ideal leaders
Students! You must all earn a good reputation now and later 
provide good leadership to the country. The children of today 
are the citizens of tomorrow.  The youth of today are the leaders 
of tomorrow. When you become leaders, you must make this 
country sacred. As are the leaders, so will be the nation. If you are 
good, the country too will be good. You will earn much merit if 
you shape yourselves to be noble citizens of this great country of 
Bharat, that has the reputation of being a tyaga bhoomi  (land of 
sacrifice),  karma bhoomi  (land of noble acts), and punya bhoomi  
(sacred land). It is for serving this country in a noble manner that 
you must really care for your body, and not for any other purpose. Remember, the body once gone will never come back. Any other 
thing lost may possibly be recovered but not the body, never. You 
must resolve to keep the body in good shape till the goal is fully 
achieved. 
Having resolved what ought to be,
Hold on till you succeed.
Having desired what ought to be,
Hold on till they are fulfilled.
Having asked what ought to be,
Hold on till you get it.
Having thought what ought to be,
Hold on till the thought is realised.
With heart mellowed, the Lord must yield to your wishes,
Or forgetting yourself, you should ask Him with all your heart. 
Persevere, be tenacious, and never give up,
For it is the quality of a student never to retreat,
Abandoning his resolve.
Embodiments of Love! Swami blesses that you will duly treasure 
all the advice given to you by elders, guests, and teachers, and 
make ample use of them in the years to come so that you can 
lead ideal lives. With this blessing, Swami brings this discourse 
to a close.
Bhagavan sang two bhajans :  Pibare Rama Rasam ...  and 
Govinda Krishna Jai  ....
 May 000.
5. SUBTLE IS THE LORD
Daivadhinam jagat sarvam.
Satydhinam tu Daivatam.
Tat satyam uttamadhinam.
Uttamo Paradevatam.
God controls creation,
While truth holds sway over God;
But truth itself is subservient to a Noble One,
And such a One is the very Embodiment of God!
Embodiments of Love!
An individual has many experiences in the waking state and 
other distinct experiences in the dream-state. In the latter state, 
he creates everything he experiences – feelings, pleasure and 
pain, joy and sorrow. In the deep-sleep state he is oblivious to 
everything worldly or imaginary, and becomes one with Primary 
Consciousness. Thus, under three different circumstances, the 
same person has three different types of experiences. Experiences 
may vary but the Transcendental Being within is eternal and not su bject to any change. A garland drawn on a piece of paper 
will never move, shake, or wobble with respect to the paper. 
The paper itself might get tossed violently by gusts of wind 
but the garland would always remain firm on the paper and not 
undergo any relative movement. Likewise, although the external 
circumstances and the thoughts of an individual may undergo 
changes, the Divinity imprinted within will ever remain steady, 
constant, and never undergo any change. All aspirants must 
therefore cultivate clear vision and constancy of mind. 
The body is an infinite reservoir of auspiciousness
The human body may be compared to a bamboo pole. The 
bamboo has many joints that interrupt its smoothness. For 
the human being, the six vices, namely kama (desire), krodha 
(anger),  lobha  (greed), moha  (attachment), mada  (pride), matsar-
ya (jealousy), represent the bends or the joints. The human body 
has been referred to as tungabhadra.  Tunga  means infinite and 
bhadra  means auspiciousness. Thus, when one uses the word 
tungabhadra  for the human body, it means that the body is an 
infinite reservoir of auspiciousness. Everyone must therefore 
carefully introspect to check whether this sacred gift called the 
body is being properly used or is misused and mishandled. 
It was sage Narada who after deep enquiry gave this name 
tungabhadra to the human body. People often mistake Narada 
to be the one who foments trouble. This is not correct; such a 
view is an imagined and a distorted perception. Narada is the 
sage who has shown the path that can put an end to all sorrow. He radiates Know ledge. It is this Narada who knows the past, 
present, and future and who is so dear to Narayana, that gave 
this sacred name tungabhadra  to the human body. We have to 
make every effort to understand the sanctity of the human body, 
use it for noble and sacred actions, and derive Bliss therefrom. 
Human life should not be looked at from just a worldly, material, 
and physical perspective. Through intense enquiry, Sages of yore 
have unra-velled the deeper significance of human existence. 
Man today faces misery because he does not make proper use of 
his body and does not live his life as it ought to be, that is to say, 
in the service of humanity. Totally preoccupied with himself and 
his family, he has no time to think of community or the society 
he lives in. It is only when man becomes concerned with society 
that he will begin to understand why the human body is called 
tungabhadra . 
See Go d in man
Embodiments of Love! You are undoubtedly aware that human 
life is the noblest and the most precious of all. That is why the 
Vedas  declare:
Jantunam nara janma durlabham.
It is a rare blessing to be born a human. You must really appreciate 
how rare and preciou s human birth is. 
Man is called nara ; this word has two syllables, na and ra. Na  
means no, and ra means death – thus, nara  means one who is 0deathless, imperishable, and immortal. If you examine deeply, you 
will understand the inner meaning of the three words nara , Narada, 
and Narayana. Narada (the sage) is the one who shows Narayana 
(God) to nara (man). What a lofty meaning this word nara has! 
You must ponder over the fact that man who is intrinsically 
sacred is now wasting and ruining his invaluable existence. God 
is not really distinct from man. Narada recognised the identity of 
man with God and declared that it was not necessary to formally 
worship God. Narada described the relationship between man 
and God with the words,
Yallabdhwapuman, 
Siddho bhavathi,
Amritho bhavathi,
Truptho bhavathi,
Atmaramo bhavathi.
He is a true devotee who only wants God, is all the time yearning 
for God, is intoxicated by the very thought of God, and eventually 
becomes one with God. 
Man is really not different from the Indweller, and the individual 
is God  Himself. Goodness lies in seeing Narayana (God) in nara 
(man). On the other hand, man today revels in seeing God as just 
man. Such perception arises from an utter lack of faith, and is 
considered to be the height of intellectual reasoning. People think 
that it is important to achieve greatness; however, it is far more 
important to be good than to be great. The truly good one sees God 
in every human being. The evil one, on the other hand, reduces 
even the Divine to mundane levels. Such a one can be described 
as Ravana. Ravana mistook God to be an ordinary human, quite in contrast to Sage Narada who always saw Naray ana in nara . 
Every individual has divine power latent within. 
Man is the son of Immortality
Students must carefully examine all such matters thoroughly. You 
must go into the deeper aspects of the stories you read. Take the 
Ramayana, for example. This epic reveals how the principle of 
unity can lead to Bliss. On the other hand, stress on diversity leads 
only to unhappiness and sorrow. Rama, Lakshmana, Bharata, and 
Shatrugna became renowned on account of their strong sense of 
unity. Contrast this with Vali and Sugriva; they too were brothers 
but both had to undergo suffering on account of lack of unity. The 
Pandavas too illustrate how unity is strength. All the four young-
er brothers always bowed to the command of Dharmaja the eldest 
brother; they never went against his advice. The glorious exam-
ple set by them in the Dwapara age continues to remain a shining 
beacon even in this Kali age. Disunity, discord, and disaffection 
between brothers invariably produce pain and suffering. Unity, 
on the other hand, always paves the way for happiness. 
The scriptures offer many ideals for people to live by. Ravana, 
who went badly astray, realised his folly in the end. He said, “O 
people of this world! By yielding to lust and anger, I have brought 
ruin to one and all, including my family. I could not conquer 
hatred and jealousy and thereby lost all my relatives. Unable to 
understand the Fundamental Truth, I lost my sons too. Do not 
repeat my mistake.” This was the warning given by Ravana just 
prior to his death. Noble Souls are very powerful because they have comp letely grasped the basic truth. Ravana was mighty. He 
was one of great penance. He had acquired multiple capabilities 
— physical, mental, and even spiritual. But ultimately, of what 
use were all these various achievements? No use at all. Becoming 
a slave to attachment and hatred, he had, in the end, to suffer 
and perish. There was not a trace of Love in him. If, on the other 
hand, one instils Love in one’s heart, one can emerge victorious 
even under the most adverse circumstances. 
The scriptures hail man as Amrutasya putraha , or the Son of 
Immortality. Unable to understand this truth, man has degenerated 
into anrutha putra  or the son of falsehood. You should be the child 
of Immortality and not of falsehood. You should not merely love 
God but become God Himself. It is only when you experience love 
that you would begin to get a feel for who God is. Who is God? 
If you believe that God is far from you, He is definitely far away. 
But if you earnestly believe that God is very intimate and that He 
is the greatest friend of all, then He is as close to you as you are 
to yourself. It is a great mistake to believe that God exists only 
in a temple, or a sacred place, or in a pilgrim centre. All this has 
been explained very clearly by noble souls who have experienced 
Divinity within. Traditional and ritualistic practices are certainly 
needed to start with. It is like learning the alphabet first when 
one learns a language. Once you have learnt  the alphabet a, b, 
c, d, etc., you can learn words like GOD. After learning words, 
one can form sentences. Once one can read sentences, one can 
then read an entire book. In the same way, wise men of the past 
initiated people to the concept of Divinity by advising them to 
visit temples, holy places, etc. This is rather like learn ing the alphabet.  Even Avatars go through a learning process [by way 
of setting an example]. All such practices were recommended 
as spiritual drill for the ordinary people and beginners on the 
spiritual path. 
Proximity to the Divine confers remarkable experiences
For every spiritual practice there is an inner meaning, however 
trivial the practice might seem. Sainath (teacher and former 
student of the Institute who spoke earlier) mentioned that even 
apparently simple things that Swami says and does are full of 
deeper meaning. He is speaking from personal experience. 
Sainath, Dilip, Satyajit, Patle, Srinivas — all these boys, who 
serve Swami, stay with Him in the Poornachandra Auditorium. At 
night, they sleep not far away from Swami, and nothing escapes 
their attention. 
On occasions, departed souls visit Swami both during day as well 
as at night. One morning, Swami returned to the Poornachandra 
Hall as usual after morning bhajan . It was around ten o’clock, 
and Swami went upstairs. Sitting there in the chamber was 
Easwaramma, the mother of Swami’s body. Swami asked her, 
“Why do you come like this? What would people say? Don’t 
come like this.” She replied, “Swami, this is Your mother. What 
do You know about the love of a mother? Only a mother can 
understand my feelings. I am a mother and You are God full of 
Love for all. A mother cannot understand God’s Love and God 
cannot understand a mother’s love! I have come here in order 
to tell You something.” Swami then told her, “Tell me quickly whatever it is that you want to say; I have to go somewhere soon.” 
Easwaramma pleaded, “Swami, I don’t know what to do because 
You are always in a hurry! Please relax, spare me a few moments, 
and listen carefully to what I have to say.” Swami asked her to 
continue and she said, “The situation in the outside world today 
is not very good. Everywhere, it is bad thoughts, bad actions, and 
evil manipulations. You believe that people who come here are 
all full of Love for You. It is natural for You to think so but in 
my opinion, this is not always the case. When You give darshan , 
so many people offer a handkerchief to You. This frightens 
me. Please accept kerchief only from those in whom You have 
complete faith; ignore the rest.” Swami then asked, “Why are you 
making such a request?” and she replied, “For You, all are equal. 
Everyone is Your child. However, some people are wicked. The 
kerchief they offer may have poison and when You wipe Your 
face, the poison may enter Your mouth.” Swami said, “Alright, 
to satisfy you, I shall henceforth be very selective.” 
Some days after this, Swami was resting at night. The boys 
serving Swami were all sleeping nearby.  Around  a.m., the 
mother of this body once again made a visit. Swami motioned her 
to the bathroom, where the conversation took place. She began 
to speak loudly and Swami cautioned her saying, “Shh! Speak 
softly; the boys are all sleeping nearby. If they wake up, they 
will know about your visit.” Easwaramma said in reply, “Swami, 
why should I be afraid of them? I am afraid only of You and none 
else. I have not done anything wrong. Only those who have done 
so need to be scared. I have come here only out of my love for 
You and nothing else.” Swami then said, “Alright, now tell me what you have come for.” She replied, “Swami, yesterday was a 
festival day and You wore a new dhothi . To properly secure it, 
You went looking for a belt. You did not like any of those brought 
to You because they all were rather ornamental.” What she said 
was correct, and Swami did look for a belt. Easwaramma then 
continued, “Swami, why do You have to ask others? You gave me 
a chain just before I died. Here it is; take it and use it as a belt.”  
The day prior to her death [Swami was in Brindavan at that time, 
and so was Easwaramma], Swami had materialised a nice chain 
for Easwaramma because she liked such things. He then placed it 
round her neck. Next day, she gave up her body saying, “Swami, 
Swami!” After her demise, her body was taken to Puttaparthi. Just 
before that, Swami told Ramabrahmam (who was the caretaker 
in Brindavan at that time)  that Mother Easwaramma liked that 
chain very much. Let her be buried along with the chain.” So the 
chain was not removed from the body before it was interred. This 
was the chain she was now offering to Swami. To send her away, 
Swami accepted the chain.
Meanwhile, Sainath woke up. The slightest sound and these boys 
all wake up! Sainath began to wonder, “I am hearing voices. How 
could anyone have entered Swami’s room? All doors have been 
locked; the lift also has been locked; and the keys are with me. 
How could anyone get inside?” Slowly the boys came near Swami. 
They all were scared but Satyajit picked up courage and gently 
asked, “Swami, we heard voices. Who was that?” Swami first 
said, “That is none of your business.” But seeing their concern 
for Swami’s safety, Swami revealed who had come.  Swami said, 
“The one who came was the mother of this body. She passe d away about twenty eight years ago, before your time.” These 
boys are all in their mid-twenties or so. The boys then wanted to 
know what the lady had given Swami. Swami showed them the 
chain; they all saw it. Later Swami gave the chain to one of the 
boys, and it is still with him. 
On another occasion, a lady in Simla suffered a massive heart 
attack. She had lost her husband and had two small children to 
look after. She was suffering from intense physical pain and, on 
account of her children, deep  mental anguish as well.  It was   
a.m. Swami left the body in order to save her. This body then 
collapsed and fell down, hitting the floor with a big bang. The 
boys heard the sound and rushed inside. They saw the body on 
the floor, seemingly lifeless. There was no movement at all. They 
tried to lift the head but could not. Imagine that! These four or 
five young men, all so strong, could not lift this little head! They 
brought towels to wipe the wounds if any, but there was no sign 
of any bleeding. Slowly they understood; Swami was away on an 
extra-corporeal trip in order to save somebody. They just sat there 
and waited for Swami to return. When the task was completed, 
Swami re-entered the body, and the boys were very happy. 
The boys staying with Swami have had many such experiences. 
They are all extremely devoted to Swami. They never waste a 
single moment, and rush to Swami’s side the moment their work 
is over. This is true of  those working in the institute and those 
serving in the hospital. On festival days when they feel that 
Swami may retire early, the hospital boys come back ahead of 
schedule, without having their meals. If Swami asks them about food th ey will reply that they are not hungry. But Swami does not 
accept such replies and arranges food for them. All these boys are 
very devoted to Swami, and Sainath is one of them. Swami does 
not wish to give publicity to these boys, but at the same time, the 
world must know about the love and devotion with which they 
take care of Swami. 
Man himself is the Form of God
It is not possible to enumerate or describe what kind of experiences 
one can have with God. Man and God are not distinct from one 
another. Drawing attention to this, Sainath quoted the saying, “I 
and you are one.” Even this is not the best way of putting it. ‘You’ 
are not different from ‘I’. There is only ‘I’ and no ‘You’! You are 
I and I am You! God, the I, is present in everything in creation, 
particularly so in human beings. 
Deho Devalayaprokto Jivo Devah Sanatanah.
The body is the temple and the Indweller is God. 
It is popularly said that Vishnu is the One bearing the conch, 
discus, and mace. What is the inner meaning of the words conch 
and discus? Conch symbolises sound, and discus symbolises the 
wheel of time. Therefore, when people say that Vishnu has the 
conch and the discus, it really means that God is the Supreme 
Master of sound and time. One should not imagine God to be 
separate from oneself. All the powers inherent in the body are 
really in the control of God, who is actually within. Therefore, do not think God is separate from you, then assign Him a separate 
Form, and thereafter start decorating that Form. 
About thirty years ago, Burgula Ramakrishna Rao (a great devotee 
of Bhagavan, who served as the Chief Minister of An-dhra 
Pradesh, and later as the Governor of Kerala and Uttar Pradesh 
as well), compelled Swami to go to the holy city of Tirupati, 
where Lord Venkateswara is the presiding Deity. At the temple, 
Swami was received in the traditional style with full honours, 
and was conducted into the sanctum sanctorum, where the idol 
of the deity is installed. Mr. Anna Rao was the Chief Executive 
Officer of the temple at that time. Swami told Anna Rao, “Why 
do you disfigure this beautiful idol with so many decorations and 
ornaments? If the jewellery is removed, the Lord would look far 
more majestic.”  Burgula Ramakrishna Rao added, “Swami, I 
too do not like all this decorations but then, people always do 
such things for their own pleasure. ”  Swami then remarked, “It 
is better to leave the idol in its natural form.” Anna Rao listened 
to all this but was unable to do anything. Decoration of the idol 
is not the proper way to see beauty in God and experience joy. 
Inner beauty is what gives true  Ananda (Bliss), and such joy is 
the true fragrance of life. 
God needs no decoration. However, the human form that enshrines 
Divinity has to be given due respect and treated accordingly. As 
Swami mentioned earlier, the human body was given the name 
tungabhadra ; is it proper then to display it or treat it in an improper 
and inauspicious manner? Swami wears a robe so that almost all 
the body is covered. It is not possible to cover the hands, feet, and the face. However, at times, Swami’s hair partially covers His 
face.  But what can I do about it?  The Avatar’ s  body comes with 
a brilliant effulgence of its own. In fact, every being has within it 
some divine effulgence. Everything that Swami does has its own 
innate significance. A small example. People eat when they are  
hungry; and people drink water only when they are thirsty. One 
cries only at times of sorrow, and smiles only when happy. For 
every action, there is a specific reason. Swami too takes care of 
His body for specific reasons. 
Modulate your voice if needed but never compromise on truth
The three Ps, namely, purity, patience, and perseverance, are very 
important. Swami is ever the embodiment of purity. Whatever 
Swami does is always for others and never for Himself. The 
purity present in Swami cannot be seen anywhere else; that is 
how  Swami’s heart is pure. It is that purity that draws people in 
hundreds and thousands from all over the world to Swami. No 
invitation is sent to people to come here, and yet they flock in 
such large numbers; such is the magnetism of a truly pure Body. 
Swami is also very patient. Mountains may move but Swami’s 
heart is ever steady and unruffled. However, at times, Swami may 
“hiss”! This tactic is used solely to rectify and correct people who 
are going astray. Such methods become necessary because people 
do not always respond to nice words of advice! When Swami 
gently asks people to sit down, they do not listen but when He 
raises His voice, there is instant obedience! (Laughter.) 
V oice and tone modulation can be useful and effective, and at 
times even lives have been saved. Once during the Kurukshetra 0war, Aswatthama, the son of Dronacharya,) took a terrible vow 
to annihilate all the Pandavas. Coming to know of this, Draupadi 
prayed to Krishna to save the Pandavas. The leelas  of the Lord 
are not only wonderful but also most mysterious. For the sake of 
devotees, God enacts dramas and even changes the scenes in His 
play for their welfare and to ensure their safety. In this instance, 
the Lord saved the Pandavas with a delicate touch that only He is 
capable of. He went to meet sage Durvasa, who was immensely 
delighted to receive Krishna. The sage then asked,  “Lord, what 
brought You to my humble ashram ?” Krishna smiled and said, “I 
have a small job for you.” The Sage was happy and said, “I am 
at Your service. You just have to command.” Krishna then said, 
“Good! Tonight, you have to save the Pandavas.” Durvasa was 
puzzled and asked, “Lord, it is You who protects everything in 
Creation. Who am I to do that job?” Krishna replied, “That is a 
different matter. But for this job, you will be My instrument. I 
extend protection in many different ways. On this occasion, you 
have to do something specific, as per My instructions.” Durvasa 
wanted to know what it was and Krishna continued, “Dig a pit, 
ask the Pandavas to hide in the pit, cover the pit with planks, 
grass, and mud, and then take your seat on the cover so prepared. 
The enemies of the Pandavas may come and ask you about the 
whereabouts of the Pandavas. They may say, ‘O sage who knows 
the past, present, and future, please tell us where the Pandavas are 
hiding.’”  Durvasa intervened and said, “Lord, I cannot tell a lie.” 
Krishna countered, “Did I ask you to utter falsehood? I am Truth, 
and I will always ask you to speak only the Truth. However, you 
are at liberty to change your voice suitably, to achieve the desired 
effect. I am sure you understand.” The sage nodded and smiled. Sometim e later, after the Pandavas had been hidden away, 
Aswatthama came there, exactly as Krishna had forecast. Durvasa 
was sitting with his eyes closed. Bowing to the sage, Aswatthama 
sought, in a most humble manner, some information concerning 
the whereabouts of the Pandavas. Durvasa slowly opened his 
eyes; they were flaming. Angrily he roared, “Yes the Pandavas 
are here, right beneath me.” Besides anger, there was also much 
sarcasm in the sage’s voice. Aswatthama was frightened because 
the sage was well known for his fiery temper and his propensity 
to curse those whom he was angry with. Promptly he fled from 
the scene, and the Pandavas were duly saved. All Avatars employ 
such techniques, and Swami does the same when required. 
In the Rama Avatar , it was the day scheduled for the coronation of 
Rama. Rama had just met Kaikeyi and returned to His residence, 
where Sita was busy getting dressed for the big occasion. Smiling 
broadly, Rama told Sita, “Listen to this, for it is very important. 
I have to leave Ayodhya immediately. On account of a promise 
given earlier by My father, I have to go in exile to the forest.” Sita 
was stunned. She then recovered and said, “You are going to the 
forest? In that case, I too will go with You.” Rama replied, “No, 
you cannot. The forest is not a fit place for you to live in. You will 
constantly face danger from the demons and the wild animals.” 
Sita then said, “What! You the Protector of the whole world cannot 
protect one woman? I do not believe that You cannot protect me; 
it is simply that You do not want me to accompany You! I am 
determined to follow You!” Rama tried hard to dissuade Sita 
from going with Him but she was adamant.  Speaking harshly, 
Rama then said, “If you come, it would mean more trouble for 
Me; you would just be adding to My burden. I have  to go to the forest by way of obeying My father’s command. What role do 
you have in this? Why do you have to come?” Rama prepared 
to leave the premises when Sita asked, “Where are You going?” 
Rama replied, “I am going to see My mother to bid her goodbye.” 
Sita said, “I shall go with You,” and Rama agreed. Together they 
went to Kausalya’s palace. 
Kausalya was in tears. She lamented, “O my dear Son, I was so 
happy thinking that You were going to be crowned. But in a few 
short moments, destiny has taken such a shocking turn. After You 
leave, I cannot remain here in Ayodhya even for a second. So, I too 
will go with You to the forest.” Rama softly replied, “Father is old 
and also somewhat disabled. No matter what, you cannot leave 
him. For a woman, husband is God. Your prime duty is to serve 
him.” Sita heard all this. She was very intelligent you know!  On 
return to their abode, Sita opened the topic again and told Rama, 
“I am going with You.” Rama tersely replied, “Not possible.” It 
was now Sita’s turn to raise her voice, and she said, “You told 
Your mother that husband is God. In that case, is not my husband 
my God? You  are the moon and I am the moonlight. The moon 
and its light are linked; can they ever be separated? Moonlight 
has to be where the moon is. It is unthinkable that Rama is in the 
forest and Sita is in Ayodhya. I am coming with You!” Rama had 
to yield to this powerful and indisputable argument! 
Commence spiritual practice at an early age
As Swami said earlier, never utter falsehood. But, for the sake of 
the welfare of others, you can adopt other suitable strategies to 
achieve the desired goal. Sarve loka hite ratah.
May everyone be prosperous. Always wish everyone well. 
Next, 
Sarve samudita gunaih.
May everyone be virtuous. And finally, 
Sarve jnana sampannah.
May eve ryone be endowed with Wisdom. The key to these three 
cardinal principles, namely, well being, virtue, and wisdom, 
is contained in Swami’s three P’s: purity, patience, and perse-
verance. In the strict pursuit of the three Ps, Swami remains 
unmatched in the entire world (loud applause). Whatever Swami 
does is always for the good, welfare, joy, and comfort of others, 
and not for Himself. Never does Swami do anything for His 
personal benefit or advantage. From top to toe, there is not a 
trace of selfishness in Swami, and there is no place for it either. 
Everything that Swami does is always for you and you alone. 
Embodiments of Love! Boys and Girls! It is not possible to fully 
understand the divine principle. No one can ever understand 
God. People may declare that they have done so but the very next 
minute, they are full of doubts and confusion. Such vacillations 
are due to tendencies acquired over many births. Influences of the 
past can and do hamper spiritual progress. Hence, transformation 
does not come easily; it has to happen slowly but steadily. That 
is why Swami repeatedly says: start early, drive slowly, reach safely. Your s is the right age to make a serious start and to begin 
assiduous spiritual practice. Always be calm and peaceful, and do 
not give any scope for your purity to get contaminated. Purity and 
patience would automatically make perseverance quite easy. 
Swami always addresses you as Premaswaroopulaaraa  
(Embodiments of Love). Swami is ever full of Love and that 
is why His words too are always saturated with Love. Swami 
expects all of you to actually become what He hails you as. You 
should ensure that your Love does not ever get diminished or 
diluted under any circumstance whatsoever. If you live like that, 
Swami is ready to grant you whatever you want! Students of 
today will become the leaders of tomorrow and the emancipators 
of this country. You must therefore drive away all bad feelings, 
cultivate virtues, and always have sacred vision. Be ever careful 
about what y ou say and let there be no room for untruthful and 
improper words. Such ideal behaviour would bring great joy to 
your parents. It is your duty to make them happy. Remember,
Matr Devo bhava. 
Pitr Devo bhava.
Mother is God; father is God. All parents shower love on their 
children. Your parents care for you as much as Swami’s parents 
cared for Him. It is therefore your duty to bring Ananda  (Bliss) 
to them in every possible way.
Swami brought His divine discourse to an end by singing the 
bhajan: Bhava Bhaya Harana ….
 May 000.6. THE EXALTED NATURE OF 
DEVOTION
Devotion is the key to the spiritual path,
And  vital for sailing across the ocean of life;
Devotion heightens the yearning for divinity,
And is the stepping stone for liberation. 
Embodiments of Love! Students, Boys and Girls!
This land Bharat has eloquently proclaimed through the ages the 
virtues of bhakti  or devotion. Devotion does not merely mean the 
observance of rituals, the performance of penance, or meditation. 
Devotion really means sincere and intense love for the Lord. It 
implies pure and steady love, untainted by any selfish desires 
or action. Such love knows no boundaries and is beyond all 
regulations. The spontaneous outflow of selfless love from man 
to God is true bhakti . Love admixed with worldly desires cannot 
be called devotion. The only desire one must have is for God; 
all other desires must be set aside, and nothing must be allowed 
to come between oneself and God. The love coming from the 
devotee’s heart must flow unimpeded to God. love for God must 
be totally impervious to the vicissitudes of life. Constantl y meditate on the Lord
Dharmaja, the eldest among the Pandavas, is one example 
of a person who was able to achieve this kind of one-pointed 
devotion. He remained unruffled even when his wife Draupadi 
was being subjected to extreme humiliation in the royal court. 
Similarly, when Abhimanyu the son of Arjuna was slain in the 
battle, Dharmaja accepted the verdict of destiny with perfect 
equanimity. He remained equally calm when Aswatthama the 
son of Dron acharya mercilessly slaughtered all the Pandava off-
springs. Nor was he bothered when he and his brothers had to 
spend long years in exile in the forest, foregoing all the royal 
comforts they were used to. All this was possible for Dharmaja 
because his mind was ever absorbed in the contemplation of 
Krishna. He was constantly thinking of Krishna, always chanting 
His Name, and was generally oblivious to what was going on 
around him. 
Dharmaja was not alone in such one-pointed devotion. His wife 
Draupadi also thought of Krishna incessantly and constantly 
chanted His Name. After the gruesome murder of the young 
Pandava children, Arjuna tracked Aswatthama the perpetrator of 
the atrocity and dragged him before Draupadi. And what did she 
do on that occasion? Did she curse the murderer? Did she explode 
in fury? No; with great forbearance she said to Aswatthama,
These children were at home
And did not enter the battlefield;
Nor did they hunt and kill; 
They were just tiny tots,Devoid of all ill feelings.
Why then did you cruelly strike them,
And in the darkness of night slaughter them?
They were the children of Dronacharya’ s disciples,
That very same Drona,
 Who was also your father and guru.
Can you truthfully declare,
That what you did was right?
Bhima could not bear to see what Draupadi was doing. Here was 
Aswatthama waiting to be dealt with severely for his dastardly 
act, and Draupadi was trying to reason with this evil monster! 
Exploding in anger, Bhima roared:
Here is this demon,
Who has slaughtered our children,
And this foolish woman,
Is trying to reason with him!
Should the murderer be spared,
Or dealt with as he deserves?
If no one is willing to punish him,
I shall with bare hands,
Crush him to pulp!
Consumed by fury, most of the Pandavas were about to jump 
on Aswatthama. Draupadi raised her hand and said, “Stop, you 
should not kill or harm this person.”
O Partha! It is wrong to kill
One who is afraid,One whom courage has abandoned,
One who is asleep,
One who is intoxicated,
One who seeks refuge, 
And finally, a woman.
“You should not kill Aswatthama, for he is your preceptor’s son.  
Just shave his head off as a token punishment and set him free.”  
This is how Draupadi reacted to the situation; she did not have the 
slightest hatred for one who mercilessly wiped out all the Pandava 
offsprings. Among the Pandavas, Dharmaja and Draupadi were 
two precious gems. It is their constant con-templation of Krishna 
that enabled them to face all odds with equanimity and display 
magnanimity as well as forbearance, under the most trying of 
circumstances. 
Draupadi constantly chanted:
Kleem, Krishnaya, Govindaya, Gopijana Vallabhaya, Swaha!
This sacred chant has deep significance. Kleem  stands for prithvi  
or earth. Krishnaya  means jala or water. Similarly, Govindaya  
is a reference to agni or fire. Likewise, the other words refer 
respectively to vayu  or air, and akasha  or ether. In short, the 
words of this sacred chant refer to the five elements. Through this 
chant, Draupadi proclaimed her belief that Krishna the Supreme 
was not only immanent in all the elements, but was Himself the 
elements. This was the profound way in which both Dharmaja 
and Draupadi meditated on Krishna. Krishna was everything and He was also Perfect. Therefore, no matter what the circumstance, 
He was beyond both criticism and reproach. Such are the shining 
examples of devotion available to us in Bharatiya Culture. 
The ideal offerings to God
True devotion is not bound by rituals, set procedures, and 
prescribed forms. It is exemplified by the flood of tears that 
originate from the ocean of love in your heart. The Gita talks 
about various offerings to the Lord like patram (leaf) , pushpam 
(flower) , phalam (fruit) , and toyam (water). These words should 
not be taken literally. By leaf, the Lord does not mean the tulsi or 
the bilva  leaf normally used in ritualistic worship. Truly speaking, 
the human body is the leaf that must be offered to the Lord. Like 
the leaf of the tree, the human body too would one day die and 
decay. No one can say when that will happen. Before such a fate 
befalls, the body in its fullness, freshness, and purity, ought to be 
offered to the Lord with the words:  
Oh Lord! This body gifted by You,
I reverentially offer back unto You,
Treating it as a leaf, 
And in the spirit in which tulsi leaves are offered. 
Why is this leaf called the body special? Because it is not the sort 
of leaf that would dry up in just a day or two. You must say with 
feeling, “Lord, I don’t know what kind of leaf would please You. 
I have this body, and I offer it to You. Please treat it as a leaf and 
accept it.” Next, flower. You must say,00Oh God who has gifted me a heart,
That same heart I offer back unto You
Along with my humble salutations; 
What else is there to offer?
The flower of your heart is what would please the Lord most and 
not the flowers purchased from the bazaar. The bazaar flowers 
fade in a few hours but the heart is not like that. Totally pure, 
fragrant, soaked in love, and perfect, it does not wither easily. 
After this, fruit. What fruit would please God? Is it apple, orange, 
mango, or something else? God is not interested in fruits that 
grow on a tree; He is interested in your mind! Mind therefore 
is the fruit that must be offered to the Lord. Lastly, water. Is it 
tap water, well water, or Ganges water that the Lord wants from 
you? None of these. What God expects are the tears of joy that 
flow when your Heart is full of love for Him. These then are the 
offerings that the Lord expects when you worship Him. 
God can be secured with Love alone
Sathyabhama [one of the consorts of Krishna] once got the idea 
that using her wealth, she could secure Krishna exclusively for 
herself. Can God be ever bought for money? No! Love alone 
can get Him; but Sathyabhama did not appreciate this.  Sage 
Narada appeared on the scene at this stage, and the matter was 
placed before him. Narada is the one who imparts Wisdom. 
Wanting to teach Sathyabhama a lesson, he decided to stage a 
small drama. He asked for a big balance to be brought, and then 
invited Krishna to sit on one of the pans. Krishna of course knew 0very well what Narad a was up to, and smilingly obliged the sage. 
Narada then asked Sathyabhama to place gold on the other pan. 
But lo and behold! No matter how much gold was placed on the 
other pan, the scale refused to become even. Sathyabhama felt 
utterly frustrated. Seeking advice, she went to Rukmini [the other 
consort of Krishna], who at that time was engaged in the worship 
of Tulsi . After hearing what Sathyabhama had to say, Rukmini 
remarked, “God belongs to all and resides in every being as the 
Eternal Indweller. No one can have a monopoly of God, nor is it 
good to even entertain such a desire.”The gold was then removed 
and Narada now asked Rukmini to try and somehow match 
Krishna’s weight. Rukmini replied, “O sage, I believe Krishna’s 
Form can be balanced just by uttering His Name, and that is what 
I am going to do.” Narada was not prepared to accept such a 
scheme and said, “The Form is visible and tangible whereas the 
Name is not. I want you to match Krishna’s Form with something 
that has a form.” Rukmini agreed. She took a tulsi leaf in her 
hand and prayed:
O God, Who is worshipped with leaf, flowers, fruits, and water,
If it be true that You submit Yourself
When You are offered Pure Love instead of all these,
I pray that You be balanced by Your Name,
And then tilt the scale with this tulsi leaf. 
So praying, Rukmini said, “Krishna!” Immediately the scale 
became even, although one of the pans was totally empty. 
Rukmini then placed the tulsi leaf on the empty pan, and the pan 
carrying Krishna went up instantly; the Lord had been more than 
matched! 0This story teaches that the Lord submits Himself only to pure 
devotion; He cannot be obtained in any other way; least of all, He 
cannot ever be bought! There is nothing greater than pure bhakti , 
which is why it is given such an exalted status in Bharatiya 
culture. Our ancients held that devotion is more precious and 
valuable than all the material wealth one can dream of. It is this 
wealth that man should really seek instead of gold. In fact, it is 
the bounden duty of man to acquire this wealth; and he does not 
have to go far to seek it, for this treasure is already locked up 
within him. 
The chakras and their significance
In every human being there are seven chakras or centres of 
psychic power, Shad chakras  as they are called. These chakras  
have been interpreted in various ways. Among these, the two 
most important ones are the hridaya chakra  and the sahasrara 
chakra . They are described as being special kind of lotus flowers, 
the former having eight radiant petals, and the latter a thousand 
petals. It is said that a thorough understanding of the principles 
underlying these two chakras  would facilitate the attainment of 
divinity. The flower of the heart represents God, while each petal 
of the sahasrara  represents sixteen aspects of Divinity. Thus, the 
thousand petals of sahasrara  represent in all, sixteen thousand 
aspects of Divinity. The sixteen thousand gopikas (cowherd 
maids) that the scriptures talk about represent nothing but sixteen 
thousand variants of Divinity. They say that one gets liberated 
when one ascends from the hridaya chakra  to the sahasrara 
chakra.  What does this really mean? Simply this: Just as the 0petals dissolve their individual identity and merge together to 
form a radiant flower,  the gopikas merged into the Omnipresent, 
Omnipotent, and Omniscient God. The coming together of the 
gopikas and God is, in the chakra  language, the coming together of 
the two important chakras  mentioned earlier. God is the Ultimate 
Divine Master, and everything in creation belongs to Him. All 
beings are His property. The sahasrara flower [representing the 
mind] is His property, and it must be offered to Him a lone. The 
Ramayana provides an illustration. 
Sita is the daughter of Mother Earth and the consort of Rama 
– this is as far as the Ramayana is concerned. In spiritual terms, 
Rama is Paramatma (God) and Sita is prakriti (nature). Nature 
hwas created by God and belongs to God. In the Ramayana, this 
is symbolised by the marriage of Sita and Rama; this marriage 
represents the eternal unity and the inseparable nature of God 
and His Creation. Ravana, who did not understand all these 
subtleties, tried to abduct Sita and paid dearly for it. Toward the 
end, Ravana’s wife Mandodari said, “Ravana, Sri Rama is God 
Himself and Sita is the embodiment of Mother Supreme. You 
have committed a heinous crime in abducting Sita. What right do 
you have to take away what belongs to someone else? Repent at 
least now for what you have done. Go to Rama, fall at His Feet, 
seek His pardon, and restore Sita back to Him.” But alas, when 
disaster beckons, the mind gets perverted; so Ravana ignored 
Mandodari’s advice and later paid the price for his rashness. 
 
Being aspects of Divinity, the gopikas were the property of God. 
Through their lives they demonstrated how God and His property 0became one. In a subtle sense, the sahasrara  with thousand-
petals and representing sixteen-thousand Divine aspects is 
derived from the hridaya . The petals and the flower are not 
separate. The sahasrara  is the Mind and the hridaya  is God. The 
enormous powers of the mind belong to God, and they cannot 
be appropriated as one wishes. Dissolving one’s ego, the mind 
must, in its entirety, be offered to God. It is this principle that is 
described by way of  the chakras  on the one hand, and through 
the gopikas on the other. The yogis  and rishis  of yore understood 
all this and tried to elevate themselves so that the two chakras  
came together. This is described as ascending from the hridaya 
chakra  to the sahasrara chakra . It implies the unifi cation of the 
mind and the heart. Why were the rishis  so particular about this 
unification? Because this union led to Infinite Bliss. Happiness 
is union with God. The heart is the seat of God, and the mind 
is born of the heart. Thus the mind is the property of the heart. 
When the Master and His property are united there is Bliss. 
Krishna created the gopikas and enacted a drama involving them 
in order to demonstrate how one must relentlessly go in quest of 
God. The gopikas recognised Krishna as Divine and described 
Him in numerous ways. When they were separated from Krishna, 
they became very depressed. Life without Krishna seemed totally 
empty and meaningless. In their hearts they prayed, “O Krishna, 
won’t You come and visit us at least once?” Krishna eventually 
responded to their prayers and came. Pangs of separation had 
by this time reduced the gopikas to skin and bones. They were 
beyond hunger and thirst. Krishna saw their pitiable condition 
and said, “You  should not starve like this. Eat something.” They 0replied, “Krishna, our food is the melody of Your flute. We know 
no food other than Your music.” Radha added:
O Krishna! Sing please a sweet song,
And fill our hearts
With nectarine words and Bliss.
Distil the essence of the Vedas,
Transform it into lilting music,
Play it on Your enchanting flute,
And captivate us with Your melody.
Sing, O Krishna! Sing for us!!
This is the way Radha appealed to Krishna. Krishna then picked 
up a bamboo twig, made it into a flute, and played music for the 
gopikas . Radha wa s transported to the height of ecstasy and said, 
“Krishna, this is the moment I have been waiting for so long. 
I am now full.” So saying she gave up her body and merged 
into Krishna. After this incident, Krishna never again touched 
the flute. 
God’s response depends upon how much you yearn
God offers Himself to His devotees in exactly the same manner 
in which devotees offer themselves to Him.  
Yad bhavam tad bhavati.
As you feel, so you become. If you constantly cry out, “O God, O 
Most Loving God,” He responds by saying, “O My devotee, My 
dearest  devotee.” (Applause.) God has no thought other than for 0His devotee. If the devotee always thinks of God, then God too 
will always be thinking of the devotee. No one can come between 
the two. The Pandavas demonstrated this to the world. They had 
to face innumerable difficulties, humiliation, and suffering but, 
in the midst of all their travails, they never forgot Krishna. They 
always said, “Krishna’s glorious Name is our food, water, and 
nectar.” It is by such thoughts that they sanctified their time. 
For them, Krishna was always first; everything else came later. 
For the Kauravas on the other hand, the priorities were radically 
different. For them, Kauravas first, relatives next, and Krishna 
last. They left Krishna and in the process got lost! This shows the 
impor-tance of having God as priority number one. In the priority 
list, the world must come only after God. How can there be a 
world w ithout God? God is Eternal whereas the world comes and 
goes; that is why it is called jagat ; jagat  = ja + gat; it comes and 
goes. Your focus must always be on the permanent and not on the 
temporary. Then alone can you   become Immortal. 
Embodiments of Love! It is not enough to merely do japam  
(ritualistic chant of the Name), and dhyanam  (meditation). You 
must in addition have a deep yearning for the Lord for He alone 
is Eternal and Permanent. It is from Him alone that you can get 
Eternal Bliss. Do not go after ephemeral pleasures. Do not be 
deluded by false attractions. The world is transient and all the 
pleasures it can offer are fleeting too. That is why in the Gita it 
is said:
Anityam asukham lokam.
The world is illusory and full of miseries too. 0Imam prapya bhajasva Maam.
Constantly pray to Me. The world comes and goes, whereas God 
is always there. He neither comes nor goes; He neither makes an 
entry nor an exit, for He is ever present. That is why the gopikas 
always thought of Krishna and were constantly praying to Him. 
It is impossible for anyone to describe even in a small measure 
the Love of God or His Sweetness. The more you describe, the 
more you feel these are indescribable. How can anyone describe 
the Infinite? One must instead be absorbed in the contemplation 
of the Glory of God, which is what the Pandavas did; and that is 
why Krishna was prepared to do anything for them. 
Examples of Krishna’s compassion
Once during their exile, Dharmaja and Draupadi were walking 
through the forest when Draupadi saw a huge fruit on a tree. She 
wanted to have the fruit since it could make a sumptuous meal 
for all of them. Arjuna happened to come by and, responding to 
Draupadi’s wish, brought the fruit down by shooting an arrow. 
He then tried to lift the fruit but could not; it was very heavy. 
Dharmaja and Draupadi gave a helping hand but the three of 
them together still could not lift the fruit. Then Dharmaja said:
“O Krishna , not a blade of grass can move without Your will;
Is it necessary to mention all the details?
From the tiny ant to the vast galaxies,
It is You who pervade and prevail everywhere.0The ignorant do not realise this,
And arrogantly imagine,
That it is their intelligence that makes the world go.
Clever and intelligent they might be,
But can they forecast what will happen when?”
“O Krishna, nothing can happen without Your divine Will.” 
Meanwhile, Bhima, Nakula, and Sahadeva arrived on the spot. 
The arrival of Bhima was greeted with joy for he was the mighty 
one and could be depended upon to lift the fruit. Bhima tried at 
first quite casually, using just one hand; but the fruit would not 
budge. Realising that it was not such a simple matter, Bhima then 
made a serious try using both his hands but no luck once again. 
All six then tried to heave the fruit but still it was of no use. 
Now there is a story behind this unusual fruit.  In this forest there 
lived a rishi named Roma Rishi – this name means the one with 
long hair . It was he who had nursed this tree and was doing intense 
penance to attain the fruit. This fruit was known as amrutaphala, 
by eating which one would be for ever free from hunger and 
thirst. That waswhy Roma Rishi  was keen on having it. Seated 
in meditation, the rishi sensed that some intruders were trying to 
take the fruit away. His long sprawling hair then automatically 
started extending in search of the culprits; once the culprits were 
located, the hair would tie them down. Draupadi was frightened 
by the approaching coils of hair. She prayed, “O Krishna who 
saves us all the time, You must come to our rescue once more. 
We have no refuge other than You.” 
Krishna promptly arrived on the scene, smiling as usual. He 
enquired, “Sister, why are you crying? You wanted the fruit; 0you have got it; now go ahead and enjoy it!” Draupadi replied, 
“Krishna, I desired the fruit without realising the implications. We 
are humans and cannot be expected to be aware of supernatural 
consequences. You must save us now.” Krishna then said, 
“Draupadi, My hands are tied. The rishis  too love Me, and they 
are constantly thinking of Me. I am installed in their hearts, so I am 
obliged to them also!” Though Krishna appeared to be wriggling 
out, was He the one to give up the Pandavas so easily? No, and 
He came up with a neat trick that would save the Pandavas from 
the wrath of Roma Rishi . Whatever God does or says is always  
for the benefit of His devotees; He is never  driven by personal or 
selfish considerations. Krishna said, “Now all of you, Draupadi 
included, go to the hermitage of Roma Rishi and pay your respects 
to the Saint. Don’t be afraid. Just go there, and I shall follow 
soon. Whatever happens, remain tight-lipped, especially after I 
arrive. Be careful and remain silent throughout.”
The Pandavas went to the hermitage in accordance with Krishna’s 
Master plan. There they found the rishi fuming and all set to 
curse. Angrily the rishi asked the Pandavas, “Who are you and 
where do you come from?” Precisely at that moment, Krishna 
entered the hut of the rishi.  Roma Rishi  hastened to welcome 
Krishna and said, “Lord, how lucky and fortunate am I to have 
You visit my humble abode!” The sage was bubbling with joy. 
Meanwhile, Krishna appeared to be surprised to see the Pandavas 
there. Instantly He started prostrating most reverentially before 
them one by one. He even fell at the feet of Draupadi. The rishi 
was stunned to see all this. He said to himself: “Krishna is verily 
God, and He is prostrating before these people. Does that mean 0that t hese people are even greater than God?” But he did not 
spend too much time analysing what was going on. Obviously the 
visitors must be exalted ones. So, following Krishna’s example, 
he too started falling at the feet of the Pandavas one by one. 
Having prostrated, he could no longer curse them! That was  just 
not done – one does not curse those to whom salutation has been 
offered. The rishi’ s  anger quickly came down, even as Krishna 
was chanting santhi . Incidentally, Santhi  is always chanted 
three times. Do you know why? Because one wants peace at the 
level of the body, mind, and soul. The rishi then asked Krishna, 
“Lord, what is all this mystery? There is none greater than You 
and yet, You are prostrating before these humans! What is the 
inner significance of this?” Krishna smiled and replied, “O Noble 
One, I dwell in the minds of My devotees. I am the captive of 
My devotees. These Pandavas have extraordinary devotion for 
Me. No matter what the circumstance, they never forget Me. I 
am under the control of such devotees!”  The sage realised the 
greatness of the Pandavas and said, “Please take this fruit; I do 
not need it.” The rishi then wished them all a long life; not just 
a long life but a long, long life, happy life, and a peaceful life! 
Sure enough the Pandavas were happy till the very end. With this 
particular episode, God taught an important lesson to humanity. If 
you have steady devotion for God, there is nothing that cannot be 
accomplished. God Himself would come running forward to help 
you. Numerous such incidents occurred during the incarnation of 
God as Krishna. 
Here is another example of Krishna’s limitless compassion. On 
the ninth day of the Kurukshetra war, Bhishma took a terrible vow to exter minate all the Pandavas before sunset the next day. 
Draupadi came to know of this and became highly perturbed. She 
said to Krishna, “O Lord, this must not happen. You have to do 
something. I don’t know how, but You must make sure that I do 
not become a widow.” Krishna smiled and was non-committal. 
He just said, “Wait and see what happens.” God may appear non-
committal but when you appeal to Him with deep sincerity, He 
will certainly respond. 
Night came, and quiet descended on the battlefield, everyone 
having withdrawn to their respective quarters. In his tent, Bhishma 
was restless and was pacing to and fro. Meanwhile Krishna came 
to Draupadi and said, “This is the moment. Bhishma is unable to 
sleep and is pacing back and forth in his tent. He is regretting the 
vow he has taken. You must slip into his tent this very moment and 
throw yourself at his feet.” Draupadi nodded and started moving 
toward Bhishma’s tent. She was wearing special slippers used by 
royalty, that made a squeaking noise. The noise could be clearly 
heard in the stillness of the night. Krishna signalled to Draupadi 
to stop and said, “If Bhishma hears this sound, he would know 
that a lady is coming. He should not know about your approach. 
So remove your sandals and give them to Me.” Draupadi did as 
instructed. Krishna collected the slippers, wrapped them in His 
upper cloth, and started walking behind Draupadi, some distance 
away. 
Quietly, Draupadi slipped into Bhishma’s tent. Absorbed as he 
was in thought, Bhishma did not notice her entrance. Immediate-
ly upon entry, Draupadi threw herself at the feet of Bhishma. As 
she did so, the bangles in her hand made a sound. Bhishma heard the soun d and realised that a lady was prostrating before him. 
Without a second thought, he blessed the lady in the traditional 
manner, “May you have a long and happy married life.” Draupadi 
was happy when she heard the benediction. She said, “This is 
enough for me,” and rose. It was then that Bhishma realised 
whom he had blessed. He exclaimed, “What! You, here at this 
time?! Who brought you here?” Draupadi replied, “Who else but 
Krishna?! He is the One who suggested this strategy to prevent the 
slaughter of my husbands. You have blessed me with a long and 
happy married life and so you now have to spare my husbands!” 
Precisely at that moment, Krishna entered. Bhishma was happy 
about the turn of events, though it meant going back on his vow. 
The Pandavas were ideal men and great devotees of the Lord. 
God in His Infinite Mercy had staged a drama as a result of which 
the Pandavas were now secure. 
Bhishma was tired, having paced up and down for a long time. 
He sat down and said, “Krishna, have You brought any eatables 
for me? You seem to have a bundle slung on Your shoulder. Why 
don’t You open it and give me some of the food it contains?” 
Krishna smiled and said, “Do you think it is My job to bring 
food for you? This bundle does not contain food but the sandals 
of Draupadi. I carried them so that there was no sound when 
Draupadi entered your tent.” Krishna then opened the bundle and 
the sandals fell on the ground.  Tears flooded Bhishma’s eyes. In a 
voice choked with emotion he said, “Lord, there is no limit to the 
extent You are prepared to go in order to save Your devotees!”  
The Avatar  is beyond petty worldly considerations and, where 
devotees are involved, no task is too mean or lowly for Him. He will do what has to be done, anytime, any place. Protection 
and the welfare of devotees is His priority number one. Krishna 
always protected the Pandavas and they, for their part, worshipped 
Krishna with great feeling. Krishna’s Name was always on their 
lips. The Lord was ever uppermost in their minds. The feeling was 
mutual, and Krishna too constantly concerned Himself with the 
welfare of the Pandavas. As is the sound, so is the resound. The 
Lord’s yearning for the devotee matches the yearning the devotee 
has for the Lord.  God is inscrutable. People think: “How can 
God do such lowly things?!” God does not have such distinctions 
or gradations. For the welfare of His devotees, God is prepared to 
do anything. Without devotees, where is God?! God’s greatness 
and noble acts are all due to devotees.
The magnetism of Sai’s prema!
So many of you have gathered here. Why have you all come? 
There is only one reason for this. You have come for that which 
is not in you, that which cannot be got at home, that which is not 
available in your village or town, or even country. What is that? 
Pure Divine Love, or Sai’s prema ! That is the reason why all 
of you have come, and not because someone invited you [loud 
applause]. That which you don’t have is Sai’s prema  or selfless 
love! That which you cannot get in your village, town or country 
is Sai’s prema ! That love is available only here and it is in search 
of that you all have come! In short, you have come here in search 
of something that you desperately want but cannot get anywhere 
else. Having come in such a quest, collect all that you can before 
you return. Fill your hearts with this divine love. Without devotees, 
where is Baba? And without Baba, where are the devotees?! There is an unbreakable bond between Baba and His devotees. The two 
are inseparable and inter-dependent. Devotees are Baba’s very 
life. Likewise, Baba is the very life of His devotees. The two 
lives have the same breath. If you thoroughly grasp this principle, 
then, wherever you are, you will always enjoy Baba’s protection. 
Those who are firm and steadfast in their devotion will never 
face any troubles or difficulties. Surely, you must have heard or 
read many stories that illustrate that those who repose full faith 
in God and are always pure, never come to any harm. You must 
have pure, unsullied, and steadfast devotion.
Your heart must stand firm like a rock. There are rocks on many 
seashores.  Huge waves constantly dash against these rocks 
but the rocks remain firm. Waves repeatedly bash the rocks but 
they do not give way. Your heart must be like those boulders on 
the oceanfront. You may be constantly bombarded by worldly 
problems, but your faith in God must remain firm like a rock. 
That is true devotion.
Embodiments of Love! You can give up everything but never give 
up God! Never forget God! Engrave this lesson in your hearts. 
God is your most assured insurance and source of protection. 
At the conclusion of the discourse, Bhagavan sang the lively 
bhajan, “Subrahmanyam  ...”, at a vigorous tempo!
 May 000.7. GOD IS THE ONLY TRUE FRIEND
The Supreme Self is the same as the Individual Self,
The Individual Self is also divine.
He who realises this unity,
Is truly enlightened.
Embodiments of Love!
There is only one divine principle
Students! Human life is hard to obtain. One may ask: “How can 
one assert that Divinity is latent in the human being?” The Gita 
is the authority. It declares:
Mamatma Sarvabhutantaratma.
(I the Universal Spirit am present in all beings). The Lord’s 
declaration is the proof, if any is needed. Krishna says, “I am 
present in all beings.” It means that the Universal Spirit or the 
Lord is present in all beings as the Prime Motivator. Man alone has the capac ity to recognise the latency of the Divine within; 
other beings do not have this capability. That is the reason why 
human life is regarded as a precious gift to be used carefully. 
Man is enveloped by five kosas  or sheaths. They are: annamaya 
kosa (food sheath), praanamaya kosa  (life sheath), manomaya 
kosa (mind sheath), vijnanamaya kosha  (sheath of wisdom), and 
anandamaya kosa (sheath of Bliss). Whereas other beings can at 
best reach out to three kosas , man can easily go to the fourth and 
even beyond, if he makes the effort. This is what makes man so 
superior. It is through wisdom that man can perceive the under-
lying unity between the individual Self and the Universal Self. 
If this capability is not an expression of the Divinity within, then 
what else is it? 
All beings are subject to moha or attachment but man is 
capable of breaking away and attaining moksha  or liberation. 
This capacity for the transition from moha  to moksha  is once 
again an expression of the divine force within. Although divine 
capability finds greater expression in man than in other beings, 
Divinity is actually latent in all things in the Universe.  It is this 
Omnipresence that provides a powerful undercurrent of unity to 
the otherwise apparent and bewildering diversity. What the eyes 
see is superficial; that which is True lies beneath.
Maya  or delusion arises on account of the three gunas  (intrinsic 
tendencies), namely, the satva guna  (gentleness), the rajo guna 
(aggression), and the tamo guna  (torpor). Maya  leads to moha  or 
attachment, which is of three kinds – dhaneshana  (attachment to wealth), dhaareshana  (attachment to wife), and putreshana  
(attachment to one’s progeny). One who transcends the three 
gunas , is totally free from both delusion as well as attachment. 
Clearly, therefore, if you want to be rid of attachment, you have 
to go beyond the three gunas . So long as you are in the grip of the 
gunas , you cannot escape maya  and moha . The Gita says: 
Acalam Carameva Ca.
God is both mobile and immobile; these two aspects of mobility 
and immobility are present in all living creatures. When a pot is 
immersed in water, there is water in the pot as well as outside the 
pot.  In the same way, God is not only in you but also above you, 
below you and behind you. That is why the Vedas declare:
Antarbahisca Tatsarvam Vyapya Narayanassthitah.
The Lord is present within, without, and everywhere. When an 
iron rod is placed in the fire, it gets hot. The heat is everywhere; it 
is present in the rod as well as the fire. In the same way, the same 
God is present in man as well as in the whole world surrounding 
him. There are not two Gods or two divine principles in action. 
There is only one God and only one divine principle. That which 
is latent within, is seen as a reflection without. That is why 
Swami often says that the world is merely a reflection of the 
Inner Being. If there is no reality within, how can there be a 
reflection outside? How can one say the world is real and deny the 
Indweller? Reality is within, and it is seen as a reflection outside. 
In the same manner, action originates from within while reaction comes from outside. Total Reality is a composite of everything 
within and everything outside. Rishis  of yore grasped this truth 
and proclaimed it to the entire world. It is such teachings of truth 
that helped ordinary people of those days to rise to exalted levels. 
Ancient teachings are full of inner significance. They are not 
commonplace instructions relating to the phenomenal but keys 
to Inner Wisdom.
You must yearn for liberation
A long time ago, the population of the world was just one billion, 
while today it is five to six billion. The population has swelled 
but the desire for liberation has sharply declined. In ancient times, 
most people pined for liberation; the percentage was as high as 
seventy-five but today, not even twenty percent want liberation. 
Why? B ecause the emphasis is on the quest for worldly-
knowledge. Such knowledge drives people toward worldly pur-
suits and a million ways of making money. In one manner or the 
other, all of today’s education is aimed at making a living rather 
than life itself, and the fundamental purpose of human existence. 
How can education that caters to the stomach produce in the 
Heart a yearning for liberation? Modern education promotes only 
mohapeksha  (craving for worldly things) instead of mokshape-
ksha (desire for liberation). In olden times, students controlled 
their desires and reduced their worldly wants, increasing instead 
the desire for liberation. What is the meaning of worldly desires? 
It means craving for the supposedly good things that are available 
in the external world, the sort of things that the birds and the 
beasts go after. Is it for seeking these that one goes through 
school and college? Does on e have to work so hard to attain these? Our ancients recognised the futility of such pursuits and 
instead directed their attention to more purposeful goals. Modern 
educational system has totally inverted the priorities. What our 
ancients shunned, has now become priority number one. Such is 
the perversion of today’s education! 
Gratitude to the guru
In those da ys, there was gratitude to those who showed the right 
path. Students never failed to prostrate before their guru , and 
they gave expression to their gratitude in many ways. Whatever 
the guru  wanted was given unhesitatingly and with much love. 
The preceptors sacrificed much for their disciples, and, for their 
part, the disciples were not far behind either, in the matter of 
sacrifice. What about the students of today?
They are ready to injure those who feed them. 
They will ridicule those who teach them.
And they will not hesitate to harm those who help them.
Such are the fall-outs of modern education, which is supposed 
to be so advanced. Students of olden days were humble and 
obedient to their gurus . The tribal boy Ekalavya provides the 
classic example. 
Ekalavya adopted the celebrated Dronacharya as his guru , even 
though the latter refused to accept Ekalavya as his pupil. Ekalavya 
never received any instructions in archery from his adopted guru ; 
yet, there was never any doubt in his mind that Drona was his 
guru . He became an archer par excellence through self effort.  0One da y, Drona took his favourite disciple Arjuna into the forest.  
They took a hunting dog along with them.  On spotting a wild 
animal, the dog started barking.  All of a sudden, Arjuna found 
five-six arrows coming from somewhere and piercing the mouth 
of the dog.  The person who shot the arrows was none other 
than Ekalavya. Though he could not see the dog, guided by the 
barking sound, he shot the arrows one after the other that found 
the target.  They both were stunned. They then started searching 
for the archer and soon located Ekalavya. Arjuna asked the tribal 
boy, “Who is your guru ?” Ekalavya pointed to Drona and said, 
“He is my guru .” Drona angrily said, “I am not your guru . I never 
taught you anything.” Ekalavya replied, “Sir, that may be, but in 
my mind I adopted you as my guru . For me, there is none other. 
My respect and devotion for you have enabled me to acquire all 
skills, even though you personally never taught me. I have learnt 
it all from within.” 
In those days, there were no books and all instructions were by 
word of mouth. Word was therefore considered very sacred. In 
Sanskrit, Aksharam  means word but it also means Imperishable, 
a term used for God. Thus, Word is God! 
Dronacharya was unhappy to see another archer whose skill was 
greater than that of his favourite student Arjuna. Wanting to ensure 
that Arjuna was number one and that there was none to excel 
him, Drona told Ekalavya, “If I am your guru , then what about 
my gurudakshina  (fees paid to the teacher)? Ekalavya replied, 
“Master, what is it that you want?” Without the slightest trace of 
magnanimity, Drona angrily demanded, “I want your right thumb as my payment.” Drona knew that without the thumb, Ekalavya’s 
career as an archer would be finished; and automatically, Arjuna 
would move to the number one position. On hearing Drona’s 
demand, Ekalavya pulled out his knife, cut his thumb off without 
any hesitation whatsoever, and offered it as gurudakshina.
Giving up the vital thumb,
He ceased to be an archer.
Disabling himself as a mark of respect,
He surrendered his very skills as a token of gratitude.
Such was the spirit of gratitude amongst disciples in those days. 
For the sake of their gurus , they were ready to sacrifice anything, 
including their lives. Just compare this with what is happening 
to day! Both the teacher and the student are found wanting. 
The teacher stretches his hand out for money even before the 
instruction is complete. The student is regarded as a source of 
income rather than as a responsibility. In olden times, things were 
different. The guru not merely had affection for his disciples but 
actually looked upon them as his own sons. Drona, however, was 
an exception to this noble tradition, having most disgracefully 
betrayed the trust placed in him by Ekalavya who was not even 
formally enrolled with him. Would Drona have done such a thing 
to his son? 
Yad bhavam tad bhavati.
As the action, so is the consequence. In due course, Drona had to 
pay for his cruelty. As the action, so is the reaction. No one can 
escape the inexorable law of reflection, reaction, and resound.The ideal friend
Students! You should not be immersed in books all the time; you 
must be virtuous and also do service to your teachers in such 
a manner that would please them. In every human relationship, 
there should be balance and parity. At one time, the brothers Vali 
and Sugriva were inseparable; but enmity developed and they 
parted company. While Vali remained in his place, Sugriva hid 
himself i n the mountains to avoid Vali’s wrath. Sugriva was all 
the time wondering how he could overcome his brother, now his 
enemy. Vali was very strong and powerful and could be defeated 
only by one who was more powerful than him. Sugriva consulted 
his companion Hanuman for advice and the latter suggested that 
Sugriva should be patient; time would show the way. 
One day, while Sugriva and Hanuman were wandering in the 
hills, they spotted two people in the distance. There was an 
extra-ordinary radiance about them. It appeared as if they had 
descended from the very Heavens. Sugriva asked Hanuman to 
investigate and ascertain who those two were. He said, “Find 
out if these two are Vali’s agents who have come in disguise.” 
Clearly, Sugriva’s observation was a reflection of his inner fear; 
otherwise, how could he have made such a statement, considering 
that the strangers had a distinct divine aura about them? Hanuman 
replied, “To me these two look divine. Anyway, I shall go and 
investigate.” 
Comi ng down from the mountain, Hanuman approached the 
two effulgent strangers, who were none other than Rama and Lakshmana. Rama introduced Himself and said, “We are the sons 
of Emperor Dasaratha, presently in the forest in exile. Recently 
someone abducted My wife Sita, and we are wandering about in 
search of her.”  
A king should always speak the truth, and Rama did what a king 
ought to. 
Hastasya bhusanam danam.
Kanthasya bhusanam satyam.
Charity is the ornament for the hand. Truth is the ideal necklace. 
Listening to sacred words is the jewel that should adorn the ear.  
What more ornaments do you need? Every word uttered must be 
true. He is mighty, who always adheres to truth. 
Hanuman told Rama, “Lord, I shall take you both to my King 
Sugriva who lives over there. Kindly tell him Your problem, and 
he might be able to help.” Carrying Rama and Lakshmana on his 
shoulders, Hanuman leapt over the hills and landed where Sugriva 
was. Seeing the two brothers, Sugriva forgot all his problems and 
became ecstatic. Beaming, he said to Rama, “Lord, You must be 
tired. Kindly rest here for a while, and partake of these fruits. 
There is also some cold and refreshing water for You to drink; 
have some of that also please.” But Rama and Lakshmana were 
not interested either in rest or in food. 
Sugriva sensed the power latent in Rama and was eager to befriend 
Him. Now what  sort of a friend should one have? Not the o ne 
who feigns loyalty but betrays with cunningness; not the one who 
speaks sweetly but never matches words with action. He alone is fit to be called a friend who swears by truth. True friendship 
implies one breath though there are two bodies involved. Sugriva 
wanted such a friend so that with his help he could overcome 
Vali. 
Sugriva wondered: “Is Rama strong enough to overcome Vali?” 
He decided to check up Rama’s power and capability. On the 
following day, Sugriva took Rama to a huge fig tree and said, 
“Rama do you know what tree this is? It is a jungle tree that 
grows to a big size and is very strong. There are six trees in a row 
here. Once my brother Vali shot an arrow that pierced through 
not just one but two trees. I am on the lookout for someone who 
can excel that feat.” Sugriva then requested Rama to despatch 
an arrow and the latter obliged. Rama’s arrow went through not 
just two trees but all the six of them and flew beyond to a great 
distance. Sugriva immediately prostrated at the feet of Rama and 
declared, “You are th e friend I have been looking for all along.” 
Who was this friend that Sugriva had found? He was the very 
Lord Himself! The friendship between Rama and Sugriva was 
formally solemnised with fire as the sacred witness. Sugriva then 
said, “Rama, from today I am Your servant while You are my 
master and preceptor. Please relieve me of my sufferings, give 
me courage, and lead me to victory over my brother.” Rama kept 
His promise to Sugriva and killed Vali. This story teaches that 
if you are looking for a friend to help you, then that friend must 
be stronger than your adversaries. In life, obstacles are the main 
adversaries, and the only friend who can help you across is God; 
He is the only True Friend.Lack of  virtues leads to doubts
Doubts readily spring to the mind of the worldly wise. They may 
be clever and intelligent where worldly matters are concerned 
but pretty dumb where real discrimination is required. Sugriva 
was one such person. In his heart he felt that Rama was divine; 
yet, he had to test Rama’s skill in archery – there were doubts in 
his mind; the mind and the heart were not in harmony. Hanuman 
provides a striking contrast to Sugriva in such matters. From the 
moment he first set eyes on Rama, there was never even an iota 
of doubt that Rama was God Himself. It is the so-called educated 
ones who become plagued with all sorts of doubts. This is what is 
happening today. Man is totally preoccupied with the acquisition 
of worldly skills and worldly knowledge, completely ignoring 
basic values and the necessity for the cultivation of virtues. 
Modern education may make you clever,
But it would never help develop character. 
Education that does not foster virtues leads to [spiritual] blindness. 
Can you afford to be blind? No! Without virtues and the Grace 
of God, you cannot really achieve anything. Karna was rich, 
strong, and powerful, but he distanced himself from dharma  and 
Krishna. What is the use of wealth and skills if you do not have 
the Grace of God? 
Slave he becomes,
Who does not have the support of God.
This mighty Karna, who had many good qualities, did not submit 
himself to God. He refused to become a servant of Krishna. If you fail t o serve God, all the intelligence you might possess is 
of no value. In fact, the intelligence then gets misused. Since 
Karna spurned Krishna, he eventually fell in battle despite his 
strength and physical prowess. One must always strive to earn 
the protection of dharma  and the Grace of God. You become 
strong only when you harmonise your activities with divinity. 
When the goal and God go together, there victory is assured. 
Students! Boys and girls! It is not enough if you just immerse 
yourselves in text books. Study of these books and the acquisition 
of secular knowledge are no doubt required. However, all such 
knowledge is totally useless without the support and the backing 
of devotion to God. Devotion is the foundation. All forms of 
worldly and physical power are useless if they are not based on 
devotion for God. 
If character is gone, everything is gone
The story of Ekalavya illustrates how sacred and pure were 
students in ancient times. Pure and divine feelings must radiate 
from every heart, which is possible only when virtues and character 
are present. All of you are aware of Prahlada. He was a student 
just like you, in fact much younger in age. What extraordinary 
character he possessed, even at that age! Thanks to this blessing, 
in later life he was able to achieve much success and victory. He 
could even vanquish Indra, the chief of the devas  or demi-gods. 
Indra became depressed by his defeat and began exploring all 
possibilities for regaining his kingdom. 
One day, the preceptor of the devas  summoned Indra and 
said, “Prahlada is presently performing the sacred ritual called Viswajit . On such occasions, gifts are given as charity. You must 
present yourself before Prahlada, and ask for his character as a 
gift. You will then be able to regain your kingdom.” Indra got the 
hint. Disguising himself as a brahmin , Indra went to the court of 
Prahlada. The latter was  impressed with the brahmin and asked, 
“Sir, what is it that you would like to have?” Indra [posing as a 
brahmin ] replied, “O King! I want very little. Just give me your 
character.” A surprised Prahlada said, “That I can easily give but 
you should really ask for something more substantial. I am ready 
to give you anything you want. Why then are you prepared to 
settle for something so little?” The cunning Indra replied, “For 
me, this small thing is enough. I do not want much.” Prahlada 
said, “As you wish.” Immediately, Prahlada’s character peeled 
off and merged in Indra. Prahlada did not seem to be bothered. 
A little later, another entity emerged from Prahlada and left him. 
Prahlada was surprised and asked, “Who are you?” The entity 
replied, “I represent your kingdom and opulence. Once character 
goes, kingdom and opulence have to do likewise; therefore, I 
am leaving you!” In this manner,  Prahlada lost everything. This 
story teaches that once character is lost, everything is lost. 
A crestfallen Prahlada now realised what had happened to him. 
He prayed intensely and said, “Lord, I do not care anymore for 
kingdom, wealth, and all the rest of what I lost. I just want my 
character back. That is enough.” It was thus that Prahlada came 
to realise the very important role that character played in life. In 
fact, character is three-fourths of one’s life. Prahlada prayed to 
the Lord for the restoration of his character. At this point, pleased 
with Prahlada’s willingness to part with even his character in order  to keep the word he had given, Indra returned the gift he 
had received. This story teaches how fundamental and important 
are values and character in life. Character is supreme. Behaviour 
is born of character; if your character is good, so would be your 
behaviour. The welfare of a country depends on the character of 
its citizens. Men and women of character alone bring prosperity 
to a nation. 
Embodiments of Love! Give the utmost importance to the 
development of character. Apart from the books that you normally 
study, there is one big book that you definitely ought to read; 
that is the book called the World! All that you want to know and 
need to know are contained in this extraordinary book. Besides 
books, you also need a teacher. Who is the best and the greatest of 
all teachers? Your heart! Not the physical heart but the spiritual 
heart. You also need a friend. Who is the best possible friend 
you could ever have? God! [Loud applause.] Taking God as your 
friend, your heart as the teacher, and the world as the Great Book, 
acquire all the knowledge you wish to.  You should master this 
pusthaka  (book) using your masthaka  (head)! Books printed on 
paper are not so important as this book composed and written by 
God Himself. It is available everywhere, to everyone, at all times, 
and is absolutely free. So, even as you pore over your regular 
textbooks, remember your guru  the Heart; and make sure you 
always have your true Friend God near you! 
Sarvada sarvakalesu sarvatra Daiva cintanam. 
(Think of God at all times, and at all places.) God is in you, with 
you, above you, below you, around you; and He will always take care of you. Do you know why?  Because He is your best Friend 
[loud applause]! Your so-called worldly friends are always selfish 
and have their own axes to grind but God is not like that. He 
is totally free from desires and expects nothing. He only helps, 
supports, and protects. And in return He only wants your love. 
He has absolutely no desires.  His heart is filled with love and 
compassion for His devotees. Is this treasure of selfless love 
available anywhere else [except with God]? 
All that happens is only for your good
Students! Right from today, develop sacred feelings, serve your 
parents, respect elders, and adopt God as your friend. With God 
as your friend, you are sure to find fulfilment in life. Cheerfully 
accept all tests He may subject you to, remembering that they all 
are meant for your own good. No matter how difficult or painful 
the test, always repeat to yourself: “This is good for me, this is 
good for me.” You must have full faith that everything that God 
does is only for your good and welfare. You have a disease and 
you undergo surgery. The doctor cuts you with a sharp knife; 
he does so not out of hatred for you but because he wants to 
cure you. In the same way, understand that God too is curing 
you out of love for you; there is thus no room for grumbling or 
complaints. 
Students! Be aware that man has within himself all the powers 
that one can think of. Krishna said:
Mamatma Sarvabhutantaratma.
I am present in all beings. You should be charged with the feeling 
that the Divine Spark is present everywhere and in all beings. 0If you sincerely cultivate this feeling, you would, without fail, 
be able to have access to the Divine Power within you in full 
measure. With such a feeling, man can penetrate through all the 
five kosas  or sheaths surrounding him. That is why it is said,
Jantunam nara janma durlabham.
Among all the living forms, the human form is the most precious. 
When he can have the company of the divine within, why should 
man seek bad company without? Why does he have to become a 
slave to others? It is to God that one must become a slave. Not 
just that.
Seek to serve the servant of the Lord,
And have the desire to help His devotee.
Serve God in this fashion,
And the entire world would serve you.
But if a slave you become to desires,
Then a slave you shall be to the whole world. 
Keep desires under control,
And the world would become your slave.
The only desire you must have is the desire for God. Then God 
will protect you at all times and eventually Liberate you. 
Sanctify the period of youth
Students! Yours is a sacred and golden age. Do not defile it. Make good use of the golden opportunity and sanctify your life. Do 
not waste a single moment. The time lost may appear to be just 
a moment but in that fleeting moment you may lose everything! 
Suppose you are spooling thread into a bundle. You wrap the 
thread one round at a time. If you accidentally let the ball drop, 
it would roll down the floor and unwind itself to a considerable 
extent. Thus a single moment of carelessness may cost a lot. Hence, 
always be very careful and hold on to the golden opportunity 
before you; then alone would you be successful. 
Embodiments of Love! Study well. By all means acquire all the 
secular knowledge you want to. But let it not stop just at that. 
Remember:
Secular knowledge is for making a living,
While spiritual knowledge is for life!
Worldly knowledge is certainly required because one has to live 
in this world. But spiritual knowledge is transcendental. While 
secular knowledge is useful for daily life, spiritual knowledge 
is for the life hereafter. You cannot postpone the acquisition of 
spiritual knowledge; you have to do it now! Secular knowledge 
will fill your belly but spiritual knowledge will fill your heart. 
One is ‘left’ and the other is ‘right’. While marching, both the left 
and right steps are needed — you march: left, right, left, right…..
When the time comes to go, the ‘left’ has to be left behind! You 
can take with you only the ‘right’ or spiritual knowledge. ‘Left’ is 
weak but ‘right’ is strong and also right! So, keep to the right! It 
also earns you the right to reach God! In marching through life no doubt both the ‘left’ and the ‘right’ steps are needed but recognise 
their relative merits and utility. This is how normal life must be 
blended  with spirituality.
Embodiments of Love! Always think of God, constantly chant 
His Name, and sing, whenever possible, His Glory through 
bhajans. Propagate to the entire world the greatness and the glory 
of bhajans.
At the conclusion of the discourse, Bhagavan sang two bhajans : 
“Govinda Krishna Vittale ...”  and “Vahe Guru ...”.
0 May 000.8. BUDDHA’S MESSAGE*
The more you grind sandalwood,
The greater is the fragrance;
The more you chew sugarcane,
Sweeter is the taste;
The more you heat gold,
The greater is its brilliance.  
Likewise trials and tribulations will only
enhance the goodness in noble souls.
Embodiments of Love!
The more one loves one’s fellow beings, the greater would be 
the Bliss that one enjoys. The more you love others, the happier 
you would be. Therefore, if you wish to be constantly happy, you 
must always love all. Love is the royal path to God. The best way 
to God is to love all and serve all. This is the lesson that Buddha 
taught humanity. 
Ahimsa is the greatest dharma of all
Buddhists chant the following:
Buddham saranam gacchami.
Dharmam saranam gacchami.
Sangam saranam gacchami.
* This discourse was delivered on Buddha Poornima, when Buddhist devotee s 
from several countries were celebrating the festival in the divine presence.These  three maxims imply that firstly, one must sharpen the 
intellect and the capacity for spiritual discrimination. Next, 
intelligence has to be used in the service of society. Thirdly, 
service must be based on dharma or righteousness. If these three 
steps are followed, they would lead to Bliss. Never harm any 
living creature in any way whatsoever. Help ever, hurt never – 
this is the essence of Buddha’s teaching.
Ahimsa paramo dharmah.
Nonviolence is the supreme dharma.  One must never ever hurt or 
injure another person by thought, word, or action. You may won-
der: “Is such a thing possible?” Yes it is, provided you have firm 
determination. With resolution and absolut determination, there 
is nothing in this world that cannot be achieved. Fear is a great 
obstacle to achievement. Once you realise that the same divinity 
resides in all, you will never be afraid of anything or anyone.
Prahlad a saw unity in diversity. He clearly perceived Narayana 
to be the substratum of everything in creation and happily 
surrendered to Him. He realised that God is Omnipresent. His 
father Hiranyakasipu was just the opposite. He saw diversity 
in unity and became deluded by the multiplicity of forms in 
Creation, each with its own name. These forms are all transient 
whereas God represents the Eternal Truth.
God is known by various names and of these, the greatest and 
the most fitting is Satchitanada.  Sat means that which remains 
unchanged in all the three periods of time – the past, the present, and the future. Strict adherence to truth would enable 
one to experience sat. Chit means total awareness or complete 
knowledge. It is that which enables one to experience divinity in 
all its aspects. Once sat and chit are experienced, ananda or bliss 
would follow automatically. 
Everyone wants to be happy. Such a desire is natural and it 
springs from th e fact that man’s true nature is Bliss. Bliss is God 
but man does not understand that. He does not understand that he 
originated from God, that life’s undercurrent is God, and that his 
final destination also is God. Man is born of ananda , the basis of 
his life is ananda , and his goal also is ananda.  Truly speaking, it 
is not difficult to know what the basis of life is, and what should 
be the goal of life. Bliss should be the goal, and one must seek it 
in all earnestness. The human body is temporary; the pleasure that 
it can give also is fleeting. Therefore, one must seek that which is 
permanent, that is to say, God, or, what is the same thing, Bliss. 
It is meaningless to seek this Bliss by way of instruments that are 
impermanent. The body can give only bodily pleasure, and the 
mind can at best give only mental satisfaction. But these do not 
represent Bliss. 
Buddha left his home in quest of the secret of ananda. In his 
wanderings, he saw a dead body, an old man, and a sick person. 
These painful sights made him to enquire deeply. He realised that 
death could not be avoided. Old age also is inescapable, being the 
natural culmination of childhood, youth, and middle age. Such 
changes form part and parcel of the physical world, which itself 
is ephemeral. These changes are natural, and one must not be perturbed or agitated by them. Buddha asked himself, “What is 
the cau se of death? Why do old age and sickness come upon 
humans?” After much pondering, Buddha concluded that the 
body is just like a water bubble, while the sickness of the body 
has its origin in the mind. In modern parlance, the psychological 
attitude of a person determines his actions and behaviour. 
Vishnu is all-pervasive. He is powerful. In the human being, 
Vishnu is represented by the mind. The mind is thus a very 
powerful instrument in the possession of man. The body must 
be used in conjunction with the mind to experience divinity and 
not diverted to other activities. In life, the alternation of pleasure 
and pain, joy and sorrow, good and bad are all inevitable. One 
must not be deluded by them. But man is deluded by duality and 
fails to realise the Omnipresence of the Lord, despite performing 
innumerable yajnas  and yagas  and engaging in all forms of 
ritualistic worship. 
One day in his wanderings, Buddha came to a village. The 
residents of the village were performing a yajna  and, as a part of 
the rituals, were preparing to sacrifice an animal. Buddha saw this 
and advised the villagers not to do so. He said, “No harm must 
be done in any manner whatsoever to any living being, because 
God dwells in all.”
Isnah sarvavidyanam.
Isvarassarvabhutanam.
God is wisdom. God dwells in all beings. Buddha added, “This 
is what I have learnt. God dwells in all; therefore the individual 
is God and God is the individual. Hence, it is wrong to kill this 
animal.” The head priest replied, “Sir, we are not killing this anim al; we are offering it liberation.” Amused by the reply, 
Buddha said, “You are offering liberation to an animal that did 
not ask for it. Instead, why don’t you liberate a person who is 
asking for it? Your argument has no basis in the scriptures. No 
Veda  advocates what you are saying. Your observation is false 
and untrue. Do you think Lliberation can be granted by inflicting 
harm, pain, and injury? No! Your father, mother, wife, and son all 
want liberation. Why don’t you offer them in sacrifice and grant 
them all the liberation that they seek?  You are so eager to liberate 
an animal that has no desire for it but unwilling to liberate fellow 
humans who are hungering for it. What kind of perverted logic is 
this? What you are trying to do is the worst of sins. Never hurt, 
injure, or kill living beings.” This is how Buddha conveyed the 
idea 
Ahimsa paramo dharmah.
Ahim sa (nonviolence) is the greatest dharma  of all. 
The love principle inherent in man is equally present in all beings, 
birds and beasts included. Therefore, one has to place the same 
value on the lives of all beings. Share the love latent within you 
with not only fellow human beings but also with all creatures in 
nature. This is the true universal love principle. Such principle 
alone should be the basis of one’s life. 
The real meaning of liberation
People have strange ideas about liberation, imagining that it 
involves going to heaven and having eternal existence there.  That 
is not th e meaning of liberation. It means achieving selfless love that is constant, unabating, and total. This is the state that one 
must seek to attain; it is only when this state is reached that one 
is truly liberated. In the name of liberation, seekers are trying out 
all sorts of spiritual paths. All such exercises can at best confer 
temporary satisfaction. The path of Pure Love alone can truly get 
you there and confer permanent Bliss. 
You are aware of the nine traditional paths of devotion: sravanam 
[listening to the sacred word] , keertanam [singing the Glory of 
the Lord] , Vishnu smaranam [chanting the Name of the Lord] , 
pada sevanam [service to the Lotus Feet] , vandanam [offering 
salutations to the Lord] , archanam [offering worship] , daasyam 
[service to the Lord] , sakhyam [being the Lord’s friend and 
companion] , Atma nivedanam [surrender] . These paths, if followed 
by rote, will fetch nothing more than temporary satisfaction. If 
you want liberation, then a flood of love must accompany such 
pursuits. Pure love must be the undercurrent of whatever path 
you choose to adopt. Indeed, it must be so in every spiritual 
endeavour. Everything must be done out of love for God, and for 
God – this is true devotion. Bhakti  does not mean mere chanting 
of the Name, ritualistic worship, studying the Vedas , etc. All such 
activities represent but one aspect of devotion. True devotion is 
the direct flow of love from you straight to God. Unconditional 
and selfless love for God is true devotion. Worship of God must 
be totally free from any demands, especially the fulfilment of 
worldly desires and the expectation of worldly rewards. However, 
people always worship God with a lot of self-interest – this is not 
true devotion. What you must offer to God is pure and selfless 
love. It is such love alone that would secure liberation. Indeed, such love itself is liberation, because it frees you from worldly 
desires. As Swami often says: moksha  is mohakshaya  – liberation 
from attachments and desires is true liberation. 
One God, but many Names
Pure love cannot be learnt from books. Nor can it be taught 
by others. It has to well up from deep within. Your heart is the 
source of Eternal Joy and Eternal Bliss. You yourself are Ananda 
Nilayam  or the Abode of Bliss. This love originating from your 
heart must be offered to the Lord. Swami said the other day:
Deho Devalayah prokto jivo Devah sanatanah.
The body is a Temple, and the Indweller is God Himself. The 
same God resides in all bodies. Therefore you must love others to 
the same extent you love yourself. This is a body [Swami points 
to Himself], and that also is a body [Swami points to another 
person]. Bodies may be different but the God within is the same. 
There is a man who is addressed as father by his son. The daughter-
in-law calls him father-in-law, while the grandchildren call him 
grandfather. The individual is the same but the manner in which 
different people address him varies. Similarly, the same God is 
given different names by the followers of different religions; they 
hail Him as Allah, Jesus, Rama, Krishna, Buddha, and so on. 
Though the names vary, God is one and the same. Therefore, 
there is really no room for dispute between people belongin g to 
different religions. You may address God by the name of your 
choice but all calls go to the same destination. Goal is one, and 
God also is one. Thus, in respect of God, there should be no 0difference of opinion. In fact, 
Sarva jiva namaskaram Kesavam pratigacchati.
No matter to whom you offer salutations and greetings, they all 
go to God Himself. Since the same God resides in all, where is 
the room for arguments based on caste, creed, race, etc.? As the 
deputy foreign minister of Sri Lanka (who spoke earlier) said, we 
all belong to the caste of humanity. 
There is only one caste, the caste of Humanity.
There is only one religion, the religion of Love. 
There is only one language, the language of the Heart,
And there is only one God,
He is Omnipresent.
This one God can be given any name you choose. These are names 
given by you to God, but in actual fact, God has no names of this 
kind. He is nameless and formless. He is pure consciousness and 
pure energy. This divine energy and consciousness are present in 
you, and you must use these extraordinary powers and capability 
in a most reverential manner for sacred activities only.
From prema to poornam – from pure love to totality
God has blessed you with pure love but due to worldly 
perturbations, and your food habits as well as life style, this love 
gets cont aminated. It gets adulterated by kama (desire), krodha 
(anger), lobha (greed), moha (attachment), mada (pride), and 
matsarya  (jealousy). The aberrations and pollution of divine 
power that one sees these days are entirely due to food and 
habits. Sattvik  food is the proper diet for man, because it alone 
fosters good, noble, and pious tendencies. Buddha ate only satvic  food, which in due course led to the blossoming of buddhi  or the 
intellect in all its fullness. The Vedas declare:  
Candrama Manaso jatah, caksoh Suryo Ajayata.
Moon is the presiding deity of the mind while Sun is the presiding 
deity of vision. The moon is not self-luminous; it shines by 
reflecting the light from the sun. The light is the same; it originates 
in the sun and gets reflected by the moon. However, while th e 
direct light from the sun is bright and brilliant, the light reflected 
from the moon is soft and subdued; it is cool to the eye. Sunlight 
represents jnana or spiritual wisdom, while moonlight represents 
prema  (love). 
You know how a fruit comes into existence. It starts as a flower, 
becomes a bud, grows big, then becomes an unripe fruit, and 
finally transforms into a sweet fruit. The flower, the bud, and 
the ripe fruit merely represent different stages in the evolution 
of the same entity. Similarly, in the pathway to God, the karma 
marga   (path of action), the bhakti marga  (path of devotion), 
and the jnana marga (path of wisdom) represent different aspects 
of the same underlying principle. That underlying principle is 
prema , and the three paths mentioned are three different ways of 
showing one’s Love for God. Prema  is fundamental, and that is 
what you should focus on. You have to develop humility on the 
one hand and divine feelings on the other. The festival of Buddha 
Poornima is celebrated to remind us that prema  is the pathway to 
poornam (totality).
Avoid sycophancy
Buddha wandered across the length and breadth of the land, advising people to follow the path of divine love. In the process, 
he became physically exhausted. Thus, once when he stopped 
in a village, he decided to take some rest and asked one of his 
disciples to speak to the villagers in his stead. Happy about his 
good fortune and charged with great enthusiasm, the disciple said 
in the course of his talk, “Buddha is the One of love, wisdom, 
and compassion. Such an exalted one was never born before 
and never will be in the future.” The villagers were thrilled to 
hear this and responded with a loud applause. Buddha, who was 
resting, heard the sound. He came out of his room and went to the 
disciple. Motioning the disciple to stop talking, he asked, “Son, 
how old are you?” The disciple replied, “Lord, I am twenty-
five.” Buddha then asked, “What places have you visited?” The 
disciple mentioned the names. Buddha then said, “You are young 
and inexperienced and have seen so little of the world. With 
such limited knowledge, how can you be sure that none like this 
Buddha was ever born or will not be in the future? You do not 
know the past, nor do you know the future. You do not even know 
everything about the present. What authority then do you have 
to make assertive statements about both the past and the future? 
By talking the way you did, you are merely exposing your utter 
ignorance.” Buddha then declared, “Many great souls have been  
born in the past and many more will be in the future. None can 
contradict thistTruth.”
Buddha disliked pomp, show, and sycophancy. He was simple, 
ever calm, pure, humble, and always full of love as well as 
compassion. Only a person equally full of love can appreciate 
his greatness. Practice alone leads to Bliss
Embodiments of Love! It is not enough to be happy just on this 
day of Buddha Poornima. You must be able to experience bliss all 
the time, and you can do so by following the teachings of Buddha. 
These days, people are great heroes in making platform speeches 
but zeroes when it comes to practice. It is far more important to 
translate Buddha’s teachings into practice than to make eloquent 
speeches. This is the proper way to enjoy happiness. This is also 
the right way of showing respect and reverence for Buddha. 
The teachings of Buddha are lofty, sublime, and sacred. His most 
important teaching is:
Ahimsa paramo dharmah.
Ahimsa or nonviolence is the greatest dharma  of all. Buddha 
asserted this with great emphasis and force. Buddha also advised 
that one’s looks must be sacred. He said, “Sacred vision is a must 
for leading a pure life. You should cultivate samyak drishti  (the 
habit of looking only at good things) and samyak sravanam  (the 
habit of listening only to good things).” For Buddha, everything 
had to be pure and sacred. If you throw a pebble into a well, ripples 
are created and these travel up to the edge of the well. In the same 
way, if you throw a pebble called good thought into the well called 
the heart, the ripples generated travel throughout the body. When 
the ripple reaches the eye, it stimulates pure vision. When the 
ripple reaches the ear, it tunes the latter to sacred sounds. When 
the ripple reaches the hands, it swings them into good action. In 
this manner, when the ripples spread across the entire body, there 
is a symphony of sacred activity all round. Thus, good and noble thoughts are fundamental to sacred activity. 
Such are the great teachings of Buddha. What is your response 
to them? No doubt you all read books containing Buddha’s 
teachings. But the moment the book is put down, all the teachings 
are forgotten. Remember it is only when the sandalwood is 
continuously ground that the fragrance can be experienced. It 
is only when sugarcane is well chewed that the sweetness can 
be experienced in full measure. In the same way, it is only the 
continued and the sustained practice of sacred teachings that can 
lead to Bliss. Great people of the past have left behind innumerable 
teachings that must be followed and ideal examples that ought to 
be copied. It is enough if you practise just one or two of these 
great lessons from the past.
 
Sanc tify Time, do not waste it
God has given you the gift of time. What for? For you to sanctify 
it. But are you doing that? Introspect and find out how much time 
you are wasting. Time is God; don’t waste time. Time wasted is 
life wasted. These days, people are wasting their time in every 
conceivable way. They can find time to remain glued to TV sets 
but have no time for service or doing something sacred. Why do 
you have to waste time in useless pursuits? Instead, why can’t 
you use that time for charitable and service activities? This is 
what Buddha did, always serving others. The moment came when 
he had to give up his body. He had a small coin with him at that 
time. There is a story behind that coin. To please Buddha, kings 
and emperors built great mansions for him to stay; but Buddha was not happy with this. One day an old lady came to him and 
said, “Sir, I am poor and do not have much money. But I love you 
and want to give you something. I have this small coin. Please 
accept this as my offering”. Buddha was very happy; the amount 
was small but the heart of the giver was large and full of love.  
Large amo unts gifted with pomp and ostentation do not count for 
much. A small gift with pure love is far more precious. As Swami 
often says, one teaspoon of cow’s milk is far superior to a barrel 
of donkey’s milk.
Buddha was once resting in a forest. He was by himself. A fear-
some demon came to him and said, “I am very hungry. Are you 
prepared to become a meal for me?” Buddha smiled and replied, 
“I am ready! Death is certain to come some day or the other. Why 
then should I not die today, especially if I can satisfy your hun-
ger?” Never be afraid of death, because it is a certainty; no one 
can escape it. Buddha was not afraid of death, and that was why 
he was ready to become a meal for the demon. The moment the 
demon heard the reply, it transformed into a dove and said,  Today, 
you have demonstrated your enormous capacity for sacri-fice. 
From now on, I too shall spread your message everywhere”.
 
God and lo ve are not different
Buddha’s teachings were based on the love principle. The same is 
true of Sai also. Love is the basis for all Incarnations. No one is 
making any effort to understand this fundamental truth. You have 
to develop selfless love. If you do, the whole world would be in 
your control. This love is blissful and nectarine. The sweetness of 
nectar may have limits but the sweetness of divine love has none. It is beyond all measure. It is beyond description too; it can only 
be experienced. Buddha discovered this love, experienced it, and 
became one with it. God and love are not different.
The bubble is born in water,
It grows and lives in water,
And it finally merges with water.
Man is a bubble,
And God is the water!
Man is a bubble born of water that is God. The individual is God 
and God is the individual. The two are not distinct, as people 
imagine.
Embodiments of Love! Regard all as just different forms of God. 
Parents give you a name, and that is the name you print on your 
visiting card. The card that you present to God must not have 
your given name but love. When you show your card to another 
person, that person recognises you by the name and address on the 
card. God, on the other hand, recognises only love, love, love!
Start the day with love
Spend the day in love.
End the day in love.
This is the way to God!
[Loud applause!] Therefore, starting from today the auspicious 
day of Buddha Poornima, vigorously develop your love for 
God. Propagate and spread selfless love. There can be no greater 
spiritual preaching than love. The study of scriptures can make 
a person scholarly [in the worldly sense] but not wise. Who is 
a true scholar? Who is the truly wise one? He who has perfect equanimity and is equal-minded under all circumstances alone 
can be described as scholarly and wise. They pore over books, 
claim to have maste red all the texts, and proclaim themselves to 
be highly learned. Such self-praise and self-acclaim are a sure sign 
of ego. Ego is very dangerous because it drags one with certainty 
to ruin. What is the use of mere study? Do these scholars practise 
even a bit of what they have studied? Hardly. Scholarship will not 
protect or redeem you; only pure love can.
Pure love is like a well-paved, one-way road with no speed-
breakers. You can rush along it to God at whatever speed you 
want. Rivers also illustrate this principle. All rivers speed down 
from mountains. They flow fast and swift to somewhere. Where 
to? To the ocean. In the process, they go over boulders and rocks, 
skilfully avoiding obstacles on the way. They never stop, but keep 
moving all the time towards the goal. Life must be a river rushing 
towards the ocean called God. The flow should never stop or 
falter. Overcoming all obstacles, you must keep rushing toward 
God. That must be the characteristic of your spiritual journey. 
Be strong-willed, resolute, determined, and sincere. There should 
be no room  whatsoever for weakness. If your vision, hearing, 
thoughts, feelings, and actions are good, you will experience 
nothing but Bliss.
Obey God’s command and spread love
Embodiments of Love! You need not go in search of God; He will 
come in search of you. God does not reside in temples, mosques 
and churches. These are structures built by man. God resides in 
a temple that He has built for Himself, and that is the human body. The human body is a living temple, a walking temple, and 
a talking temple. No man-made temple can match this God-built 
temple in power and sanctity. This temple has not been built with 
brick and mortar. No [human] architect has designed it, and no 
engineer has built it. This temple has come into existence by the 
will of God. You must treat your body as a precious gift of God 
and safeguard this sacred gift. Obey God’s command and engage 
only in sacred actions. Spread love as much as you can, and also 
the fragrance of the Atmic Principle.
Body and Head must both be oriented toward God
Sarira madhyam khalu dharmasadhakam.
The body has been given for following the path of dharma.  Man 
is not born to eat, drink, and make merry. No doubt, food is 
necessary to sustain life. 
Bhiksannam deha raksartham, vastram sita nivaranam.
Food  for maintaining life and clothes for covering the body 
should be the guiding principle. Food and head must lead you 
only to God and nowhere else.  There must be perfect harmony 
between food, the head, and God. By itself, the head carries no 
value. There is a story that illustrates the point. 
Emperor Ashoka was once going  through a forest. Seeing a 
Buddhist monk, he alighted from his horse and prostrated at the 
feet of the monk. Ashoka’s minister, who was accompanying the 
Emperor, was shocked. He wondered, “How can such a great man bow before such a lowly one as a renunciate?” Nevertheless, 
the minister kept quiet and did not voice his misgivings. Later 
when they were back in the palace, the minister gently raised the 
topic. He said, “O Emperor, how can such a great and intelligent 
one like you place your head at the feet of an inconsequential 
monk?” Ashoka just smiled and did not reply. Some days later, he 
summoned the minister and quite casually said, “Obtain first the 
head of a sheep, a goat, and a man. Take these three and try to sell 
them in the market. Afterwards, come back and report to me.” 
The minister was taken aback by this most peculiar command, 
but then, orders are orders especially when they come direct from 
the Emperor. The minister procured three heads, as told, and tried 
to dispose them of in the market. He was able to find a buyer for 
the heads of the sheep and goat, but no one came forward to buy 
the human head. The minister went back and reported the matter 
to the Emperor. Ashoka said, “Well, if no one is prepared to buy 
the human head, give it away free.” The minister went back to the 
market place but to his dismay, no one wanted the human head 
even if given free. He went back to the palace and reported to the 
Emperor. Ashoka smiled and said, “Do you remember how you 
protested when I placed my head at the feet of a monk?  Now 
you have discovered for yourself that the human head has no 
value! The head is not eternal; yet, you were agitated by what I 
did. Though the head has no value, when placed at the feet of a 
noble one, it brings blessings and grace. That is what I wanted 
you to learn.”
Darsanam papa nasanam,
Sparsanam karmavimocanam.
Sambhasanam sankata nasanam, 0The vision of the Lord wipes out all sin.
The touch of the Lord destroys all bondage.
Talking to the Lord removes all difficulties.
Ashoka continued, “The moment my head brushed against the 
foot of the monk, all my sins were wiped out.” Wisdom slowly 
dawned on the minister. 
Realise the usefulness of the body while you are alive. It is when 
you are alive and in possession of the body that you can have 
darshan , sparshan , and sambhashan, [i.e., the opportunity to see 
the Lord, touch the Lord, and converse with the Lord]. Can you 
have these after the body is gone? Impossible! The world may 
not give you what you want but from the Lord, you can certainly 
get all the good things you want.
Resolve to follow Buddha’s teachings
Embodiments of Love! All of you have come here with great 
devotion. Your sincerity is praiseworthy. You must resolve to 
follow the teachings of Buddha. He was a noble soul. The best 
way of celebrating Buddha Poornima is to put into practice the 
teachings of this holy one. It is not enough to be happy just on this 
festival day. By constantly re-living the experience of this holy 
day, you must experience joy all the time. The cow first grazes; 
it then sits down quietly to chew thoroughly what it had eaten 
earlier. If an animal can do this, can not a human do the same with 
respect to the teachings he acquires? When you get back home, 
ruminate over what you have learnt today. Recall repeatedly the 
experiences you have had today. This is the way to digest what you have learnt and also be happy. It is only when you do this that 
your journey to this place would become worthwhile. You should 
not forget the lessons the moment you leave from here.
Spiritual lessons must soak into your blood and spread everywhere. 
God has a special name: Rasovaisaha. It means that in the human 
body, God is present as the Divine Essence. This divine essence 
spreads all over the human body, to every limb and organ. 
Therefore, God is also given another name – Angeerasa. Angam 
means limb; Angeerasa  therefore means One who pervades over 
all the limbs, soaking them with His divine power and essence. 
Thus, God is within you as Angeerasa. You think you are taking 
care of yourself and protecting yoursel f. This is not true! It is God 
who really does so. Who do you think protects you when you are 
fast asleep and do not know what is happening around you? Who 
takes care of you then? It is God who does so. In fact, He cares 
for you at all times, at all places, and under all circumstances. 
Since God always protects, there is no need to be afraid of pain 
and sorrow. Difficulties are bound to come, but they also will go 
away. They do not stay forever; they are like passing clouds. But 
God is steady and permanent. Make Him the basis of your life 
and think of Him always. This is the lesson you must grasp today, 
as a part of your pilgrimage to this place.
At the conclusion of the discourse, Bhagavan sang the bhajan, 
“Vahe Guru ...”..
 May 000.9.  PREYAS AND SREYAS  —WHAT WE 
SEEK AND WHAT WE OUGHT TO SEEK
Enthusiasm, dynamism, courage,
Intellect, energy, and valour –
Where these are present, 
There one can see the Glow of God. 
Embodiments of Love!
The effulgence of Divinity can be seen when the six qualities 
of enthusiasm, dynamism, intellect, energy, courage, and valour 
shine in a person. Bhoga (craving for sensual pleasures) and tyaga 
(the spirit of sacrifice) cannot ever co-exist. Bhoga  will not allow 
tyaga  to come anywhere near, while tyaga  would strongly resist 
bhoga . One might wonder, “Is it possible to sacrifice and yet be 
happy?” The answer is, “Yes, it is possible”.  If ego is effaced and 
there are no expectations of reward for the actions performed, 
sacrifice itself becomes a joyous experience; happiness and 
sacrifice then merge into one. Happiness is not the property of 
any particular individual; all are entitled to it, and everyone has 
the right to enjoy it. To receive your share, you must sanctify your life by serving society, using the gifts God has endowed 
you with. 
The two competing forces
The scriptures say:
Ìsa vasyamidam jagat.
The whole universe is divine. Every bit of the universe functions 
on account of divine energy and power. Other than God, there is 
nothing else in the universe, any place, any time. But no one has 
grasped this truth. The outlook of people is largely worldly and 
so also are their expectations. 
There are two comp eting factors at work in this world. The first is 
preyo shakti  (force that promotes a material outlook or tendency) 
and the other is sreyo shakti  (force that promotes a spiritual 
outlook or tendency). The former is what motivates people in the 
various stages of life, from childhood to old age, driving them 
to sensual pleasures. Sreyo shakti , on the other hand, manifests 
as the noble virtues daya (compassion),  prema (Love),  sahana 
(patience), sahanubhuti (empathy), tyaga (spirit of sacrifice), 
etc., in the individual.  
In the Bhagavad Gita , Krishna describes the actions motivated 
by these two shaktis  as paradharma  and swadharma  respectively. 
What is meant by swadharma ? The prefix swa relates to the At-
ma; therefore, swadharma  means dharma  that is in conformity with the Atma , that is to say actions performed in harmony with 
the nature of the Atma . Sreyo shakti  is the driving force behind 
swadharma. Paradharma  on the other hand, relates to actions 
performed mainly in conformity with the dictates of the senses and 
the mind. The motivating force in this case is preyo shakti , which 
triggers the senses into useless indulgence. Man today hungers 
for preyo shakti , totally ignoring sreyo shakti . While preyo shakti  
can secure fleeting pleasures, sreyo shakti  can earn God’s Grace 
for you. What causes rain? God’s Grace is primarily responsible 
for it. God’s Grace makes the sun and the moon shine, the rivers 
to flow, and the crops to grow. Sunshine, food, and water help 
you to live and be happy. God has given all these and much more 
for the common benefit of all living beings. Every living creature 
has equal right to enjoy these gifts of God. 
Always  follow Atmadharma
Every gift of God offers the opportunity to go from preyas  to 
sreyas . People are engaged in all kinds of worldly activities. 
You grow crops, you harvest them, you eat food, you study and 
acquire various types of worldly knowledge, and so on. If all 
these mundane activities are performed with a spiritual outlook, 
then you can enjoy bliss. Performing action with a spiritual 
outlook is the essence of Atmadharma . If you enquire deeply, 
you will realise that everything happens not merely because of 
your personal efforts but on account of the will of God. From the 
atom to the cosmos, things happen only because of God’s will.
From here to there,
From the ant to the galaxies,You know not what it is,
You comprehend it not.
People may imagine
That they make the world go.
It is not their wealth,
Nor pride and pomp,
But God’ s Will alone,
That runs the universe.
The gross and the subtle, ignorance and knowledge, the worldly 
and the spiritual – we form such pairs and thereafter make 
a distinction between the members of such pairs. In truth, the 
members of a pair are interrelated and not separate from each 
other. There is no duality, as we tend to make out. The two 
members of a pair are in fact intimately connected with each 
other. All actions when motivated by the heart become spiritual; 
but when driven by the mind, they become worldly. Modern man 
is dragging even the so-called spiritual actions to the mundane 
level. There are many today who are described as dharmatmas  
(people of charitable disposition), tyagatmas  (people given to 
sacrifice), yogatmas  (so-called yogis engaged in spiritual actions), 
and karmatmas  (people supposedly engaged in selfless service). 
But there is none in this world that might be called an Atmatma . 
Who is an Atmatma ? Not the one who follows karma yoga  (the 
path of spiritual action), or bhakti yoga  (the path of devotion), 
or jnana yoga (the path of wisdom). An Atmatma  is one who 
follows the Atma Yoga ! There is none in this world that follows 
this unique path. 
The body is visible and tangible. The mind, though subtle, can 
be discerned through one’s experience. Everyone knows of the existence of the body and the mind. But there is none that truly 
understands the depth of the Atma  and has experienced It in the 
fullest sense of the word. He alone is entitled to be called an Atma 
Jnani  (the Knower of the Atma ), who understands the real Self. 
No deep enquiry is needed concerning the body – it is just made 
up of the five elements. It is fragile and can collapse any moment. 
It is therefore pointless to enquire into the principle of such an 
ephemeral and transient entity. Those who follow the preyo marg  
(the worldly path) are highly body-conscious. Swami said the 
other day that the mind is the Embodiment of Vishnu. What does 
one mean by that? Vishnu is the Omnipresent One. The mind too 
pervades everywhere, and that is why it is linked to Vishnu.
Manomulam Idam jagat.
The mind perva des the whole universe. Traditionally, Brahma 
is described as the son of Vishnu, born out of the navel. In the 
human body, sound originates from the navel while the thought 
behind the spoken word is born in the mind. Thus, the emergence 
of words, consequent to a thought occurring in the mind is a 
physical symbolisation of the emergence of Brahma from the 
navel of Vishnu. As Swami said earlier, in the human being 
Ishwara is the heart, Vishnu is the mind, and Brahma is the word. 
However, there is none in this world that has experienced this 
Trinity of Godhead within. 
See unity in diversity and realise the Self
Many people head for the forest to experience the Self within. 
How foolish! Where is the need to go to the forest to discover the 
God within you and around you? 
When you have a lamp at home,
Why seek one elsewhere?When the  Self is there right within you, there is no need to 
withdraw to the forest in quest of It. Such an act is a sign of sheer 
ignorance. It reflects the seeker’s inability to cognise the seat of 
the Atma. The Atma  is within you, and that is what you have to 
know first and foremost. 
The Atma  or the Self within is not localised. It is all-pervasive, 
universal in nature, and the fountainhead of all creation. The Atma  
being the source of the five elements, wherever the elements are 
present, so is the Atma . Thus, since your body is made of the five 
elements, it should be obvious that the Atma  is also present in you. 
God has created all the five elements for the benefit of mankind. 
Air and water, for example, sustain life. Again, air, water, and 
land are all needed for growing crops; this is another example. 
Without food, the body would wither away; for the sustenance of 
life, food is a must. All the five elements have originated from the 
Self or the Atma . It is therefore necessary to examine the spiritual 
overtones of the five elements. 
The (Universal) Self or the Atma , is the fundamental basis for the 
existence of all the five elements. The same Atma underlies all 
– the elements do not have Atmas  of their own.
Ekatma sarvabhutantaratma
The same Universal Spirit or Self pervades all beings and entities. 
Today, mankind is facing various problems because it is not 
focussing on the underlying unity in creation. Instead, it is being 
deluded and carried away by the superficial diversity. You must see unity in diversity and concentrate on the underlying divine 
substratum. The tru e seeker goes in quest of this unity, and this 
search in turn leads to Atma jnana  or the wisdom of the Self. 
Ignorance is just the opposite of this wisdom; its characteristic 
is to see diversity where there is unity. You should not fragment 
the One into disjointed bits and pieces. This would weaken you, 
though superficially you might feel strong. To comprehend the 
Principle of the Atma , it is sufficient to see unity in diversity. 
God is not only all-pervasive but sweetness itself
You see clouds forming in the sky. The clouds bring rain. Rain 
helps crops to grow. Crops give you food-grain. You cook the 
grain and prepare a meal, which you then eat. You have here a 
chain of complex but linked events. What is the driving force 
behind all this? Who motivates this complex but linked chain? 
The Atma  is responsible for all this! Atma  is also known as 
Brahman , and the Atmic Principle is the same as the Principle of 
Brahman  or the Divine Principle. 
Who is this Brahman ? Brahman is the One who is all-pervasive. 
When God manifests as Word, He is called Brahma. The scriptures 
describe this Supreme One as follows:
Sabdabrahmamayi, Caracaramayi, Jyotirmayi, Vanmayi, 
Nityanandamayi, Paratparamayi, Mayamayi, Srimayi.
God Almighty is the Primordial Sound, the Immovable as well 
as the Movable, the Divine Light, the Word, Eternal Bliss, the 0Supreme, Illusion, and Ultimate Wealth. This is a comprehensive 
description of God. This divinity manifests in the individual as 
the divine trinity consisting of Ishwara, Vishnu, and Brahma. The 
heart of man represents Ishwara, the mind represents Vishnu, 
and word represents Brahma. All the attributes that describe 
Brahman  apply equally well to the Perfect Individual. They also 
apply to the word because word is God. The spoken word is the 
form of Brahma, who is an aspect of God. Speech is born of 
the mind, which is an aspect of Vishnu. Thoughts are shaped by 
the feelings of the heart, which is an aspect of Ishwara. Brahma, 
Vishnu, and Maheshwara are not different; they are just aspects 
of the same, one and only God, also known as Atma  or Brahman . 
If man gives up ego, he becomes perfect and rises to the level of 
divinity. What is it that people readily give up these days? Good 
and sacred habits! No, no! This is not what you should do. You 
should embrace sacred feelings, thoughts, and actions and give 
up all bad thoughts and habits. Welcome the sacred and drive 
out the evil. Reject the bad like you expel the excreta. When you 
take in food, you retain only the nu trient part and excrete the rest. 
You eat a tasty fruit; but, after digesting the essence, you expel 
the foul waste part. Worldly things have this mixture of good and 
bad. But one thing is totally sweet. What is that? God!
Vacanam Madhuram, Caritam Madhuram,
Vasanam Madhuram, Valitam Madhuram,
Calitam Madhuram, Bhramitam Madhuram,
Madhuradhipaterakhilam Madhuram.
His words are sweet, His eyes radiate sweetness, His gait is sweet, 
and His smile too is sweet! The Lord of Mathura [Krishna] is sweet,  sweet and nothing but sweet!  Even ambrosia and nectar 
may satiate after some time but where the sweetness of the Divine 
is concerned, one cannot have enough of it. 
Yato Vaco Nivartante Aprapya Manasa Saha.
Words and the mind fail to describe God and His sweetness. 
Such is the greatness of the Atmic principle, and that is what 
man is ignoring today. Preoccupied with petty priorities, man 
has become totally indifferent to the real purpose of life. At the 
end of it all, what is it that man has achieved? Nothing. Man’s 
action these days is like breathing in carbon dioxide and exhaling 
oxygen. This inversion is the result of bad thoughts flooding the 
mind. This is not how it should be. God has arranged for man to 
breathe in oxygen and exhale carbon dioxide; in the same way, 
man should take in what is good and reject what is bad. 
Life should be based on sacrifice. Just look at the trees. But for 
them, where would you get the oxygen that you breathe? All 
beings in creation —trees, birds, animals, and insects— help in 
their own respective ways. But modern man has sunk below the 
level of animals. There is hardly any trace of helpful attitude 
anywhere. Every action of man is driven by selfishness and self-
interest. These two base qualities represent animal tendencies, 
and are not representative of the true nature of man. Man is the 
embodiment of truth and love. He is the one of peace. Although 
he might not be aware of it, man’s life is sustained by sathya, 
dharma , and prema. It is by recognising this underlying principle 
that the ancients of India declared: 
Satyam vada dharmam cara.Always be truthful; always abide by righteousness. 
These declarations are a testimony to the greatness of Bharatiya 
(Indian) culture. Never forget Truth!
From truth emerged creation;
Truth is what sustains creation;
Truth is that into which creation finally dissolves;
This is the authentic principle
Of the Universal One. 
God is in you
Where is this Supreme, Universal Cosmic One? It is not out 
somewhere there but right within you! Man today is indifferent to 
this remarkable and eternal truth. People read all kinds of spiritual 
books and engage in various types of sadhana  (spiritual practices). 
What does sadhana  really mean? It means the transformation of 
the bad into good. But what happens in practice is just the opposite! 
People do sadhana  in such a confused and mistaken fashion that 
they end up forgetting the good and welcoming the bad! Man is 
not making effort to understand what Sadhana  means. Sadhana 
= sa + dhana. Sa means the Atmic Principle, and dhana  means 
wealth. Thus, the principle of the Atma  is true wealth, health, and 
happiness. Where is this true happiness or bliss? Bliss is where 
you came from. You were born of bliss. Why don’t you recognise 
your roots? You are prepared to believe anyone and everyone but 
not your own heart! Twenty-one thousand and six hundred times 
a day, your inner voice cries out Soham, Soham,  – I am God, I am God. This is the spiritual message conveyed to you by your 
breathing process. You are foolish to ignore this Inner V oice and 
pay heed to what ignoramuses outside proclaim. Where is God? 
He is in you! Swami said earlier,
Deho Devalayah prokto jivo Devah sanatanah.
The body  is the temple, and God is the Indweller. All bodies 
are temples, and the same God is the presiding deity in all these 
temples. Why then do you differentiate between people? Why do 
you hate some and like others? Do not entertain such feelings of 
difference, because the same God resides in all. Do not abuse or 
criticise anyone. To do so is a sign of bad character and weakness. 
Be alike to everyone. The best way to love God is to love all and 
serve all. Since the love principle inherent in every being is the 
same, you must try to achieve Selfless Love. Such Selfless Love 
alone is true love for God. God is Love. Love is Awareness. Love 
is Divinity. 
God has so many names. Aham or I – that also is a name for 
God. If you say Aham Brahmasmi [I am God], there is a slight 
tinge of duality in that statement. Here, there is a reference to I 
as well as God. A better declaration would be: “I am I!” That is 
all there is to it. This is true advaitam  [philosophy of monism]. 
I am not this or that; such statements imply duality. If you say, 
“This is mine,” it implies that you are separate from the thing 
you are referring to. “I am I,” is the correct and proper way of 
declaring your innate divinity. This is I, that is I, that also is I, 
and so on [here, Swami pointed to various people and objects]. 
Everything is ‘I’! Superficially, the different objects may have different names, but at the basic level, they all have the same 
name – ‘I’. There is only ONE! 
Jewels are many, but gold is one.
Cows are many, but milk is one.
Flowers are many, but worship is one.
Paths are many, but the goal is one.
Immersed in illusion, people worship this and that. Such actions 
are based on external perceptions and feelings. If you have a 
worldly outlook, you will win worldly rewards. Worldly feelings 
and thinking are negative; do not have such an attitude. Always 
have positive thoughts – positive, positive, positive! Positive 
thinking alone is the foundation of the Atmatathwam  (Principle 
of the Atma ), which is the same as Chaitanyatathwam  (Principle 
of Awareness), which is the same as Prematathwam (Principle of 
Love) and also Anandatathwam  (Principle of Bliss). See how all 
these different principles are one and the same! 
Bliss is not separate from you; it is inherent in you because God 
is in you. Bliss is in your body because God is the Indweller. It 
should be obvious that you are not the body. You say, “This is my 
body.” This clearly implies that you are separate and distinct from 
your body. The human body is just a machine, an instrument. Like 
a water bubble, it is transient. Can you identify your Immortal 
Self with this body? You must say, “I use this machine for My 
sake! I do not use it for the sake of any other person for the simple 
reason that there is no other person! It is ‘I’ everywhere!” 
Let us say you have a desire for something. You say, “I desire 
this or such and such a thing.” Ask yourself, “Do I want this thing for my sake or the sake of the thing or object concerned?” 
You feel like eating an apple. Is it for your sake or the sake of 
the apple? You eat for your satisfaction. In the ultimate analysis, 
every individual acts for their personal satisfaction, and not really 
for the sake of the world. The world is generally neutral – it 
has neither satisfaction nor dissatisfaction. Whatever one does is 
for one’s own Self-satisfaction. Self-satisfaction promotes Self-
sacrifice, which in turn leads to Self-realisation. 
Embodiments of Love! God is not separate from you; in fact, He 
resides i n you. He manifests when you are virtuous and have the 
right tendencies and attitudes. The gunas  or tendencies of a pers on 
are strongly influenced by food and life style. If these are such 
as to promote body-consciousness, then the six deadly enemies, 
kama (desire), krodha (anger) , lobha (greed) , moha (attachment) , 
mada (pride) , and matsarya (jealousy) , overwhelm the person. If 
one rises above the body to the level of the heart, then the divine 
qualities of prema (love) , daya (compassion) , sahana (patience), 
and sahanubhuti (empathy) all manifest in the person. These 
virtues constitute the essence of swadharma [Swami often refers 
to this also as Atmadharma ]. Actions performed for the sake of 
the Real Self constitute  swadharma. Practice of swadharma  leads 
one to experience the bliss of the Self or the Atma . 
Bliss is within, and you do not have to go elsewhere in search of 
it. In fact, ther e is nothing other than you! What you think you 
see outside is only a reflection of your own Inner Self. Some of 
the reflected images may appear distorted but that is a fault of 
the mirror, and has nothing to do with your Real Self. Prakriti or 
nature is t he mirror in which you see yourself. Prakriti is based on gunas  (tendencies or attributes), which leave their imprint on 
the images that you see. Looking at the distortions, you draw 
wrong conclusions. This is not correct. One who understands 
the principle of the Self will see through these distortions and 
aberrations. He will not be deluded by them. There is a mole 
on Swami’s left cheek, but in the mirror, it appears as a mole 
on the right cheek. Can one straightaway accept what one sees 
in the mirror? If you have confidence in the Reality of the Self, 
then you will not be deluded. But if that confidence is lacking, 
then you will be easily swept by the opinions of others. You 
have a mind of your own, and you have been blessed with the 
power of discrimination; why then should you allow yourself to 
be misguided by others? Follow God and not others. First know 
thyself, i.e., your innate Divinity, your Real Self, which is the 
Inner Reality. 
Embodiments of Love! Each and every one of you is the 
personification of love. There is no individual without love. 
However, when the pure love latent within manifests outside, it 
gets modified by the tendencies of the person concerned. People 
are worldly in their outlook, and that is why people are also so 
diverse in their attitudes, despite the common underlying divine 
basis. Worldly outlook is characteristic of preyas . Sreyas , on the 
other hand, makes one turn to God; such a person has no other 
interest, especially of a worldly nature. Therefore, always follow 
swadharma  or Atmadharma . Do not be bound or limited by 
paradharma , which is based on bodily considerations. 
God must be your goal
If you immerse a pot in water, there is water in the pot and also 
around the pot. The water inside is not different from the water 
outside. The same is true of God. The scriptures say:Antarbahisca Tat Sarvam Vyapya Narayanah Sthitah.
God is present inside, outside, everywhere. It is the same God 
who is within as well as without. You must have unshakeable 
faith in this truth, in this basic fact concerning the Divine. Never  
forget God, no matter what the problems or difficulties. Don’t 
you have a mind? Don’t you have aspirations and goals? Be 
firm; be resolute. God must be your goal, and you must pursue it 
with steadfast determination. Today, man is not doing that; he is 
following goals set by others, by foolish and thoughtless people. 
What do you achieve by this? Nothing! On the other hand, you 
lose even what you have. 
Seek  sreyas and not preyas
Students! You are all studying here in the hope that the degree 
that you will acquire will get you a nice job. Employment is 
necessary no doubt. But remember this: what you are taught in 
the class relates only to the external world. It constitutes secular 
knowledge. This secular knowledge must be supplemented with 
a strong dose of spiritual knowledge, which comes only by 
following the sreyo marg (spiritual path). 
Preyas  (worldly outlook) and sreyas (Spiritual outlook) are like 
left and right. You have been given a left hand and a right hand. 
Why? So that the two may work together. While working, the 
two hands must synchronise and be in harmony with each other. 
Swami has mentioned this before – when you do namaskaram , you 
bring your two hands together. One palm represents the worldly path a nd the other the spiritual path.  Namaskaram  is an act that is 
symbolic of the fusion of the two paths. Do not compartmentalise 
certain things as purely secular and other things as purely spiritual. 
Both are intertwined, and any separation that one seeks to make 
is entirely artificial. Namaskaram thus symbolises unification of 
the two paths. Some people greet by taking one hand to the head 
– they do a kind of salute! This gesture is not appropriate. It 
gives the impression that you are knocking your head, ruing your 
fate or misfortune! Namaskaram = na + ma + skaram . The first 
two words mean, “I am not”, and the word in full implies, “I do 
not have any ego.” Ego brings ruin and must therefore be totally 
avoided. Perhaps you have some worldly desires, but excessive 
desires would breed ambition, which in turn would make you 
wicked. The only desire one must really have is for God. Saints 
like Meera and Sakkubai clearly understood this, and made God 
their sole priority. They re alised that God is the Indweller, and 
worshipped Him with great devotion. God alone can be within; no 
one else can. There is a person who claims to be your friend; can 
this friend of yours be within you? Worldly friends are external 
but your true friend is inside; that is God! He alone can be both 
inside as well as outside, and He has the right to be so! Your 
heart is a single-seat sofa, and there is place for only one. That 
one seat must be reserved for God. If you lead your life filled 
with this feeling, not only would your life be always happy but, 
in addition, you would be able to spread that happiness all around 
you. Your family would be happy. If families are happy, the whole 
village would be happy. When all villages and towns are at peace, 
the whole country would be peaceful. Today, we mechanically 
repeat santhi , not just once but thre e times. The one that leads the chant is himself not at peace! Whom else is he praying for? 
Peace does not come with mere chanting. Peace will enter the 
heart only when it is swept clean of wicked qualities. Once bad 
thoughts are given some room, t hey would rapidly multiply. The 
best way of keeping bad thoughts away is to cultivate the feeling 
of Oneness. 
Try to experience Oneness
The gopikas  (cowherd maids) of Brindavan always strove to 
experience Oneness. They said, “O God, we have this body, 
which is transient. It may collapse any moment. We must make 
proper use of it while it is with us. You have now taken a Form 
and come amidst us. We would like to take advantage of this and 
develop a proper relationship with You.” They then sang:
O Lord! If You are a gigantic tree, 
I will be a creeper around You;
If You are a fragrant flower,
I will become a bee and hover around;
If You are the infinite sky,
I will become a tiny twinkling star;
If You are a mighty mountain,
I will become a waterfall;
If You are the infinite ocean,
I shall become a river and merge in You!
This was the intense devotion and the sense of unity that the 
gopikas  had. You too should feel the same way because, truly 0speaking, there is no plurality; there is only One. You should never 
be deluded by diversity and superficial differences.  Your father, 
mother, guru , etc., – at the body level all these are different; but 
the divine Principle in all of them is the same. Why then do you 
entertain a feeling of difference? Why then do you experience 
diversity instead of unity? 
Here is this body [Swami points to His body]. It is made up of the 
five elements. There is another body [Swami points to a person 
nearby]. That too is made up of the same five elements. Therefore, 
both are one; where is the scope for difference? Your mother, father, 
friend –every one of them is made up of the same five elements. 
Thus, even from the purely material point of view, there is only 
one, reflecting the philosophy of advaitam  or monism. In the 
entire universe, there are only the five elements; there is no such 
sixth [gross] element. No matter where you search, you cannot 
find a new element; everywhere, it is only these five. Yet, within 
a human being, there is a separate and distinct element. It is not 
gross but subtle. And that is Supreme Love! This Supreme Love 
may be regarded as the sixth element; it reflects the Indweller and 
the divine Principle. The Vedic  aphorism
Tat Twam Asi
meaning ‘That thou art’, reflects this divine Principle. You 
must aspire for this sense of unity between yourself and God. 
You should neither be exuberant with nor be overwhelmed by 
body-consciousness. The experiences you have with your body 
and mind should neither send you into raptures, nor plunge you into deep de pression. Supreme love rises far above duality and 
transient experiences as well as feelings. With this spirit of love, 
you can attain indescribable bliss.
Go through life smiling always
Students! The more you love humanity, the greater would be 
the happiness that you experience. On the other hand, if your 
love is feeble, then so will be your sense of joy. Therefore, love 
all. What do you lose by loving all? Nothing whatsoever. Love 
can confer so much joy. If you smile, others would do the same. 
Therefore, all of you must go through life with smiles and joy. 
When someone scolds, one normally feels hurt while the person 
who is scolding gets some satisfaction. Don’t feel hurt when you 
are criticised or abused. Instead, react by just smiling. You may 
wonder, “Why should I smile when that person is saying so many 
unpleasant things about me?” The answer is simple. You must 
smile because you have given the other person a chance to derive 
some satisfaction, even if it is by hurting your feelings. Be happy 
that you were an instrument to make the other person happy. 
This is the positive attitude and sense of Love that you have to 
develop. You must be charged with
uthsaaham, saahasam, dhairyam, buddhi, shakti, parakramam
enthusiasm, dynamism, keen sense of discrimination, energy, 
courage, and valour. These are the six forms of wealth that you 
must go after. Where these are present, there one can see the 
effulgence of Divinity. God is Omnipresent; so are the five elements created by God. 
There is no place where God is not; the same is true of air and 
water. You might not always be able to see the presence of water, 
but it is there nevertheless. In the atmosphere, it is present as 
water vapour, while below the surface of the earth it is present 
as subterranean water. When man turns wicked, the water table 
starts going down, suggesting that divine water does not wish to 
see the face of man! Water feels disgusted. It says, “Why should 
I see and be useful to such an evil fellow?” and then hides itself! 
Or else, it becomes brackish and unpotable. Man then sheds 
tears, which too are salty! What is described as toyam  [water] in 
the scriptures is not this type of useless water but crystal clear 
and pure water, as God Himself made it. What is the toyam you 
must offer back to God? Tears of joy! God gave water to man 
with love. Man must offer back love to God; God’s love can be 
secur ed only with love. 
The other day, Swami mentioned that God is described as Chitta 
Chora  [the One who steals the Heart]. If a devotee happens 
to say, “God, You are a big robber,” then others would object. 
They would ask, “How dare you describe God as a thief?” and 
then thrash the devotee! However, if with love the devotee sings 
Chitta Chora Yasoda ke Baal, then others join in the singing with 
great joy. Therefore, express your love for God through music! 
Everyone would then join you in chorus. Let your speech and 
actions be expressions of your love. March resolutely forward in 
love, no matter what the obstacles. Welcome troubles; welcome, 
welcome, welcome! If sorrow comes, welcome it; if pleasure 
comes, welcome that also. Sukha duhkhe samekrtva labhalabhau jayajayau.
Pleasure and pain are not really different; they merely represent 
two aspects of the same occurrence or event. Pleasure is an interval 
between two pains. If there is no pain, how then can there be 
pleasure? Without darkness, brightness has no meaning. Hence 
have the faith that whatever befalls you is for your own good. If 
people blame or criticise you, do not get upset. Criticism should 
spur you to work better, so that  later you earn praise. This is a 
dual world, and pairs of opposites are inevitable in it. However, 
that does not mean that you should get submerged by duality. 
As Swami often says, a man with a dual mind is half blind. If 
you expose yourself to duality, you would automatically become 
half blind. Duality is a part of Nature, and the world cannot be 
non-dual. But, using your discrimination, you must be able to see 
through this duality; that is the only way to secure happiness.
Embodiments of Love! Swami always addresses you by the 
endearing term Embodiments of Love; you must strive to become 
worthy of that description. Never go against the dictates of Love. 
Do not get angry with anyone; be pleasant to all. You will then 
experience what the scriptures describe as
Nityanandam, Paramasukhadam, Kevalam Jnanamurtim,
Dvandvatitam, Gagana Sadrsam, Tatvamasyadi Laksyam.
Ekam, Nityam, Vimalam, Acalam.
This is the state variously described as: Eternal Bliss, Supreme 
Happiness, Supreme Wisdom, Beyond Duality, All-pervasive, the Embodiment of Oneness, Pure, and Immovable. How can one 
in a state befitting such a description ever be in sorrow? Swami 
will discuss this point tomorrow.
Students! Time flies! Time is flowing fast but are you getting 
closer to the goal? If you want to go to Bangalore, you must drive 
in that direction. If instead you drive in the opposite direction, 
how can you ever get to Bangalore? Life’s journey may be slow, 
but must be toward the proper goal. Do not get disheartened by 
obstacles that are bound to come en route . You must be determined 
to reach the goal. Where exactly is this goal? It is within you. 
How is the goal to be attained? Simple: removal of bad qualities 
would get you there. Once bad thoughts are given up, you would 
have reached the destination. Give no scope for bad thoughts. See 
good in all. Everyone must love God. Do not waste your time 
by looking for God elsewhere; He is right within you, around 
you, behind you, above you, and below you. Is it ever possible 
to get away from such an omnipresent God? God is everywhere 
but what you see of Him outside is just a reflection of the inner 
Divinity. That is why Swami often says: Art is outside while heart 
is inside. God is in the heart. That also is why Vedanta  [ancient 
Indian philosophy] advocates the development of inner vision. 
At the conclusion of the discourse, Bhagavan sang two bhajans : 
Pibare Rama Rasam and Hari Bhajan Bina….
 May 00010. GOD IS PURE BLISS
The Embodiment of Supreme Bliss, 
The Embodiment of Transcendental Happiness,
The Embodiment of Transcendental Wisdom,
The One beyond duality,
The One in Eternal Bliss,
The Embodiment of Oneness,
The Supreme One, The Eternal One, 
The Unsullied One, the Ever-steady One, and
The Eternal Witness.
In the Anandavalli  portion of the Rig Veda , there is a beautiful and 
poetic reference to Brahmananda  or Supreme Bliss. Brahmananda  
refers to mliss that is limitless and beyond description by words; 
it is also something that cannot be comprehended by the ordinary 
mind. Unless one leads a calm, pure, noble, virtuous, peaceful, 
and unsullied life, one can neither understand nor experience this 
Brahmananda . Supreme bliss is beyond the physical, mundane, 
and transient world. From e phemeral pleasures to divine bliss
Our ancients have categorised the various types of joy 
and happiness that can be experienced. The lowest type is 
manavaanada , that refers to the pleasure that humans experience 
in the course of their normal life, and which is connected with 
worldly objects, entities, and matters. Thousand times greater 
is gandharvaananda or the happiness experienced by celestial 
beings. daivaananda  is the next higher level of happiness, and 
is a thousand times greater than gandharvaananda . It refers to 
the joy experienced by the devas  or the demi-gods. Far greater 
than daivaananda  is Brihaspathiananda , or the bliss experienced 
by Brihaspati, the preceptor of the devas . A thousand times 
greater is Prajapatiananda  or the joy experienced by Prajapati 
(in ancient Indian scriptures, Prajapati is the one associated with 
the practical aspects of Creation). Brahmananda  is a thousand 
times greater than Prajapatiananda , the highest joy that can be 
measured on a finite scale. You can see what an immense gulf 
separates manavaananda  that man hungers and normally settles 
for and Brahmananda that he really ought to seek. 
People use the word Brahmananda quite casually, without the 
faintest idea of what it actally means. Thus, every petty pleasure 
is glibly described as Brahmananda.  For example, if a person has 
a nice meal, he describes the experience as Brahmanandam . Man 
does not understand what an infinite gulf separates manavaanada  
and Brahmananda . The pleasures that man normally enjoys is not 
even a tiny spec of Brahmananda.  He does not realise that while 
worldly pleasures can be described in words, Brahmananda  is 
indescribable. Sandeepan Chatterjee [who spoke earlier] said that divine love 
and bliss transcend the bounds of space and time, and that they 
are beyond season and reason as well. Indeed; Ananda  is Ananda  
at all times and under all circumstances. Since Brahman and 
Atma  are synonymous, Brahmananda can also be referred to as 
Atmananda.  Supreme bliss is verily the same as the bliss of the 
Self. In fact, Ananda is just another name for Brahman or God. 
Worldly happiness that man is so crazy about is insignificant 
compared to the vastness that is Brah mananda  or Atmananda.
You are aware that air is present everywhere and that it has no 
specific form. Yet, when this formless air that is present everywhere 
fills a balloon, it acquires a form – that of the [inflated] balloon. 
If you go on inflating the balloon, a stage would come when the 
balloon would burst. The air inside the balloon then merges with 
the air outside to become formless and vast once again. What a 
great difference there is between the trapped limited air and the 
vast free air! Similar is the comparison between the tiny spec 
called mananvaanada  and to the infinity that is Brahmananda . 
Our ability to experience happiness is one of the many gifts of 
God. However, owing to his limited vision, man makes only 
a minimal use of his capacity to enjoy happiness. He is ever 
ready to settle for just manavaananda ; this will not do. Like the 
exploding balloon and the merger of the air inside with the air 
outside, man must break out of human bondage, soaring to the 
level of Brahmananda.
Brahmananda  is one of the Names of God. It conveys the idea 
that God is ever in a state of Supreme Bliss. Bliss is thus the Form 
of God, and therefore it is that God who is called Brahmananda . There are many other such names, and these were mentioned in 
the beginning. The next in the list is
Parama sukhadam ,
meaning real ecstasy. What is this sukham  [happiness or ecstasy]? 
Is it connected with the body? Is it physical, sensual, or intellectual? 
It is beyond all these. Our ancients said, “ Tasmai Namaha.” It 
means, “I offer my salutations to the Embodiment of Happiness”. 
Our ancients did not try to describe this supreme ecstasy but knew 
that God is its very Embodiment. So, they hailed God as Parama 
Sukhadam. God is the personification of Happiness that is beyond 
the constraints of space and time, and also human reasoning. If 
one is to describe this Parama Sukhadam  or Transcendental Bliss, 
all one can say is that it is neither physical nor has it a form that 
can be comprehended. Nectar has an appearance, and its taste 
could possibly be described; but Parama Sukhadam  is beyond 
both form and words. God is Eternal Bliss – what else can one 
say? He is totally unaffected by all pairs of opposites like praise 
and blame, [worldly] joys and sorrows, etc. He is ever supremely 
happy. 
Kevalam Jnanamurtim ,
Kevalam means that which transcend space, time, and 
circumstances. Jnana  means wisdom. Thus, jnana moorthim  
means Embodiment of wisdom. What sort of wisdom is this? 
Can it be acquired from books? Is it connected with the physical 
world? Can it be acquired by yogic  practices? Jnana  is not of this 
type. It  is supreme, transcendental wisdom, which is beyond this world, beyond space, time, and beyond circumstances as well. 
This jnana  is also known as Brahmajnana  (Knowledge of the 
Brahman) or Atmajnana  (Knowledge of the Atma ). It is eternal. 
Whereas worldly knowledge can be acquired from books and 
one can compare scholars saying he is better and so and so is 
less learned etc., Brahmajnana  is total, and beyond textual and 
academic knowledge. 
God alone is the Embodiment of jnana  – in fact, He is Jnana  
itself. Brahmajnana is Eternal, Total, and Omnipresent. It is the 
knowledge of the Self. Since the Self is in you, this knowledge 
also is in you. The moment you realise your True Self, you 
acquire this knowledge. Acquisition of this knowledge confers 
supreme wisdom. Since this knowledge also confers supreme 
bliss, acquisition of Brahmajnana,   automatically elevates you to 
the state of Brahmananda  and Parama Sukhadam. 
Dvandvatitam
The state represented by Brahmananda  has another name : 
dvandvateetham. It is a state that transcends all dualities like pain 
and pleasure, good and bad, praise and blame, merit and sin. It is 
a unique state of Total Oneness. The Vedas  say:
Ekam sat viprah bahudha vadanti.
Truth is only One though scholars describe it in various ways. 
Truth is One, not two – that is what dvandvateetham  implies. It 
means that Brahman or God is infinitely beyond duality in which 
man is imprisoned. 0Next, 
Gaganasadrisam
This means that like space, Supreme Bliss is both ethereal and all-
pervasive. Who is it that is called by the name Gagana Sadrisam ? 
God of course! In fact, all the words Swami has mentioned so far 
– Brahmanandam, Parama sukhadam, Kevalam jnana moorthim, 
Dvandvateetham , and now Gagana Sadrisam –  all these are 
Names of Almighty God. 
Tatvamasyadilaksyam
The four Vedas  proclaim four mahavakyas  or fundamental truths. 
These basic statements are: (1) Prajnanam Brahma  or God is 
Pure Consciousness. (2) Ayam Atma Brahma , meaning that Atma  
(the Self) and Brahman (God) are one. (3) Aham Brahmasmi, 
meaning I am God. (4) Tat Twam Asi , meaning That thou art! 
All these four statements imply the same, namely, there is only 
God and that, therefore, man also is divine. They underscore the 
Unity of Divinity. Thus God is also described as Tatwamasyadhi 
Lakshyam or the Ultimate Goal [which represents Total Unity].
After this, 
Ókam, Nityam, Vimalam, Acalam.
These four words also are Names of God. Ekam means One. 
Everything in this vast Universe is just God [though, may 
be, in ‘disguise’]. However, man is carried away by physical 
appearances. Thus, he perceives and experiences only diversity, totally missing  the underlying divine Unity. The diversity that 
man sees is purely physical and superficial. He sees only diversity 
because his vision as well as outlook are both entirely worldly 
and external. 
Let us say you have the numeral one (1). You next add a zero 
adjacent to it. This gives you a number that you call ten. You then 
add another zero and get hundred. Go on adding more and more 
zeroes, and you progressively get larger and larger numbers. You 
get hundred, thousand, ten thousand etc. In this way, with a mere 
string of zeroes, you can increase the number to million, trillion 
and so on . You can get astronomical numbers by just adding zeroes 
to . Remove this , and you are left with a mere string of zeroes! 
You may have a large number of zeroes but they carry no value. 
But place the number one before this string of zeroes, and you 
get numbers that carry value – that one makes all the difference! 
In the Universe, That One is God, one of whose Names is Ekam. 
God is just One, no matter by what Name you choose to call Him 
or what Form you wish to ascribe to Him. 
Next we have Nityam , which means Eternal.  God is not only 
Eternal but also Changeless. He remains so in all the three periods 
of time – past, present, and  future – in all the three worlds, and 
in the presence of the three  gunas  (satva, rajo  and tamo gunas ) 
too. This divine constancy is described in the scriptures by saying 
that He is beyond trikalam  (three periods of time) , trilokam 
(three worlds) , and trigunam (three gunas ). Thus, God is Nityam, 
Nityam, Nityam !
After this, we have Vimalam  – Pure. Today, contamination and 
pollution are everywhere. Air and water are polluted. Fo od too is contaminated and polluted. What is even more serious, man’s 
mind is polluted. God, on the other hand, is the personification of 
Total Purity. He is absolutely unsullied, crystal clear, and pristine 
pure. 
Achalam . This means steady and not wavering. All objects and 
entities made up of the five elements are subject to changes with 
time; in fact, change is an inherent part of their nature. The Sun 
changes with time, and so does the Moon. The stars also change 
with time. The Earth is always in motion. You know that in a 
movie, sixteen frames change per second. So it is in Creation 
– changes all the time, everywhere, and in everything. But God 
is Achalam or steady and constant.
Calanam Acalameva Ca .
God is no doubt steady and unchanging, but He is also immanent 
in things that are subject to change. Even so, constancy being the 
basic nature of the Absolute, God is known as Achalam .
Sarvadhi Saksibhutam .
In addition to all the names mentioned so far, God is called the 
Eternal Witness. He is a witness to everything and all the time. 
Names of God not given by man
Pious and noble rishis  of the past gave so many Names to God. 
Keen to experience Divinity, they sacrificed everything worldly and ma terial, and did intense penance. Induced by his inner 
feelings, each sage ascribed an attribute or form of his choice to 
God and then gave a name to God appropriate to his conception. 
God is actually both Formless and Nameless – all the descriptions 
of God are due to the rishis  of old. However, Names of God like 
Brahmanandam , etc., have nothing to do with worldly or physical 
descriptions . They transcend all these and relate to a superior 
plane. In this plane, God is beyond all normal and conceptual 
description. He is the Supreme One beyond all duality, and is 
described as
Brah manandam, Paramasukhadam, Kevalam Jnanamurtim, 
Dvandvatitam, Gaganasadrisam, Tatvamasyadilaksyam,
Ókam, Nityam, Vimalam, Acalam, Sarvadhisaksibhutam .
God alone is entitled to all thes e glorious Names. 
The all-comprehensive nature of God’s Name
Once, sage Narada came across young Dhruva who was then 
undertaking an intense penance to propitiate Lord Narayana. 
Narada said, “Dhruva, you are so young. Is it possible for you 
to undertake such an intense penance? How are you going to 
contemplate on God? In what form will you meditate on Him?” 
In this manner, Narada asked many questions. Dhruva smiled and 
replied, “O sage, the idea that I should do penance was planted 
by Him. The seed of thought becomes a sapling due to Him. The 
sapling grows into a giant tree because of Him. And He it is who 
also makes the tree to bear fruits. I have no doubt that the very 
same God will take care of me. I have not studied the Upanishad s 
or other sacred texts. I know only the Name of God.”  Narada  asked, “What Name will you chant?” Dhruva thought for a while 
and replied, “I shall chant: Gopijana Vallabhaya Namaha .”  
Here, the word gopi does not just refer to the gopikas  of Brindavan. 
Gopa  means the Earth, the Vedas , the Word, and cows. The root-
word for all these four words is Go.  Gopis  are those who worship 
and take care of these four sacred entities. They worship the 
Earth, they foster the Vedas , they are true to their word, and they 
also protect the cows. In essence, the gopikas  of Brindavan did 
all these. God does not have any names per se, but various names 
are given to Him. 
Dhruva said to N arada, “I am one among the gopis . I am a part of 
the Earth, a part of the Vedas , etc. In short, I am one among the 
many created by the Lord. Who protects and sustains the many? 
God. That is the One I am worshipping with this chant.” Swami 
said the other day,
Kleem, Krishnaya, Govindaya, Gopijanavallabhaya, Svaha .
You will recall that kleem  means earth. Krishnaya  means water, 
govindaya  means fire, and the other two words mean respectively 
air and space. These five words thus symbolise the five elements, 
which are the very personification of God. Thus, even a chant of 
the names of any one of the five elements amounts to calling out 
to God. All five words mentioned are also the Names of God and 
there is no particular need to chant the name Krishna, Vishnu, or 
Siva. It was only after the emergence of sects like Vaishnavites 
and Saivites that the fashion of chanting particular names like 
Vishnu and Siva emerged. This practice not only narrowed one’s perspective about God but also promoted unwanted controversies. 
God does not have any specific name. 
Become free from desires and attain Perfect Happiness
Tasmai Namah.
This i s short salutation hails God as: “O God, the Embodiment 
of Supreme Happiness!” When are you truly happy? You feel 
that way when you are free from all worries and anxieties. God 
has no desires and that is why He is always happy. Try to be 
like that, free from desires, and you too would always be happy. 
It is desires and worldly expectations that destroy happiness. 
To achieve permanent happiness, you must be totally free of 
desires. You may or may not believe this: Swami has no worries 
whatsoever, and is therefore always in a state of bliss. Swami 
has no thoughts relating to Himself. However, because He has 
come with a physical form and on account of His contacts with 
people, He might, at times, appear to be concerned and worried.  
But truly speaking, Swami is beyond both desires and worries. 
He wants not hing for Himself from anybody at any time. What 
He wants is only your welfare and that is the feeling dominant in 
Him all the time. 
The true meaning of Self-satisfaction
Suppose you want to eat a fruit. Do you want the fruit for your 
sake or the sake of the fruit? No. You want the fruit because 
you wish to enjoy it. You are attracted by a nice piece of textile. 
Do you want it for your sake or because you wish to give some satisfaction to that cloth? Obviously, the latter is not true; you 
want the cloth for your sake. It is the same with food. In this 
manner, every desire you have is for the gratification of your own 
self. There is something in you that drives you, and that driving 
force arises because you are either consciously or unconsciously 
seeking satisfaction for yourself. However, in almost all these 
cases, it is the lower self that is involved; that is why one 
describes all such actions as selfish.  In spirituality, one must 
focus on the Higher Self; all actions must spring from the desire 
to satisfy this Higher or real Self. This is true Self-satisfaction. 
Actions aiming at satisfying the Inner Self are not selfish in the 
worldly sense because they are far from worldly desires and petty 
expectations. 
This Real Self within is nothing but the Atma , and Brahmananda  
is Happiness connected with providing satisfaction to the Atma . 
Apart from the names already mentioned, the Atma  is also known 
as Paramatma , Paratma , Ekatma , etc. 
The journey to God must be by way of selfless service to 
society
Man is a vyashti  or an individual. He is a part of samashti  or 
society. And society is a part of Parameshti  or God. The vyashti  
must journey to Parameshti  through samashti . The individual 
must involve himself with society in some manner or the other, 
and serve it selflessly. If in the name of your individuality you 
cut yourself off from society and give preference to the pursuit 
of your personal ambitions etc., you can never become one with 
God! Such selfishness is contrary to the spirit of unity and Oneness that God represents. He who yearns to experience Brahmananda  
must first develop Love for God and the longing to become one 
with God. This longing must be translated into practical terms by 
first becoming one with society. How do you become one with 
society? By selfless service. When you serve society in a selfless 
manner, you will start realising that all are one. 
Enlightenment can occur in a flash
The Vedas  proclaim, 
Vedahametam purusam mahantam
adityavarnam tamasah parastat
The rishis  of old declared to mankind: “O man! We have seen 
God [in man]. He has the effulgence of the Sun latent in him but 
he lies in the darkness [of  ignorance].” People then asked the 
rishis : “Where did you see this God? Inside or outside?” To this 
the rishis  replied:
Antarbahisca Tatsarvam Vyapya Narayanassthitah.
“God is everywhere, inside as well as outside.” They then added, 
“Man, there is God in you. You have the effulgence of the Sun, 
but the darkness of ignorance is eclipsing this radiance.” The 
rishis  saw God everywhere. Since God is Omnipresent, Bliss too 
is everywhere since bliss is God’s Form. God has no desires and 
that is why the state He is in is described as Parama Sukhadam  
(Supreme Happiness). If there are no desires, then one can truly 
experience Eternal and Supreme Happiness, which is what God is. Absence of desires also makes God the personification of Supreme 
Knowledge. Supreme Knowledge exists when there is Supreme 
Bliss – the two go together. Thus, Supreme Knowledge, Supreme 
Happiness, and Supreme Bliss – all these are synonymous with 
God. These aspects of God are not the result of causal effects; 
they are intrinsic to God. The Almighty transcends reason, is 
beyond causality, and is also beyond both space and time. He is 
not bound by circumstances either.  
Here is an example. You are now here in Brindavan.  You are 
sleeping in your room and while doing so you dream that you 
are in Calcutta. Why did you go to Calcutta? How did you travel 
to Calcutta? Who accompanied you? How long did it take you 
to reach Calcutta? There are no valid answers to these questions 
because dream is beyond space, time, and circumstances such as 
one experiences in the waking state. Suppose you actually want 
to go to Calcutta. You catch a flight at 7 a.m. and in about three 
hours you are physically there. At Calcutta Airport you take a taxi 
and go to a house. What for? To meet your relatives there. Thus, 
in real life, there is a purpose for the travel – you wish to meet 
your relatives, that is the purpose. The mode of travel is air and 
the journey is made in the morning. The duration of the journey 
is three hours. The time of departure is  a.m. Experiences in the 
waking state are thus governed entirely by time, space, reason, 
and circumstances. On the other hand, experiences in the dream 
state are completely beyond all such considerations. 
The dream-state experience illustrates another important point. 
You are fast asleep at night. At .0 a.m. you get up to go to 
the bathroom. You come back and fall asleep again. The time now is . a.m. You drift into a dream. In the dream you see 
yourself growing up, getting educated, securing a job, getting 
married, having a son and later playing with this son.  In the 
dream, the child cries. With a start you wake up. You look at 
the clock. It shows 1.40 a.m. In just five minutes of dream, you 
have experienced so many stages in life that take nearly forty 
years in real life. In the same way, if you are able to rise to the 
transcendental state of turiyavasta , you can experience God in 
just the fraction of a second. You may wonder, “Is this possible?” 
Well, can anyone explain how it is possible in five minutes of 
dream to go through what takes forty years in real life? No one 
can. In the same way, though no one can explain it, it is possible 
to experience Divinity, literally in a flash. 
Here is another example. You are living in a house. Circumstances 
arise and you go abroad, locking up the house. You return after 
spending ten years overseas. You open the lock and enter the 
house. You then put on the switch. The room you are in has 
remained dark for ten years but in just one moment, it is filled 
with light. It took just one second to put the switch on, and in 
a flash the darkness is removed. In the same way, it does not 
necessarily take ages for the darkness of ignorance to be removed 
and for enlightenment to occur. Enlightenment is a process that 
is beyond reason and season. Why? Because God who confers 
enlightenment is also beyond reason and season. Intensely 
directing your intellect toward God amounts to flicking the 
switch. When the spiritual switch is flicked, Supreme Bliss can be 
experienced immediately. Therefore, the realisation of this exalted 
state described variously as Brahmanandam, Parama Sukhadam , 
etc., can happen instantaneously, without any apparent reason. To 0have this experience, you do not have to withdraw to the forest as 
people mistakenly imagine; it can happen to you right here. 
Offer service, and receive love!
Peace is right within you. To experience what is right within 
you, why think of withdrawing to the forest? Such thoughts are 
foolish; peace is in one place and you are thinking of looking 
for it elsewhere. Peace is within you! If you want to discover 
this treasure within you, then, as Swami said earlier, you must 
serve others and experience love. If you do so, then you would 
automatically discover peace. Enlightenment is nothing but 
experiencing peace and love within, and this enlightenment is 
nothing other than Supreme Bliss and Absolute Happiness. 
When the mind wavers, faith also falters
Everything is in you. That is why it is said, 
Sarvatah Panipadam Tatsarvato‘ksi Siromukham
Sarvatah Srrtimalloke Sarvamavrtya Tisthati.
With hands and feet everywhere, with eyes, heads, mouths, and 
ears  everywhere, He exists enveloping all. He pervades through 
all these means.
Once, Krishna asked Arjuna, “How old are you?” Arjuna replied, 
“I am  seventy.” Krishna then said, “Arjuna, do you know My age? 
I am seventy five!” For this body also seventy-five is coming! [Obviously, this is a  reference to the forthcoming Seventy-fifth 
Birthday. Perhaps, Swami was dropping a hint to those who 
forgot that He is none other than Krishna come again!] Bhishma 
was then one hundred and thirteen. At that age, he served as the 
Commander-in-Chief of the Kaurava forces in the Kurukshetra 
war. Can you think of such a thing in this day and age? People 
lived long those days.
When the mind is not steady but wavering, there are aberrations. 
Once, Krishna chided Arjuna, “I taught you the Gita and gave 
you much spiritual advice; but you don’t remembering anything. 
Do you know why? Because you do not consider My teachings 
to be important. You are indifferent to them, and that is why you 
have forgotten all that I taught you. Had you regarded them as 
important, then you would have remembered all My teachings. 
You have also forgotten that you and I have been together in 
many lives .” Arjuna felt sorry and with humility asked, “Lord, 
how is it that You remember everything and recall them all, while 
I am not able to do so?” That is forgetfulness.
 The Real You or the Inner Being
 Is ever aware in all states,
 Be it the waking state
 Or the dream state,
 Or the deep-sleep state.
 It knows no forgetfulness.
You, however, are not in the Taraka  state, or the one of Perfect 
Awareness, but in the tamasic  state, which is one of torpor. Arjuna was baffled and asked, “How can that be Lord? I am not all that 
dull.” Krishna smiled and replied, “Is that so? Now tell Me; we 
have been together for so long; can you remember all the events? 
You do not. But you do remember your birthday, and also the day 
of your wedding with Subhadra, even though the marriage took 
place decades ago. Arjuna, where were you last year on Chaturdasi  
[fourteenth] day in the month of Margashirsha  [approximately, 
November]?” A crestfallen Arjuna replied, “I don’t remember.” 
Krishna continued, “You can recall precisely the date of your 
marriage that took place fifty years ago but cannot remember 
where you were on a particular day just last year! This reflects the 
human tendency of forgetfulness, caused by a wavering mind.” 
A short time after this conversation took place, the death occurred 
of Arjuna’s son Abhimanyu.  But Arjuna was not aware of this.  
When he returned home, he wondered, “Every evening as I 
returned from the battlefield, my son used to receive me. Today, 
why has he not come?” Krishna, who was then by the side of 
Arjuna, knew even earlier about Abhimanyu’s death but did not 
reveal it to Arjuna; there was a time and place for everything and 
in due course, Arjuna would become aware of the news. In God’s 
Drama, there is a time and a place for everything. When Arjuna 
came to know of Abhimanyu’s death, he could not bear the shock 
and collapsed.  He shouted at Krishna calling Him “ Vamsanaasi !” 
[destroyer of the clan] for not having protected his son. Arjuna 
continued, “We all are now too old to have children again. With 
the death of Abhimanyu, our lineage has come to an end and You 
are responsible for it!” Krishna smiled and replied, “Arjuna, your 
mind is wavering. Right now you are in the grip of grief, and swayed by emotion, are speaking without thinking. But it does 
not matter; this mood will pass.”
Someti me later, Abhimanyu’s wife delivered a baby but 
unfortunately, it was still-born. Draupadi took the dead child in 
her hand and said, “Alas, even this child is dead.” Sahadeva was 
sent to fetch Krishna. Krishna came.  Draupadi placed the body 
of the still-born child on a plate, took it to Krishna and said, “O 
Krishna, have You given us the gift of a dead child?” Krishna 
was smiling as usual. It was Krishna’s habit to always smile, 
no matter what the situation. Others might be worried, anxious, 
upset, or in despair but Krishna was always smiling. Grief and 
sorrow could never touch Him; He was far beyond them. Krishna 
told Draupadi, “This child is the exact replica of Abhimanyu. 
His eyes are like that of Abhimanyu and so is the face.” Arjuna 
could not bear this and shouted, “Yes, the breath too is similar! 
Abhimanyu is dead and so is this child!!” Krishna smiled and 
chided Arjuna, “You are a fool, unable to understand what I am 
saying.” Krishna then ignored Arjuna and continued talking to 
Draupadi. The latter had full faith in Krishna and His willingness 
to do anything for His devotees. 
In the matter of devotion, women are exemplary. It is the wife that 
drags the husband to God. God gave the gift of bhakti (devotion) 
to women and jnana  (wisdom) to men. In court language, whereas 
men can go only up to the Durbar Hall [where the King holds 
court], women can go to the inner quarters [where women stay]. 
In the same way, the devotion of a woman can take her right inside 
God’s heart, whereas such access is not so easy for a man. Why? 
Because, compared to women, men have less faith in God and correspondingly also less devotion. Women, on the other hand, 
have total faith. Arjuna did not believe that Krishna would do 
anything, but Draupadi had full faith that Krishna would restore 
the dead child back to life. 
The Pandava brothers were all seated there, looking totally 
crestfallen. Meanwhile, Krishna was continuing His conversation. 
Arjuna was boiling inside but was unable to say anything. All 
of a sudden Krishna told Draupadi, “Sister, give me the child.” 
Draupadi did.  Krishna then patted the child and the baby began to 
cry. The Pandavas were stunned; unbelievable, but the dead child 
had come back to life! They shouted with joy, while Krishna named 
the child Parikshit (As He had made them undergo His pariksha 
(test) before giving life to the child). Arjuna too witnessed the 
miracle. He ran to Krishna, fell at His feet, and hailed Him thus: 
“Krishna! Vamsoddharaka !! [Krishna, the Emancipator of the 
clan]” Krishna smiled and said, “Arjuna, just a short while ago 
you called Me the destroyer of the clan and now you are hailing 
Me as the Emancipator of the clan. How quickly you change! 
How fickle you are! How your mind wavers!” 
 If you say yes, 
 Sa i says yes; 
 If you  say no,
 Sai also says no.
 This yes and no relate to you,
 But for Sai, 
 It is always Yes, Yes, and Yes!
[App lause.] One moment Krishna was called the destroyer and 
the in the next He was called the Emancipator. These descriptions 
do not relate to Krishna but the person using the terms. They reflect the wavering mind of man. God is Unchanging and far 
beyond fluctuations.
Parikshit having regained life, everyone was very happy. All of 
them were sitting around Kris hna. Arjuna moved close to Krishna 
and gently asked, “Lord, why did You let my son Abhimanyu die 
at such a young age? I did not even get a chance to see him before 
he died. Should death come so early? Could You not have let him 
live a little longer?” Krishna replied, “O foolish one! You are 
determining the age of a person by looking at the present body. 
This age that you are talking of has no meaning really. Birth and 
death of the body follow according to the law of nature.” 
Here is an example that illustrates how one should understand the 
so-called early or untimely death. Suppose you go to Kashmir. 
You may not be aware  of it but Kashmir was the home state of 
Kaikeyi. While in Kashmir, you purchase some woollen cloth in 
order to stitch a suit. After return, you put the cloth in a cupboard, 
lock the cupboard, and then forget all about the cloth. Ten years 
pass and you are about to shift your residence. You are packing 
things for the transfer of residence. At that time, you discover 
the woollen  cloth that you have stored away a long time ago. 
You regret that you have forgotten about this nice fabric all these 
years. That very day, you go to a tailor and ask him to stitch 
a nice suit for you. Soon, the suit is delivered. You wear this 
brand new suit and attend a wedding party. A buffet dinner has 
been arranged there. You bend down a little with the plate to help 
yourself. Suddenly you find that your suit gives way and tears 
[laughter]. You feel sad. You wonder, “Brand new suit; how can 
it tear like this?” Yes, the suit is indeed new but the cloth is not new; it is old. 
Krishna told Arjuna, “Abhimanyu did not die young as you 
imagine; he was ‘old stock’. In this birth he might have lived 
only for a few years, but in reality, the one whom you called 
Abhimanyu was not young at all.” Arjuna then said, “Lord, I was 
not aware of such subtleties.” Krishna smiled and replied, “Yes, 
My dear son, life and death are both mysteries! You will not be 
able to understand them.” 
Experience God and do not try to analyse Him
It is not possible for anyone to comprehend Divinity. What God 
does one moment may appear to contradict what He does the next 
moment. God’s actions are inscrutable, beyond, time, space, and 
human reason. As Swami often says: “No reason, no season!” 
It is therefore both meaningless and improper to analyse God’s 
actions and to interpret them. If God says ‘Yes,’ it shall be so. If 
He says ‘No,’ it shall be so. That is Destiny! You must accept all  
this and not argue. To question God’s actions would imply lack 
of faith.
 
Let us say right now you go out to the bazaar and tell people 
there what Swami is speaking about. You tell them that Swami 
is God. A man in the crowd asks you, “Where is God?” You tell 
him, “He is there on the stage delivering a discourse.” He argues, 
“That is not God. God does not exist.” You should then tell him, 
“If you say that God does not exist, that applies only to you and 
not to me. For me, God does exist. What right do you have to tell 
me that God does not exist? To believe in God is my right. If you are destined not to have faith in God, that is your misfortune.” 
Your faith in God must be strong. If it is, God will surely respond 
always. If you emphatically declare your firm belief in God, non-
believers would automatically shut up and walk away. 
You must understand that Creation is full of mysteries. The eleven 
words starting with Brahmananda are not praises of God. Nor   
are they descriptions of God. In fact, they are the Names of God. 
The celebrated Gayatri Mantra  has three basic parts.  
Om
Bhur Bhuvassuvah, Tatsavitur Varenyam,
Bhargo Devasya Dhimahi,
Dhiyo Yonah Pracodayat.
First there is praise; next, there is meditation; finally, prayer – 
adoration, meditation, and prayer. But the hymn beginning with 
Brahmananda , goes far beyond even the famous Gayatri . The 
words Brahmananda  etc., have nothing to do with praise – they 
are the very Names of God. The Gayatri Mantra  is the gift of 
Sage Viswamitra to humanity. It has a basis; it can be analysed; 
its meaning can be comprehended. But the Divine Principle [to 
which the words Brahmananda  etc., refer] is beyond human 
reasoning, human analysis, and human understanding as well. 
God knows  no sorrow, has no pain, and is beyond thought. 
Sorrow and grief come only to those with thoughts, while the 
one without th oughts is always happy. God is beyond thoughts 
and is therefore always in Bliss. No matter what people tell Him, 
Swami always responds by saying, “ Santosham, santosham ” [meaning ‘I am happy to hear that’]. That is because Swami is 
Parama Sukhadam . A lady comes to Swami and cries, “Swami, 
my husband died”. Swami replies, “ Santosham ”. The shocked 
lady asks, “What Swami! I am telling you that my husband has 
died and You are saying You are happy!! Are You happy that 
my husband died?” Swami replies, “No matter what you say, for 
Swami it is always santosham, santosham, santosham !” Once,        
a person told Swami, “Our people met with an accident”. Swami 
said, “ Chala santosham  [very happy]”. 
Swami is always happy. What is there to be unhappy about? 
Whatever has to happen according to destiny, will happen. Why 
then bother and feel sad about it? Life and death are natural. 
They are common to all and not meant specifically for this person 
or that. Therefore, one must calmly face the verdict of destiny 
and accept with equanimity whatever happens. People suffer not 
because of destiny but because of desires and attachments. If you 
have attachments to the things of the world, you are bound to 
experience joy and sorrow in alternation. Pleasure and pain are 
an integral part of the dual world. 
Everything happens according to the will of God. He gives and 
He takes back what He wants when He wants. You might have 
seen railway goods wagons carrying a marking: Date of Return. 
It means that on the due date, the wagon has to be returned to the 
parent railway department. The body is like the goods wagon. 
When it is sent here, a return date is stamped on it though you 
might not be aware of it. When the due date comes, the body goes  
back where it came from – that is all. Thus, when there is birth there is also death. The two form a natural pair. So, no one should 
give way to sorrow on account of death. 
There is Bliss in every aspect of life, and God is Pure Bliss. Since 
God is in you, you should always be happy. You should ever be 
full of love. Never allow that love to become polluted or degraded 
into hate. 
At the end of the discourse, Bhagavan sang the bhajan , Prema 
Mudita …
 May 000.00
011. HOW TO BECOME DEAR TO THE 
LORD
Anapeksah Sucirdaksa Udasino Gatavyathah
Sarvarambha Parityagi Yo Madbhaktah Same Priyah
He who is totally devoid of desires,
Absolutely pure, 
Firm in determination,
Completely detached,
Immune to the play of Time, 
And has renounced pomp and ostentation;
Such a one is dear to Me. 
  GITA: (12.16)
Embodiments of Love!
God loves dearly, those who possess the qualities enumerated in 
this sloka  (verse)  of the  Bhagavad Gita . 
The qualities needed to become dear to the Lord
Anapeksha  means that the devotee is beyond apeksha , i.e., desires 
or expectations. Is it ever possible for man, bound as he is by 0the body and the senses, to be without desires? Hardly. Some 
desire or the other will always be there. However, there must 
be control over the desires that one has. What sort of desires 
are permitted? Recall what Krishna has to say about this matter. 
He says that all righteous actions are divine. Thus, among the 
permissible desires, the best is the desire for tyaga  or sacrifice. 
The yearning for dharma  also is important. The desire for God 
is mandatory. Although what must truly be desired is very clear, 
people have widely different types of expectations and desires. 
While some consider being righteous as very important, others 
think that achieving [worldly] greatness is the best among goals. 
Some even try to combine these two objectives. Truly speaking, 
no one has the freedom or the authority to do as one likes. One 
must do exactly as the Lord says. 
The Lord has stated very clearly that He wants you to attain the 
state of anape ksha. How does one do that? One does this by 
strictly confining to righteous activities alone, performing such 
actions exclusively for the pleasure of the Lord, and by offering 
all such actions in their entirety to the Lord. Actions performed in 
this spirit rise well above worldly desires and expectations. Thus 
the word anapeksha  ought not to be interpreted in a very rigid 
sense. W hat it really means is having the irresistible urge to work 
only for the Lord and for His sole pleasure. However, that does 
not mean one can do anything and everything. Our actions must 
be such that they please Him and would secure His approval. If 
a devotee conducts himself in this fashion, he becomes dear to 
the Lord. 
The second quality that the devotee must possess is sucih  or 0cleanliness. What sort of cleanliness does the Lord expect from 
us? Is it outer cleanliness or inner cleanliness? Both are required. 
God loves cleanliness; cleanliness is Godliness. However, one 
cannot confine oneself to external cleanliness alone; inner purity 
also is very necessary. In fact, it is of prime importance. God is 
omnipresent. He is present both outside as well as inside. However, 
we must first try to recognise the Divine Principle within. 
Here is an example. There is a brass vessel, and you are using it 
to prepare soup. If the vessel is not tinned inside, the soup would 
get spoilt and even poisoned. Our heart is like the brass vessel. 
This vessel must be coated inside with prema . If this precaution 
is taken, the inside will be clean. Inner purity is essential for 
achieving external purity. What exactly is meant by external 
purity? It does not mean washing yourself with soap and water. It 
means performing selfless service to society and doing such action 
for the pleasure of God. It is such service alone that produces 
external purity. If inner purity is lacking, the service rendered 
would inevitably be tinged with selfishness, thereby diminishing 
external purity. 
The third quality that the devotee must have is daksha  or strong 
and unshakeable determination. What sort of determination must 
you have? You must say, “Come what may, I shall not rest till I 
accomplish this or achieve this.” This is the sort of resolve you 
ought to have. Swami occasionally says:
Having resolved what ought to be done,
Hold on till you succeed.0This is determination.
Having desired what ought to be,
Hold on till they are fulfilled.
This is determination. 
Having asked what ought to be,
Hold on till you get it.
This is what is meant by determination. 
Having thought what ought to be,
Hold on till the thought is realised.
Such is the quality of determination. In the end, what should 
happen?
Out of sheer disgust, the Lord must yield to your wishes!
Persevere, be tenacious, and never give up.
It is not the characteristic of a devotee to retreat,
Abandoning his resolve.
What is meant by determination? It means having the firm resolve: 
“I should definitely see God, have God, and secure His Grace.” 
God loves dearly the devotee who has such firm determination. 
Next comes udaasina , which means detachment. You must be 
totally detached with respect to whatever you are doing. You can 
do any kind of work; you may, for example, be engaged in service 0activity. However, you should not have expectation of any type 
[including of the outcome], and also not seek any reward, praise, 
appreciation, etc., for what you are doing. Especially while 
working for service organisations, you should be very careful; 
you must not have any craving for fame and name. You must not 
seek praise and respect. You should not lament, “I am working so 
hard and doing so much but there is no mention of it whatsoever 
in the newspapers!” If you do your work with such cravings and 
expectations, then the good that you might be doing gets nullified 
and the sanctity of the work gets destroyed. Therefore, you must 
do service work sincerely, being immune to success and failure, 
praise as well as criticism. 
After this, gathavyathaha ; this means being impervious to 
the ups and downs brought about by time. Acquisition of this 
particular virtue also calls for strong determination. You should 
neither brood over the past nor worry about the future. Why all 
this pointless contemplation? No matter how much you think, 
reflect, and brood, the miseries of the past cannot be corrected nor 
set right. As regards the future, no one can say anything definite 
about it since it is so very uncertain. You are keen about achieving 
something tomorrow; is there any guarantee you would be alive 
then? Are you sure you would be alive? No one can speak with 
certainty on such matters. Therefore, what is the point in worrying 
about the future? The future is hidden in the womb of time; no 
one can see it. So, why spend time imagining all sorts of future 
scenarios? As for the past, it is gone and lies buried in the sands 
of time. The past cannot be revived, recovered, or resurrected. 
The future belongs to time. Why therefore waste time reflecting 
about both the past as well as the future? If you do want to think, 0then do so about the present. Man cannot live without thinking. 
Waves of thought constantly assail you. Channelise your thought 
so the present. Why? Because both the past and the future are 
contained in the present. The present is a seed that came from 
a tree called the past. This seed also contains the tree called the 
future. Thus the present is very important, being the embodiment 
of both the past and the future; therefore, go by it. 
He who speaks and conducts himself,
Judging properly the situation and circumstance,
And without wounding or hurting others; And without himself 
being hurt in the process
Such a one is wise and blessed.
Don’t worry about the future, but concentrate on the present. If 
you take proper care of the present, the future is bound to be 
bright; of that you can be sure. 
Lastly, sarvarambha parithyagi – this implies total renunciation. 
Who is a true renunciate? He who remains perfectly calm at all 
times and under all circumstances is the one who merits such a 
description. Such a one is beyond pomp and ostentation. God 
distances Himself from the ostentatious type. In fact, exhibitionism 
is the first thing that one must renounce. Pomp is a sure sign of rajo 
guna (tendency to be pushing and aggressive). The craving for 
ostentation is the starting point for all desires. Seeking publicity 
is a reflection of worldly desires. Do not go after worldly goals 
for they represent the temporary and the evanescent. Shun pomp, 
show, and publicity. Krishna declared that it was such a recluse 0that was dear to Him. 
Toda y, everywhere it is a case of show and publicity. The person 
may spend just five rupees on charity, but he is prepared to invest 
five hundred rupees on publicising his act in the newspapers. 
Is this not show? It is only the one who seeks fame that needs 
publicity; on the other hand, the one truly interested in service 
has no need for it. Never hanker after publicity. As long as you 
are after pomp, you would never be able to experience Atmic 
Bliss. How can one who is ignorant of the Self ever earn God’s 
Love? While seeking God’s Grace, one must be very patient in 
everything and in every aspect. Then alone can it be said that 
one is treading the spiritual path; then alone would one become 
eligible for God’s attention. 
Selfless service alone begets God’s Love
Embodiments of Love! If you wish to become eligible for 
God’s love, then your actions must be consistent with love. It is 
impossible to secure God’s love without  appropriate and sacred 
actions. Can the one who is always hankering after rewards be 
ever truly happy? The only compensation you ought to seek is the 
pleasure and joy of doing your duty properly. The joy of service 
is the true reward. If you go against the command of God, then 
everything is bound to go wrong. 
Yad bhavam tad bhavati.
As is the feeling, so is the result. If you desire God’s love, then 
your actions must match and be compatible with your desire. If 0you do not want God’s Love, then you are at liberty to do as you 
please. However, if God’s Love is what you want, then you must 
act in an appropriate manner. In this world, you first have to pay 
the price before you acquire the authority to possess what you 
desire. You go to a shop to buy a towel. The shopkeeper quotes 
a price of twenty rupees. When you pay twenty rupees cash, 
the shopkeeper packs the towel and gives it to you. No cash, no 
towel! God also follows a similar ‘transaction’ procedure. What 
kind of ‘business’ does God do? Divine business! If you lovingly 
obey God’s command, then you are sure to receive Love. God’s 
Love has no limitations or stipulations. Only one condition: you 
give and then you receive. As Swami said earlier:
Offer selfless service,
And receive Love. 
Without offering selfless service, how can you expect to receive 
God’s love? To receive God’s love, you must be totally free 
from worldly desires and constantly engage in selfless service. 
The service must be of a pleasing nature. All actions must be 
performed exclusively for God’s pleasure. For this, you do not 
have to give up anything. Just keep on doing your normal duty in 
the manner ordained by Destiny. You wish to study; by all means 
do so. But in what manner should you study? You should do it 
for God’s pleasure. You are employed in some place. How should 
you do your work? Do it as if you are trying to please God. Tell 
yourself, “I am doing this job as an offering to Him”. Install this 
feeling in your heart and do whatever you want to or have to. 
However, before rushing to adopt this course, pause, reflect, and 
make sure that God would really be pleased with what you are 0trying to do and offer to Him! You cannot do all sorts of silly and 
stupid things, claiming that you are doing it  for God’s pleasure. 
If you act ju st according to your fancies, do you think that God 
will accept your actions as an offering? Every action of yours 
must have the stamp of quality that is acceptable to God. Without 
that stamp, your action would be a counterfeit. God should 
acknowledge that your action is good. When you affix the proper 
postage stamp, your letter can go to far off places. But if there 
is only address on the envelope and no stamp, it is of no use. An 
unstamped letter dropped into the mailbox would end up only in 
the dead-letter office. Therefore, if you really want your offering 
to reach God, then you must affix the stamp of prema . It is only 
when prema  saturates every action of yours that God will shower 
His Grace. He will do so in many forms too.
Nothing comes without perseverance
Slowl y but surely, you must develop all the qualities enumerated 
in the Gita Sloka . Do not ever doubt that the acquisition of these 
virtues is impossible. 
Go on rubbing two pieces of wood,
Fire is sure to emerge.
Go on churning curd,
Butter is sure to be formed.
Engage constantly in enquiry,
Wisdom would certainly blossom.
Sparks of fire are produced when two pieces of wood are rubbed 0hard together. Butter is formed when curd is churned in a sustained 
manner. Similarly, in spirituality, sustained enquiry leads one to 
Wisdom and Divinity. You realise the truth: Tat Twam Asi – That 
thou art. Is it possible to get fire without rubbing and butter 
without churning? The fire is latent in the wood and is not visible. 
You have to rub hard to make the fire emerge. Butter is latent in 
the curd, and you have to churn hard to make it come out. In the 
same way, if you want God’s love, you must constantly do good 
work, d o it solely for God’s pleasure, and also offer it all to God. 
It is only when you work with such a spirit of surrender that you 
become eligible for God’s love. Surrender does not mean that you 
are vanquished and that the other one has emerged victorious. 
In spirituality it means that the two merge into one – there is 
nothing like giving or receiving. Recognise the Cosmic Unity that 
pervades everywhere. Recognise that this substratum of Unity is 
nothing but God. You will then automatically experience God. 
Students! All this may sound very difficult to practise. Know 
the truth that happiness comes only after hard effort. Without 
difficulty, there cannot be joy.
Na sukhat labhyate sukham.
Happiness does not beget happiness; happiness is born only 
out of difficulties. If there are no difficulties to start with, how 
can you enjoy the sweetness of pleasure? So, you must struggle 
to some extent and face difficulties. Without darkness, does 
brightness have any value? Without hunger, does food have 
value? Similarly, you must discover the true taste and value of happiness. In what way must you do this? Discover first the Love 
within you, and then use it to receive God’s Love. Once you tap 
the pure and unpol luted Love within you, you will become the 
recipient of God’s Love. God would even overlook and forgive 
your mistakes. However, do not take this for granted and commit 
mistakes endlessly! You have to safeguard all the treasures God 
has deposited in you. 
God is everywhere but you must make an effort to recognise 
Him
The gopikas  (cowhed maids) constantly worshipped Krishna. 
They became very depressed when Krishna went away to 
Mathura. They were so absorbed in the thought of Krishna that 
they constantly called out His Name, no matter what task they 
were engaged in. Once, a gopika  was carrying on her head pots 
containing milk, curd, and butter. She was heading for the bazaar, 
and her intention was to sell the dairy products there. Normally 
the village vendor calls out loudly, “Milk! Butter! Curd!” etc., 
to announce the products available for sale. But this particular 
gopika  was so absorbed in the contemplation of Krishna that she 
completely forgot to call out the name of the products she had 
brought to sell. Instead, she wandered up and down the bazaar 
street crying out, “Govinda, Krishna, Madhava,….” etc. She went 
on repeating the Lord’s Name. She completely forgot everything 
about vending and returned home without selling anything. Such 
was the intensity of devotion in those days. 
A gopika  once told Krishna, “O Krishna, in what way am I to see 
You? How am I to recognise You? It is not possible! You are in everything and yet, You are invisible! When we declare You to 
be invisible, then You suddenly manifest Yourself. And when we 
say You are present, you suddenly vanish!” 
O Krishna, can we ever know You?
Subtler than an atom,
Bigger than biggest,
 You are in every one of the eighty-four lakh species,
And You dwell in each and every living being of every species.
Can we ever know such a One as You?
People in those days believed that there were  lakh living species. 
God is present as the Indweller in every living being belonging to 
each of these very large number of species. How come? Because 
He is the One that became many. When the forms of God are 
so numerous, in what particular form should we worship God? 
By what Name should we call Him? Forms are the result of our 
physical perception, and Names are what we have given to these 
various forms. By Himself, God is just Truth. 
Here is a flower, a pad, and a cloth [Swami points out to various 
objects on the table before Him]. To the eye, they all appear quite 
different. The flower is a flower, the cloth is cloth, and the pad 
is a pad. Despite the varying names and forms, there is common 
underlying factor – they all exist. This existence is the basic 
Truth. It is the unifying substratum behind the different names 
and forms. IT IS!  It is the same with God. God there certainly IS,
And visible also He is!
God IS, IS, IS! He exists!! You should have complete and total 
faith in His existence. If you have this faith, you can see Him 
everywhere. How is it that you have faith in your mother? Do you 
ever doubt whether she is your mother or not? Never! How come 
you have faith in your father? Do you ever have doubts about 
his being your father? You prefer to believe in all worldly things 
but are unwilling to accept spiritual truths. This is the biggest 
mistake and the weakness of modern man. 
Bhrama - Brahma
The warden [of the Brindavan Campus, who spoke earlier] referred 
to the Ramayana . Rama, Lakshmana, Bharata, and Shatrughna, 
representing the four Vedas , took birth as Emperor Dasaratha’s 
sons. Rama was the embodiment of the Rig Veda , Lakshmana 
represented the Sama Veda , Bharata stood for the Yajur Veda , 
and Shatrughna represented the Atharvana Veda . Thus, the four 
Vedas  manifested as four Royal Princes. Sage Viswamitra was 
performing a yaga  [Vedic ritual]. He knew very well that only 
Rama, Himself the embodiment of the Vedas , could protect the 
ritual he wished to perform. So, Viswamitra went to the palace of 
Dasaratha to seek the assistance of Rama. The Emperor was very 
pleased to see the Revered Sage and said, “O sage, what brought 
you here?” Viswamitra replied by asking a question, “Will you 
do what I ask you to do?” Without taking even a second to think 
about it, Dasaratha replied, “Of course, without fail”. Dasaratha thus committed himself and became bound to his word. 
One’ s action must match one’ s capacity,
Must be pre-determined,
Taking all aspects into account,
Both good and bad,
Must never be in haste,
And also be consistent with the goal.
Otherwise, it can prove deathly and dangerous.
Before you give your word, you must think carefully. You should 
not glibly or blindly give your word and then regret as well as 
retract. Dasaratha gave a promise because of his immense faith 
in sage Viswamitra. The sage said, “O King, I want you to send 
your son Rama with me to the forest in order to protect the yaga  I 
am performing there.” Dasaratha was stunned. He thought, “This 
son Rama was born to me after countless prayers, after observing 
so many austerities, and after performing so many yajnas .  Is 
it possible to send such a dear and tender son to the forest to 
fight demons and protect the yaga ? Rama is so young. He has 
never seen a demon. He may be frightened by those terrible 
creatures.” Dasaratha’s love for Rama produced in him a surge 
of such thoughts. Viswamitra sensed Dasaratha’s misgivings and 
severely reprimanded the Emperor, “You have no idea who your 
son is. He is the very incarnation of God. Do not consider Him to 
be your tender son! It is your attachment that is blinding you to 
the Absolute Reality that Rama is. Give up this bodily attachment 
and replace it with devotion.” Viswamitra sent for sage Vasishta 
[Dasaratha’s resident preceptor]. Vasishta said, “O Dasaratha, do you know why I am serving as a priest in your royal household? 
I am not here because I am enamoured by your wealth, fame, and 
power. I knew that God was going to take birth here in human 
form. I wanted to sanctify my life by having the darshan  of that 
divine boy, spending time with Him, and experiencing bliss. That 
is the reason why I am here, and not for any worldly gains. Why 
do you entertain doubts about Rama? Send Him immediately with 
Sage Viswamitra to the forest.” With great reluctance, Dasaratha 
yielded to Vasishta’s command.   
Viswamitra was no ordinary Sage. As his name implies, he was 
a friend to the whole world. How did he achieve this status? By 
giving humanity the priceless gift of the  Gayatri Mantra . This 
great Viswamitra, widely reputed for his intense penance, who 
possessed extraordinary spiritual powers, and who was the guru  
of so many, was now taking the young Royal Princes Rama and 
Lakshmana to the forest. The party penetrated deep into the jungle 
and approached the river Sarayu. It was evening time, and the 
sage told the Princes, “Offer your evening prayers now.” After 
Rama and Lakshmana did so, Viswamitra pointed across the 
river and said, “We are going over there. That is where I shall be 
performing the taga. It is becomin g dark, and You will see terrible 
demons there. To ensure that You do not get frightened, I shall 
teach You two mantras : Bala  and Athibala . Come and sit near me 
and receive the instruction.” The sage taught the two mantras . 
You see how illusion blankets clear thinking! Here is the great 
sage who, in the Court of Dasaratha, emphatically declared and 
hailed Rama as God Incarnate. But now in the forest, that feeling 
has gone. He is imagining Rama to be a tender young prince, 
likely to be frightened by demons. This shows that no matter how evolved, when one has bodily relations, doubts can and do 
arise about Incarnations. Such doubts are the result of delusion. 
Bhrama  (delusion) can eclipse Brahman (God)! Delusion is born 
of tendencies accumulated over many births. Divine feelings 
and the ability to recognise God in human form, on the other 
hand, is the result of sacred actions performed. What an ocean of 
difference separates bhrama  and Brahman! Even a great sage like 
Viswamitra could come under the grip of bhrama ! 
God can be bound only with Love
You too occasionally have such delusory experiences. Questions 
arise like, “What is Divine? How should one relate to Divinity? 
Who is  human? What is a demon? What is an animal?” and 
so on. The answers to these are simple. Divinity is Pure Love. 
He who follows the path of righteousness is a human. Cruelty 
reflects demonic nature.  And the presence of animal qualities in 
a person brings that one down to the level of an animal. Divinity 
can be fully experienced only through love and no other way. 
God cannot be bought with money, as many foolishly imagine. 
You all know the story of Sathyabhama [one of the consorts of 
Krishna]. She wanted Krishna all for herself and did not want 
Him to go anywhere. She asked Sage Narada how she could 
achieve this. Narada is the one who offers instruction in spiritual 
knowledge. Recognising that Sathyabhama’s ego was responsible 
for her unreasonable desire, he decided to teach her a lesson. 
For this purpose he devised a plan, and asked Sathyabhama, “Do 
you have the wealth that can match the weight of Krishna?” She 
replied, “I have with me the magical Syamanthaka jewel. I can create wealth, and any amount of it. Therefore, do not entertain 
any doubts about my affluence. I will certainly be able to match 
Krishna’s weight with gold, precious stones, and jewels.”  Narada 
then called for a large balance and sent word to Krishna to join 
him. When Krishna came, Narada asked the Lord to sit on one 
of the pans. He then asked Sathyabhama to pile her gold, etc., 
in the other pan. No matter how much gold was placed, the pan 
carrying Krishna remained down; it did not show any tendency to 
go up even a tiny bit. Sathyabhama became scared. She ordered 
all her wealth to be placed on the other pan; no effect. Finally, she 
placed even the treasured and magical Syamanthaka jewel. Even 
then the balance remained stuck. She ran to Rukmini [the other 
consort], calling out loudly, “Sister! Sister!” Up to this time, she 
never cared for Rukmini or bother to look at her face. It was 
Rukmini’s birthday, but the jealous Sathyabhama had prevented 
Krishna from visiting Rukmini even on that day. Rukmini is a 
compas sionate one. She asked Sathyabhama, “Sister, why are 
you so agitated? What happened?” Sathyabhama narrated all 
that transpired and then said, “It is all the work of that Narada!” 
Rukmini went worshipfully around the tulsi plant in her garden, 
plucked a leaf, kept it in her palm, and came with Sathyabhama to 
where Krishna was. Narada was waiting for the two with a broad 
smile on his face. Krishna too was full of smiles. He said, “I am 
ready to offer Myself for sale, to whosoever is prepared to buy 
Me.” Rukmini then said, “Narada, Krishna can be matched only 
by His Glorious Name and not by material wealth. I am therefore 
simply going to chant “Krishna!”. Narada replied, “How can one 
balance the One with Form with a word that is formless? I cannot 
accept this kind of balancing. You must place some object on the empty pan and try to tilt the balance. Sathyabhama tried putting 
all her wealth but it was of no use. What are you going to place            
on the pan?” Rukmini then sang,
O God  Who is worshipped with leaf, flowers, fruits, and water,
If it be true that You submit Yourself
When You are offered Pure Love instead of all these,
I pray that You be balanced by Your Name,
And then tilt the scale with this Tulsi leaf. 
So saying, she chanted the Name Krishna and then placed the 
tulsi leaf on the empty pan. The balance immediately tilted, 
with the pan carrying Krishna going up. Krishna had been more 
than matched! Narada observed, “The Name Krishna made the 
scale even and thereafter, the tulsi leaf was enough to tilt the 
balance.”  
God yields only to love. Anything you offer to Him, no matter 
how inconsequential it might be in a material sense, is acceptable 
to Him if the offering is accompanied by pure love. Even a single 
tulsi leaf is enough. God cannot be secured with wealth but only 
with love. There is in fact no wealth greater than love. So, offer 
love to God. If you offer Him pure love, then God will be very 
pleased and will always be with you. If you want to be worthy of 
God’s love and the recipient of His Grace, then you must obey 
His command. What does He say?
Anapeksah sucirdaksa udasino gatavyathah
Sarvarambha parityagi yo madbhaktah same PriyahHe says, “If you have all these qualities, then you become dear 
to Me.” God would readily claim you if you do what He says. 
You must understand fully what God wants of you and conduct 
yourself accordingly. 
Embodiments of Love! How to grasp God’s teachings? How to 
develop and sustain faith in Him? Swami will speak to you on 
these topics tomorrow.
Bhagavan concluded the discourse by singing the  bhajan, 
Bhavabhaya Harana….
 May 0000
12. KSHAMA , THE GRANDEST AND 
NOBLEST VIRTUE
Love being His Form,
He is present everywhere as Love;
Become bonded to this Love
And strengthen your spirit;
For this will lead you to
The Pure Bliss of non-duality.
Embodiments of Love! Boys and Girls! 
True and Selfless Love manifests as sacrifice. Such love knows 
no hatred. It envelops the entire universe, and is capable of 
drawing near even those who are seemingly far away. Love it is 
that transforms the human into the Divine. It can transform pasu 
(a bestial person) into Pasupathi  (Divinity). In the phenomenal 
world, you come across many shades and derivatives of this 
primordial love. You love your father, mother, brother, sister, 
friends, and so on. In all such cases, there is always a tinge of 
selfishness somewhere or the other. Divine love, on the other 
hand, is totally free of even the slightest trace of selfishness. You must surrender to such love, become completely submerged by 
it, and experience the bliss it confers. 
Kshama is the breath of life
For acquiring such love, the quality of kshama  or forbearance 
is a vital necessity. [ kshama  is a word rich in meaning. Besides 
forbearance, it also implies extreme patience and an enormous 
capacity to forget as also forgive. In view of this, the word 
kshama  is directly used in most places in order not to dilute 
Bhagavan’s emphasis.] Every individual must cultivate this 
noble quality. Kshama  is not achieved by reading books or 
learnt from an instructor.  Nor can it be received as a gift from 
someone else. This prime virtue kshama can be acquired solely 
by self-effort, by facing squarely diverse problems, difficulties 
of various sorts, anxieties, and suffering as well as sorrow. In 
the absence of kshama , man becomes susceptible to all kinds of 
evil tendencies. Hatred and jealousy easily take root in a person 
lacking this virtue. 
Divinity is nothing but the combined manifestation of prema  and 
kshama . At one stroke, kshama  subsumes sathya , dharma , and 
the entire Vedas . It is the greatest among tapas  (penance). It is the 
grandest and the noblest among virtues. It is all encompassing. 
The Mahabharatha  and the Srimad Bhagavatham  both contain 
many episodes that illustrate the disaster that befalls when 
kshama  is lost. Jealousy is the first bad quality that makes its 
entry when kshama  makes its exit. The Mahabharatha  gives a 
graphic portrayal of how life that is otherwise smooth, can be 
totally shattered by jealousy. The Golden island Lanka was like the ver y heavens but Ravana’s jealousy reduced it to ruins. 
Whereas kshama  can give complete protection, its absence 
can plunge one into distress and disaster. Impatience breeds 
selfishness and promotes jealousy, which together spur infighting 
and divisive tendencies of various kinds. The troubles the country 
is currently passing through are largely due to the absence of 
this noble quality of  kshama. Impatience has ruined even very 
great spiritual aspirants. Likewise, kings have been reduced to 
beggars. Absence of kshama  can make  yogulu  (yogis ) into rogulu  
(sick persons). Without kshama , mankind becomes degraded and 
starts declining, but if it has this quality then it can progress by 
leaps and bounds. Kshama  is thus the very breath of life. 
Can there be smoke without fire?
Can a car move without a driver?
Can a traffic light flash without a bulb?
How then can there be Creation without a Creator?
Ever ything must have a basis. For spiritual progress and 
advancement, kshama  is the real basis or foundation. When 
kshama  disappears, disturbance sets in and there is a decline. 
Great countries have lost their glory, prestige, and reputation 
for this reason. Patience is therefore a vital virtue that must be 
assiduously cultivated, if one is to successfully face troubles and 
tribulations. Without patience and the capacity for forbearance, 
one becomes spiritually weak. Such weakness leads to bad 
feelings, undesirable thoughts, and unbecoming actions. When 
patience is gone, the greatest of men get reduced to utter fools. 
The importance of kshama  cannot be over-stressed. This virtue 
is best cultivated under adverse circumstances, and one must therefore gladly welcome troubles instead of regarding them as 
unwelcome. Difficulties help one to nurse and build the capacity 
for patience, as the example of the Pandavas clearly shows. When 
they were in power and authority, the Pandavas were somewhat 
deficient in kshama  but once they went into exile and had to face 
numerous hardships, kshama  automatically began to develop 
in them. Thus, times of distress offer the ideal opportunity for 
the development of patience and forbearance. In fact, pain and 
kshama  go together, because kshama  grows best in an environment 
of sorrow and misery. However, because of mental weakness 
as well as ignorance, we invariably shun painful experiences 
and distress. You should not be weak; be brave and welcome 
troubles. Let them come, more the merrier. It is only with such 
a courageous attitude that you would be able to bring out the 
kshama  hidden within you. Can you get promoted to a higher class 
without passing an examination? It is only when you secure the 
prescribed marks and pass the examination that you are declared 
eligible to advance to the next higher class. While preparing for 
the examination you have to face stress and many difficulties 
but how sweet is the promotion! So, welcome troubles as tests 
that prepare you for higher things. Some people may wonder, “If 
I develop  kshama as Swami says and my life gets packed with 
troubles, how then will I survive?” Well, it all depends on what 
is meant by survival. kshama  is the true breath of life. It is the 
greatest ornament that one can acquire. It is kshama  that enables 
you to develop equanimity, and go beyond duality. Going beyond 
duality is the real purpose of life, and this cannot be done without 
kshama.  You must therefore be happy when troubles descend on 
you because that is when kshama  truly blossoms. How  doubts arise
Students! Often you are seized with doubts. You wonder, “We 
are happy here because we are close to Bhagavan and are able 
to have great devotion for Him. But the moment we leave from 
here, our devotion and love both diminish. Why?” This happens 
because one is deficient in kshama.  Doubts arise frequently in an 
impatient person. Such a person has no tolerance, and intolerance 
is a fertile breeding ground for doubts. An impatient person is 
drowned in doubts about God. Devotees with great faith too are 
sometimes gripped by doubts. Why? Because of lack of kshama . 
It is therefore important to continuously assess the state of your 
patience and your capacity for forbearance. You must constantly 
ask yourself, “Is my kshama  getting strong or weak?” You must 
then say, “Patience is my very life breath, and I cannot afford to 
let it slacken.” 
Kshama  is no ordinary thing. It is the consolidation of sathya, 
dharma, ahimsa , and all such values that the Vedas  extol. It is 
the ultimate in happiness and also an incomparable treasure. It is 
the most valuable asset and property that one can acquire. When 
people abandon kshama , politics becomes degraded, criticisms 
and accusations are exchanged freely, and there can even be 
turmoil. This is what happens when forbearance gets eclipsed. 
When kshama is absent, jealousy takes root
The moment kshama  makes its exit, asuya  (jealousy or envy) 
makes its entry. The opposite of asuya  is anasuya . These two quali ties are like two sisters but with diametrically opposite 
tendencies. In the scriptures, there is the story of a woman named 
Anasuya  who had three sons. They were no ordinary sons for 
they were none other than Brahma, Vishnu, and Maheshwara. 
Swami has already told you that in the individual, Maheshwara 
represents a Pure Heart, Vishnu represents a Pure Mind, and 
Brahma represents Pure Speech. Thus, if a person’s nature is 
snasuya , then that person will have a pure heart and a pure mind; 
moreover, the speech of the person will be pure and sweet. If 
anasuya  has three sons, so has asuya ; the three off-springs are: 
hatred, pomp, and anger. Why is there such a huge difference 
between the two sisters? Because one is courageous while the 
other is not. Anasuya  is courageous; it is her courage that enables 
her to face all difficulties; and it is also her courage that is the 
fountainhead of kshama.  One must always be courageous, for 
this is the only way to acquire kshama. 
Remember how mighty Ravana was? He possessed enormous 
physical strength, worldly intelligence, and various related 
capabilities in an abundant measure. In spite of all this, because of  
the total absence of kshama , his heart became polluted with envy 
and hatred. Now, love has the extraordinary capacity to draw near 
even those who are far to start with. Hatred, on the other hand, 
drives away even those who are near. Ravana had no love. He 
lacked kshama  but was rich in asuya ; as a result, he eventually 
had to pay a very heavy price. Is it possible to have kshama  if 
one’s looks are bad, if one lends one’s ear to foul words, and if 
one’s actions are rooted in evil? No! Man today is seeing what he 
ought not to, hearing what he should not, and doing what is  most undesirable. How can there be peace in such a polluted heart? 
Ravana’s heart was completely polluted which is why Hanuman, 
that great devotee of Rama, advised Ravana thus: 
O Ravana, I shall teach you a lesson!
Lanka is no longer yours, O evil one!
Listen carefully and waste not this opportunity.
Ignoring the intellect,
And becoming a slave to evil tendencies,
You have got yourself into the clutches of death!
Sita is the Mother of all beings;
She is your mother too.
By abducting her,
You have committed a terrible sin.
One arrow of Rama,
Will remove all your ten heads!
O sinner! I destroyed your minions holding Sita a prisoner,
And in retaliation you have set fire to my tail.
Now watch while I make Lanka burn,
Before putting off the fire in my tail.
Hanuman said, “Ravana, your discrimination has been totally 
warped by jealousy.”
Jealousy is the greatest enemy of man, and it takes root when 
kshama  is absent. If you possess the virtue of kshama , then none 
of these enemies can come anywhere near you. If the hearts of today’s students are polluted, it is because of the absence of 
kshama. This is a quality that has to be painstakingly cultivated 
by self-effort and cannot be acquired as a gift from others; nor 
can it be obtained from books or even a teacher. It is only your 
own tenacity and firm determination that will help you cultivate 
this virtue. You must be resolute and ready to face any difficulty 
in the quest of your goal. Life is a challenge; meet it! In fact, 
it is a series of challenges and not just one or two. Face them 
squarely, resist the obstacles, and firmly march forward. Such 
determination alone would take you to your goal. If the Heart 
is devoid of kshama , it becomes vulnerable to doubts. Man 
today does not even know what to doubt and what not to doubt! 
Caught in the whirlpool of doubts, modern man sometimes sinks 
to depths much lower than that of animals. In fact, at times 
he makes animals look better! Animals behave within certain 
bounds, and the dictates of season and reason. Man, on the other 
hand, knows no such bounds; for him, there is neither reason nor 
season. Absence of kshama  is responsible for all this. Cultivation 
of kshama  must therefore be an important priority. No doubt you 
will face many difficulties on the path but they should not deter 
you. Knock them aside and bravely march on, taking courage 
from the fact that once you have kshama  there is nothing that you 
cannot achieve. 
Embodiments of Love! On occasions, you might fail in the class 
tests or in the examinations but that should not plunge you into 
depression. Realise that your failure is simply the result of lack of 
sufficient effort on your part. Tell yourself, “I did not work hard 
enough. Had I done so, I would certainly have passed. It is all my fault ent irely.” Own up your mistake, resolve to try again, and be 
determined to succeed next time. Instead, do not try to cover up 
your lapses by seeking imaginary excuses; such excuses serve no 
purpose. Your failure was simply the result of your neglect - that 
is all. With firm determination, you can achieve anything in life. 
When difficulties come, do not hide; confront them bravely and 
squarely. Difficulties are inevitable, and they will come in all 
shades – personal, financial, academic, professional, and even 
spiritual. Face them all. 
Students sometimes start earnestly on meditation but after a while 
they lose their seriousness. As a result, whatever progress was 
made initially, gets wiped out. Whose fault is it? Can you blame  
God? No! You alone are responsible for whatever has befallen  
you. Instead of facing the impediments to your meditation, you 
become impatient; once you become impatient, you start having 
doubts about the utility and the efficacy of meditation; after that 
your interest starts slackening – all this because of the lack of 
patience. So, kshama is indispensable. Kshama  is life itself and 
the very breath of life. Life bereft of kshama , is meaningless and 
one who lives so is no better than a corpse. Therefore, acquire 
and protect kshama  at all costs. 
Kshama must be cultivated when young
Students! The stage of life you presently are in is most important. 
This is when you can easily overcome all sorts of obstacles and 
tide over all difficulties. If you miss this chance to cultivate 
patience, when do you think you are going to do it? Is it after 0becoming old? Habits must be formed when one is young. You 
cannot acquire the habit of thinking about God in your old age. 
When the messengers of death are at your doorstep,
When your relatives have given up hope
And are preparing for your last journey,
When your wife and children
Are lamenting about your imminent departure,
Is it possible to acquire in that last moment,
The habit of chanting God’ s Name?
Impossible! Such a thing cannot be done. Good habits must be 
cultivated in the stage of life you are in now. This is when you 
should start stockpiling patience, and accumulate a lot of it! This 
is the stage when kshama  becomes the principal weapon of your 
life. If bad thoughts arise in you, resist and say: “These thoughts 
are coming  because I am deficient in kshama . Let me counter the 
deficiency.” Bad thoughts cannot penetrate one who possesses 
kshama . If the doors are slammed shut, can anyone enter? For 
aspirants in the spiritual path, kshama  is indispensable. 
Be ever ready for the tests of God
In life, your capacity for forbearance would be constantly put to 
test, and you must therefore be very careful. In the class, you are 
expected to be ever ready for surprise tests. You cannot excuse 
yourself saying that you have not prepared and are not ready. The 
teacher will not accept that plea because you are always expected 
to be ready. You know what photographers do before snapping a 
group photo. Just before clicking they say, “Ready.” The Divine Cam eram an, however, does not follow this practice. With Him, 
you have to be ever in readiness for no one can say when He 
will click the shutter. If you are not ready, the picture will not be 
good. So, in life you must always be ready for tests; achieving 
this preparedness is true sadhana (spiritual discipline) . Do not 
imagine that sadhana  is a drill performed according to a set time-
table.  Time is not beholden to you and will therefore not oblige 
you. Time will not follow you; rather, you must follow Time.
Determination a must, for acquiring kshama
The Vedas  declare:
Uttisthata jagrata prapya varannibodhata.
Arise, awake, and stop not till the goal is reached! Drowned in 
foolishness, you are sleeping soundly! Get up from this slumber of 
ajnana (ignorance), enter the realm of prajnana (consciousness), 
and experience sujnana  (enlightenment). This really is the type 
of sadhana  you ought to undertake. People do not understand 
this and simply declare that they are doing sadhana . Everyone 
is trying; trying, trying all the time! What is all this business 
about trying? Meek and puny efforts cannot be called sadhana . 
To qualify for that name, the effort must be strong and made with 
firm determination. You must be firmly resolved to achieve the 
goal. 
In life, actions must be accompanied by firm resolves. God too is 
firmly determined about the things He chooses to do. In the Gita 
He says, Paritranaya Sadhunam Vinasaya Ca Duskrtam.
Dharmasamsthapanarthaya Sambhavami Yuge Yuge.
This is His first resolution. He says, “For the protection of 
the virtuous, for the destruction of the wicked, and for the re-
establishment of dharma , I am born from age to age.” Next He 
says, 
Ananyascintayantomam Ye Janah Paryupasate.
Tesam Nityabhiyuktanam Yogaksemam Vahamyaham.
“As for those who exclusively worship Me, who meditate on Me 
with no other thought and who are ever steadfast – I bear entirely 
the burden of their welfare”. If God Himself can make resolutions, 
why not you? What are the spiritual goals you have resolved to 
attain in life? If you have not set any such goals for yourself, then 
your life would be empty and meaningless. Life must have goals, 
and must be a brave journey involving the conquest of (spiritual) 
obstacles. Life’s journey is full of bumps and jumps; without 
resolve and determination, these bumps can produce confusion 
and depression. When confusion and depression march hand in 
hand, life would become a total waste. 
Students! In everyone of your spiritual endeavour, you must 
make the resolution, “This I MUST achieve; this virtue I SHALL 
acquire.” This is the way to prema  and kshama . If you proceed 
in this manner with unshakeable faith and idealism, then without 
any doubt, your life will be fully redeemed. All your actions 
and feelings must be dripping with kshama , prema , and daya  
(compassion). Love knows no hatred and is totally free from desires. T hus God is said to be Love personified. Kshama  will 
grow if you have unshakeable faith in God. Once you have learnt 
to be infinitely patient, Love will walk in almost immediately. 
Prema  combined with kshama  is the surest way to fulfilment. 
Therefore, when you worship God, make sure you repose total 
faith in Him. Without faith, what is the use of worship? Faith 
alone will take you beyond worries.
Kshama leads to bliss
Life is full of worries. They seem to come in an endless procession. 
What is it that does not cause anxiety?
Birth is a worry, and so is existence itself;
Family life is a worry, death is a worry,
Childhood is a worry, old age is the same,
Living is a worry, working is a worry,
Pain causes worry, pleasure too causes worry,
Worry, worry, all the time!
You are plagued by multiple worries all the time. In this world, 
troubles will come for sure but one must learn to rise above 
worry; this is possible only with kshama . Welcome troubles with 
a smile saying, “Come my friend, you are the bearer of joy!” 
Truly speaking, it is not friends but enemies who give one bliss. 
Do you know how? Enemies put you on your guard and help you 
to develop kshama . When one is filled with kshama , one cannot 
help being blissful. That is why Swami is stressing so much the 
acquisition of this incomparable virtue. Embo diments of Love! Along with love, also cultivate kshama . 
What is normally professed as love is not real love because 
it invariably tends to be narrow, restricted, and tinged with 
selfishness. Do not mistake this distorted feeling to be love. This 
so-called love is based on selfishness and self-interest. Liberate 
this shackled love from the various clutches, purify it, and then 
direct it toward God. Once you have gone through this cleansing 
process, kshama  will grow automatically.
The absence of kshama  is responsible for most of the problems 
the world over, and the decline in the innate humanness of man. 
Where virtues and values are concerned, man is able to achieve 
hardly anything. When blades of grass stand all by themselves, 
they become a ready meal for cattle but when stranded and plaited 
into a rope, even a mad elephant can be tied down – that is the 
power of unity. Therefore, you should always be united. Unity 
promotes patience and strengthens it. What is the type of unity 
that Swami wants from you? Unity in matters relating to God and 
good activities. Such unity will develop purity, and once purity is 
attained, divinity becomes accessible. 
Kshama develops courage
Students! In matters spiritual, make sure that you get a firm grip on 
whatever it is that you are seeking. No matter what the obstacles 
or troubles, do not ever be afraid. Your steps must always be 
forward and never backward. But that is not what one finds 
amongst students of today. During the Mohurrum festival, people 
dance chanting two words, Hassein and Hussein, taking first one 
step forward and then one step backward. In the process, they end up being where they are! Similarly, you keep saying Sairam, 
Sairam, Sairam, but remain spiritually stagnant. When will you 
start moving ahead? Go forward, trampling over difficulties. To 
reach great heights, you must have courage. And how does one 
become courageous? When the heart is full of kshama , the spirit 
of courage will automatically makes its appearance. 
Vibhishana provides the classic example. It was through kshama  
that he acquired the courage to defy Ravana and cross over to the 
side of Rama. He arrived in Rama’s camp chanting ‘Rama, Rama, 
Rama’. Seeing Vibhishana in the distance, Rama immediately 
raised His hand as a gesture of grace and protection. However, 
the people around Rama said, “Lord, that person is a rakshasa , 
a demon. He is the brother of your enemy. You must therefore 
not grant him protection.” Meanwhile, Vibhishana kept on telling 
Rama, “I am Yours, I am Yours.” Rama then said, “The moment 
a person tells Me ‘I am Yours,’ that person shall receive My 
protection, come what may.” Such was Rama’s determination; 
you too must have similar determination in every spiritual 
endeavour of yours. 
One day during the Lanka War, there appeared a young man on the 
battlefield. Vibhishana drew the attention of Rama to this warrior 
saying, “Rama, this person is mighty, powerful, and valorous. 
He is stronger than most, and You must slay him without fail.” 
In response, Rama despatched an arrow felling the Rakshasa  
warrior; the young man was dead. Vibhishana then went near 
the dead body and began weeping profusely. Rama gently lifted 
Vibhishana and said, “What is all this? Why are you crying over 
this man?” Vibhishana replied, “This is Neeludu my only son. I urged You then to kill him since he was with the enemies but 
now, my emotion as a father is overwhelming me. I am unable 
to bear the sight of the death of my dear son right before my 
eyes. So, please grant me the power of patience and forbearance 
so that I can rise above such tragedies.”  Notice how unique is 
Vibhishana’s prayer. He said to Rama, “ Kshama  is my sathya  and 
dharma ; it is also Rama for me! Kshama  is my God and I cannot 
ever afford to forget it.” This episode reveals how even great men 
suffer pain if they lose their grip over kshama . On the other hand, 
with kshama ,  there are no limits to what can be achieved.
Kshama and bad company do not go together
These days, it is not uncommon to see evil doers [seemingly] get 
away with it while good people suffer. It appears as if someone 
commits the crime and someone else gets punished – this is how 
things are in the world. Here is an example. You are sleeping 
in your room at night but mosquitoes disturb you. So, next 
day, you use a mosquito net but it still does not help because 
a few mosquitoes have sneaked into the net. You now resort to 
a drastic remedy – you spray Flit all over. You cannot identify 
the specific mosquitoes that bit you but you are not bothered; 
you spray over all the mosquitoes you can see. Only one or two 
mosquitoes bit you but now hundreds are dying. Why is this so? 
Because of friendship. Even if you are innocent, you have to 
suffer if you keep the company of evil doers. It is to drive this 
home that Swami often says: “Tell Me your company and I shall 
tell who you are.” Once bad thoughts get in, they multiply rapidly 
and soon drive out kshama ; and kshama  once lost is not easily regained. You must therefore protect this virtue at all costs and 
see that you never lose it, especially because with kshama  you 
can achieve anything.
Embodiments of Love! Students! During the Summer Course, you 
will receive such advice from elders and from Swami. Trea sure 
them in your hearts. However, it is not enough to merely place 
on record the advice heard; you must make every effort to put 
them into practice. It is no use locking it up all  inside; their 
impact must be made manifest through good actions. A villager 
was once walking carrying  a bundle of food on his head. After 
sometime, he found the bundle to be a burden. So he made his 
way to the bank of a river, sat down there, opened the bundle and 
ate the food in it. In a few minutes, the burden disappeared, and 
the food consumed gave him fresh energy. In the same way, it is 
only when you put into practice what you have learnt that you 
will gain experience and strength. In turn,  this will lead you to 
success. 
Embodiments of Love! Drive away bad thoughts and make 
room for good and noble ones. Through sacred thoughts, foster 
kshama . This will give you multiple capabilities, enabling you 
to transform your life into an ideal one. Study of books alone 
will not enhance your capability; they will merely provide you 
with superficial or bookish knowledge. This obviously is not 
enough. Real capability and strength come by tapping the Inner 
Power latent in you. All that is outside is artificial. Real truth and 
power are both inside, in your heart. It is the heart that must be 
strengthened, but, unaware of this fact, people become furiously 
active in the external world, only to get lost there. Ther e are many types of food catering to the needs of the 
gross body but what about  food for the heart? That food can 
be obtained only when you turn your head toward God. You 
must understand the subtle linkages here – food, head, and God. 
Thus, along with the acquisition of worldly knowledge, you 
must also give importance to culture and refinement. Earlier, the 
Vice Chancellor spoke about the culture of Bharat. He crisply 
summarised the essence of many ancient texts. Bharatiya  (Indian) 
culture is timeless, sacred, deep, profound, full of inner strength, 
and provides full protection. Today, we are losing our grip over 
such a great culture. Instead of ignoring and brushing it aside, we 
must do everything possible to nurse and foster it. Refinement 
accumulates and manifests as culture. 
Here is a cloth [at this point, Swami showed His handkerchief]. 
It has been woven from yarn. Where did the yarn come from? 
From cotton. By processing cotton, one gets yarn. By further 
processing yarn, one gets cloth. Likewise, this table has come 
from wood that has itself come from a tree. Refinement comes 
about only through processing and shaping. Farmers grow paddy. 
Can you eat raw paddy? No; it has to be polished first and then 
cooked before it is eaten. In life too, refinement is necessary. And 
culture is nothing but accumulated refinement. Bharatiya  culture 
is ideal in this respect, and worthy of being followed by everyone 
at all times. 
Therefore, with God’s Name on your lips, and unshakeable faith 
in your heart, acquire kshama , allowing it to manifest as daya  or 
compassion. At the conclusion of the divine discourse, Bhagavan sang the 
bhajan , Rama, Rama, Rama, Sita, ... .
 May 0000
13. ALWAYS CHANT THE NAME OF    
THE LORD
In the Krita Yuga it was tapas,
In the Tretya Yuga it was yajna,
In the Dwapara Yuga it became worship,
And now in the Kali Yuga it is namasmarana.
Embodiments of Love! Students, Boys and Girls!
The teachings of Manu offer an unsurpassed guide for achieving 
lasting happiness and joy in each and every yuga  or age. Manu 
declared that for the Krita Yuga the right path was penance and 
meditation; for the Treta Yuga it was performing appropriate 
yajnas [Vedic rituals]; for the Dwapara Yuga the prescribed path 
was worship, and for the Kali Age it is namasmarana  or chanting 
the Name of the Lord. 
In those days, everything was pure. The environment was 
unpolluted, the food was pure, and the habits were sacred. All actions wer e based on truth. Manu recognised even then, the 
sanctity of human life and the divinity latent in the human being. 
Having done so, he shared this knowledge with one and all. The 
declarations of Manu form the foundations of bharatiya  culture. 
Ignorance has driven away the fear of sin;
Love of God too has vanished.
No wonder human values have disappeared,
No wonder there is turbulence everywhere,
And no wonder peace is being threatened.
The people of the Krita  Age were engaged in the constant 
meditation of the Lord. They meditated not for just a few minutes 
or hours or even days; they were always absorbed in the thought 
of God. They were guided by the scriptural teaching:
Sarvada Sarvakalesu Sarvatra Hari Cintanam.
Contemplate on God at all times and under all circumstances. In 
those days, people were beyond unworthy desires and narrow-
minded feelings. Their hearts were pure, their feelings were 
sacred, their mind was mature, and they were ever in bliss. They 
therefore never entertained any petty or worldly desires. They 
enjoyed God’s grace and were blessed with good crops as well as 
all the other needs of daily life. Such people are not to be found 
these days. The essence of bharatiya  culture was amply reflected 
in the behaviour, conduct, and the sacred feelings of the people 
of the Krita Yuga. People of those times sought unity in diversity. 
They did not have any kind of dissatisfaction or discontent. A sacred heart produces a mature mind. In that age, life  moved at 
a leisurely pace. Unlike people of modern times who are tied to 
rigid schedules, they did not have specific meals at specific times, 
like breakfast, lunch, etc. They did not have the wide variety of 
vegetables that is available today. Their meals were thus very 
simple in nature; they ate rice with curds in the morning and 
did so again at night. That is why people of those days were 
both healthy and strong. They made use of all available time for 
contemplating on God. However, with the passage of time, this 
practice of simple living and high thinking began to get slowly 
eroded.  
After th e Krita Yuga  came the Treta Yuga  when devotion began to 
declin e. It was during this period that kings and kingdoms came 
into existence and politics made its first appearance. The king 
ruled, and the people followed the king. Thus it came to be said ‘as 
was the king so were the people’ – the king became a role model 
whom the subjects copied. It was no longer possible to spare time 
for continuous meditation as in earlier times. Instead, certain 
specific times and occasions were set apart for the performance 
of various yajnas and yagas  [Vedic  rituals]. Yajna  is an offering to 
God. It also means a selfless act of sacrifice. People of the Treta 
Yuga  believed that yajnas  provided the pathway to divinity. Like 
the people of an earlier age, they too desired, pined, and yearned 
for God; but the path they chose was different. In course of time, 
certain aggressive and selfish tendencies arose that corrupted the 
original sacred feelings behind the Vedic rituals. 
After this came the Dwapara Yuga  when yajnas  and yagas  slowly receded to the background, getting replaced by archana  or ritual 
worship. People of this age sought to reach God through worship 
performed at prescribed times, through the study of the scriptures 
and other sacred texts, and by observing vows and other such 
austerities. In course of time, as the number of kings, landlords, 
and power brokers increased, matters of polity began to receive 
dominant attention, and all forms of worship started declining. 
Reason f or the decline of Bharat
For the people of the present Kali Age, there is a new prescription 
since neither constant meditation nor the performance of yajas  
and yagas  is possible. To attain God, all that one has to do is 
namasmarana,  i.e., constantly chanting the Name of God. There 
are no rigid stipulations or conditions regarding the chanting of 
the Name of God – one may sing or just chant His Name anytime, 
anywhere, and under any circumstance. In the beginning, it used 
to be incessant namasmarana ; but slowly, the time devoted to the 
pursuit of even this most easy path to God, has dwindled. From 
this one fact alone, you can judge for yourself the extent to which 
the great culture of Bharat has declined. 
In the Treta Yuga , Rama declared, 
Janani Janmabhumisca Svargadapi Gariyasi.
One’s mother and motherland are greater than the very heaven. 
Today, who is bothered about the motherland? Who worships the 
motherland? Who is fired by patriotism? Such feelings are not to be found anywhere. What is the reason for this indifference? 
Politics polluted heavily by evil designs, cunning manipulations, 
and patently selfish interests is responsible for this tragic decline. 
Today, wh o bothers about patriotism? There are so many 
politicians, but is there anyone concerned about upholding the 
prestige of the country? No one; everyone is driven solely by 
selfishness and self-interest. He alone is a true politician who is 
prepared to sacrifice everything for the sake of the country. But 
unfortunately, such a spirit of sacrifice is not to be seen anywhere. 
Present-day politicians exploit the wealth and the resources of 
society for their personal benefit and advancement. Their effort 
is concentrated entirely on acquiring power and achieving status. 
Their sole desire is to enjoy position and esteem in society. Can 
one afford to neglect one’s country in this callous manner? Can 
politics exist if there is no country in the first place? How can a 
person who does not respect his country ever be a politician? 
Can a leader who does not know what service means,
Ever serve the people and the country?
Can the one hankering after position
Ever have a pure heart?
Listen to this truth, O brave sons of Bharat!
Today’s politicians want power alone and not the welfare of the 
country. On account of extreme selfishness and self-interest, 
politics has become completely degraded. It is such polluted 
politics that has destroyed the sanctity of Bharatiya  culture. A 
thousand promises are made but not even one is fulfilled. Many talk about Bharatiya  culture but no one knows whether these 
people really understand what our culture is all about. What good 
has come out of this practice of placing party loyalty above the 
country? 
Swami s aid the other day: “One plus one (1+1) is two while 
one minus one (1-1) is zero.” Suppose you remove the plus and 
the minus signs; then you are left with ! Eleven is a much 
bigger number than one; we get this bigger number simply by 
removing both the plus sign and the minus sign. We don’t need 
either the plus or the minus. In reality, the progress of the nation 
depends on the welfare of society. Therefore, we should pray 
that all should be happy. However, present-day politics promotes 
divisive tendencies. Politicians say, “So and so is mine while so 
and so is yours.” This separation into ‘mine’ and ‘thine’ reflects 
nothing but extreme narrow-mindedness. On the other hand, 
we should abide by the feeling of oneness and declare, “All are 
mine, we all are one.” It is selfishness that plunges the country 
into ruin. That day when we get rid of this selfishness would be 
the day when the country will  turn around and get on the road 
to prosperity. Presently, everyone is saturated with selfishness 
and self-interests. This would not do; instead, we must foster the 
feeling that all of us belong to one Universal Family. Today, the 
population of Bharat is about one hundred crores (one billion). If 
every one of this huge number of people were to feel that all are 
one, how blissful it would be! How prosperous the country would 
be! But the politicians and the people of today seem to delight 
themselves in fragmenting the country into tiny bits. What is the 
motivating force behind this extreme divisive tendency? People imagine that by carving out their own bit of territory, they can 
become ministers! What sort of a minister would such a selfish 
person make? He would be a deluded individual living from 
minute to minute. He could lose his position any minute! We 
should not go after such foolish desires. 
Students! Boys and Girls! Do not ever enter politics! Instead, 
enter the path of service to the nation! [Loud applause.] Desire 
and pray for the welfare of the entire universe. Develop the sense 
of unity and banish the feeling of differences. This is true service 
to the country. You should live in unity and be charged with 
the feeling that all are your sisters and brothers. Your sense of 
togetherness ought to exceed even that which is found amongst 
the members of a family. You all know that when Vivekananda 
delivered his address in Chicago at the Parliament of Religions 
on the subject of the wisdom of our ancients, he began with the 
words, “Brothers and Sisters of America.” The audience was so 
thrilled to hear this that they gave him a standing ovation. They 
were so happy to be referred to as brothers and sisters. Today, 
however, Bharatiyas  (Indians) are ashamed to regard others as 
brothers and sisters. 
That which fosters the feeling of universal peace,
That which dispels narrow feelings,
That which immerses you in the nectar of unity,
Is not education but the spirit of mankind.
We have to spread such a spirit amongst one and all. Humanness 
is something that came along with us at birth and not later. The human being and the quality of humanness came into existence 
at the same time. How is it that we have forgotten such a divine 
feeling? 
The real meaning of sadhana
How great is Bharatiya  culture! The ideals it upholds are not 
meant merely for the citizens of this country but for the whole 
of humanity. Culture is that which refines man. Refinement 
implies the elimination of bad traits and the development of 
good and noble qualities. One becomes cultured when all bad 
and undesirable qualities are totally got rid of and daily life is 
based entirely on virtues. 
Country does not mean just land or territory but people who 
live there. Who is manava  (man)? Manava  is the one with 
manas  (mind). What is meant by mind? Mind is just a bundle of 
thoughts and desires. Man becomes a genuine human being when 
all thoughts are bound to Truth. Humanness manifests in such a 
person as good and noble conduct. Today, truthful thoughts are 
conspicuous by their absence. If we fill our lives with thoughts 
based on falsehood, the whole world then becomes filled with 
untruth. Hence, eliminate all bad qualities within you; develop 
good qualities, and endeavour to experience Divinity – this is true 
sadhana (spiritual practice). What is the real meaning of sadhana ? 
Transforming the bad into good is sadhana . What is the point in 
claiming that you are doing sadhana , if this important principle 
is not observed? In the name of doing sadhana , you close your 
eyes and roll the rosary beads; but the mind is wandering all over the place! This is not sadhana ! We have to expel  bad thoughts, 
bad feelings, and bad tendencies, and replace all these with good 
thoughts, noble feelings, and sacred habits. Purging out the bad 
and replacing it with good is what sadhana  is all about. 
Education must bring out the latent human values
Education has become a fashion and everyone is eager to study. 
However, the way instruction is imparted is ridiculous. Students 
are made to cram guide books and pass competitive examinations. 
Is this the way to acquire knowledge? Is this the way to achieve 
success? It is very much like a person trying to board a moving 
bus; it is dangerous!
You have slogged and studied,
And you have learnt many subjects;
But of what use is all this?
You must acquire that knowledge
That frees you from death.
This is the essence of Bharatiya culture.
What you need is educare and not education because the latter is 
negative while the former is positive. The negative fills the head 
while the positive fills the heart. 
An empty head can be filled,
But can one fill a head that is already full? 
Without first flushing it clean, 
Is it possible to fill the mind with good thoughts?0Mode rn education is directed towards filling the head whereas 
educare seeks to fill the heart. It promotes good and truthful 
feelings, good conduct, righteous action, and justice. Thus, study 
of textbooks alone is not enough.
Secular knowledge
For comfort and happiness in this world;
Spiritual knowledge
For happiness in the other world.
No doubt, making a living is inescapable and some effort for this 
is also necessary. However, one should not mistake education as 
something meant merely to help us to make a living. Rather, it 
should help you to become determined to achieve the real goal 
of life. Education should be for life and not for living alone. The 
proper education for life is the development of good character. You 
should not fail to read books that help to promote good character. 
Many great people of the past have written classics that help in 
the development of virtues. You must absorb their essence. Avoid 
narrow sentiments based on individual communities or castes. 
All differences arising out of caste, creed, and community ought 
to be set aside altogether. 
There is only one caste, the caste of humanity,
There is only one religion, the religion of love.
There is only one language, the language of the heart. 
Always abide by these principles. Never stop the contemplation 
of God for it is the very basis of life. The great sages of the past faced many difficulties and obstacles while treading the path of 
Truth, but they marched resolutely forward. Even today there are 
noble souls that are totally wedded to truth and righteousness but, 
unfortunately, they are ignored by society. Even though society 
may ignore such people, God does not. What is it that is gained by 
achieving recognition by society? Nothing permanent.  Society 
may approve today, but tomorrow it may ignore you and cast you 
aside. ‘Yes’ and ‘no’ pertain to the worldly domain but for Sai it 
is always ‘Yes’, ‘Yes’, and ‘Yes’! 
It is thus important to discover the Divinity latent within you. It is 
impossible to be ever away from Divinity. God is in you, around 
you, above you, below you, with you always, and constantly 
protects you. And such a God, we forget so very easily! Relentless 
quest for the God within is the essence of our ancient culture. 
People often refer to our ancient culture. In reality, our culture is 
eternal and changeless, being based on pure and unsullied truth. 
It cannot be hidden; it is ever effulgent. Today, man is trying to 
forget this glorious and evergreen basis of his true nature. People 
are not making even the slightest effort to understand what a true 
human being is, and what is the real meaning of humanness. 
Follow manudharma
The word manava  or man is derived from Manu, his teachings, 
and his life. Man is also referred to as manuja. Manuja = manu 
+ ja. Ja means to be born. Thus,  manuja  means one who has 
descended from Manu. Who is this Manu we are talking about? 
He is the very embodiment of dharma. Even to this day, legal experts talk about manudharma or the code of righteous co nduct 
as laid down by Manu. No doubt they speak eloquently about the 
teachings of Manu; however, their conduct is in complete violation 
of what Manu had taught! He who follows the commandments 
of Manu alone is eligible to be called a true Bharatiya . It does 
not matter to which country he belongs; country is not important; 
dharma  is! It is important to follow dharma , no matter what the 
difficulties and obstacles. 
Students! Boys and Girls! Your first priority must be to set your 
own house in order. Love and respect your parents. The scriptures 
command: 
Matru Devo bhava.
Pitru Devo bhava.
Mother is God; Father is God. Without them, would you exist? 
Yet, no one bothers to respect parents or take care of them in their 
old age. This is a big mistake. If today you fail to respect your 
parents, tomorrow you would receive the same treatment from 
your children. Reflection, reaction, and resound are inescapable 
in life. So you should have good feelings, good thoughts; see 
good alone, and also do only good. There is no need to be afraid 
of anything. Only those who have done wrong have reason to 
fear; not those who are good and are doing only good. Those 
wishing to tread the path of truth should be totally free from fear. 
Influenced by undesirable and crazy political influences, people 
today are becoming mad! Hence, say goodbye to politics! Good 
conduct is important, and not politics. Therefore, good conduct and good behaviour must be your first priority. Swami is very 
distressed to obse rve the behaviour and character of the so-called 
educated people of today. They boast of a string of degrees and 
high academic qualifications, but their behaviour does not reflect 
their so-called attainments. Bad behaviour is the very negation of 
education. Humility is the foremost characteristic of one who is 
truly learned. What is the use of claiming to be educated if you 
have not acquired the virtue of humility? Education in ancient 
times laid great stress on humility and obedience. What is the 
meaning of education if it fails to foster these noble virtues? Such 
education is no education at all. 
The importance of kshama
For a human being, humility is of foremost importance. Humility 
is born of kshama  (forbearance). Swami has already told you: 
kshama  is sathya, dharma , the essence of the Vedas ; it is all-
inclusive, and the most important thing in the world. It was Ksh 
kshama ama  that elevated sage Viswamitra from the status of 
a raja yogi  to Brahma yogi . It was on account of the power of 
kshama  that Bhagiratha was able to make the sacred Ganges 
hidden in celestial heights to descend to the earth. Kshama  it was 
that enabled Emperor Janaka to transform from a karma yogi  to 
jnana yogi . The power of forbearance can help you to achieve 
anything. 
Students! You are not aware of this; Swami is nothing but kshama  
from top to toe. It  is this that enables Swami to deal with any 
situation in a perfectly calm manner. Swami is never bothered by difficulties; rather, Swami welcomes them! Why? Because it is 
difficulty that enables one to cultivate kshama . But these days, 
people who declare themselves to be devotees welcome pleasure 
but abhor difficulties and pain. You must maintain equanimity 
and treat pleasure and pain alike – that is what kshama  is all 
about. You should accept the fact that pleasure and pain are 
both gifts of God, and try to be unaffected. It is important that 
students make every effort to cultivate the virtue of kshama . It 
may happen that sometimes you might not do well in exams. 
You should not be upset by t hat; work hard, try again, and do 
well the next time. Marks may seem important but not earning 
bad remarks is even more important! Make sure your behaviour 
does not attract unfavourable comments from others. Be careful 
that you do not earn a bad name. Let good and noble feelings be 
the basis of your conduct. Wherever you go, people must say, 
based on your good conduct, “This person seems to be a student 
of the Sri Sathya Sai Institute of Higher Learning.” Swami is not 
interested in earning a reputation; all that Swami wants is that 
you must earn a good name. 
Vision is poor, not the country
Sometimes, out of love for Swami, people say that our culture is 
Sai culture. This is not the right way of putting things. Our culture 
is not new; it did not come into being recently; it is very ancient. 
Bharatiya  culture revolves around God, who is described as
Nirgunam, Niranjanam, Sanatanam, Niketanam, 
Nitya, Suddha, Buddha, Mukta, Nirmala Svarupinam.
Attributeless, Blemishless, Eternal, Ever Immersed in Himself, Ever Pure, Ever Illumined, Totally Free, and Immaculate. 
People make pompous speeches praising Swami but Swami 
does not approve of these. Instead, good conduct must be your 
primary goal. Don’t make others your example; rather, others 
must consider you as the example to be followed. That is the 
outcome of true Self-confidence, which in turn leads successively 
to Self-satisfaction, Self-sacrifice, and finally to Self-realisation. 
Everything is within the Self, and that is the Self that you must 
realise. This is the philosophy underlying Bharatiya  culture. 
Since ancient  times this country has faced many difficulties and 
troubles. People from many lands have invaded Bharat. Moghuls, 
Arabs, and the British all wanted to conquer this country, which 
everyone calls poor. It is foolish to describe this country as poor. 
Is there a country that can excel Bharat? People say this country 
is poor; it is not at all poor; it is the poverty of people’s mind that 
makes them say so! If Bharat is really a poor country, why was 
it repeatedly invaded? The wealth looted from this country was 
loaded by these invaders on horses, elephants, and camels, and 
then c arried away. Bharat is the land of wealth and prosperity. 
What is it that we are short of? It appears poor only when seen 
by petty minds linked to narrow vision. 
Yad bhavam tad bhavati.
As is the feeling, so is the result. Broaden your mind and your 
vision; you would then be able to see your country also in a wider 
perspective. When you have sacred texts worth more than gold,
Why run after other types of learning that are not so precious?
Slavish imitation of other cultures is not necessary because 
our culture itself has so much to offer. Why at all should we 
look down upon our country? Should we not be aware of its 
tremendous resource and potential?  Bharat is the fountainhead 
of all higher learning; it is the master, and what is not found 
here cannot be found anywhere else. Our people have forgotten 
the greatness of Bharat and have instead started extolling other 
countries. This does not mean that you have to criticise other 
countries. All countries are good in their own special way, and we 
must see the good in all. All religions too, are good. What then 
is bad? It is the mind that is bad and polluted! It is on account of 
mental aberrations that people quarrel about religions, decrying 
some and praising others. 
All religions teach only good,
And one has to follow the teachings 
Using one’ s discrimination. 
If the mind is pure,
No religion would appear bad. 
All religions are good – Christianity, Islam, Zoroastrianism, 
Buddhism, Jainism, Sikhism. All religions are good without 
exception. Only when the mind is polluted do other religions ap-
pear bad. Your perception of re ligion is influenced by your mind. 
The mind is a powerful instrument that can travel very fast. 
Manomulam idam jagat.The mind pervades the whole universe. Therefore, if you have a 
good and pure mind, the country too would appear good. Hence 
try to correct your mind before attempting to correct other things. 
If everyone does this, the country would automatically improve.
Always be grateful
Students! You all study hard for pariksha  or examinations. This 
type of knowledge will not give you real raksha  or protection!  
Raksha  is more important than pariksha ! It is a great fortune to 
have been born in Bharat. To be able to declare that you are a 
Bharati ya is a matter of great luck. You must be worthy of this 
boon given to you. Under no circumstance must you criticise 
your Motherland. Even in your dream, you should not think of 
forgetting or disowning your Motherland. That is true gratitude. 
What is the use of taking birth as a human, if one lacks a sense 
of gratitude? The one without gratitude is a wicked person. In 
the hymns that pertain to the worship of Surya  or the Sun God, it 
is said that the Sun God may forgive any sin but not ingratitude. 
You should never fail to be grateful, and never give anyone the 
opportunity to accuse you of being ungrateful. 
You must endeavour to enhance the glory of Bharatiya  culture. 
Don’t be afraid or ashamed of doing this. Do not think that others 
would harm or criticise you. Just ignore such people. In fact, you 
must be even ready to lay down your life to defend the culture 
of Bharat. Death comes but once, and what can be nobler than 
facing it for the sake of the country? Such a brave death would 
amount to an expression of the deepest gratitude to your country. Never ridicule or speak ill of your culture, especially driven by 
fear. Mother is so near to you. You may have to search for God 
but you don’t have to search for your mother. Therefore, how can 
you ever forget mother? That is why Lord Rama declared,
Janani janmabhumisca svargadapi gariyasi.
One’s mother and motherlan d are greater than the very heaven. 
These days, many people claim to be the devotees of Rama. They 
keep chanting the name of Rama but of what use is this empty 
chantin g? Rama sacrificed wealth and power, whereas these 
devotees want nothing but wealth and power! They are after money 
whereas Rama was ready to give up even a kingdom. Is there 
anyone who is prepared to do such thing today? Rama sacrificed 
everything including comforts, in order to uphold dharma . Sita 
too did the same. Regarding her husband as God, and feeling that 
it was her duty to be by His side at all times, she too sacrificed 
everything and went in exile to the forest. However, when she 
desired to have the golden deer, she had to suffer separation fr om 
Rama. She lost her dear, when she wanted the deer! That was the 
reason for her suffering. Later, repenting her folly she lamented:
Where from did this wicked animal come?
And how did I get deluded by it?
When you are in trouble, people distance themselves from you. 
Further, difficulties will dull your power of discrimination and 
you will not be able to see clearly the distinction between good and bad. Patience and forbearance are the answer to all this. 
Never be in a hurry; always reflect carefully. This is the way to 
success. 
Sense control alone confers real strength
Swami would not object to your going to any country you 
want, acquiring any qualification you desire, and occupying any 
position that you aspire for, provided you use whatever you have 
achieved for rendering service. The more important the position 
you occupy, the greater ought to be your urge to serve your 
country. Of what use are they, if opportunities are used solely for 
personal benefit and advancement? 
Having got this chance,
Make the best of it;
For once lost,
You will not get again
The blessing of serving Partheeswara.
He will promote your devotion,
Grant you strength,
And lead you to liberation. 
Listening to others, 
Do not throw away this fortune.
Control your mind,
And wipe out forever,
All your accumulated karma.0This s hould be your goal. Do not be misled by others. Instead, 
follow your conscience for that is the voice of God. People follow 
their senses and not their conscience. This is not good, because 
one who follows the senses would inevitably come to ruin. Do 
you recall how mighty Ravana was? There was none as wealthy 
as he was. He annexed all the wealth of his brother Kubera. He 
built mansions of gold. He regarded himself to be a very great 
person, possessing as he did enormous strength, both physical 
and intellectual. He had also the power of penance. But in the 
end, of what use were all these? He succumbed to the senses and 
became their slave. 
The one who conquers the senses alone is strong, while the 
one who yields to them is weak. The quality of strength is seen 
clearly in the case of Hanuman. Before Rama, he was the very 
embodiment of humility whereas before Ravana, he stood as a 
mighty warrior. When Ravana asked Hanuman as to who had 
sent him, Hanuman replied: 
The One who clipped the nose and ears of your sister,
Is the One who has sent me here!
An arrogant person got a stinging and fitting reply! Hanuman was 
no ordinary person. He had no ego, and occupied the position of a 
minister to Sugriva. He was brave, courageous, highly educated, 
and virtuous, and it is these qualifications that enabled him to 
become a devotee of Rama. Ravana became furious hearing 
Hanuman’s reply and roared, “How dare you speak to me like 
this? Nobody in the world has ever spoken to me in this fashion. 
You are addressing me as though I am a servant!” He added,Even a mighty emperor
Dare not speak as you have done;
I shall silence you 
And teach you a lesson. 
To this Hanuman replied, “O mad fellow! Others do not know 
your true worth while I do! God is my Master, and fools like you 
cannot command my respect. I will address you any way I like 
and will even strike you if necessary!” 
Such a contemptuous reply infuriated Ravana even more. 
Remembering that the tail is very dear to a monkey, he ordered 
Hanuman’s tail to be set on fire. To this Hanuman reacted by 
saying, “I shall pay you back in your own coin and teach you the 
very lesson you are trying to teach me!” Hanuman then set Lanka 
ablaze by setting fire to numerous mansions. Panic stricken, the 
citizens of Lanka wailed,
Who is this monkey,
And who has sent it?
It has torched all our houses,
Where are we to go now?
They say it is the servant of Rama -
That ought to please Sita.
In this manner, even in the hour of their distress, the people 
of Lanka thought of Rama. It is important to think of God at 
all times, in times that are good as well as bad, whether one is 
being praised or criticised. Never forget God, no matter what the circum stance. Whatever be the difficulty, do not ever give 
up God. Only then can it be said that you are upholding human 
values. These precious values must be fostered, for, without 
virtues, what is the meaning of calling a person a human being? 
Uphold sathya , dharma , santhi , and prema firmly and at all times 
for it is only the one who safeguards human values that can be 
called a human. The one that lacks human values is a demon. Man 
is called manava . What does this mean? Manava  = ma + nava . 
Ma means ‘not’ and nava  means ‘new’. Thus, manava  means 
‘not new’. Thus, man is not something new or recent. He is quite 
ancient because he has been taking birth again and again. One 
has a human birth on account of deservedness acquired earlier. 
Therefore, you must make sure that in this birth too, you earn 
merit by abiding human values and exhibiting human traits. That 
is the proper way of justifying your human form. 
Listen, recall, and assimilate
Emb odiments of Love! Students! Right now, you all are happy 
listening to this discourse. But, that is not enough; when you go 
away from here, you must ruminate on what you have heard and 
digest the lessons. You must listen here and practise there. You 
have all seen cows going out to graze. When it sees green grass, it 
makes a beeline for it and rapidly consumes it. It then withdraws 
to a quiet spot, rests there and masticates in a leisurely fashion 
what it has eaten earlier. In the same manner, you should, when 
you go back, recall what you heard here and digest the essence of 
the lessons. A disciplined human being would practise this three-
step procedure: s ravanam  (listening), mananam  (recapitulating), 
and nididhyasam (assimilating). Accumulate deservedness and protect it. This deservedness is not 
obtained from outside but from within your own self. Therefore, 
aim at enhancing your deservedness and never give up Bharatiya  
Culture that has come to us through many ages like Krita Yuga, 
Treta Yuga , and Dwapara Yuga . The superficial aspects of the 
culture might have changed but its core remains intact. Changes 
are inevitable and nothing to worry about. After all, you too 
have undergone changes. When you were born, you were a 
baby. A few years later, you became a boy. At the age of thirty, a 
person is called a man. When the person becomes seventy-five, 
everyone calls him grandfather. Are these not changes? Yet, the 
person undergoing the external changes remains the same. In the 
same manner, although yugas  have come and gone, our ancient 
dharma remains the same. You too should not allow any change 
in your basic nature as a human being. Your intrinsic nature is 
Truth. To ensure that this intrinsic nature does not get tainted, it 
is necessary to develop intense devotion for God. Always keep 
chanting the Name of God and you will never be able to forget 
Him at any time. God’s Name is so sweet!
At the conclusion of the discourse, Swami sang the bhajan, 
Prema Mudita….
 May 000
 
14. MY LIFE IS MY MESSAGE
Today, Swami is going to speak about the childhood of this body. 
Childhood is childhood, but the significance of the childhood of 
this particular body cannot be easily understood by students. That 
is why Swami is going to speak on the subject this morning. 
Kondama Raju [Swami’s grandfather] had four sons. The eldest 
was named Pedda Venkama Raju. The second son was named 
Chinna Venkama Raju. The third son was named Venkata Subba 
Raju while the fourth bore the name Venkata Rama Raju. Since 
Venkavadhoota was his preceptor, Kondama Raju liked the name 
‘Venka’ very much; that is why all his sons had Venka admixed 
in their names. 
In due course all these sons got married but being poor, all the four 
families had to share the same small hut. The hut did not have a 
tiled roof but only one of thatched grass. As time passed, children 
were born in all the four families. Chinna Venkama Raju had 
twelve children; Pedda Venkama Raju had eight children; Subba 
Raju had nine while Venkata Rama Raju had eleven. There were 
enough children to fill a small primary school! [Loud laughter.]
In those  days, people knew how to live united, adjust to each other, get along with each other, and help each other. For the sons, 
Kondama Raju was father but for their wives, he was not a blood 
relative. Thus, on account of the daughters-in-law, differences of 
opinion slowly began to crop up. Noticing this, Kondama Raju 
realised that it was no longer possible to continue the joint family, 
that it would have to be split, and that each son would have to 
shoulder his responsibility separately. The family had just two 
acres of land – it was that poor. Kondama Raju divided this land 
equally amongst the four sons so that they got only half an acre 
each. He also divided the ancestral house into four portions, ten 
feet by eight feet each, and gave one portion to every son for 
living with his family. This may seem small but by the standards 
prevailing then in the villages, this was ample space. 
After this division, Kondama Raju had no place of his own in 
the original house. So he moved to a small plot eight feet by 
eight feet and built there a small hut for himself. The four sons 
told him, “Father, why do you have to live alone? You are old. 
Please be with each one of us by turn for a while, and spend your 
remaining days in this manner.” He replied, “I do not wish to live 
with my sons and daughters-in-law. I wish to live independently, 
supporting myself by opening a small shop.” It was a small 
provision shop that supplied common needs like pulses, puffed 
rice, some edibles, coconuts, etc. The shop was very small, not 
bigger than this table [at this point, Swami indicated the table in 
front of Him]. For the village, however, this was a big enough 
shop. When Kondama Raju declared that he would run a small 
shop and take care of himself, Pedda Venkama Raju said, “But 
who would cook for you, look after you, attend to your needs, 
etc.? We  feel it would be good if you were to have someone by your side.” Kondama Raju thought over the matter for sometime. 
Whom should he take with him?  At that time, this body was 
about seven years of age. Kondama said, “Venka (this is the way 
he addressed his eldest son), don’t think otherwise; I would like to 
have Sathyam live with me. He alone is my property.” Everyone 
said, “But Sathyam is so young! How can He cook for you? We 
will hire a cook.” Kondama replied most emphatically, “I do not 
want anybody except Sathyam. If Sathyam is by my side, no one 
else is required.” 
At that ti me, Sathyam had just one pair of shorts and one shirt. 
He had to manage with  those for one whole year. The shorts and 
shirt would be worn while going to school; at home, Swami would 
wear a small dhothi . Life was very simple then. After advancing 
to the fourth standard, it became necessary to go to the school in 
Bukkapatnam since the school in Puttaparthi did not offer studies 
beyond the third. One had to go to Bukkapatnam by walk. There 
were other boys in the village who studied there, and Swami used 
to go along with them. 
Early in the morning, Swami would make a millet preparation 
– two balls of it, one for the grandfather and one for Himself; 
also, some groundnut chutney to go along with it. After this, 
Swami would run to school. Once a week, He would prepare 
some dal [a soup-like preparation made out of pulses], laced with 
spinach. There were no vessels made of metal; only earthen pots. 
After hurried cooking, Swami w ould run all the way to school. 
At noon, there would be a break; as soon as the bell rang, Swami 
would run back home. The distance to be covered was three miles [about four and a half kilometres]. All the boys used to do this, 
and Swami did the same. On reaching home, Swami would serve 
food to His grandfather. He would wash the clothes, keep food 
for the night, and then have His meal. After this, a long run back 
to the school; this was how life went on for some years. 
Kondama Raju was quite upset by all this. He thought, “There 
is no one to help Raju.” One Sunday he asked, “Sathyam, am 
I giving You a lot of trouble?” Swami replied, “Grandfather, 
if I do not work hard now, when else then? Start early, drive 
slowly, and reach safely! This is work that I have to do with 
pleasure! So long as I am strong in body and mind, I am ready 
to do any amount of work.” The grandfather was immensely 
pleased with this reply. This is the loving manner in which we 
spent time together. Sometimes in the evenings, Swami would 
prepare rasam . The wonderful aroma of the preparation would 
spread all over, attracting the attention of people who lived in 
the neighbourhood. They  were mostly tribals, called Valmikulu 
or Boyavallu. These people would wonder, “Where from is this 
nice aroma coming? What is the item being cooked? Raju is too 
young to make such items and Kondama Raju is too old to do the 
cooking. Who else could it be?” 
One day, one of the tribals who had discovered the secret came to 
the hut, wrapped up in a blanket. He was shivering and suffering 
from fever. He said, “I am getting the smell of something good 
being prepared here. Please give me some of it.” Kondama Raju 
was a most compassionate person. He called Swami to his side 
and whispered into His ears; he did not want everyone to know and that is why Swami was summoned to his side. Kondama 
Raju said, “Poor fellow, he is eager to have the rasam  that you 
have prepared. Give him some.” Swami gave that person some 
rasam . Next day, his fever was gone. The news quickly spread 
and from then on, everyone in the neighbourhood started coming 
for rasam, bringing aluminium tumblers; and for their sake, 
Swami had to make extra! He would make rasam  in a big pot. 
Meanwhile, the tumblers would have been lined up, and Swami 
would pour rasam  into them one by one. Thanks to the rasam , 
sickness disappeared from the village and everyone was happy. 
In due course, this news reached the other street where Pedda 
Venkama Raju and Chinna Venkama Raju resided; soon, people 
from there also started coming for the rasam ! What you have to 
note here is that even at the age of seven, Swami not only had to 
manage the house but also serve others outside. Drawing water, 
cleaning, cooking, procuring the provisions – everything had to 
be done by Swami. 
Meanwhile, Swami was made a teacher! Students living on the 
street – students does not mean just young boys; some of them 
were in their twenties (!) – they all came to Swami and said, 
“Raju, please teach us alphabets and how to read.” Swami readily 
agreed. Kondama Raju was not happy about this and said, “Raju 
works so hard during  the day; He has little rest, and now you are 
adding to His burden.” Swami intervened and told Kondama Raju, 
“My mission is to make everyone happy. Teaching these people 
is no problem at all. I will do this teaching without problem or 
inconvenience to you.” 0Ther e was a person named Narayana Rao, who lived near the 
Sathyamma Temple. There were only two persons in the village, 
namely, Karnam Gopal Rao and Narayana Rao, who had proper 
houses. This Narayana Rao, made available a small thatched hut 
in his compound and that became our ‘school’. Classes were in 
the evening, after all the household work was over. Swami used 
to serve food to Kondama Raju, eat, wash the vessels and put 
them away, and then leave for teaching. 
Swami must make a special mention about the type of students 
He taught. These students were really adults; some even had 
moustaches! Swami would come wearing shorts; yet, all these 
grown-up people would stand up as a mark of respect. In the 
beginning, they used to address Swami as ‘Raju’ but soon they 
began to say ‘Sir!’. There was no chair for the teacher; so, a big, 
nice stone was brought, covered with cloth, and this became the 
chair. The students had no slates to write on. Swami therefore 
asked them to bring sand from the Chitravathi River and spread 
it in the ‘classroom’ before the places where the students sat. The 
sand thus became the slate! Swami used to write the alphabets, 
starting in the traditional manner with ‘ Om Namo Narayanayah ’. 
This is how the instruction was commenced. Within a week, the 
students had learnt the basics of the alphabets. The students now 
needed books and slates. In those days, the slate cost one anna  
[the decimal system of currency did not exist then; the rupee was 
divided into sixteen annas , and each anna  into twelve pies; three 
pies made one pice], and for one pie, one could get three slate-
pencils. Swami asked the students to procure these but they did 
not have any money, not even one anna  – that is how poor they 
were. Students! You have to note how much Swami cared about the 
welfare of those whom He taught. There was a small shopkeeper 
named Venkataramana Shetty who lived in Puttaparthi in those 
days. Swami told him, “Listen, I want you to give slates to each 
of the eleven persons studying with Me.” The shopkeeper said, 
“But they will not pay me any money!” Swami replied, “I shall 
see to it that they do; My students will not default.” Having 
total faith in Swami, the shopkeeper supplied slates and slate-
pencils to all the eleven students. Swami then told His students, 
“Be careful with the slates an d the slate-pencils. Use the slate-
pencils till they become really small. You have obtained all these 
by paying money and so you have to be careful with what you 
have acquired.” This is how Swami taught even in those days that 
money never ought to be wasted. The students learnt everything 
with great enthusiasm. 
These people had no regular employment. They used to grow a 
small amount of spinach in their backyards and then try to sell it. 
Swami taught them how to augment their income. He asked them 
to go where there were tamarind trees, collect the tamarind fruits 
that fell down, remove the seeds, and then sell the processed 
tamarind. Swami said to them, “This belongs to no one; it is 
God’s property. No one can object to your collecting and selling 
tamarind this way.” These people followed Swami’s instructions 
with implicit faith and total obedience. With money earned this 
way, every week they used to pay back the shopkeeper one bottu  
[a quarter- anna ]. In a little over a month’s time the slate and the 
pencil were paid for completely, by each and every student. The 
students were now happy and declared,  “At last, the slate and the pencil r eally belong to us.” Swami cautioned, “Yes, it is now 
yours, but never waste anything!” This is how Swami constantly 
reminded His students about the importance  of never wasting 
anything. 
In due course, the spinach business began to thrive. Where there 
is sacrifice, there is quality; and where there is quality, there 
Goddess Lakshmi [the Goddess of Wealth] appears. Swami now 
advised these people to grow papaya fruits along with spinach. 
This way, in due course, they could now earn about half to one 
rupee per month, which they kept aside. 
Two years passed. Swami had completed studies up to the sixth 
standard, which was the highest available in Bukkapatnam. In 
those days, one prepared for ESLC [Elementary School Leaving 
Certificate] examination; for this one had to study up to the 
eighth standard which meant going elsewhere. But then some 
one would have to look after Kondama Raju. At this juncture, 
Seshama Raju [Swami’s elder brother] came to Puttaparthi and 
told Kondama Raju, “By keeping Him here, you are denying 
Him education; this would spoil Him. Therefore, send Him with 
me.” Kondama Raju was a very wise and philosophical man. He 
replied, “Well what have I studied? Nothing. You are supposed 
to have studied; what good has it done to you? What is the harm 
that has come to me by my being uneducated? It is all the same, 
whether one receives this education or not. I do not care for this 
type of education. You do not possess even one thousandth of the 
good qualities that Sathyam has! In what way has your education 
benefited you?” Seeing the angry response of Kondama Raju, Seshama Raju remained s ilent; in those days, youngsters kept 
quiet when elders became angry; they did not argue back. 
Later, Seshama Raju called Swami aside and said, “Look Sathya, 
education is very important. What can you do without education? 
Even to count, for example, for counting the number of clothes 
given to a washerman, one has to study and learn. Education is 
therefore indispensable.” Swami then went to His grandfather 
and said, “Grandfather, I am going.” He asked most anxiously, 
“What happens to me?”  Swami then arranged for one of the sons 
of Venkata Subba Raju to take His place. In this manner, Swami 
prepared to leave for Kamalapuram, along with His elder brother 
Seshama Raju. When word got round about the impending 
departure, the eleven students being trained by Swami began 
to cry, “Our teacher is going away; we are losing our teacher. 
What happens to us now? What will be our fate?” That was their 
affection for Swami. 
On the following morning, these eleven students planned to walk 
all the way to the Bukkapatnam Bus Stand along with Swami 
and His elder brother to see them off. From Bukkapatnam, we 
were to go to Dharmavaram, and from there to Kamalapuram. 
These students wanted to give a parting gift and so they collected 
some money; each contributed half-an- anna . It came to almost 
six annas . They offered the money to Swami but Swami refused 
saying, “ I do not want all this. You keep it for yourself.” In those 
days things were so cheap that one could buy a short-pant for 
half-an- anna  and a shirt for just one anna . Swami took just what 
was needed for one shirt and one short-pant, plus two pice for stitching charges. But the tailor was so nice and so full of love 
for Swami, he said, “Raju, for You there are no charges!” What 
you must notice here is that everyone had love for Swami. What 
was the reason? Soft and sweet words, always spoken by Swami. 
This is what endeared everyone to Swami. These students got the 
dress stitched and sent it over. 
Meanwhile, Seshama Raju got married. Following his marriage, 
he had to go to Anantapur for some further studies and training. 
His wife was left behind in Kamalapuram, and Swami had to 
do all the household work. In those days, a train used to pass by 
early in the morning. Hearing the whistle of the engine, all the 
town-people would take their pots and head for a pond five miles 
away, to fetch drinking water. Swami would go at four in the 
morning to bring water. It was the time of the Second World War. 
It so happened that one day, a special military train passed by at 
eleven o’clock at night. Hearing the whistle of the engine, all the 
people went as usual to the pond, without realising what time it 
was. Swami also went with all the others. It was very chilly then 
but one had to carry on nevertheless. After daybreak, there was 
more work to do; water had to be drawn from the well for people 
in the house to bathe. After this, there was a lot of household 
work to be done, followed by the cleaning of the entire house. 
It was only after finishing all this work that Swami could go to 
school. 
In the school there was a Muslim teacher by name Mehboob Khan, 
who liked Swami very much. One day, with much kindness and 
consideration he said, “Raju, You work so hard all the time. I live just opposite Your house and, through my window, can see what 
You are doing. You are fetching so much water and also doing so 
much household work.” Swami replied, “Sir, the body has to do 
work. In fact, the body has been given for doing work. If there is 
no work, laziness would set in and the body would become sick. 
Work is not all that difficult.” In due course, Mehboob Khan’s 
love for Swami increased. He used to teach English; the lessons 
were simple and Swami would quickly absorb them. 
It was only the sixth standard, but there were many big boys in 
the class. Some of them were as old as eighteen or twenty! If all 
the boys in the class stood up, Swami would not be seen because 
He was so much shorter. Even if He stood on the bench while 
others stood on the ground, He could not be seen easily – that is 
how short He was. Even now, Swami is rather short; just imagine 
how short He must have been then! [Laughter.] 
Mehboob Khan eagerly looked forward to taking classes for us. 
One day, the Telugu class was in progress. It was being handled 
by one Kondappa. The bell rang, signalling the end of that class; 
it was Mehboob Khan’s turn next. However, Kondappa continued 
with the class and asked, “Did everyone take notes in my class? 
Those who have not done so, stand up on the bench.” Swami 
said, “Sir, I did not take notes.” Swami had no money to buy 
notebooks! Swami ought to have stopped there but continued: 
“Even without taking notes, I know all the answers. You can ask 
questions and test Me if you want.” Kondappa became angry 
and said, “You have the audacity to talk back? Stand up on the 
bench! [In those days, this was one form of punishment given to 
students.] The students in the class protested by shouting ‘No! No!’ in unison. This made the teacher even more angry. He said, 
“You will remain standing like this for the next three periods!” 
It was time for Kondappa to leave the class. He got up but the 
chair stuck to him and also rose! [Laughter.] He thought that  
some nail had got stuck in his dhothi  and that was the reason 
why the chair came up when he got up. Or might be there was 
some gum dropped on the chair. He called the sweeper to check 
for gum on the chair. The sweeper said that there was no gum. 
Meanwhile, Mehboob Khan rushed into the class; it was Swami’s 
class, and he was very keen to be there as quickly as possible. 
He saw Swami standing up on the bench. Tears rolled down his 
eyes; wiping them, he asked Kondappa, “Why did you make Raju 
stand up on the bench? This is wrong. This is my class and you 
have no business to make Him stand.” Turning to Me, Khan said, 
“Sit down!” Swami then said, “Sir, both of you are My teachers. 
He asked Me to remain standing on the bench for three class 
periods. How can I disobey him? I cannot sit down unless he 
permits Me to do so.” This is the way one should conduct oneself 
with teachers. Mehboob Khan then told Kondappa, “Raju is a 
very good boy; ask Him to sit down.” Kondappa knew this but 
said, “He answered back and I did not like that.” Mehboob Khan 
replied, “You are not aware. There is the mighty power of truth in 
this boy. His name itself is Sathyam! He always abides by truth, 
and that is why He commands so much power.” Reluctantly, 
Kondappa said, “Sit down!” The moment Swami came down, 
Kondappa got unstuck! 
News about this incident spread rapidly, and Kondappa getting 
stuck to the chair became the talk of the school. Some teachers called Swami and said, “Sathya, did You really make Kondappa 
get stuck to the chair?” Swami replied, “Sir, I did not do any such 
thing; as is the action, so is the consequence.” As a result of this 
incident, Raju became well known. 
Swami then moved on to the seventh standard. Holidays came, 
and Seshama Raju took Swami to Hampi [an ancient town of 
historical importance in the neighbourhood]. On reaching the 
place, Seshama Raju told Swami, “You keep a watch over the 
luggage while my wife and I go and have darshan  [of Siva in the 
form of Virupaksha].” Swami said, “Please do; I shall mind the 
luggage.” It is Swami’s nature to always help. Seshama Raju then 
said, “After we come back, You can go and have darshan .” 
Swami sat down there with the luggage while the brother and 
his wife entered the temple to have the darshan  of Virupaksha. 
Inside, they did not see the Virupaksha idol but Swami! Then 
Seshama Raju said, “Look, Raju is here! Who is taking care of 
the luggage?” He came out running and saw Swami there! He 
ran back inside and saw Swami there also. Seshama Raju and his 
wife then began to converse with each other. They said, “There 
is some strange power within Sathya. His effulgence itself is so 
unusual. We are not treating Him as He ought to be.” Meanwhile, 
the Municipal Chairman came there, in order to have the darshan  
of Virupaksha. He too saw only Raju instead of the idol. He was 
surprised and asked the temple priest, “Who is this boy? Where 
did He come from?” All of them came outside and there they saw 
Swami near the luggage. They then exclaimed, “This was the boy 
we saw there inside the temple where the idol is installed! Clearly, 
this is no ordinary boy; there is some extraordinary power within Him.”  The Chairman asked Seshama Raju as to who I was; he 
replied, “My brother.” The Chairman then invited all of us to his 
house for tea the following day.
We went to his house. Swami was offered coffee but Swami 
said ‘no thanks’. The host then offered milk, coconut water, 
etc., but Swami refused them all – Swami does not partake of 
such beverages and drinks. From the day this body came into 
existence, it has never touched tea, coffee and such drinks. Other 
things offered were also refused. They then realised that Raju 
was different and said, “There is some extraordinary power in 
this boy.” They were very keen to present something to Swami, 
like a dress. But they were not sure if Seshama Raju would get 
angry if such a gift was given; or the boy might refuse, thinking 
that his brother Seshama Raju would become angry. Finally, 
the Chairman brought a collar pin made of gold, and, holding 
Swami’s hand, slipped the pin into Swami’s palm. While giving 
the pin the Chairman said, “Please accept this. I am the Chairman 
and a respected person in this locality. You must pay heed to my 
word. I am giving this out of love, as if you are my son. You must 
not refuse this offering.” Seshama Raju’s wife spoke in the same 
tone: “He is an elder and You must not refuse what he is giving 
out of love.”  Swami reluctantly accepted the collar pin but was 
not happy. He does not like to receive material objects as gifts 
from others.    
The Hampi visit over, we all came back to Uravakonda by bus. 
Next day, Swami had to go to school. Swami left the house and 
went about ten feet when the collar pin fell down. Many searched 
for it but the pin could not be found. Swami then said:Understand that I am Sai!
Have no more worldly bonds with Me.
I have bonds with none.
It is beyond the power of anyone to restrain Me!
The collar pin symbolised worldly attachment, and when it was 
lost, it was also symbolic of the end of the ‘Raju phase’ and 
attachments implied by it. Declaring  that He had no worldly 
relationship with anyone, Swami ran to the house of one 
Anjaneyulu. He was the Prohibition Commissioner in those days. 
In front of his house there was a small rock. Swami went and sat 
on that stone. 
Meanwhile, Seshama Raju, his wife, the children – all came 
running to where Swami was. They said, “Come back home.” 
Swami replied, “I have no home.” Seshama Raju then said in a 
stern voice, “Stop this philosophy and come back; I don’t wish to 
hear all this idle talk.” Swami replied, “This is not idle philosophy 
but the Truth! I am not going anywhere.” Seshama Raju tried to 
drag Swami away but he could not move Swami even an inch! 
In the meantime, Anjaneyulu appeared on the scene and told 
Seshama Raju, “Why are you trying to force Him?” Seshama 
Raju replied, “I am not forcing Him; just that He has come away 
without having food.” Anjaneyulu then said, “That is no problem; 
He can have food in my house today.” 
Swami was taken inside by Anjaneyulu and served many items 
of food on a plate. It was always Swami’s practice to mix all the 
items before eating. This used to be the practice in the Shirdi 
Avatar  also; there, Lakshmi Bai would serve many items and 0Baba would mix them all before eating. In this Avatar  too, Swami 
is following a similar practice. 
Swami now started having food in Anjaneyulu’s house, and spend 
time sitting on the rock. Anjaneyulu’s children would say, “Raju, 
why are You doing like this? Your study is getting disturbed. 
Time is getting wasted. Don’t give up study,” and so on.  But 
Swami did not pay any attention to such talk. 
People al so used to ask, “Who are You? What is Your name?” 
Swami replied, “My name is Sai.” In those days, no one knew 
the name Sai Baba. They mistook Sai Baba to mean ‘Sahebu’, 
which meant a Muslim. At that time, the Commissioner’s son 
ran inside, brought a camera and clicked a photo. In the picture, 
Shirdi Sai could be seen in front of Swami. Thereafter, Prohibition 
Commissioner Anjaneyulu gave Swami the name Sai Baba, and 
in due course the name remained. 
Earlier while in school, Swami used to lead the school prayer. 
The Headmaster Kameswara Rao was an ardent devotee. He used 
to say of Swami, “Sathyam is not a pillavaadu  (an ordinary boy) 
as you imagine; He is a Pidugu  (thunderbolt!).” Kameswara Rao 
it was who had asked Swami to lead the school prayer. Swami 
asked, “What prayer should I recite?” He replied, “You compose 
Your own prayer.” On the spot, Swami composed a prayer that 
reflected the sentiments of many  religions like Buddhism, 
Sikhism, Jainism, etc. 
[At this point, Swami sang melodiously, the prayer song He had 
composed sixty years ago as young Sathya.]Some said that the names of other religions like Islam etc., should 
not be mentioned. Such objectors merely reflected their own 
narrow-mindedness but all the school children liked the song. 
One evening, Seshama Raju asked Swami, “Where from are 
You producing such songs? Are they Your own compositions or 
have You copied from somewhere else?” Seshama was himself 
a Telugu poet and poets are known to be crazy at times! That is 
why he asked such a question!!
Later, Seshama asked Swami to write a small play and also act 
in it. So, Swami wrote the play Cheppinattu Chesthara? You all 
know about this play. Swami acted in the drama and also won a 
big prize for His acting. 
The Headmaster wanted to raise some funds for the school 
building. So he announced that there would be a dance performance 
by the well-known dancer Rishyendramani. The prize was to be 
distributed by the Head of the Panchayat  [Council of Village 
Elders], one Rama Subbamma. This Rishyendramani was 
reputed as a dancer of great skill and talent. She could balance 
a jug of water on her head and dance without allowing the jug 
to fall or the water to spill. However, this dancer was not going 
to appear in our school. Swami was expected to play the role! 
So, to uphold the announcement of the Headmaster, Swami had 
to appear on the stage dressed like  dancer Rishyendramani and 
perform her type of dance! For the dance, Swami placed a bottle 
of water on the head, a plate on top of the bottle, and two lamps 
on the plate! This is not all! While dancing, a sewing needle had 
to be picked up with the eyelids, and this had to be done without allowing the objects on the head to fall down! Rishyendramani 
could do all this, and Swami was expected to emulate her feat!! 
Everyone was stunned by the performance. No one knew that it 
was Sathya who had danced and not Rishyendramani. Seshama 
Raju also witnessed the show; he too could not believe his eyes; 
so spectacular was the show.
It was time for the prize distribution. Rama Subbamma came 
on the stage and showered praise on Rishyendramani for her 
scintillating performance. She then announced, “By way of 
showing my appreciation, I am now going to present a medal to 
Rishyendramani.” All eyes were now on the stage, eagerly looking 
for the arrival of Rishyendramani. Instead, wearing shorts, Swami 
came there running! Rama Subbamma said, “Boy, this medal is 
not for you but for Rishyendramani.” The Headmaster then came 
there and told Rama Subbamma, “That was not Rishyendramani 
who danced; it was this boy, dressed like her!” Rama Subbamma 
was stunned; she dropped the medal, lifted Swami, and hugged 
Him! That was how the Kamalapuram experience was. 
In course of time, Swami entered the eighth standard. There was 
one Raghavan, who was the drill master. He was well-built and 
had a good personality. At that time, a cattle fair was due to take 
place in the neighbouring town of Cuddapah. The drill master 
wanted all the scouts in the school to go and do service in the fair. 
The question arose as to who should be the leader of the scouts. 
Boys from all classes, from the sixth to the twelfth, volunteered. 
But Raghavan was firm; he said that Raju alone was fit to be the 
leader. Swami told the drill master, “Sir, how can I be the leader? I am not big enough for the job.” Raghavan replied, “I know 
that You can be the leader. You can do it!” Swami then softly 
said, “Sir, a leader must have uniform, whistle, stick, shoes, etc. I 
cannot afford these. Therefore, I cannot assume the responsibility 
of leadersh ip.” One must always be realistic and state truthfully 
what one can do and what one cannot. Meanwhile, all the students 
unanimously declared that they wanted Raju as their leader for 
the scout camp in Cuddapah. Raghavan explained why this was 
not possible – the leader had to have the proper dress, whistle, 
shoes, stick etc, and Raju could not get these. 
Two boys used to share the desk used by Swami in school – 
Ramesh and Suresh.  One was the son of the local Shirastadar 
while the other was the son of the Tashildar. Swami used to sit 
in the middle and these two boys used to sit on either side. All 
of us were of the same height. Ramesh was the only child of his 
parents. He went to his father and said, “Father, I want two scout 
dresses; I like them very much.”  He got them. He then neatly 
packed one set and then wrote a letter: “Raju, You must accept 
this dress. If You don’t, I will give up my life!” Ramesh kept the 
dress packet and the letter in Swami’s place in the desk. Swami 
read that letter, tore it, and prepared a reply: “Friendship cannot 
and must not be based on giving and taking. If such transactions 
exist, then it can no longer be called friendship. Thus, your giving 
Me a gift is not good. You love Me very much, and I too love you 
a lot. If I were to accept your gift, then our mutual love would 
get spoiled. For this reason, I cannot accept what you are giving. 
If you do not want our friendship to be ruined, then you will take 
back what you have given.” Ramesh insisted, “Does not matter if our friendship gets ruined; but You must accept what I am giving. 
I have not even told my father what I am doing. This is my dress, 
and I want to share it with You!” However, gently but firmly, 
Swami made Ramesh take back his gift. 
In due course, the news that Swami was an excellent composer 
of poems and songs reached one Kote Subbanna. This person 
made his living by selling medicines. He had a big shop full of 
medicines. One day he sent word that Raju should go to his house. 
Swami sent a reply: “Why should I? I have no work there; I do 
not go about aimlessly from house to house like a rat or a cat!” 
Students should know this. You all have the tendency to go from 
room to room; this is not a good habit. Only cats and rats move 
about like this; you are neither cats nor rats. You must remain 
where you are. 
Kote Subbanna realised that Swami would not come to his place; 
so, he came to Swami. Once you are after Truth and remain firm 
in your determination, then even people of great stature would 
have to come to you. Subbanna placed a small bag containing 
some eatables in Swami’s hand and said, “Listen, I have a new 
wonder drug called Bala Bhaskara ,” and then went on describing 
its wonderful properties. He added, “I want a small help from 
You.” Swami replied, “Help I always give. That is My ideal. What 
is it that you want?” He said that he wanted a poem extolling the 
efficacy of the new medicine, and added, “If You can have the 
poem ready by the evening, it would be very nice!” 
Swami wrote the song. Kote Subbanna came to the school to 
collect the poem because he was not supposed to come to the house. He was waiting near the school gate. There Swami gave 
him the composition. Subbanna then said, “I have the poem 
alright but what about the tune for the song, and who will sing it? 
I don’t understand.” Swami said, “There are people who would 
be ready to do all this, if you pay them money. You can also 
prepare placards, and have little boys carry them while singing 
the song.” Subbanna then said, “I shall do all this but You must 
indicate how the song must be sung.” By evening he managed to 
round up a few boys and Swami taught them the song. The song 
was a hit, the advertising was a tremendous success, and Kote 
Subbanna did brisk business! 
[At this point Swami sang, in His own beautiful way, the song He 
had composed over sixty years ago that advertised the qualities 
of the wonder drug Bala Bhaskara .]
The story of the Cattle fair that Swami mentioned earlier, did not 
quite end there. The scouts in the school were preparing to leave 
for duty. They very much wanted Swami to go along with them. 
If He did not go, the boys would feel very unhappy and sad.  But 
Swami had His own constraints; He could not go without the proper 
dress etc. So, Swami decided to act as if He had acute stomach 
ache. If one has fever, it can be detected with a thermometer or 
even by touching the body; but stomach ache cannot be verified 
so easily! Meanwhile, the boys who were going in a procession 
came to our house. They saw Swami groaning and moaning and 
said, “Raju, if You are not going, we too will not.” Drill master 
Raghavan added, “Why did such a thing happen to You? It is 
our supreme misfortune.” Swami replied, “Sir all of you pleas e go ahead. I shall join later if the pain subsides.” A minimum of 
five rupees was needed for expenses during the ten days of the 
camp; but Swami did not have even five paise! After everyone 
left, Swami sat up on the bed and thought of a plan. 
At that time, Swami had just completed studies in the sixth 
standard. The textbooks  used in the sixth standard were available 
with Swami. In those days, the same books  were used in the class 
year after year. Thus, the books with Swami could be passed on 
to someone just entering the sixth standard. Swami decided to 
give these used books to a Harijan boy in the town. He went to 
the boy’s house, called the boy out and told him, “Take a look at 
all these books that I used last year. They cover all the subjects 
like civics, history, and so on.” The boy examined the books. 
All that he needed were there; besides, they were in very good 
condition. These days, students do not take good care of their 
books. They scribble on them and even draw all kinds of pictures 
and cartoons. If books are spoiled, then so would be the heart. 
Books must always be maintained in a good condition – this is 
what Napolean also advocated. The Harijan boy, after examining 
the books that Swami had brought, said, “Raju, these books are 
worth twenty rupees but I would be able to give You only fifteen.” 
Swami said, “I do not want fifteen rupees; five would do.” 
In those days, currency notes were not yet in vogue; so Swami 
received the cash in small change. Two rupees were needed as 
bus fair and three rupees for food. Swami separated the coins 
amounting to three rupees, placed the change in a piece of 
old cloth and tied it into a bundle. When Swami came home, the bundle gave way and the coins scattered all over the place 
making a lot of sound. The lady of the house [Seshama Raju’s 
mother-in-law] came out and angrily said, “Where did you get 
all this money from? You must surely have stolen it!” Swami 
explained, “I did not steal this money; I got it in return for my 
old textbooks.” The lady retorted, “I do not believe a word of 
what You say.” Swami then brought the boy who had purchased 
the books, to bear witness. Falling at the feet of the lady that boy 
said, “Mother, Raju is incapable of stealing. It was I who gave 
Raju the money, all these coins that are spread over here.” The 
lady shouted, “You two are made for each other! You are just 
dancing to His tune. Both of you get out from here!” So saying, 
the lady collected all the scattered coins.
Swami had promised the scouts that He would join them at night. 
At five o’clock in the evening, Swami had food and started walking 
towards Cuddapah. Swami reached the destination in the early 
hours of the morning, at about .0 a.m. Swami was feeling very 
thirsty but there was no drinking water around. However, there 
was a tub nearby with water meant for bathing cattle. Swami was 
forced to drink some of that water. It was very quiet and there 
was no one around. When Swami looked around, He noticed that 
there was a bundle of beedis and a one- anna  coin on a stone near 
the tub. Swami intensely dislikes beedis. So He crushed them and 
buried the bits in the sand. Having done that, He took the one 
anna coin and started walking. Soon it was daybreak. 
All that Swami had was one anna . Is it possible to survive for 
nine days on just one anna ? While so wondering, Swami noticed that in the fair, a game of petty gambling was in progress. Swami 
decided to play! Every time He did, He won; soon, the one anna  
He had started with had become twelve anna . At that point Swami 
stopped, feeling that this amount was sufficient to see Him through 
for the entire stay. Since He was on a winning streak, many urged 
Swami not to quit but continue playing. Swami told them that 
there ought to be a ceiling on desires and walked away. 
Swami has played many games but this was the only time He 
had indulged in gambling. One should never gamble, but at that 
point of time Swami did so because He had no money. However, 
on reflection, Swami felt that He ought not to have gambled; so 
He went back to return all His winnings to the man who ran the 
gambling game. But that man refused to take back the money 
won from him. He then told others, “Strange boy. I don’t know 
where he comes from. But this much is certain: He is a very good 
boy!” 
After the cattle fair was over and the scout service had concluded, 
Swami returned to Kamalapuram. He carried with Him some 
fruits and flowers to be presented to His sister-in-law [Seshama 
Raju’s wife]. Swami’s long absence had infuriated the people at 
home, especially as all the work normally done by Swami had to 
be done by them. Thus, when Swami returned, He got a very cold 
reception. The fruits and flowers that He lovingly offered were 
flung away; and, Swami was severely punished. As a result, the 
hand was badly swollen. What could be done? Swami had to bear 
it all with patience and forbearance. 
There was an old lady in the adjoining house. She used to watch all this and cry silently, because she could not bear to see Sathya 
hurt. O n the following day, Seshama Raju’s son died and a 
telegram was sent to Puttaparthi. In those days, the telegram was 
received in Bukkapatnam and then hand-carried to Puttaparthi. It 
so happened that Pedda Venkama Raju had gone to Bukkapatnam 
for the weekly fair. There someone handed him the telegram sent 
by Seshama Raju. Immediately, Pedda Venkama Raju boarded a 
bus for Kamalapuram. When he came home, he saw that Swami’s 
hand was badly swollen. He asked what had happened and what 
caused the swelling. Swami said it was due to a boil. He did not say 
anything then. But meanwhile, the old lady in the neighbouring 
house told Venkama Raju all that had been happening – about the 
heavy work-load, the ill-treatment, etc. 
In the evening, Pedda Venkama Raju took Swami out. It was 
dark and so Swami carried a lamp. We went beyond the limits 
of the village. There, Pedda Venkama Raju stopped. The lamp 
was placed on the ground. Pedda Venkama Raju took Swami’s 
hands into his, cried, and then said, “Son, did I send You here 
because I could not feed You? I will do anything, I will even 
become a petty peddler of salt to support You. Why do You have 
to suffer so much here? Though Your father, I have never raised 
my hand against You and struck You! You are being put to too 
much suffering here. Come back with me at once.” Swami gently 
said, “They need a lot of help here right now. It would not be 
proper to leave and go away abruptly. You please go now. I shall 
come back later when the time is appropriate.” Swami never said 
anything against His brother or the other members of his family. 
Father went back most reluctantly but after he returned, he kept 0on writing postcards, “Come back immediately.” And then, in 
order to get Swami back real quick, the message was sent, “Your 
mother is in a serious condition.” Swami knew that this was not 
true. He stayed in his brother’s place till the examinations were 
over.
Swami is telling all this in order to impress upon students, 
how young people ought to behave and conduct themselves in 
relation to elders and teachers. You know a lot about the world. 
You are aware that even great sages have faced many problems. 
The best way to get over problems is to develop sacred feelings. 
Always, help ever, and hurt never. This is the maxim followed 
by Swami, and that is how He grew up. These days, young boys 
have so many clothes – ten pairs of trousers, ten shirts, ten bush 
shirts…! Swami did not enjoy such luxury; He had to be content 
with just one shirt and one shorts per year. One must learn to 
manage with minimum possessions and be simple. As Swami 
often says, less luggage means more comfort. You must decrease 
your acquisitions and possessions. You must also decrease your 
desires. Do you think you will lose anything by doing so? No; 
on the contrary, by strictly adhering to Truth, you can achieve 
anything you want. Therefore, you must always follow the path 
of Truth. Thus, the two maxims,
Sathyam vada, dharmam chara,
Always speak the truth, and always adhere to righteousness, form 
the fountainhead of Bharatiya  culture. Hence, follow the path 
of truth and foster love for God. Once you have intense love for God, you can achieve anything in this world. There is nothing 
greater than love in this world. You young people should never 
forget love. With love, you can accomplish anything. You can 
even acquire big and valuable objects. 
[At this point, Swami materialised a big diamond. The creation 
of the diamond was greeted with loud applause. Holding up the 
diamond, Swami asked the audience, “Can you see it?” He then 
showed the diamond to Prof. Anil Kumar (who was translating) 
and asked, “How is it?” Amazed, Prof. Anil Kumar replied, 
“Swami, it is brilliant!”] 
Such things will be in your hands. Once you have truth, everything 
comes to you. King Harishchandra was able to accomplish 
everything; how? On account of adherence to truth. He lost his 
wife. His son died. He also lost his kingdom. He then ended up 
as a caretaker in a cremation ground. However, in spite of all his 
difficulties, he never compromised on truth. His wife then told 
him, “I too shall strictly adhere to truth. Together we shall sail 
through all other problems. Otherwise, together we shall sink. 
But we shall never give up truth.” 
[Swami interrupted His discourse and, pointing to the diamond 
He had created earlier, asked Prof. Anil Kumar, “Is it glowing?” 
He replied, “Swami, it is shining brilliantly!”]
If you adhere to truth, you can do anything. Once in Kodaikanal 
– many must have seen it. [Swami asked someone in the audience 
what He had materialised in Kodaikanal. He then continued.] 
Swami had materialised the Syamanthakamani in Kodaikanal. This extraordinary jewel belonged to Sathyabhama. Swami 
showed  the jewel to all present there; later, it was sent back to 
where it came from! 
Whatever you want is in these Hands. Do not underestimate 
Swami just because He is moving about and talking to you 
all like an ordinary person. Everything is in this Hand!  You 
may not know about it, but just wait; in the days to come, the 
whole world would be in this Hand like this diamond [so saying, 
Swami pointed to the diamond in His Hand, and there was a big 
applause]. 
From today, all of you students must become wedded to truth. 
Always be just and you would then be automatically respected. 
Adore and revere your parents and also your teachers. Are you 
aware to what extent Swami gave respect to His teachers? I don’t 
think you know. The other day, Swami spoke about kshama . 
There is a lot of difference between mere patience and kshama ; 
peopl e often mistake one for the other. Kshama  is the golden 
virtue that enables you to face with equanimity all difficulties, 
troubles, obstacles, losses, suffering, calumny, etc. The world is 
not aware but it is because of kshama  that Swami generously 
forgives and forgets all the misdeeds done against Him [applause]. 
Without kshama , it would not be possible to put up with even for 
a moment, what is going on around! Yet, Swami is so forgiving 
that He tolerates every mistake including very big ones – which 
is possible only when there is kshama . It is Swami’s Kshama  that 
will bring the whole world to Him. Adhere firmly to sathya  and 
dharma,  and you would have no reason to worry about anything. 
Only then would you be able to achieve anything you want. 
Students must therefore be humble always; humility and kshama  go together.
[Swami paused and then gently indicated that perhaps He had 
been speaking for ‘too long’. In unison, all the students roared, 
‘No Swami!’. Laughing, Swami joked, ‘Already you have started 
telling lies!’ Bhagavan then continued.]
Swami wishes to mention one more thing. One day as Swami 
was returning from Bukkapatnam, He passed by an elderly lady 
who was removing lice from the hair of a child. This lady had 
the habit of chewing betel leaves and spitting frequently. It so 
happened that when Swami was going past her, she spat and the 
red spittle splattered all over Swami’s dress. It all happened quite 
accidentally of course – nothing deliberate. The lady saw what 
had happened and became quite upset. She lamented, “Raju, 
look what I have done!” She then tried to remove the stain left 
by the betel juice. Swami told her not to worry, went home and 
immediately  washed the shirt clean. Had the shirt have been 
given to a washerman, he would have charged about half an anna 
or so.  But no; Swami would never spend money like that; money 
was not only scarce but also very valuable. Swami would wash 
and then iron the dress using an improvised iron – a vessel with 
burning charcoal in it. 
That is how frugal Swami was. He never added to the financial 
burden of His parents. Swami never borrowed, never caused any 
dissatisfaction to parents, always upheld the family honour – that 
is how Swami spent His student days. You too should be like 
that, and bring credit to your parents. They struggle hard to bring 
you up and you owe them a deep debt of gratitude. Just because 
you can receive money from home, it does not mean you should spend it any way you like. It is not good to waste money; misuse 
of money is evil.
Good conduct and behaviour would not only get a good name for 
you, but also bring credit to the Sri Sathya Sai Institute of Higher 
Learning. Swami will, without fail, help you to any extent, if you 
endeavour to earn a good name. Swami will ensure all success. 
It is not enough if you merely listen; you should actively put into 
practice,  the teachings of Swami. If you do so, it will do you a 
lot of good in the future. Purity will not only bring you peace but 
a good reputation as well. 
[Swami then asked the students to sing bhajans . They sang two 
bhajans : Govinda Murahari Madhava ...  and Bhajore Bhai Sai 
Ram…. Swami greatly enjoyed both the songs. Swami then 
asked, “Who wants this diamond? Tell Me, and I shall give. Who 
wants it?” Bhagavan then threw the diamond into the audience 
and it vanished! The miracle was greeted with loud applause.]
 May 000 15. THE IDEAL STUDENT
With scholarship, one may subdue savants in court;
Brave in spirit, one may fight courageous battles;
Born a king, one might rule over an Empire;
One may lavish gifts of gold;
One might be able to count all the stars in the sky;
One might be able to enumerate all the living species;
One may master all the eight forms of knowledge;
One may even land on the moon;
But of what use are all these achievements,
If one is not able to control the mind and the senses,
And uphold eternal human values?
Students, Boys and Girls!
What the world badly needs today is not wealth, affluence, and 
prosperity but students with exemplary character. The progress of 
the nation depends on such students alone. This is the fundamental 
assumption of Bharatiya  culture. Bharatiya  culture is the epitome 
of truth that is eternal. It is impervious to the passage of time and not influenced by history. Sanathana dharma is the core of 
Bharatiya  culture. The culture of Bharat is latent in everyone as 
human values. This land Bharat is sacred in all respects. There is 
sathya  in its dust, dharma  in the wind, and daya (compassion) in 
the sand. Prema or love flows in the sacred river Ganges. To top 
it all, there is kshama or forbearance in the people of this land. 
Human Values are your very life
Bharat has been the home of such noble qualities and virtues 
from ancient times. The rishis  of yore crowned sacrifice and 
not people. They accorded dharma  a place of pride in their 
lives, were committed to justice, and embraced sathya.  It is 
such sacred practices alone that have protected Bharat through 
the ages. Unfortunately, values declined in the course of time, 
and Bharatiyas  of today have  completely forgotten all about 
our ancient culture. People no longer remember their duty and 
obligations. In the prevailing situation, the basic principles of 
our ancient culture have become a vital necessity for one and 
all. Indeed, because of its fundamental nature, this culture is 
needed not only for the people of this land but also for the whole 
of humanity. Which country can afford to deny sathya ? Which 
country can say that it has no need for dharma ? Is there a person 
who says that he or she does not want santhi ? Is there a human 
being that does not want love? Sathya, dharma, santhi, prema , 
and ahimsa  are indispensable for the whole of humanity. They 
are vital for the survival of mankind. Neglecting to uphold these 
basic values, Bharatiyas  in recent times have slowly forgotten all 
about virtues and character. Students, B oys and Girls! You are the future citizens of this 
country. The glory of the ancient culture of Bharat can be revived 
only if you become the torchbearers. Today, falsehood, injustice, 
bad conduct, and evil are rampant everywhere in the country. 
You students must firmly resolve to wipe out all such forces of 
immorality. Students of Bharat must make every effort to abide by 
basic human values and to spread joy and happiness in society. 
Human values do not come from somewhere outside. They are 
latent  in a human being and come along with the person at the 
time of birth itself. Since they are already in you, there is no need 
to go searching for them all over the place. They are in you and 
follow you wherever you go. If you cannot recognise the values 
already latent in you, how then are you going to understand your 
innate nature? If a person does not understand what sathya  and 
dharma  mean, how then is he going to live as a human being? 
Therefore, begin by realising that sathya  and dharma  are already 
in you. Bharatiya  culture stresses the tremendous importance 
of sathya  and dharma  through the injunctions: sathyam vada, 
dharmam chara. Always speak the truth  and follow the path of 
righteousness. Sathya  and dharma  are the fundamental guiding 
principles of mankind. 
Without sathya, dharma, santhi, and prema,
Education is empty.
Without sathya, dharma, santhi, and prema, 
Charity and donations have no value.
Without sathya, dharma, santhi, and prema,
Sacred activities so-called are pointless.The e ternal values sathya, dharma, santhi, and prema
Are the four pillars of Sanathana Dharma. 
What else is to be communicated 
To this august body of students?
Gateway to ruin
Students! Human values are your very life, and you should never 
abandon them. Do not dissipate yourself by struggling for worldly 
achievements and power. No matter how powerful you are, if 
you immerse yourself in the world, you are sure to get drowned. 
Ravana was most powerful. His strength was unmatched and so 
was his wealth. There was no comfort he did not enjoy. There was 
nothing he lacked. He was highly learned too, having mastered 
sixty-four forms of knowledge. He even knew the language of 
the birds and the animals. Despite all this, he became a slave to 
just one bad quality, lust; and that one weakness brought about 
his total ruin. On account of desire, he lost his kingdom, his kith 
and kin, and his own son too. In the end, he lost his life. 
There is also the example of Hiranyakasipu, a scientist par 
excellence . Whereas modern scientists have journeyed merely to 
the moon, Hiranyakasipu travelled all the way to the stars in order 
to investigate them. Once, as a part of his studies he was about to 
disturb a star. Fearing that there might be terrible consequences, 
people respectfully requested Hiranyakasipu to abandon his 
plans. Hiranyakasipu yielded and returned. This man who was 
so clever, smart, and accomplished, hated God. Why? Because 
he was a slave to anger. Anger and hatred blinded Hiranyakasipu comp letely and brought about his downfall. He lost everything, 
including his life. An angry man will never achieve true success. 
He will constantly face obstacles and be driven to sin. He will 
invite only contempt from others. This is what anger does to a 
person, and Hiranyakasipu embraced this vile quality. 
We also have the example of Duryodhana who was just as bad as 
Hiranyakasipu. He grabbed the territory that rightfully belonged 
to the Pandavas and exiled them to the forest. It was lobha  or 
greed that drove him to such mean acts.  Kama (desire) , krodha 
(anger) , and lobha (greed) , are three great enemies of man. The 
evil persons mentioned thus far had only one bad trait each in 
them; but in this Kali age, all the three evil qualities co-exist in the 
same person. If one weakness alone led to such disaster earlier, 
what can happen to a person when all three are together present is 
beyond one’s imagination. Students must therefore exercise strict 
contro l over tendencies that can lead toward kama, krodha,  and 
lobha. Perhaps it may not be possible to completely quell such 
tendencies; only the very great have been able to wholly vanquish 
them. Even so, these bad qualities must be kept in check as much 
as possible. If any undesirable thoughts come to you, pause and 
think: “Is it good or bad? Is it right or wrong?” If your heart says it 
is bad, then immediately drive the thought away. Such discipline 
alone would, in future, enable you to become an emancipator of 
this country. Unfortunately, at the present time, neither parents 
nor teachers nor leaders give proper guidance and direction. This 
is what is responsible for students going astray. 
Students are intrinsically selfless, pure, and unsullied. Basically, 
they are very good. If they have bad qualities, they are generally 00inherite d from parents. In the school, the bad qualities multiply. 
When they enter adult life, the prevailing political environment 
wipes out all traces of good qualities. Politics is the root cause 
for the present plight of the country. It alone is to be blamed for 
the decline of values and virtues, and the concomitant growth of 
evil. Therefore, avoid politics! Instead, dedicate your life for the 
progress, welfare, and the development of the nation. No matter 
what, be resolute in serving the country. Nothing excels service 
and sacrifice. 
Always be happy
Students! In olden times, centres of learning were regarded as 
highly sacred. People in such centres prayed thus:
Sarve loka hite ratah.
May everyone be prosperous. In those days, people prayed for 
the welfare of one and all. 
Sarve samuditah gunaih.
May everyone be virtuous.
Sarve jnana sampannah.
May everyone be blessed with wisdom.
Broaden your mind and treat the body as most sacred. Always 
ensure that your words are truthful and unsullied. Do not 0perm it your body to stray to the path of sin. Man’s true nature 
is a combination of a pure heart, an unsullied mind, and sacred 
speech. That is why it is often said: The proper study of mankind 
is man. He alone is worthy of being called a man whose thought, 
word, and actions are in perfect harmony. You should speak the 
truth that comes out of your heart. What you say, you must do.  
Tridalam, Trigunakaram, Trinetram Ca Triyayudham.
Trijanma Papa Samharam, Eka Bilvam Sivarpanam.
I reverentially offer the trifoliate Bilva leaf to Lord Siva, the 
Three-eyed One, who bears three weapons, and has the power 
to wipe out the sins committed in three births.
In the Gita,  there is a reference to pathram  (leaf), pushpam 
(flowe r), phalam  (fruit), and toyam  (water). Your body is the  leaf, 
your mind is the fruit, and your heart is the flower. Your tears 
of joy represent water. You should shed tears of joy and not of 
sorrow. Why at all should you ever be sad? Sorrow is the result of 
worldly attachments. Never give any room for sadness; always be 
happy, happy, and happy! What is happiness? Happiness is union 
with God. Be always attached to Divinity, and problems will not 
bother you. Due to bondage as well as due to the vagaries of the 
world, pain and pleasure will keep visiting you in alternation. 
But you should learn to ignore them; they are just passing clouds; 
they come and go. They should never be allowed to enter your 
heart. Instead, let your Heart be just a witness. In fact, your heart 
is truly the Eternal Witness. By all means do what you must; do 
your duty; but remain aloof and detached. Abide by the advice 
of your parents. Absorb all their good teachings. Revere them as 
your preceptors and God. Rishis  of old declared:0Matr Devo bhava. Pitr Devo bhava.
Acharya Devo bhava. Atithi Devo bhava.
Mother is God, father is God, your teacher is God, and your guest 
also is God. In fact, in this world, all are divine. If you are good 
boys, you become God boys! You should therefore all become 
good boys and experience the Atmic  Principle. If your heart is 
devoid of divine feelings, your entire life would become empty. 
Strive for the restoration of dharma
Spirituality has declined sharply in recent times, and consequently 
human values have been forgotten. In turn, this has led to the 
disappearance of ethics and morality. Owing to the absence of 
ethics and morality, dharma also has vanished. Since there is 
no dharma , there are no ideal persons anymore and there is no 
idealism left.
Clearly, restoration of human values should be the country’s first 
priority; then alone would the country be seized with spiritual 
fervour. The rise of spirituality will automatically promote 
morality in society. The return of morality is nothing but the 
restoration of dharma  (dharmasamsthapana ). When dharma  
prevails, everyone can easily lead an ideal life. 
Students! You should all lead ideal lives. For that, you must 
strictly adhere to the path of dharma. Enquire deeply: “What is 
the basis for dharma ?” Morality is the basis of dharma !
Dharayatiti dharmah.0Ceaseless contemplation of God is tantamount to following 
dharma.  What is the prime quality of fire? To burn is its natural 
attribute. If it does not burn, it cannot be called fire. What is the 
quality of ice? To be cold is its nature. If it is not cold, it cannot 
be called ice. In the same way, what is the distinctive quality 
of man? Truth is the innate quality of man. But unfortunately, 
there is hardly any trace of truth in the world today. That is why 
there are law and order problems all over the world. Man opens 
his mouth only to utter untruth. No one believes what the other 
person says. How can children grow up to be truthful in such an 
environment? 
Satyam nasti parodharmah.
There is no dharma  greater than sathya . If there is no sathya , 
there cannot be any dharma.  Harishchandra faced innumerable 
obstacles and enormous difficulties; but he stuck resolutely to 
Sathya  all his life. People complain: “What can I do? It is so 
difficult to be truthful these days. If I do so, I might have to 
lose my job.”  So what? Let go of the job. Why so much fuss 
about udyogam  (job)? What you really need is yogam  (spiritual 
progress) and not udyogam  (employment)! 
Man today is all the time concerned only about job and money. It 
is nothing but job, money; job, money; job and money. Man has 
become a servant of job and a slave of money. Is this the way to 
live? You must become a slave of sathya ! Today we need leaders 
who are  dharmic . Only a slave of sathya can become a dharmic  
leader. Without dharma , how can one become a dharmic  leader? 0The behaviour of people these days is a matter of great shame. 
Truly sp eaking, you are the son of dharma  but what is it that you 
are doing to uphold dharma ? There is none to speak forthrightly 
like this, and that is why the country is plummeting to ruin. 
There is no need to be afraid of being truthful. Be bold and face 
difficulties squarely. Bear the suffering and march resolutely a 
head. Students of such high calibre are a vital necessity in today’s 
world. 
Students! Life is meant to be a saga of bliss. Adhere to the path of 
sathya . Install dharma  in your mind. Then you will automatically 
experience and enjoy santhi.  You must be totally aligned to 
Bharatiya  culture. What is meant by samskruti  (culture)? That 
which refines is culture. You should be a refined and a cultured 
individual. 
Bharatiya  culture is most sacred. Because of its spiritual basis, it 
has from ancient times served as a beacon to all lands. Elsewhere 
today, the situation is deteriorating. And this country which was 
once the fountainhead of sathya  and dharma  is faring no better. 
It is a matter of shame that it has lost its old glory. You are the 
children of this ancient culture and civilisation. You must uphold 
this tradition so that you can hold your head proudly and declare 
that you are a Bharatiya , wherever you go. This is the level of 
self-respect that you must achieve. You must boldly declare: 
“This is my motherland, this is my mother tongue, and this is 
my tradition.” You must enhance the prestige and the reputation 
of this country. You must be an instrument that spreads the name 
and fame of Bharat. Spiritual power alone will enable you to do 0all this, and  dharma is the basis for spiritual power.  For dharma , 
sathya is the foundation. The close inter-relationship between 
sathya  and dharma  is the cardinal feature of Bharatiya  culture. 
Hallmark of a Sai student
Embodiments of Love! Just recently, all of you have taken a 
stiff examination with difficult questions. A few questions were 
so difficult that even some teachers did not know the answers! 
Nevertheless, all students have scored over ninety percent! Two 
students have even scored centum ! The overall performance 
has been so good that Swami feels that everyone should have 
got a hundred out of hundred! (Loud applause.) Elsewhere, it 
is difficult to find students with such concentration and focus 
on spirituality. The discipline of students is also of a high order. 
Swami does not want to praise students in their presence but facts 
need to be mentioned. The discipline found in the Sathya Sai 
educational institutions cannot be found anywhere in the world 
(applause). Elsewhere, you might find enforced discipline but in 
our institutions, discipline is spontaneous, born of the heart, and 
therefore sacred. Sai students bring credit to their alma mater , 
irrespective of where they go. The Sri Sathya Sai Institute of 
Higher Learning enjoys great reputation all over the world. 
There may be a few shortcomings here and there. You must aim at 
being perfect and eliminate these. You must earn an even higher 
reputation for your Institute. One look at you, and people must 
be immediately able to identify you as a Sai student. Your looks 
must be sacred, conduct impeccable, and behaviour exemplary. 0Your looks must ever be compassionate,
Your words must ever be soaked in truth,
And your feelings must ever be nectarine.
You must always be happy and under no circumstance appear 
downcast. Smile always; that should be your trademark. 
Swami constantly gives, without even being asked
Students, soon many of you will be leaving the portals of the 
Institute. Wherever you go, maintain your character and your 
sacred outlook. Swami blesses that this shall be so. Right from the 
beginning, Sai institutions have been giving free education. Not 
a single paisa is charged as fees. There are no fees of any kind. It 
is all free, free, and free! Actually, where you are concerned, this 
term free has no place. Who is giving free to whom? You are all 
Mine, and I am yours (loud applause)! I give My children what I 
want to give; is it proper to describe this as a free offering? You 
must appreciate this bond of unity between Swami and yourself 
– I and you are one!
If you want a new dress, do you go to your father and say, “Father, 
you are making so much money. You are able to afford so many 
luxuries. How about a new dress for me?” You do not do that. 
You simply demand the dress as a matter of right, irrespective of 
what his earnings are and what his status is. You have the same 
right with Swami. You do not have to beg of Swami or praise 
Him before making a request.0Ìsanah Sarvavidyanam.
Ìsvarah Sarvabhutanam.
God is present in all beings and the same Divine Principle is 
present in you as well as Me. You must understand this fundamental 
truth. It is enough if you grasp this basic fact; there is no need for 
formal worship, ritual, and the like. Fill your heart with sacred 
feelings; there is nothing greater than that. 
Draw people into the Sai path
You must all register steady spiritual progress and share with 
others what you have gained. Every year, each student must 
induct at least ten others into the spiritual path and train them 
properly. This is your real job, not the one that fetches a salary .  
Train as many people as you can to follow Sai’s principles and 
teachings.
It is said that Bharat is economically backward. This is no doubt 
true to some extent. But there is a greater problem faced by the 
country; in fact, it is a grave danger, and that is the decline of 
moral and spiritual values among the people. It is this decline 
that is mainly responsible for the present plight of the country. 
If public morality and ethics improve, all-round progress would 
automatically follow. Hence, do not be concerned that the country 
lacks wealth. What is true wealth? True wealth is love for God. 
That is the wealth you must acquire. Develop all the love you 
can; never stop. If you wish, go for higher studies and seek high 
positions. But always use these advantages for helping others. 0Help ever, hurt never. Help everyone and not just the members of 
your family or community. Do not differentiate by saying, “These 
are mine, those others are not”. Regard everyone as belonging to 
you. Su ch feelings alone can weld the whole of humanity into 
one tightly-knit family ( viswakutumbam ). Never forget this.
The importance of adjustment and understanding
Embodiments of Love! During the summer course, you may have 
had to face many inconveniences. Swami knows about them all. 
In fact, these inconveniences are intended to be a part of your 
training. At home you may have a room all to yourself but here 
you have had to share a small room with as many as thirty people 
sometimes. Swami knows how difficult this is. However, this is 
done deliberately in order to teach you adjustment and mutual 
understanding. These two qualities are most essential in life. If 
you have learnt how to adjust with your room mates here, you 
can adjust with people anywhere in the world, and under any 
circumstance. 
Next, food. You have come from different parts of the country 
and are accustomed to different types of food. Your tastes vary, 
but over here you all have happily accepted the type of food 
served. There was not even a trace of any discontent, displeasure, 
or disappointment. You must develop such contentment and 
joy in all aspects of life. You must be ever humble, under all 
circumstances. Humility is the hallmark of a true Sai student. 
Such behaviour would make you an ideal person and earn a great 
reputation for your Institute. This is what would make Swami 0extremely happy. Swami does not want anything else. He only 
wants you to earn a good name. This is all that Swami wants, 
and you do not have to do anything special to please Swami. 
However, Swami is ever ready to do anything for you. Get a good 
name, and become leaders in society. Then alone would Bharatiya  
culture be restored to its ancient glory. Be polite, courteous, and 
humble when speaking to elders. Never be rough or rude. Your 
humility would please the elder to whom you are speaking. At 
times, you may not be able to do what you are asked to, but 
you can be courteous while being non-committal.  As Swami 
often says: “You cannot always oblige but you can always speak 
obligingly. Cultivate this practice.” 
Always love your mother and motherland
Always be immersed in divine feelings. If you happen to see a 
wicked person, do not immediately think of that person as being 
bad. The bad actions of that person are due to the body but within 
that person is the same Atma  that is also in you. This unity, this 
Atmic  Principle is what you must focus on. Deal with this other 
person with the feeling that the Self in you is also present in him. 
This is the way to develop love for all beings. Also, do not bear 
ill will toward any country but be alike to all. Do not criticise the 
culture of other countries. Love your culture as your mother, just 
as people of other lands love their respective cultures. 
Janani Janmabhumisca Svargadapi Gariyasi.
One’s mother and motherland are greater than the very heaven. 0Always love these two. If you live like this, you will, without 
question, become an ideal person. It is not dress that makes a 
person great. Merely putting on kaashaayam  (ochre robes) does 
not make one a noble person; one should see that there is no 
kashaayam  (ill-feelings) within.  It is not externals but internals 
that are important. You must spiritualise your attitude, tendencies, 
and mind. Blessing you all to develop a sacred outlook and find 
fulfilment in life, Swami brings this discourse to a close.
Bhagavan then sang two bhajans . The first was a not commonly 
heard song beginning with the words Sathya dharmamu…. After 
this, He sang the familiar Prema Mudita….
0 May 000