1
SRI SATHYA SAI BOOKS & PUBLICATIONS TRUST
Prasanthi Nilayam - 515 134Anantapur District, Andhra Pradesh, India.Grams: BOOK TRUST    STD: 08555   ISD: 91-8555Phone: 87375   Fax: 87236PRASANTHI NILAYAMSUMMER SHOWERSIN BRINDAVAN2002
Discourses ofBhagawan Sri Sathya Sai Baba
2PUBLISHER’S NOTE
A shower in summer is cooling, refreshing andrestorative to the body. It is a welcome gesture ofNature. But a shower of wisdom from the Ultimate, isexhilarating and uplifting as it tranquillises a ruffled mindand provides elixir to a drooping heart. To the youth it isa boon as it insulates their pure and unsullied heartsagainst the corrosive influence of lust, greed, jealousyand hatred with which our present society is infested. Itis Sai’s Sankalpa (resolve) to generate generations ofyoung men and women of calibre and character toameliorate the society physically, mentally, emotionallyand spiritually so that the promised Golden Age is nomore far to reach.Summer Course in Indian Culture and Spiritualityhas maintained its freshness and fragrance coupled witha high standard of learning throughout the past threedecades, thanks to the Divine inspiration and guidancefrom Bhagawan, the Source of all and everything.The thirteen Discourses of the Divine crowned thedaily deliberations of the Summer Course of 2002 are© Sri Sathya Sai Books and Publications TrustPrasanthi Nilayam, India, A.P. 515134.All Rights ReservedThe copyright and the rights of translation in any language are reservedby the Publishers. No part, passage, text or photograph or Artwork ofthis book should be reproduced, transmitted or utilised, in original languageor by translation, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,photo copying, recording or by any information, storage and retrievalsystem except with the express and prior permission, in writing from theConvener, Sri Sathya Sai Books & Publications Trust, Prasanthi Nilayam(Andhra Pradesh) India - Pin Code 515 134, except for brief passagesquoted in book review. This book can be exported from India only by thePublishers - Sri Sathya Sai Books and  Publications Trust, PrasanthiNilayam (India).International Standard Book Number 81-7208-113-8 (set)
First Edition : August 2002
Price Rs. 27.00Published by:The Convener, Sri Sathya Sai Books & Publications TrustPrasanthi Nilayam, India – Pin Code 515134STD: 08555 ISD: 91-8555 Grams: BOOKTRUSTTelephone: 87375 Fax: 87236
Printed at :3CONTENTS
01. Education should Lead to Perfection......................nn  102. Excellence of Ancient Indian System of Education
     17
03. Harmony and Beauty in Ramayana..........................nn3704. Ramayana – an Ideal for Every Family....................
   5105. “Yad Bhavam Tad Bhavathi”.....................................nn7506. The Ideal Brothers..................................................nn8507. Rama – The Ideal Hero ...........................................nn9908. Ramayana - The Divine Masterplan.........................  11109. God has no Specific Form......................................   13110. Reduce your Desires..............................................n14711. Sense Control is the Highest Sadhana.....................   16312. Health is Wealth.....................................................n17913.Fundamental Principles of Indian Culture................
  195bound to provide a grand feast to the mind and heart ofevery reader of this volume.I prayerfully place this volume at the Lotus Feetof Beloved Bhagawan whose unfailing words ofBenediction will restore the pristine glory of Man.Jai Sai Ram
Convener4Education Should Lead toPerfectionSarve sukhino santuSarve santu niramayahSarve bhadrani pasyantuMa kaschit duhkhabhak bhaveth(May all be healthy, happy and prosperous!May all lead a life without sorrow!)
(Sanskrit Verse)
Embodiments of Love!
THE Bharathiyas pray for the welfare andwell-being of all the people of the world.This is the foremost principle of Bharathiyaculture. The culture of Bharath is eternal, everlastingand steadfast. Its glory has remained undiminishedthrough the ravages of time. The studentstoday have forgotten this sacred culture and1
52Summer Showers - 2002
are consequently facing great problems. They aredistancing themselves from peace and bliss. TheBharathiyas of yore experienced bliss and shared itwith others. Even the people of other countriesrecognized the greatness of Bharathiya culture andtried to follow the same for the benefit of their respectivecountries.Truth and Self-confidence are the Keys to Successin LifeAbraham Lincoln, who rose to become thePresident of America, was born in a poor family. Hisfather was a carpenter. His mother worked hard to earn alittle money to educate him. Their income was  barelyenough to run the family. Lincoln had to face manyhardships. He did not have even proper dress to wear.When he went to school, his schoolmates made fun ofhim as he was shabbily dressed. Unable to bear theirtaunts, one day Lincoln went to his mother and weptbitterly. She enquired as to what the matter was. Lincolnsaid, “Mother, all my schoolmates look down upon mebecause I am poor and do not have a good dress towear. They dislike my company.” Then his motherpacified him, saying, “Son, you should understand ourfinancial condition and act accordingly. Yourschoolmates talk in this manner because they arewell-to-do. We have to conduct ourselves keeping ourfinancial condition in view. We are not rich. We have to3Summer Showers - 2002
face this situation with fortitude.” She drew him close,wiped his tears and said, “You should not feel unhappyover such a trivial matter. We do not have rich friendsand relatives. But we are rich in self-respect andself-confidence. Understand that self-confidence is ourtrue wealth. One with self-confidence and self-respect isthe richest of all. Money and comforts are transient. So,strengthen your self-confidence and self-respect. Theywill certainly bestow on you all prosperity. Do  not getcarried away by what others say.” These words ofwisdom made an indelible impression on thetender heart of Lincoln. He started believing thatself-confidence was his true wealth and his verylife-breath. He stopped paying heed to the taunts ofhis schoolmates and continued his studies withdetermination. As there was no light in his house, heused to study under streetlights at night. At times, he hadno food to eat and went to sleep after drinking a cup ofwater. His mother used to work day and night tirelesslyto make both ends meet. Sometimes, she used to starveherself in order to feed her son. Lincoln lost his motherwhen he was still a child. So, his father Thomas marriedagain. His stepmother was a noble lady and looked afterLincoln with love and affection. She also taught Lincolnto develop self-confidence. Lincoln was happy underher loving care. He paid glowing tributes to her, sayingthat he never thought that a stepmother could be so kindand compassionate as she was towards him. He madeall efforts to keep her happy.64Summer Showers - 2002
Unmindful of adverse circumstances, Lincolnworked hard and pursued his studies with determina-tion. He passed his examinations with distinction.People were amazed at his success in examinations. Heattributed his success to his self-confidence. He neveruttered a lie. He considered truth as God. Later he gotemployment in a store where he worked with diligenceand honesty. Gradually he earned reputation as a man oftruth and integrity. Recognizing his nobility, his friendsrequested him to contest the election. They said, “Thereis no trace of truth or morality in politics. There is nojustice at all. The country needs a person like you whowould uphold truth and justice.” Initially, Lincoln wasreluctant to enter politics. He felt he did not have thestrength to achieve success in politics. Even someelders started exerting pressure on him to contest theelection. They promised that they would extend all thenecessary help. Lincoln stood in election and emergedvictorious. Ultimately, Lincoln became the President ofAmerica. Just imagine, a boy born in a poor family risingto the level of the President of America. His self-confidence was responsible for this.Times, country and circumstances may change.But the purity and power of the heart do not change.Before Lincoln became the President of America,people did not realize the power of self-confidenceand faith in God. It was Lincoln who taught these values5Summer Showers - 2002
to the people of America. Following the example ofLincoln, more and more people started developingself-confidence and faith in God. It is enough if acountry has one person like Lincoln.“The moon illumines the world atnight and the sun during the day.Righteousness illumines the threeworlds, and a noble son illumines his     entire clan.”      
      (Telugu Poem)
Culture Emphasizes Cultivation of VirtuesStudents!You should become the noble sons of Bharath.Strive to reverse the present trend and lead the countryon the right path. First of all, transform your heart. Onlythen can you bring about transformation in others. Ifyou want to be respected, in the first instance youshould respect others. Respect all without anydifference of caste, religion, etc. understand that thesame Atmic principle dwells in all. Ekoham Bahusyam(the One willed to become many). This is the teaching ofthe culture of Bharath. As people have forgotten thissacred culture, they are unable to earn the love of theirown parents.What isSamskruti(culture)?Samskara(refinement) is culture. That which purifies is culture. We76Summer Showers - 2002
do not partake of paddy without processing it. Weseparate the husk and boil the rice before eating it.Refinement is similar. We should refine ourselves bygiving up wicked qualities and filling our hearts withpurity. Only then can we get strength and happiness.A healthy body will have a healthy mind. Some peoplehave a misconception that the body and the mind aretwo separate entities. The body cannot exist withoutthe mind. Manah Eva Manushyanam KaranamBandhamokshayo (mind is responsible for bothbondage and liberation of man). So, you should fill yourmind with sacred thoughts. Both the body and the mindare closely interrelated. The body is the vesture of themind and the mind is the basis for the body. So, thebody and the mind should be put to right use.Today students are pursuing various types ofstudies and are acquiring high qualifications. But mereacademic qualification will not give you true happiness.Food sustains the body but cannot give bliss. Moneyprovides comforts but cannot ensure bliss. Both thebody and the mind are important. How should wemaintain our body? How can we purify the mind?Students should clearly understand this. When you havea healthy body and a pure mind, you become a perfecthuman being. Without this, you are only half man, not afull human. The purpose of education is to mould maninto a perfect human being. Modern education lacks thiscapability. Many feel that they can be happy in life if they7Summer Showers - 2002
have money. But money cannot give you true happiness.It cannot ensure sound health. You have to cultivatevirtues if you want real happiness. It is not by Dhanamu(money) but only by Gunamu (virtue) that one canremain happy and healthy. Modern students areinterested only in Kalimi (wealth), Balimi (power) andChelimi (friendship) but not in Gunamu (virtue). Whatis the use of possessing wealth and power withoutvirtue? One should depend on character and not whollyon wealth, power or friendship. Ancient Bharathiyasmade this country ideal as they relied on the cultivationof virtues. Bharath is a sacred land. One who is devoidof virtues cannot be called a true Bharathiya. Give upbad thoughts. Never utter profane words and neverindulge in evil deeds. This is the teaching of the cultureof Bharath. It lays great emphasis on unity.“Let us move together, let us growtogether, let us grow in intelligencetogether, let us live in harmony witheach other without giving room forconflicts.”
                        (Telugu Poem)
We say, all are our brothers and sisters, but howmany are translating this ideal into action? Our actionsshould be in harmony with our words. Jesus taught,Brotherhood of man and Fatherhood of God. Thesame truth is professed by the culture of Bharath. Sowthe seeds of good thoughts, water them with good88Summer Showers - 2002
actions and remove the weeds of wicked qualities. Onlythen will you reap the crop of bliss.Students!Today is the first day of the Summer Course.Purify your body and mind. Put into practice theteachings of our ancients. Follow the idealsdemonstrated by great men like Lincoln. His mothertaught him that self-confidence was the greatest wealthof man. Develop self-confidence. Uphold self-respect.Do not do anything artificially. Whatever you do, do it‘heartfully’ (wholeheartedly). Art is external, heart isinternal. Follow the dictates of your heart. People greeteach other ‘good morning’, ‘good evening’, etc., butmost of them do it in a mechanical and artificial manner.Truly speaking, there is no morning or evening. We call itmorning when the sun rises in the east, and eveningwhen the sun sets in the west. But actually speaking,there is no sunrise or sunset. It is because of the rotationof the earth that we see the sun during the day and themoon during the night.Moon is the presiding deity of the mind. BeforeRama lifted the bow of Shiva in the court of KingJanaka, Sita’s mind was not at peace. When Sita went toAyodhya after her marriage with Rama, one day sheconfided to Him how the moon of her mind wasclouded before Rama lifted the Siva bow. Rama thentold Sita that at the time of His birth, thick clouds9Summer Showers - 2002
covered the moon; so, it could not have His Darshan atthe time of His birth. Rama then promised to the moonthat He would add Chandra (moon) to His name tomake it happy. Rama further told that in His nextincarnation in Dwapara Yuga, the moon would be thefirst to have the Darshan of the Lord and to paysalutations to Him. True to the words spoken by LordRamachandra, the moon had the good fortune of havingthe first Darshan of Sri Krishna when His fatherVasudeva was carrying Him across the river Yamuna.Thus, the moon was the first to do Namaskar to theLord in His incarnation as Krishna.Give up Body Attachment and Experience the AtmaEmbodiments of Love!You may not have any material wealth; it is enoughif you have self-confidence and self-respect. Respecteverybody. Offer your Namaskar (salutations) toelders wholeheartedly. What is the inner meaning ofNamaskar? When you do Namaskar, you join yourpalms and bring them close to your heart. The fivefingers of each hand symbolize the five Karmendriyas(senses of action) and five Jnanendriyas (senses ofperception). These ten senses should follow the dictatesof your heart (conscience). That is true Namaskar.Some people do Namaskar in a mechanical way. Theydo not bring their two palms together. They sayNamaskar and lift their hands, as if they are going to hit910Summer Showers - 2002
you. When you do Namaskar, bring the ten fingerstogether and keep the two thumbs close to your heart.(Here Bhagawan demonstrated on the stage howNamaskar should be done by keeping His joinedthumbs on His chest.) It means that you are doing itwholeheartedly. Thumb is the most important finger,without which the hand becomes useless.This is the way our ancient sages and seers didNamaskar. They led a sacred life and performedpenance without any sense of fear in dense forestsamidst wild animals and wicked demons. What was thesource of their courage and strength? They had noDehabhimana (body attachment). They had onlyAtmabhimana (attachment to the Self). What was theweapon they carried with them? They carried theweapon of self-confidence with them. That is why theycould even tame wild animals like lions and tigers andplay with them. They had absolutely no sense of fear. Itis from self-confidence that one gets courage. Todayman is fear-stricken because he lacks self- confidence.Life has no meaning if one lacks self-confidence.Modern youth do not have faith in the Atma at all. Theyask, “Where is the Atma?” The Atma is everywhere.Atmavat Sarvabhutani (see the same Atma in allbeings). Sarvata Panipadam Tat SarvathokshiSiromukham, Sarvata Sruthimalloke SarvamavruthyaThishthati (with hands, feet, eyes, heads, mouth and11Summer Showers - 2002
ears pervading everything, God permeates theentire universe). Take, for instance, air. It is presenteverywhere but you can neither see it with your eyes norcatch it in your hands. You cannot deny its existencebecause you cannot live without it. The same can besaid of the Atma too. The Atma is the life principle of allbeings. That is why in temples a ritual called PranaPratishtha (investing life principle) is performed to theidols. You cannot live without the Atma. Who isresponsible for your breathing process? It is the Atma.The five elements are the very forms of the Divine.This was the teaching of Buddha. In the beginning, hevisited many noble souls and listened to their teachings.He studied many sacred texts but he was not satisfied.Ultimately, he came to the conclusion that the fiveelements are the very forms of God. In order tounderstand divinity, you have to understand the natureof the five elements. You may worship God in the formof idols and derive some satisfaction out of it. There isnothing wrong in idol worship. But understand that Godis not confined to idols. He dwells in your heart.Understand the nature of your senses and put them tosacred use. Only then can you attain Nirvana. Buddhaunderstood this truth and attained Nirvana. His cousinAnanda was by his side during his final moments.Buddha noticed Ananda shedding tears and said, “Whydo you have this body attachment? Body is negative,1012Summer Showers - 2002
whereas I am positive. This negative has to be given upsome day or the other.” Today people are deluded byDehabhimana because they lack Atmabhimana. Nodoubt, you have to take proper care of your body. Youhave to discharge your duties but do not be undulyattached to the body. “The body is made up of fiveelements and is bound to perish sooner or later, but theindweller has neither birth nor death. He has noattachment whatsoever. Truly speaking, the indwelleris verily God Himself who is in the form of the Atma.”
      (Telugu Poem)
Sense Control Imparts LavanyaThe body needs to be maintained well in order tocarry on our life journey. But do not waste your time byconstantly thinking of it and getting attached to it.Without the Atma, the body cannot exist. So, the Atmais the fundamental basis of life. It is a grave mistaketo repose faith in the body forgetting the Atma. Youshould have faith in the Self and make sacred use ofyour senses. Only then can you cultivate Lavanya.According to our ancients, Lavanya connotes beauty ofcharacter. Today we find many women bearing the nameLavanya. As one’s character develops, the splendourof one’s personality increases. Such a person willremain youthful even in advanced age. He will be everblissful and beautiful. He will be the very embodiment ofSathyam, Sivam and Sundaram. This body (Swamipoints to his body) is approaching its 77th year. How is13Summer Showers - 2002
it that this body remains youthful and attractive? It is fullof Lavanya due to the purity of my character and sensecontrol. Whoever has sense control will have Lavanya.You do not find the pictures of Rama or Krishna lookingold. They were ever young and full of Lavanya. Todayyoungsters lack sense control and consequently areageing very fast. A youth of 16 or 17 today looks like anold man of 60 or 70! Lack of sense control is the causeof their ageing fast. You will have all the physicalstrength and vigour when you have sense control. Putthe senses to proper use and exercise control over them.You will then be endowed with Lavanya. Be cheerfuland smiling. Do not laugh in an artificial manner. Manhas no reason to be sad because it is contrary to humannature. Where is the need for him to cry when he has theever blissful spirit within? Never cry. Always be happy.You should lead an exemplary life and set an ideal tosociety by helping the poor, the sick and the needy.Follow Me and Attain BlissStudents!This is the first day of the Summer Course.Understand the purpose behind conducting the SummerCourse. You would have wasted a lot of time duringthese two months of vacation. If you waste your time infutile pursuits, you cannot have sense control. And ifyour senses are not brought under control, your healthas well as your studies will suffer. Make sacred use ofyour time in this Course. This Summer Course is meant1114Summer Showers - 2002
to cultivate virtues in you so that you may attain Pushti(strength) and Santhushti (happiness) and experienceSathyananda (true bliss).Nithyanandam, Parama Sukhadam, KevalamJnanamurtim, Dwandwateetam,Gagana Sadrisham, Tattwamasyadi Lakshyam,Ekam, Nityam, Vimalam, Achalam, SarvadheeSakshibhutam, Bhavateetam, Trigunarahitam(you are the embodiment of truth and bliss, you arewisdom absolute, the one without a second, beyond thepair of opposites, expansive and pervasive like the sky,the goal indicated by the Mahavakya Tattwamasi, theeternal, pure, unchanging, the witness of all functions ofthe intellect, beyond all mental conditions and the threeGunas of Sattwa, Rajas and Thamas). This is your truenature. So, you should always be in a state of bliss. It ispossible only when you give up body attachment. Onewith body consciousness can never attain bliss.However, the body has to be maintained properly. Youshould not eat as you please. The stomach is like apetrol tank; it should not be overloaded. You shouldhave Mithaharam and Hithaharam (moderate andwholesome food). Take, for instance, Swami’sexample. Many people dine with Me everyday. They areaware of this. For the past one month, I have stoppedeating even Ragi Sankati which was My regular diet. Iam taking only one Chapati and nothing else. You all can15Summer Showers - 2002
see how blissful I am. Some people may think thatSwami is looking weak. It is just a reflection of theirfeelings. There is no weakness in Me whatsoever. I amvery strong. I can walk any distance. If necessary, I caneven run. What is the secret of this? My Lavanya isresponsible for this. Many people wonder as to howSwami appears so young and blissful even at this age.How can you expect Me to be otherwise? I have noworry at all. I am always full of bliss. Follow Me. I keepsaying, My life is My message. Follow in My footstepsand you will also remain energetic and blissful forever.Lead a happy, healthy and ideal life and serve the nation.Understand that you are born to serve and not to ruleover others. Develop the spirit of service and sanctifyyour lives.Bhagawan concluded His Discourse with theBhajan, Hari Bhajan Bina Sukha Santhi Nahin ...(After showering bliss on the participants by the melodyof the Bhajan, Bhagawan further advised theparticipating students.)Students - Boys and Girls!Everyday after the classes are over in the morning,do not waste your time in roaming about. Ruminate onthe good things taught to you by the learned speakers.Imprint their teachings on your heart. This is what youare supposed to do in the following fortnight. Whenthese teachings are firmly imprinted on your heart, they1216Summer Showers - 2002
will become a part of your being. When Uddhavabrought the message of Krishna to the Gopikas, theytold Uddhava that they wanted Krishna and not hismessage. They told him that the form of Krishna wasimprinted on their hearts like a picture imprinted on asheet of paper. It was not possible to separate Krishnafrom their heart. Like the Gopikas, develop the feeling ofoneness with God and say with firm conviction “Godand I are one”. Do not waste your time in idle gossip.Observe Mounam (silence). Talk less, work more andstudy more.Summer Course, Brindavan, 16-05-2002(Morning)
❃❃❃Excellence of Ancient IndianSystem of Education
Punar Vittham Punar Mithram Punar BharyaPunar MahiEthath Sarvam Punar Labhyam Na SareeramPunah Punah(If money is lost, one need not be worried aboutit, for one can earn it again.If a friend is lost, one can have another.If wife is lost, one can marry again.If one loses one’s piece of land, one can purchaseanother.All these can be regained. But if the body is lost,one cannot get it back.)
(Sanskrit Verse)21318Summer Showers - 2002
ONE may lose one’s wealth but it can still beearned back; one may lose friends butbetter ones can be befriended later; one maylose one’s wife but remarriage is still possible; one maylose land and property; but these also can be regained.All these can be recovered somehow or the other but thebody once lost, the same body can never be regained.One can have the experience of bliss so long as thebody exists. So, one should make every effort toexperience bliss while the body lasts. Our ancients maderelentless efforts to protect and safeguard their bodiesso as to experience bliss. But they were not able to retaintheir bodies permanently. Since the body is notpermanent, one should spare no effort to attain the stateof bliss in one’s lifetime.Ideals of Education in Ancient IndiaSince time immemorial, this sacred land of Bharathhas been the birthplace of all branches of knowledgeand education. Numerology, grammar, music and finearts, etc., had their origin in India. In fact, that which isnot found in India cannot be found anywhere else. It istherefore said, “Yanna Bharathe, thanna Bharatha”.This sacred land is the birthplace of many men andwomen of pristine virtues and high ideals.“This land of Bharath has given birth to many noblewomen like Savitri who brought her dead husbandback to life; Chandramati who extinguished a wild19Summer Showers - 2002
fire with the power of truth; Sita who proved herchastity by coming out of blazing fire unscathed andDamayanti who reduced an evil-minded hunter toashes with the power of her chastity. This land ofpiety and nobility attained plenty and prosperity andbecame the teacher of all the nations of the worldbecause of such women of chastity.”
    (Telugu Poem)
However, some foolish people are deluded to thinkthat they would find in foreign countries what is notavailable in India. What is it that you cannot obtain inthis sacred land? It is the treasure trove of all knowledgeand wealth. Unfortunately, people lack determination. Ifone is determined and makes sincere efforts, there isnothing that one cannot achieve or obtain in Bharath.The Indians in the past made strenuous efforts toconduct experiments and research in the field ofeducation and devised an original system of education.In those days, each university specialized in one area oflearning or the other. Kasi University specialized in thearea of Vyakarana Sastra (grammar). Alankara Sastra(rhetoric) was the speciality of the University ofKashmir. Ujjaini University imparted knowledge in thespecialized area of Nyaya Sastra (law). The science oflaw was taught and preserved in its pristine and pureform there. Today’s laws are distorted into illegalities.On the other hand, at Ujjaini, no scope was given foranything that was unlawful to enter its portals. Bharath1420Summer Showers - 2002
was famous for propagating and teaching such loftyideals and for its dedicated teachers and students. Thescience of Ayurveda (health sciences and medicine) wasvery well developed in the kingdom of Bharatha. In thisway, each university specialized and taught a particularsubject and popularized it. There were several suchreputed universities in ancient Bharath.Ujjaini, Kasi, Takshashila (Taxila) and Kashmir –these were all great centres of learning. Navadvipa was areputed centre for learning logic and law. The tenetsof law that could not adequately be interpretedelsewhere were easily explained and expounded here.Unfortunately, modern students are unaware of the greatwealth and power of the fund of knowledge of India andare going all over the world in search of wealth andknowledge. This is a highly unworthy and mistakenoutlook. Such ignorance should be dispelled. Weshould have the light of wisdom in us. Only then can werealise the Divine and experience bliss.Embodiments of Love!What you need to know today is that India is therepository of all knowledge and power. Spiritualscience, physical sciences and fine arts like music,literature and poetry had their birth in India. They wereall discovered by ancient Indians. Why are the studentsneglecting such a sacred land? This is the mark ofextreme ignorance. Students are unable to recognize this21Summer Showers - 2002
truth and are running after worldly pleasures. These cannever give happiness. Even if some pleasures isobtained, it will not last long.Ideal Student-teacher RelationshipThe universities of yore did not have hugebuildings and infrastructure. The residence of theteacher itself was the university. The tree under whichthey sat was the classroom. The soft words of theteacher wafted over like cool breeze and were imprintedon the minds of the students. The students were few innumber. However, the capacity of the teacher to impartknowledge was immense. The teacher taught in suchlucid and simple terms that students could easilyunderstand the higher sciences and grasp advancedsubjects. Such educational institutions flourished inancient Bharath. When the Britishers came to India, theywere much impressed by our system of education andattempted to investigate the cause for the high standardsof ancient Indian universities. They however failed intheir endeavour.The ancient system of education in India wasbased on Sabdapramana, i.e., the word of mouth. Thepractice of writing everything was not the main mode ofteaching. The students listened to the teachings impartedby the preceptor with utmost interest which gotimprinted on their heart straightaway. This was themain reason of high standards of education in ancient1522Summer Showers - 2002
India. The entire process of communication wasoral. There was no rigid timetable, or even curriculaand syllabi. The teachers taught the student any scienceor subject that he was keen to learn. There was nointerference from the government. The teaching-learningprocess was entirely heart-to-heart. The students kepttheir hearts open and the teachers filled them withknowledge. It was this heart-to-heart learning thatenabled India to propagate wisdom and knowledgethroughout the world.  Lessons were taught at any time;it never mattered whether it was day or night. The heartsof the teachers were highly pure and sacred. They didnot charge any fee from the students for impartingknowledge to them. It was the responsibility of societyto look after the needs of the teachers. Depending ontheir capacity and capability, the citizens contributedtowards the livelihood of the teachers and providedthem with all comforts. But never was any fee collectedfrom the students. Thus, the education system of Indiawas deeply sacred, highly valuable and profoundlyblissful. But, unfortunately, the Indians are neglectingtheir ancient system of education and hence are losingan invaluable heritage of knowledge and bliss.What were the duties of the students in those days?They would rise early in the morning, perform theirablutions and prayers before commencing their studies.The students went from house to house and collectedfood for themselves and the teachers. The teacher23Summer Showers - 2002
would then take whatever was required for him andthe rest would be partaken of by the students assanctified food. The teachers and students were totallyselfless and  pure-hearted. It was in such a sacredatmosphere that the knowledge of scriptures, epics andsacred texts was taught and learnt in ancient India.The teachers were highly dedicated and selfless.Every nectarous thought and word that originated intheir heart was transferred to the students in a lovingway. As education today has been made into acommercial activity, the mind of man has becomeperverted. In those days, food or education was neversold. Education was made available free of cost.Goddess Saraswathi was not bound by the shackles ofcommerce and trade. She was worshipped by gratefulteachers and students for her grace as the bestower ofthe sacred knowledge to the teachers and learners.“SaraswathiNamastubhyam VaradeKamarupini,Vidyarambham Karishyami Siddhir Bhavatu MeySada.Padma-patravisalakshiPadma-kesara Varnini,Nityam Padmalaya Devi, Sa Maam PatuSaraswathi.”(I begin my education with salutations to myriad-formedSaraswathi, the bestower of boons. May she alwaysgrant me success! That goddess with eyes like lotus1624Summer Showers - 2002
petals, coloured   like the pollens of the lotus, everresiding in the lotus, may she protect me!Saraswathi, Bhagawati, Bharathi, Poornendu-bimbanana were her various names. Daily prayer wasoffered to the goddess Saraswathi before startingteaching and learning. But the name of Saraswathi isconspicuous by its absence in the modern systemof education. Goddess Lakshmi  was worshipped byher many names, viz., Indira, Lokamatha, Rama-mangaladevata, Bhargavi, Lokajanani, KsheeraSagara Kanyaka, etc. Prayers invoking the goddessesand extolling them by their various attributes lent purityand sweetness to the teachings of ancient Bharathiyas.The  Aim  of  Education  is  God-realisationIt is in such a sacred land that God has repeatedlytaken human form. God is not some incomprehensiblefigure or entity. He can be most easily experienced.Daivam Manusha Rupena (God takes the form ofman) God incarnates in human form. Today, however,man is not ready to accept this reality of God’sincarnation in human form. Our ancients followed thepaths of Karma (action), Upasana (worship) and Jnana(knowledge) to realise God. They offered prayers toGod and worshipped Him in many ways.“Yasya JnanadayasindhoAgadhasya Anagha Guna25Summer Showers - 2002
Sevyatham Akshayo DheeraSa Sriye Cha Amrutaya Cha.”(That Lord who is the ocean of knowledge andcompassion, fathomless, changeless and replete with allpure attributes is worshipped by the earnest seekers ofprosperity and immortality.)The sacred knowledge was offered free ofcost. There was no discrimination on the basis ofcaste, community, race or religion. All were consideredequal. Music, literature, dance and fine arts were allencouraged and fostered. Carpentry, pottery andvarious branches of smithy were also encouraged andtaught with dedication. The aim was to make thestudents self-reliant through proper education. Theteacher was the repository of all knowledge. Everystudent received knowledge directly from the teacher.Without the teacher, there could be no learning. Theteachers in those days were noble and virtuous.The science of medicine was highly developed inancient India. Charaka was a highly reputed and well-known name in the field of medical science. Today theheart-lung machine and several other complicated andsophisticated equipments are required to treat heartdisease. No such gadgets were required in those days.Charaka treated the patients while chanting Mantras inpraise of God to invoke His grace. The heart disease1726Summer Showers - 2002
would vanish without a trace. For that matter, everydisease can be cured by invoking God’s grace. Onecan achieve physical, mental and spiritual strength bychanting the Divine Name.Efficacy  of  Namasmarana  for  Man’s  LiberationEmbodiments of Love!It is impossible to achieve anything without thegrace of God. Sadly today, man is steeped in injusticeand unrighteousness. All his thoughts are selfish andevil. His vision lacks the warmth of love. Idealism hasreached rock bottom. First of all, man needs to growthe crop of love in the field of his heart. This wasthe teaching of Charaka. God is not in some distant landbut resides in your very heart. He is with you, withinyou, above and below you and also around    you. Withsuch faith, man should chant the Divine Name.Discarding such an easy path, man is subjecting himselfto needless agony and suffering. On the other hand,people in ancient days would instantly get rid of anysuffering – all by chanting the sacred Name of  the Lord.Harer Nama Harer Nama Harer Namaiva Kevalam,Kalau Nastyeva Nastyeva Nastyeva Gathiranyatha(chanting of the Divine Name is the only path toliberation in this Age of Kali).In Kali Age, Namasmarana (chanting the Lord’sName) is the panacea for all our suffering. There is no27Summer Showers - 2002
greater power than the Divine Name. Chanting theLord’s Name bestows infinite bliss on man. No one canestimate the power of the Lord’s Name. In Krita yuga,meditation was the chief means of man’s liberation. InTreta yuga, it was Yagna and in Dwapara yuga,worship. But in Kali yuga, Namasmarana is the mostpotent spiritual practice to earn God’s grace. That iswhy the practice of Namasmarana has been spreadingto all parts of the world.Students!If you make a proper enquiry, you will realize thatall powers are present in you. The tremendous power ofmagnetism that is latent in man cannot be foundanywhere else. All the powers of the world are immanentin man. Though man is such a powerful entity, heconsiders himself to be a weakling and hence suffers.You are all the embodiments of Divinity. God is notseparate from you. He resides in your heart. You canhave a blissful glimpse of God if you turn your visioninward. You are unable to see Him because you lackfaith.Poems and Plays Written  by  Swami  in  hisChildhoodDuring my childhood, I used to compose severalsongs with deep meaning and gave joy to the villagers byhaving them sung. It was the time when Hitler invadedRussia in the Second World War. Some people1828Summer Showers - 2002
organised a meeting and approached me with a requestto compose some songs which could inspire ourfreedom fighters. A doll was placed in a cradle on thestage. I then composed a song extempore in the form ofa lullaby to the doll.“Do not cry, my child, do not cry.If you cry, you will not be called a valiant son ofBharath.Go to sleep, my child, go to sleep.Did you get scared because the terrible Hitler hasinvaded the invincible Russia?Go to sleep, my child, go to sleep.Do not cry, my child, do not cry.For the Red Army is marching under Stalin.They will put an end to Hitler.All the countrymen shall unite and fight to winfreedom;Go to sleep, my child, go to sleep.”  
       (Telugu Song)
The villagers listened to the song with appreciationand amazement. Many of them wondered as to how thisyoung boy Sathyanarayana Raju had come to knowabout Hitler and Stalin. These names were unknown tothe people in this region. There is nothing that Sai doesnot know. Yet I pretend as if I    am not aware. I ask you,“When did you come?” You may think that Sai Baba isnot even aware when you have arrived! I  do know. But I29Summer Showers - 2002
still ask the question to give you happiness. My onlyintention in asking  such questions is to make you happythat Swami spoke to you. I do not think that youentertain any doubt about my knowledge of your arrival.One day some school students came to me. Theyall used to address me as Sathya. They said, “Sathya!We are planning to enact a play in the school. We wantyou to write the story and some songs for it.” I agreedand prepared the script for the drama. In thisconnection, I wrote a song, taught it to two of thestudents and asked them to sing in public.What are these times that have descended on us!Oh folks! What are these times that have descendedon us!The face powder has formed a cheap substitute forthe turmeric powder;Oh folks! What are these times that have descendedon us!Gold necklaces have given way to cheap trinketsand chains;Oh folks! What are these times that have descendedon us!
                     (Telugu Poem)
In this way, I used to teach the people lessons thatneeded to be taught. In those days, sporting awristwatch was considered a fashion.People hang silver medallions from leather strap ontheir left wrists – and call it fashion!1930Summer Showers - 2002
Grotesque appearances are made that cannot beseen by the eyes – and they call it fashion!Long moustaches are cut to tiny patches under thenose – and they call it fashion!           
    (Telugu Song)
I used to compose such songs that made fun ofmodern fads and tried to draw the attention of thepublic, particularly the youth, towards ancient customsand traditions.Karanam Subbamma was a noble and pious lady.She loved me very much. I was then just seven years ofage. She often came to me, calling “Sathya, Sathya”. Idid not respond immediately. Whenever she called me,she kept asking, “Child! Why do you not come to myhouse?” I would respond, “I am not a beggar to keepvisiting others’ houses. I shall come only if invited andnot otherwise.” One day she prayed, “Son! My husbandis taking to immoral ways and ruining himself. Can youhelp me in correcting him?” I replied, “If you do notthink otherwise, I will teach him a lesson. I will composea few songs with suitable wordings and make the boyssing them in his presence.” Subbamma was worried thather husband would get angry with me. I comforted her,saying, “A person’s anger is his own enemy. It cannotharm me.” I then trained some boys to sing a song withthe objective of correcting the evil-doer. This was atask that could not be achieved by mild and soft words.Only hard-hitting words could correct him and make31Summer Showers - 2002
him feel guilty. The children were scared. I gave themcourage by saying that I would be with them. TheKaranam’s name was Narayana Rao. I wrote a songspecially to correct him, passages of which ran asfollows:“You will become an outcaste in your owncommunity;Your relatives will not entertain you and will driveyou out;Your friends will beat you with their slippers if theysee you!”
    (Telugu Song)
I used such harsh words to make him give up hismisdirected ways. I was able to hit the mark! TheKaranam learnt a good lesson and gave up his vices.Subbamma was thrilled. Though I was a small boy, sheran and fell at my feet and thanked me profusely. Shesaid, “Raju! You are small only in appearance but thereis an enormous divine power hidden in you. There isnone else who could be so daringly forceful and set rightso powerful a person as the Karanam!” She then told thefather of this body, “Venkappa! You are mistaken if youconsider your son an ordinary boy. He is very powerful.He will set ideals for the whole world in future. Do notget deluded with the feeling that he is your son. Sendhim to my house.” He declined her request and said, “Itis not customary in our family to give our children foradoption. Whatever be our limited capacity, we shall2032Summer Showers - 2002
look after him ourselves. I cannot send him to anotherhouse.”In this way, I lived a life of freedom and courage. Idid not allow anybody to have control over me. I haveno defects or shortcomings. So, why should I fear? I ledmy life cheerfully and fearlessly.I wrote some dramas also. I had several small playsstaged by small children. One such drama was entitled:“Cheppinattu Chestara” (Do they act as they speak?)Develop Divine Feelings from your ChildhoodThere lived one Panchagam (almanac) Ramappa.Kameswari was his mother. She used to conductSatsang in the evening for a few ladies in which shepreached philosophy after reading   from sacred books.Whenever she discoursed, I sat there. She read highlyphilosophical Vedantic texts and explained their meaningsomehow, though she herself found it difficult tounderstand these. She had even the handicap of notknowing the words properly. So, she tried to teach inher own way. She explained to the group of ladiesthat God is omnipotent, omniscient and protector ofDharma. Taking a suitable opportunity, I used to tell herthe correct meaning of these verses so as to help her toexplain this to other ladies.Women were hardly educated in those days. Theyused to gather in the evening around such literate ladiesand spent their time listening to sacred hymns and33Summer Showers - 2002
stories about God. I was organizing such groups rightfrom those days. I used to tell them the efficacy ofSatsang. I assembled little children and organized aPandhari bhajan group. With anklets that tinkled andcymbals that clanged, they enthusiastically sang anddanced along the streets early in the morning, waking upslumbering villagers. Earlier, villagers did not get up till7.00 a.m. But when I started organizing Pandharibhajans with the help of children, they started rising at5.00 a.m., and also started offering prayers to God aftertheir morning ablutions and bath.“Taking cymbals in hand,Tying them up firmly to hand,Clanging them together to beat outdesire and anger from within,Let us take the path to Shirdi,Let us sing ‘Jai Jai Ranga’Let us sing  ‘Jai Jai Sai’and hurry towards the Lord.”
    (Telugu Song)
Thus began the idea of Nagar Sankirtan. I startedNagar Sankirtan when I was seven years old!Subbamma would quietly join the group as well,enthusiastically playing the cymbals.Right from childhood, I have always been engagedin imparting knowledge and propounding sacredteachings to the people. The Pandhari bhajan group2134Summer Showers - 2002
was so popular that people from neighbouringvillages also came to participate in it. All those who tookpart in it experienced ecstasy and bliss. Subbammafelt very happy. For two rupees, a sackful of puffed ricecould be bought. She arranged to have it distributed asprasadam to all. It is essential to develop divine feelingsright from your childhood.I was sent to Kamalapuram for studies.Kamalapuram lies between Cuddapah and Tadipatritowns. There in Kamalapuram a businessman namedKote Subbanna somehow found out that I had thecapability to write poetry.  He came running to me andsaid, “Raju! I hear that you compose excellent poems.”I told him, “It is not that I compose poems. Whatever Iutter is itself poetry!” He said, “I shall get a pair of shirtsand trousers stitched for you if you write some poemsfor me.” I told him at once that he must not approach mewith such cheap bartering offers. “I am not waiting foryou to give alms to me. There is no need to talk to you ifyou do this!” In this way, I admonished him.He then explained that he had stocked a brand newmedicine in his shop. He wrote down and gave me adetailed list of its benefits. It was called “BalaBhaskara”. He requested that I compose a song on the“Bala Bhaskara” and teach it to a group of children,and make them go round the streets singing the song. Itold him to come back in an hour! The classes weregoing on. I did not want to shirk my responsibilities. I35Summer Showers - 2002
therefore told Kote Subbanna to come an hour later,after the classes and collect the poem. I then set the tuneand composed the song. It ran as follows:“There it is! There it is! Oh, children! come,come!There is the medicine Bala Bhaskara;Be it an upset stomach or a swollen leg;Be it a joint pain or flatulence;Be it any ailment, known or unknown;Take this Bala Bhaskara for an instant cure!If you wish to know where it is available:There is the shop of Kote Subbanna;It is in that shop that you can pick it up.Come here boys! come here!It is an excellent tonicPrepared by the famous physicianGopalacharya himself,Come here boys! come here!”    
(Telugu Song)
Kote Subbanna’s joy knew no bounds when heheard the song. He brought a big basket of laddoos andplaced it before me with gratitude. I directed that thesebe distributed to everyone present there. I never tooksweets right from my childhood. Why do I need to havesweets when I have all the sweetness within me? Mymind is sweet, my love is sweet. Why then do I needsweets? In this way, my primary task was to help2236Summer Showers - 2002
everybody, make them happy and remove theirsuffering.Embodiments of Love!Our Vice Chancellor has prayed that I should speakabout the sacred source of joy, the Ramayana. Trulyspeaking, I am not satisfied with the present educationalscenario. Today people can study as much as they wish.But what is the use of this education? They are engagedin Dhanarjana (earning money) and not Gunarjana(imbibing virtues). Money is no doubt essential but it isnot the be all and end all of life. Virtues are of primeimportance. All that you learn is forgotten at some pointof time or the other. What is needed today is spiritualeducation. It is said: “Adhyatma Vidya Vidyanam”(spiritual knowledge is real knowledge). It is thisknowledge that needs to be imbibed in the heart. Thissacred knowledge is available in the Ramayana. TheRamayana is an ancient text. It has survived thevicissitudes of time, ups and downs of history andseveral other turbulences, and still stands high as a greatideal for humanity. There are several subtle secrets in theRamayana that are not understood by many. I shall takethese tiny saplings, develop them into huge trees andmake you sit and relax under their cool shade. This shallbe my endeavour from tomorrow onwards.Summer Course, Brindavan, 16-05-2002(Evening)
Harmony and Beauty in Ramayana
Daivadhinam jagat SarvamSathyadhinam tu DaivatamTat Sathyam UttamadhinamUttamo ParadevataThe entire creation is under the control of God.That God is under the control of Truth.That truth is under the control of noble ones.The noble people are greater than gods.
(Sanskrit Verse)
Embodiments of Love!
THE society today is in utter need ofRamayana. We do not have children who re-spect their parents, nor do we have parentswho have great affection for their children. We do nothave disciples today who revere their preceptors; nordo we have preceptors who have great love for their32338Summer Showers - 2002
disciples. We do not have homes where parents shine asrole models for their children. We do not have homeswhere brothers live with mutual love and affection; nordo we have homes where wives and husbands shine asideals to others by virtue of their mutual love andaffection. Good manners and courtesies have vanished.The Ramayana stands as an ideal for the trouble-tornsociety of today in various fields of activities.House is the First SchoolThe parents of today do not bother to find out theways and means of bringing up their children andkeeping them under control. They think that theirresponsibility is over after admitting them into a primaryschool or a village school. Home is the first school forchildren. It is in this school that children should learn torespect their parents; to observe Truth, Righteousness,Peace and Non-violence; how to behave in the school;how to respect the teachers; and how to behave withfellow students. They must also know how to abide bythe rules and regulations of the school and how toobserve discipline. It is by learning these things that thestudents turn into ideal students.Wake up from bed,When the cock crows in the morn:Brush and bathe,Eat properly39Summer Showers - 2002
And moderately.Go to schoolAnd study diligently.Earn a good name thatYou are an obedient student.Don’t moveWhen weather is damp.And never go near ditches.Run and playHave fun and frolic.If you abide byAll the principles mentioned aboveYou will enjoy both health andwealth.But nobody is imparting such a teaching to thechildren.Vishwamitra in AyodhyaWhen sage Vishwamitra came to Dasaratha, theemperor received him with all courtesy, invited him tooccupy a high seat and yearned to know the reason forthe sage’s arrival, and, without entertaining any shadowof doubt, offered to render any service the sage needed.When people come to our house, it is essential that wetreat them respectfully and give joy to them. The sagetold the emperor, “O Dasaratha! I have decided to2440Summer Showers - 2002
conduct a Yagna for the welfare of the world. But thedemons pose many impediments to the conduct of theYagna. I have the power and the strength to counterthem, for I have powerful weapons at my command. Butthe austerities of the Yagna forbid me to use them whenI myself am performing it.  Violence and bloodshed areprohibited for a rithwic performing a Yagna. I thereforeseek the help of your sons to accompany me to protectthe Yagna, which I am going to perform for the welfareand well-being of the world.” These words came as ashock to Dasaratha. He did not like the idea of sendingthe tender little boys to the forest. He thought that it wasunjust on his part to send them to the forest. He toldthe sage, “Master, pardon me. I will assume theresponsibility for the protection of the Yagna. Theseboys are quite young, hardly fourteen years old. Theyare not well acquainted in the art of using weapons. Howcan they protect the Yagna?” Vishwamitra pretended tobe angry when he heard the words of the king. Heroared, “The descendants of Ikshvaku never go back ontheir promises. You have promised me that you wouldcertainly honour my request. It is unfair on your part togo back on your word. If you think that you are correctI am going back.” Dasaratha took to heart the wordsspoken by Vishwamitra. He knew that he should beextremely careful in dealing with Paamulu (snakes) andSwamulu (sages). He also feared that Vishwamitramight curse him. He called Vasishta, the family guru and41Summer Showers - 2002
held deliberations with him. It satisfied Dasaratha tosome extent. Sage Vasishta looked at Dasaratha and saidto him, “These youths are not ordinary boys. You aredowncast because of your attachment to your children.They will fall upon the enemies like thunderbolts. Youare not able to appreciate that they are the Divine mightitself in human form.” Then Vasishta called for Rama.Rama came and stood in front of Vasishta. Lakshmanaalso came, as it was his practice to be with Ramaalways. Dasaratha introduced his sons to Vishwamitra.They offered their salutations to their father Dasaratha,guru Vasishta and sage Vishwamitra. They stood waitingthere. Vishwamitra was transfixed looking at thesplendour on their faces. He desired to do namaskar tothe children. But it was not appropriate to do namaskarto the young boys openly. So he saluted them in hisheart. The pairs of brothers Rama and Lakshmana,Bharatha and Shatrughna always moved together.Lakshmana followed Rama like a shadow. Shatrughnaalways followed Bharatha. There was a reason for this.Why the Brothers were in PairsWhen Dasaratha performed the PutrakameshtiYaga, the Yajna Purusha appeared and offered thevessel of sacred pudding to Vasishta. Vasishta handedover the sacred vessel to Dasaratha who in turndistributed it equally between his three wives. Kausalyahad the confidence that the son born to her would be the2542Summer Showers - 2002
king of Ayodhya as she was the eldest queen. Kaikeyialso had the confidence that the son born to her wouldone day be coronated because Dasaratha had promisedso to her father at the time of marriage. But the virtuousSumitra had no such hopes. As the emperor did notmake any promise to her, she thought that her son wouldonly serve the king. She carried her share of pudding in abowl and placed it on the parapet wall of the terracewhile drying her hair. From nowhere an eagle came andcarried away the bowl of sacred pudding. Horrified atthis, she immediately ran down and informed Kausalyaand Kaikeyi about what had happened. Since Kausalyaand Kaikeyi were virtuous, they shared their sacredpudding with her.The queens were noble without an iota ofselfishness or jealousy. They shone as examples ofharmony, understanding and mutual love. Their conductis worthy of emulation in the current times. The threequeens offered their prayers and partook of the sacredpudding. Kausalya gave birth to Rama first; and thenKaikeyi to Bharatha and lastly Sumitra gave birth toLakshmana and Shatrughna together. The sons ofKausalya and Kaikeyi were happily playing in the cradlewhereas the sons of Sumitra were wailing all the time,day and night, without even taking food. Sumitra went tosage Vasishta and told about her wailing children. SageVasishta closed his eyes and went into yogic vision. The43Summer Showers - 2002
truth dawned on him. He said to Sumitra, “As youpartook of the sacred pudding given by Kausalya, yougave birth to Lakshmana who is an amsa (part) ofRama. As you ate the pudding given by Kaikeyi, yougave birth to Shatrughna who is a part of Bharatha.Place Lakshmana by the side of Rama and Shatrughnaby the side of Bharatha. They will rest peacefully.”Sumitra did as instructed by Vasishta. All the childrenslept peacefully without crying. Sumitra felt very happyat this and said to Kausalya and Kaikeyi “Lakshmanaand Shatrughna are your gifts. My children will serveyour children. Lakshmana will serve Rama andShatrughna will serve Bharatha. It is my good fortunethat my sons will serve others.”Rama and Lakshmana, Bharatha and Shatrughnawere intimately connected. Wherever Rama went,Lakshmana followed him. Rama would not eat foodunless Lakshmana ate with him. Similarly Bharatha alsowould not eat food unless Shatrughna was in hiscompany. When Bharatha went to see his uncle, theKing of Kashmir, Shatrughna too followed him eventhough no one told him to do so. When Rama wasleaving for the forest, Lakshmana also started followinghim though Rama had not told Lakshmana toaccompany him. Rama even told Lakshmana, “Brother!You should remain in Ayodhya to serve our parents whowill be pining away in my absence. It is your duty to2644Summer Showers - 2002
console them and give happiness to them.” To this,Lakshmana answered, “Brother! My mother has sent meto serve you. You are going to the forest in obedience tothe command of our father, whereas I am following youin obedience to the command of my mother.”Lakshmana followed Rama wherever he went. Similarwas the case with Shatrughna, who was always in thecompany of Bharata.Ideal Consorts for Ideal SonsWhen the four sons of Dasaratha returned toAyodhya from Mithila accompanied by their consorts,Dasaratha was overjoyed. He told them, “These fourconsorts of yours are highly noble and virtuous. I willlook after them as though they are my daughters. It is bythe Divine grace that I have such daughters-in-law.Where is Mithila and where is Ayodhya? It is Divine willthat all of them should be united like this.” These fourconsorts of the four sons of Dasaratha were ofexemplary excellence. Sita and Urmila were thedaughters of Janaka, and married Rama and Lakshmana,respectively. Mandavi and Shrutakeerthi who were thedaughters of Kushadhwaja, Janaka’s brother, marriedBharatha and Shatrughna, respectively. As the fourdaughters-in-law were ideal women, the home ofDasaratha was also an ideal one.When Vishwamitra took the permission ofDasaratha to take Rama with him for the protection of45Summer Showers - 2002
the Yagna, Lakshmana instantly followed Rama. As theyreached the banks of Sarayu led by Vishwamitra, thesage taught them two mantras, “Bala” and “Atibala”, sothat they would not suffer from sleeplessness andhunger. “Bala” conquers sleep; “Atibala” conquershunger. Though Vishwamitra knew that Rama wasomnipotent yet he came under the spell of Maya andtaught him the sacred mantras.The home of Dasaratha was an ideal one where allthe mothers lived in great harmony. The queens ofDasaratha also lived in great unity and understanding.Nowadays it is difficult to lead one’s life with a singlewife, what to speak of three wives? But the home ofDasaratha was an exception. Great harmony andunderstanding prevailed there. One may entertain thethought ‘why Kaikeyi behaved in a selfish mannerdemanding Rama’s exile for 14 years.’ She was workingunder the divine dictates, for Rama was committed togo to the forest to kill the demons. People entertain thenotion that Manthara poisoned the mind of Kaikeyi byher evil counsel. Kaikeyi was not a lady who wouldlisten to the words of a servant. She was a lady ofcharacter, endowed with great virtues. In fact, she lovedRama more than her son Bharatha.When the Devas and sages approached Brahmawith a supplication to save them from the atrocities ofRavana, Brahma told them, “I gave a boon to Ravana2746Summer Showers - 2002
that he would be killed neither by gods nor even bykinnaras and kimpurushas but I did not mentionManava (human). Hence, Ravana would meet his end atthe hands of Rama (in a human form), who is anincarnation of Vishnu.” Everything was happeningaccording to the Divine will. Even Lankini gave utteranceto the Divine will. When Hanuman hit her, she said, “Badtimes are ahead of Lanka.” It was prophesied that whena monkey would hit her, the downfall of Lanka wouldbegin. In fact, when Hanuman hit her, Lankini fell flat onthe ground. Lankini was a demoness of enormousstrength who was guarding the city of Lanka at theportals of the fortress.The eagle which took away Sumitra’s puddingbowl, dropped it on the lap of Anjana Devi while shewas meditating. Hanuman was also closely connected toRama, Lakshmana, Bharatha and Shatrughna as he wasborn to Anjana Devi out of the sacred pudding that thequeens of Dasaratha had partaken. Because of thisreason Hanuman felt a close link with Lord Rama andplayed an important role in His mission.Ramayana is for All and for All TimesEmbodiments of Love!The Ramayana stands out as a great ideal to theentire mankind. It sets examples in every field of life. Itshows how brothers, sisters and parents should liveas ideals. The Ramayana is an inspiration not only for47Summer Showers - 2002
ancient times but also for the modern age. Every man isborn in this world to shine as an ideal, not to leadan egocentric life. Every man should stand out as amodel to the best of his capacity. The Ramayanademonstrates to all how an ideal family should be andwhat should be ideal manners like.When Sita, Mandavi, Urmila and Shrutakeerthiwere leaving for Ayodhya along with their husbands,their parents did not shed tears of sorrow as parents donow. The parents of these four women thought that theirdaughters were duty bound to go to the home ofDasaratha. They did not think that they were going toanother home. The daughters too did not shed any tearsof sorrow. It was with tears of joy that the parents senttheir daughters to the home of their husbands. Suchwere the ideals of the people of those days.When Lakshmana decided to accompany Rama tothe forest, mother Sumitra told him, “My son, it isGod’s will that I am your mother and you are my son.We should play our roles according to divine destiny.Don’t feel bad that you are going to the forest. Ayodhyawithout you is a forest for us and a forest in yourcompany, is Ayodhya.” These were the ideals upheld bythe great women of those days.There are many lessons that the Ramayana holdsout for the entire world. One day Dasaratha noticed thatthe child Rama was massaging his own feet. He did not2848Summer Showers - 2002
ask the services of the servants to massage his feet.Dasaratha, looking at Rama’s condition, sent for theservants immediately to massage Rama’s feet. Ramatold Dasaratha, “I don’t want the services of theseservants. I will do my work myself. These are my legsand not someone else’s. So I should massage my ownlegs without depending on others. All are servants in thisworld.” All are one, be alike to everyone. This was theideal Rama demonstrated.Lavanya – the Mark of an AvatarRama was full of lavanya. Lavanya means controlof senses. His character was the cause for His lavanya.In fact, Rama and Krishna were ever youthful. Have youever seen a picture of Rama or Krishna sporting greyhair? Have you ever seen a picture of Krishna with signsof old age? Have you ever seen Him as a grandfather?All avatars are ever youthful. This body of mine isapproaching its 77th year. I do not know any weaknessand I can walk quickly. I avoid doing so because it maylook funny and people may laugh if I walk fast at thisage. People will definitely laugh if a toddler walks with awalking stick in his hand. It will look funny if an old manplays with toys. Similarly, if I walk fast, the devoteesmay laugh. We should conduct ourselves according tothe time, place and circumstances. I conduct myselfaccording to these. I don’t know any weakness.Usually, old people have wrinkles on their faces and theysuffer from deafness and cataract. I don’t have any49Summer Showers - 2002
signs of old age. There is not a single wrinkle on myface. My eyes shine like bulbs and my voice is like aloudspeaker. People go for a cataract operation in theirold age. My eyes are in perfect condition. I can seeanything at a distance. Nobody knows my power andstrength. But I use them according to the need and thesituation. I use my power discreetly. Speed breakers aremeant to control the speed. They are necessary and theyensure safety. Likewise, sometimes I control my power.These are all signs of my Divinity. You will know myDivine glory slowly and steadily in the course of time.Though I have a human body, I am free from humanattachment. Though the body is human, I am entirelyDivine.As Rama and Krishna were born with humanbodies, people entertained the wrong notion that theydied in ordinary way. Rama and Krishna did not shedtheir bodies in the human way. Rama stepped into riverSarayu and vanished. He had earlier sent Sita away.Similarly, Krishna went to Dwaraka. Uddhava sawKrishna sitting under a tree, and then Krishna suddenlydisappeared. The bodies of divine incarnations will notfall in the hands of mortals. You must earn the capacityto understand Divinity.Embodiments of Love!Since I eat like you, play with you and sing withyou, you are deluded into the belief that I am also a2950Summer Showers - 2002
human being like you. It is sheer ignorance to think ofme in that way. Some devotees think that there issomething wrong with my legs when I walk slowly. I donot have any trouble with my legs, I am happy and thereis nothing wrong with my health. I walk slowly withmeasured steps because of the robe I wear. The robe Iwear is stitched to the very hem preventing me fromtaking long steps. My walk is slow, gentle and soft,without any roughness. I am all sweetness and softness.Summer Course, Brindavan, 17-05-2002
❃❃❃Ramayana – an Ideal forEvery Family
Manam hithva priyo bhavathiKrodham hithva na sochathiKamam hithva Ishtarthavan bhavathiLobham hithva sukhi bhavathiHe who has ego is not loved by anyone;He who has anger ceases to discriminate;He who has excessive desires cannot control his mind;He who has greed cannot taste happiness.”
(Sanskrit Verse)
Embodiments of Love!
AS long as man has ego nobody will love him.Even his own wife and children will shunhim. When anger erupts in man he ceases tobe happy. Excessive desires make him lose control overhis mind. The day man distances himself from greed hewill enjoy happiness.43052Summer Showers - 2002
Rama and Lakshmana in MithilaToday’s discussion on Ramayana will be likedvery much by the ladies.Rama and Lakshmana along with Vishwamithrareached Mithila.  They soon walked along the streets ofMithila. Like a powerful magnet at work, the gaze of allcitizens was attracted towards the two princes. Even thewomen working inside their houses came out to catch aglimpse of the two boys. Children at school too camerushing out. Everyone stared at the two brothers withoutbatting an eyelid. They wondered, “Oh! What aheavenly beauty these boys have. They are resplendentlike the sun and the moon. Where have they come from?They kept wondering among themselves, but none ofthem knew the answers.Finally a young housewife appeared and explainedto the women thus, “My birthplace is the city ofAyodhya. Since I am married into a family in Mithila, Inow reside here. These handsome boys are the sons ofemperor Dasaratha. They are extremely handsome andbear the names Rama and Lakshmana. Even in Ayodhyawherever they appear they would instantly attracteverybody’s attention.” In this way the lady gave theother women all the details of the attractive princes.Meanwhile, though they were the centre of intenseattraction, Rama and Lakshmana never raised theirheads. They were enjoying their walk with their heads53Summer Showers - 2002
bowed down. Some women, in order to attract theattention of the princes, threw flowers on their pathhoping that at least then the princes would look at them.They made every attempt possible to catch the eyes ofRama and Lakshmana. Some even waved the sacredAarathi. However, the princes remained unperturbedand would not look at anybody. The youth of thosedays had such sacred vision. At that young age none ofthem ever looked at women.The Anxiety of a MotherThe citizens of Mithila were amazed by the beauty,gait and looks of the brothers. The following day thebow of Lord Shiva was to be displayed. A big functionwas organised. Rama came to the assembly along withhis brother. Ravana also had come. There were severalother powerful kings and emperors in the hall. On seeingsuch a gathering, the wife of King Janaka, Sunetra, whilewatching from behind the curtains started thinking thus:“There are so many handsome and valiant youngprinces in this assembly. Will it not be better to selectone of them, marry my daughter to him and quicklydischarge the responsibility? Why does the emperorneed to complicate the issue by announcing that the onewho bends the bow of Lord Shiva would be the eligiblegroom? Several heroic personalities have attempted inthe past and have failed. Will these youngstersassembled here succeed? How will their tender bodies3154Summer Showers - 2002
bear the burden of the heavy bow?” She was very muchworried about the issue and was discussing it with hercompanions.Her fears came true when no one in the assemblycould even lift the bow. Finally, Sage Vishwamithrasigned to Rama to lift the bow. Rama went up to the boxin which the bow was kept and lifted the bow. Themoment he did that a severe turbulence struck andshook everybody. Lakshmana then got up and with onefoot pressed down the earth firmly. Even Vishwamithradidn’t know what Lakshmana was up to. He asked,“Lakshmana, what is happening? What are you doing?”Lakshmana humbly bowed the head and said, “This isthe help I must render to my elder brother”. WhatLakshmana meant was that, when Rama raised the bow,there was a sudden tilt in earth’s balance leading to theturbulence. By pressing down the earth Lakshmana wasbalancing the shift.What love the brothers had for each other! Whenthey were once playing together Bharatha came weepingand fell into Kausalya’s lap. Kausalya lovingly enquired,“Child, why are you crying? Did your elder brotherscold you? Did your brothers fight with you?” In thisway she tried to find out the cause of Bharatha’s grief.Bharatha replied, “Mother, none of my brothers woulddream of scolding me and fighting with me. They all loveme very much. But in order to make me win, despite my55Summer Showers - 2002
best efforts Rama always keeps losing the game. Healways wants me to win.” The younger brothers shouldwin and for that Rama would deliberately lose. That wasalways Rama’s style. Every brother followed this pathand strove to make the other brothers win. Rama knewthat if his brothers won and were happy he would behappy too.Rama Strings the BowWhen Rama lifted the sacred bow of Lord Shivaout of its box, strung the thread and twanged the string,a peel of thunder was set off. Everybody wondered asto how a boy of such a tender age could achieve such astupendous task. The bow could not have been liftedeven if a thousand men were to make an attempt to doso. Several elephants were required to pull the box intothe hall. How could Rama lift such a heavy bow? Howcould he manage to string it?  News of this wonderfulfeat spread throughout Mithila and created a sensation.After Rama broke Lord Shiva’s bow, Janaka sent aninvitation to Dasaratha to come to Mithila.Janaka started making preparations for the weddingof his daughter to Rama. Kushadhwaja was the brotherof Janaka. He had two daughters named Mandavi andShrutakeerthi. King Janaka too had a second daughterUrmila. As the marriage preparations were going onSage Vasishta consulted Kushadhwaja and proposedthat his two daughters be given in marriage to Bharatha3256Summer Showers - 2002
and Shatrughna. Kushadhwaja promptly agreed. Janakashed tears of joy at the turn of events and was preparedto give his second daughter Urmila to Lakshmana.The WeddingThe brides and the grooms were then readied andbrought to the stage. As they were all seated on the stagethey appeared to light up the entire city of Mithila. Theladies experienced unlimited thrill. They praised theirgood fortune at being able to witness the wedding of notjust Sita but all the four princesses.This is divine will. If God so wills He can doanything. Who can do what God does? Who canpossess all that God has? God alone is the eternalwitness. His will alone can accomplish anything.The wedding was going on. But the four brotherswould not raise their heads and look at anybody. In themodern age on the other hand conversations andfrivolous behaviour begins much before marriage! Buthere the brides and grooms sat with their heads loweredin humility and modesty throughout the ceremony. Theycarried out the instructions of the priest without raisingtheir heads. I am narrating these incidents to you tohighlight the high order of discipline and idealismentertained in those days. Janaka stood beside Ramaand prepared to give away the bride. He offered himSita’s hand and said, “Rama, here is my daughter, Sita”But Rama would not look at Sita despite Janaka’s57Summer Showers - 2002
entreaties. This was because the custom of those saidthat, a woman would become a wife only when thesacred mangalasutra was tied around her neck. Untilthen the bride and the groom were not expected to lookat each other. This was a strict discipline exercised inthose days. Such discipline will never appear eithertoday or tomorrow. None can set or match the idealsthat were established by the four brothers.The wedding took place. It was now time for thegarlanding ceremony. The brides waited with garlands intheir hands, as did the grooms. The three brotherswould begin their tasks only after Rama started it first.The parents too waited behind the children. They wentup to Rama and bade him to place the garland aroundSita’s neck so that other remaining brothers could alsodo the same. Rama did so and all the brothers followedsuit. It was now the turn of the brides. Sita waited withthe garland in her hands. Moments passed but Ramawould not bend his head! His was a valour and dignitythat raised, strung and broke the mighty bow of LordShiva. He did not want to bend his head before awoman. And in order to protect his own honour, he keptstanding.Rama was tall, broad shouldered and valiant.Though young of age all the brothers were tall andphysically strong. The long delay made the peopleimpatient. They wondered as to why Rama refused to3358Summer Showers - 2002
bow His head. Rama too was not keen to remain thus.He looked at Lakshmana and made an almostimperceptible signal. The four brothers were alwayssharp and alert. This was depicted in Thyagaraja’s song.“But for their devotion to Rama,Would a monkey cross the ocean? Would the goddess Lakshmi worship you? Would Lakshmana willingly serve you? Would the highly intelligent Bharatha offer hisprostrations to you? Oh! How great indeed is the power of devotionto Lord Rama’s strength”                 
(Telugu Poem)
 Lakshmana was the incarnation of Adisesha – theheavenly serpent that carried the entire world on itshood. He caught Rama’s signal and understood thatRama wanted him to raise the portion of earth where Sitawas standing. With an equally slight shake of his head,he indicated that this plan would defy the laws of natureand was hence not suitable for execution. If Sita wasraised, so would everyone else! Rama signalled back toLakshmana to hit on some plan to break the deadlock.Lakshmana hit upon an idea. All of a sudden, he fell atRama’s feet and would not get up. Rama was forced tobend down and raise Lakshmana from his feet.Grabbing this chance, Sita at once placed her garland onRama’s neck. The moment Sita garlanded Rama, the59Summer Showers - 2002
other sisters too proceeded to garland their grooms.This incident amply demonstrates the lofty, disciplinedand honourable style of functioning and behaviour ofthe brothers.As the Brothers so the BridesThe wedding was soon performed. The partyreturned to Ayodhya. They were received with muchlove and gaiety. What we need to look at is not merelythe virtues of the four brothers. The characters of Sita,Urmila, Mandavi and Shrutakeerthi too need to bediscussed and elaborated. They too were highlyvirtuous. They came from a highly reputed family. KingJanaka was known to have mastered his senses. He wasan acknowledged expert in Jnana yoga. Daughters fromsuch a family cannot be ordinary mortals. Rama alonewas given the order to go into exile. But Sita also wantedto accompany him. Rama meanwhile went to his motherKausalya. She was shattered when she got the sad newsof her son’s exile in place of the joyous news of hiscoronation. “Son you are merely obeying your father’scommand and going away to the forests. What aboutyour mother’s wishes? I am your father’s “ardhangi”(his better half). What importance are you giving to thewords of this half? I too shall come with you to theforest”, she said. Rama then pacified her, saying,“Mother! Husband is verily your God. There is no otherdeity beyond him. He is now aged. Added to that, this3460Summer Showers - 2002
sad state of affairs has further crushed him. It is notproper for you to abandon him now, at this stage. Youmust remain here to serve and support him. Comforthim. Give him strength and courage to bear his pain”. Inthis way, Rama dissuaded his mother from followinghim to the forests.Sita heard all these. When Rama returned to thepalace to be clothed in tree barks, she too started towear them, indicating her desire to follow Rama to theforests. Rama strongly dissuaded her. In soft tones, shereminded him, “Lord! Why is there one set of moralcodes for your mother and another for me? Is the codeof conduct not common to all married women? Is it notthe responsibility of a good wife to make her husbandhappy? She is supposed to look after his welfare. Doesit not become my responsibility as well to do the same? Ishall hence disobey your order and accompany you tothe forest.”Urmila was a great painter. She was in her room,painting the scene of Rama and Sita’s coronation, whichshe wanted to send to her father. At that moment,Lakshmana entered. He was in a very angry mood.Rama was not agreeing to his pleas and was going aheadwith obeying Kaikeyi’s orders. He called out to Urmilaand informed her that he was proceeding to the forests.Startled at the dramatic turn of events, Urmila got up in ahurry and in the process, accidentally toppled the61Summer Showers - 2002
canvas and spilled colours on it. She lamented, “ Alas!This beautiful picture of Sri Rama’s coronation scene istotally spoiled now”. Lakshmana said, “ Urmila! I amresponsible for spoiling your painting. Kaikeyi isresponsible for ruining Rama’s coronation as theemperor. I am leaving now.” Urmila’s courage andstrength of character now came to the fore. Lakshmanahad already informed her that Sita too wasaccompanying Rama to the forest. Urmila was thrilledthat her sister would accompany Rama and serve him.But she did not insist on following Lakshmana. On thecontrary she told Lakshmana, “Lord! I know that youare proceeding to the forest with the sole objective ofserving Sita and Rama. May you succeed without anyobstacles. You must spend your days and nights insteadfast service to Rama and Sita. You need not worryabout my welfare or even think about me. Never beconcerned that you are not present by my side atAyodhya to look after me. Forget Ayodhya itselfbecause henceforth, the forest is your Ayodhya. ThisAyodhya without Sita and Rama is the forest. Hence, donot give any scope for concern about me. On my part Ishall happily contemplate on you and spend my timehere.” Urmila thus gave tremendous courage to herhusband. She felt that Lakshmana’s service to Ramaand Sita would be disturbed if he constantly thought ofher. Hence she extracted a promise from her husbandthat he would not even think about her during the course3562Summer Showers - 2002
of exile for fourteen years. She proposed, “In the forest,Rama will be your father and Sita, your mother. Yourprimary concern should be to serve them faithfully.Hence, forget all of us here.” This was the promise shetook from Lakshmana before cheerfully sending him tothe forest. Kausalya might have grieved a little, butnot Urmila. This is the attribute of an ideal daughter-in-law. She must always encourage her husband by givinghim strength and courage appropriately. A housewifeis also called ‘Grihalakshmi’and ‘Dharmapatni’.Urmila discharged her duty as a Dharmapathni byencouraging Lakshmana to tread the path ofrighteousness.Bharatha, Shatrughna, Mandavi and Shrutakeerthiwere absent when all this action was taking place. Theywere away on a holiday in the Kekeya kingdom. MotherKausalya was highly distressed at the turn of events. Atthis juncture, Sumitra’s noble qualities need to berecalled. As was her name, so was her character. Shewas verily a Sumitra (good friend). She had a pure heart.She did not weep at the turn of events. Instead, sheconsoled Kausalya thus, “Sister, why are you so sad?Rama, who has incarnated for the emancipation ofmankind, can never come to any harm. If you areconcerned about his physical welfare, my sonLakshmana is going to be there with Rama always. Hewill be Rama’s attendant and aide. You must not give63Summer Showers - 2002
any scope for fear or anxiety.” Yet Kausalya’s wasthe womb that bore Rama. Her pain at his exile was,therefore, immense. In this context, the noble andcourageous counsel of Sumitra to Kausalya was muchmore laudable. However while dealing with the epicRamayana, hardly anyone discusses these nobleattributes of Sumitra. She further told Kausalya, “Thisentire drama is the masterplan of God. You and mecannot add or change anything in this. For the welfare ofthe world and the establishment of Dharma, God hasenacted this mission. Hence, sister! Do not shed tears.Your tears at the time of departure of your sons will onlyprove inauspicious to them. With cheer and joy, blessthem and send them.” Thus did Sumitra stand byKausalya and give her a great deal of courage. Theprinces and Sita soon left.Dasaratha’s AgonyMeanwhile, Dasaratha regained his consciousnessand recalled everything. Utterly agitated, he rushed ontothe street, shouting, “Rama, are you going? No, no!Please wait!” Sumantra was the charioteer. Dasarathaimplored, “ O Sumantra! Stop! Stay a moment! Let mehave a glimpse of my Rama just once.” Rama told himto discharge his duty as per the command of EmperorDasaratha and not to accede to the wailing pleas of hisfather Dasaratha. Several scholars have depicted at thispoint that Rama had asked Sumantra to utter a lie and tell3664Summer Showers - 2002
that he had not heard the king’s plea to stop. On thecontrary, he maintained silence. In such matters ofprinciple and discipline, both Rama and Lakshmanawere very strict. They are the ideals to be emulated whenit comes to attaining victory and obeying one’s parents’commands.Exemplary Conduct of Lakshmana andShatrughnaLakshmana resided in the forests with Sita andRama for fourteen years. Yet, not even once did he raisehis head and look at the face of Sita. On the Rishyamukamountain, when Sugriva and Rama met and talked, abundle that contained all of Sita’s jewellery was broughtbefore them. She had dropped the bundle to the groundwhen Ravana was carrying her away by the aerial routeto Lanka. Sugriva had preserved the bundle since he didnot know to whom the jewellery belonged. During hisconversation with Rama and Lakshmana, he had theparcel opened and showed Rama the jewellery. Heenquired if they belonged to mother Sita or if somedemons had dropped them accidentally. Ramaexamined everything, but was at a loss to identify any ofthem. Nowadays, the entire list of the wife’s jewellery,along with their appearance and shape is alreadyavailable! Rama passed the jewellery to Lakshmana andasked him to identify them. Of all of them Lakshmanapositively identified only the anklets as having belonged65Summer Showers - 2002
to Sita. Rama asked, “How could you say so?”Lakshmana replied, “Every day after my bath, I wouldoffer salutations at my mother Sita’s feet. I hence knowthese by sight.” What noble ideals! For fourteen yearsthey were together in the same hut yet Lakshmana neverlooked at Sita’s face.Since they had such noble character, they wereblessed with what has been described as ‘Lavanya’.‘Lavanya’ in Sanskrit means beauty of character. It isused as a mere name today. It actually means purityderived from strict discipline and character.This was the lofty standard of ideals established byRama and Lakshmana. Meanwhile, Dasaratha, unable tobear the agony of separation from Rama, shed hismortal coil. There was now a dilemma as to who wouldperform his last rites. Rama and Lakshmana were awayin exile. Bharatha and Shatrughna were in their maternaluncle’s house at Kekeya kingdom. It would take at leastten days for their arrival. Hence, Vasishta and othersages decided that the body be immersed and preservedin oil. There was nothing like refrigerating or morguefacilities in those days. And Dasaratha’s body remainedthere for fourteen days.Bharatha and Shatrughna arrived. Shatrughna isanother role model that the Ramayana presents. Hematched Lakshmana in every way. While Shatrughnawould always serve Bharatha, Lakshmana engaged3766Summer Showers - 2002
himself in service to Lord Rama. The twins hence spenttheir lives in serving their elder brothers. Bharathaalways relied on Shatrughna’s wisdom and sanecounsel. True to his name, Shatrughna was one oftremendous strength and valour – one who destroyedhis enemies. There was none to surpass him when itcame to routing the enemies. It was his presence thatenabled Rama, Lakshmana and Bharatha to remain safeand secure. Shatrughna was one who never talked. EvenLakshmana would talk and sometimes argue, but notShatrughna.An EpisodeOnce, before the wedding episode, Rama,Lakshmana and Sage Vishwamithra were proceeding tothe sage’s hermitage. They crossed the river Sarayu in aboat and reached the other bank. There, they saw abeautiful hermitage. Lakshmana was astounded andasked Rama, “Brother, what is this place? It appears likea beautiful township.” Vishwamithra replied, “Don’t bein a hurry. I shall explain. This hermitage is not anordinary one. It belongs to Manmatha. He wassupremely handsome. He could attract everyone to him.He developed his inner and external strengths andpowers. He however tried to influence Lord Shiva andwas cursed by him to remain formless - ‘Ananga’. Thatis why this domain is called ‘Anga Desha’– the kingdomof Anga. It is a sacred spot because Lord Shiva67Summer Showers - 2002
travelled here. It is hence the gift of Lord Shiva andHis very own place.”They then rested for the night in the ashram. Atdawn, the residents of the ashram gave them a verywarm send-off. They had recognised that the princeswere the sons of emperor Dasaratha. Hence they werehonoured accordingly and put on a well-decorated boatto proceed with their journey.Shortly a terrific roar could be heard in thedistance. A fearful forest, full of wild beasts, came inview. Lakshmana asked Sage Vishwamithra, “Master!Where is this loud sound coming from? What is thename of this eerie place?” The sage replied, “Son! Thebooming sound is of the river Sarayu merging into themighty Ganges. The sacred Ganges is like a huge oceaninto which this river Sarayu is merging. This is causingthis huge roar. This forest is infested with wild beastsand terrible demons.”Sthalabalam – Influence of LocationThey soon stepped into the forest. Wild beastswere seen everywhere and eerie sounds were emanatingfrom all directions. This was the domain of Ravana’ssister – the demoness Soorpanakha – and a sense offear struck anyone who dared enter the forest, as everystep was fraught with danger. Hence Vishwamithrarepeatedly said,” O Rama! May all auspiciousness beadded unto you.”3868Summer Showers - 2002
Here one must remember that the atmosphere of aplace you are in, has a telling effect on your behaviour.Much later in the story when Lakshmana wasaccompanying Sita and Rama in exile in the forest, onreaching a particular place, all of a sudden his mindtotally changed. He suddenly burst out,” Brother! Whatis all this trouble? Why are you, who is supposed toenjoy every luxury, suffering here? Why am I supposedto suffer with you? Let us go back to Ayodhya now.Why should we proceed further in this terrible forest?How are we expected to eat and foster ourselves?” Itwas a sudden burst of anger from Lakshmana.Rama merely smiled and expressed no reaction.Instead, he took Lakshmana’s hand and led him out ofthe forest. The anger that erupted in Lakshmana stayedtill they reached the border of the forest. The instantRama led Lakshmana out of the forest, he calmed downto his usual self. As Rama let Lakshmana relax and calmdown under a tree, he explained to the perplexedLakshmana: “This is the kingdom of Ravana’s sister,Soorpanakha. She roams freely in this area. When youhad stepped into that area, the vibrations of that place –‘Sthalabalam’, affected you. Soorpanakha’s evilqualities diffused into you and forced you to behavethus. We shall leave this place and go away” Lakshmanafelt thoroughly ashamed of his earlier behaviour “Alas!What a shame! How could I utter such rough anduncultured words? It is not in me to talk thus. This is69Summer Showers - 2002
definitely the vibration of demonic surroundings. Theyare not my true feelings.” So, consoling himself, heasked Rama’s pardon and proceeded on their journey.Shortly thereafter they could experience thepleasant vibrations of Siddhashrama. The cool breezeand the Vedic chants charged the place with holiness.Vishwamithra then explained, “Sons! This is ourSiddhashrama. Lord Vamana was born here. Lord Shivaresided here for a few days.”At Siddhashrama, Vishwamithra entrusted Ramaand Lakshmana with a job. He said, “Sons! You havecome here to protect a Yagna. You should undertakethat responsibility. This was also the command of yourfather. From this moment onwards you are expected todesist from eating and resting. This itself is a big Yagnathat you two shall perform. You should sanctify it andemerge successful.” Rama and Lakshmana were equalto the task. They never displayed any tiredness,difficulty or weakness.As the dawn broke, the great Yagna started. Theinstant the mantras were uttered, Rama and Lakshmanawent into high alert and patrolled the place. A huge roarcould be heard. One of the sages told the brothers,“There come the demonic hordes.  They are being ledby Maricha and Subahu. Be ready.” Rama andLakshmana were without food or water or sleep. Yetthey successfully discharged their duty and killed the3970Summer Showers - 2002
demons and saw to it that the Yagna was performedsuccessfully.Wedding Invitation to VishwamitraThe total dedication of Rama and Lakshmana tothe task entrusted by Viswamithra can be understoodfrom the following episode. As the Yagna concluded, atroop of soldiers came to the ashram. They handed aninvitation to Sage Vishwamithra. This was a personalinvitation from King Janaka of Mithila. He had sentinvitations to all kings and princes to try and lift the bowof Lord Shiva and win the hand of his daughter Sita. Insuch an assembly, he prayed that the great sage too bepresent to shower his blessings. Sage Vishwamithra washappy and with great excitement, narrated to Rama andLakshmana the uniqueness of the great bow of LordShiva. He said, “Sons! You must come and see the bow.There cannot be another of its kind in this world. It is agift from the heavens. This bow is not an ordinary one.It is worth going and seeing.” Rama and Lakshmananaturally developed a curiosity to take a look at the bow.However, Rama gently reminded the sage, “Master! Ourfather had only asked us to go with you and protect theYagna. We have no instructions to go to Mithila and seethe bow. We cannot transgress our father’s orders.” Forthis Vishwamithra replied, “ Was it also not your father’scommand that you should obey my instructions?Hence, you must obey my orders!” The princes could71Summer Showers - 2002
only keep quiet and make preparations to accompanythe sage on the new journey.The Divine MasterplanFor the welfare of this country, you all need tominutely scrutinize how delicately, correctly andrighteously Rama handled each situation. He killed allthe demons and safeguarded the righteous. All these areactually small parts of a Divine masterplan. It was willedthat Rama, Lakshmana, Bharatha and Shathrugna takebirth so that they could cause the annihilation of thedemons.Lankini, the guardian at the portals of Lanka, alsomade the prophecy of the doom of the demons. WhenBrahma asked Ravana to pray for a boon, the demonsaid, “My death should not be caused by the Gods,Yakshas, demons, Kinnaras or Kimpurushas. Grantme this boon.” Brahma had seen through the fatal flaw inthis boon. The name of human was missing from thelist! Since Ravana had made this omission, his deathwas certain at the hands of a human. Lord Vishnu hencedecided to incarnate in human form.In the entire creation, Divinity assumes the role ofbeing the vital substance. Rama belonged to the solardynasty. The Sun God was their guardian deity. Withoutthe sun’s nourishing rays, life cannot thrive on earth.When creation first began, it took a few crores of yearsfor light to dawn. It was all darkness till then. Similarly,4072Summer Showers - 2002
after the birth of Rama, the sun could not shine forfifteen days! Consequently, the moon too remainedinvisible. Both the sun and the moon lamented that theycould not catch a glimpse of the Divine incarnation ofLord Rama. The Moon God performed a penance,praying to catch a glimpse of Lord Rama. At that time,Lord Rama appeared before the Moon God and said; “Iknow that you could not see me for the first fifteen daysafter my birth. I hereby grant you a boon. In my nextincarnation, you shall have my first darshan – evenbefore anybody else can see me.” And it proved to beso. When the next incarnation of Krishna took place, atthe midnight hours, as Vasudeva carried the baby to thesafety of Nanda’s house, it was the moon that had thefirst darshan of the Divine child.In this way, there are several intricate, secret andprofound teachings in the Ramayana. There are nocontradictions or confusions in this epic. The story ofRama is eternal and eminently readable.  No matter howmany times it is heard, it still does not satiate the desireto hear again and again. This sacred story can never beforgotten. Rama’s divine actions can never be ignored.Everything that he did was steeped in righteousness. Allthat he spoke was only truth. In such a sacred epic,several scholars have introduced distorted explanationsand have picked holes in some events and incidents.There can be no scope for perversions in Ramayana.73Summer Showers - 2002
There can be no place in it for even an iota of untruth orfalsehood. The entire story, from beginning to end, isnothing but truth – eternal, pure and serene.Today, we shall stop with the events ofSiddhashrama. The nature of Rama, Lakshmana,Bharatha and Shatrughna is quite unique and wonderful.“They are wonderful; they are worshipped in allthe three worlds;They are the sickles that cut the creepers ofworldly bondage, they are one’s true friends;They are revered by the sages and seers;Such is the beauty of Lord Vishnu’s deeds!”
           (Telugu Poem)
It is only the ignoramuses that are blind to the innersignificance of the Lord’s deeds and misinterpret them.This causes confusion and deviates the mind of a trueseeker from the sacred truth. The story of Lord Rama ishighly sacred. It is only when you hear the story fullycan you understand its holiness.Summer Course, Brindavan, 18-05-2002
❃❃❃41
“Yad Bhavam Tad Bhavathi”
Jihvagre varthathe LakshmiJihvagre mithra bandhavaJihvagre bandhanam prapthiJihvagre maranam DhruvamThe tongue is the cause of Truth and Prosperity.The tongue also earns for us friends and relatives.It is the tongue that brings bondage and death.
(Sanskrit Verse)
The Power of WordsEmbodiments of Love!
THE words of man earn him wealth and riches.It is the words of man that cause bondage.Hence words are cause for good and evil. Itis better to speak every word after due rumination andreflection. Words help us a lot in life.54276Summer Showers - 2002
Man should use his words with utmost care andcaution. It is important that man uses words afterweighing pros and cons. He should not be hurt norshould he hurt others. Words give life and take away life.Words are dainty delicacies.Words are aromatic fragrance.Words are the essence of nectar.Words are the essence of the Vedas. 
 (Telugu Poem)
The words uttered by Rama were sweet anddelicious. Words should be pleasant and they should beused in moderation.Words were the cause of Rama’s exile into theforest, Kaika’s infamy and Dasaratha’s death. As wordscontain potent sounds, we should use them with utmostcare and caution, discretion and discrimination. Thewords of promise given by Dasaratha to Kaikeyi at thetime of battle brought sorrow and suffering to him. Sowe should use words with utmost care.Life is impermanent.Impermanent are wealth and youth.Wife and children are also impermanent.Only truth and good reputation are permanent.
       (Sanskrit Verse)
The four sages Sanaka, Sanandana, Sanatkumaraand Sanatsujata live in human beings and render help to77Summer Showers - 2002
them. They come to the rescue of human beings in timesof dangers and ward off calamities. The four noblesages are eternal benefactors who work for the welfareof humanity day and night. When Rama was about toleave for the forest, Kausalya said to her son, “Rama!May the four sages Sanaka, Sanandana, Sanatkumaraand Sanatsujata be with you always and protect you aseyelids protect the eyes,”Rishyasringa at PutrakameshtiBefore Kausalya gave birth to Rama she had adaughter by name Shanta. As she was a female child andwas not qualified to succeed to the throne, Dasarathagave her in adoption to King Romapada. The Kingbrought her up and gave her in marriage to sageRishyasringa.Dasaratha invited many noble sages to attendPutrakameshti yaga on the advice of his ministerSumantra. He also invited Sage Rishyasringa to comeand grace the function. Rishyasringa was a noble sage.There were timely rains, peace and prosperity andpeople lived in joy and plenty wherever Rishyasringa sethis foot. Sumantra went to Rishyasringa and requestedhim to be the chief rithwik for the yaga. Rishyasringareplied, “I cannot come alone. I agree to be the chiefrithwik but my consort Shanta also should come withme. She shall also function as a rithwik.” Sumantraagreed to this. Shanta and Rishyasringa reached there.4378Summer Showers - 2002
As soon as she reached Ayodhya, Shanta didprostrations at the feet of Dasaratha and Kausalya.Dasaratha wondered who she was as she looked like arishi. Wherever she set foot, drought vanished, makingplace for timely rains. When the parents wondered whoshe was, Shanta had to reveal her identity to Dasarathaand Kausalya. She said “I am your daughter Shanta”.Dasaratha and Kausalya were overjoyed when theyrealised that she was Shanta whom they had given awayin adoption to King Romapada.Vishwamitra’s Yagna and AfterRama and Lakshmana, led by sage Vishwamithrareached Siddhashrama. Both the brothers guarded theyagna with great care and killed the demons that tried todisrupt the yagna. They kept strict vigil over the yagnawithout food and sleep. Vishwamithra was very happyon the successful completion of the yagna. Rama andLakshmana prayed for permission to go back toAyodhya. Vishwamithra had promised Dasaratha, “OKing! Being their father, you are deluded to think thatthey are ordinary boys. Nothing untoward will happen tothem. As soon as the Yajna is completed, I would sendthem back hale and healthy.” At the time of thecompletion of Vishwamithra’s yagna a messenger camefrom Mithilapura with a message to him. Janaka had senta message to Vishwamithra praying him to come andattend the function, where the bow of Shiva was to belifted and strung. After reading the message of Janaka,79Summer Showers - 2002
the venerable sage said to Rama and Lakshmana, “Youshould go to Mithila to see the bow of Shiva”. Hedescribed at length the greatness of the bow of Shiva.As the two brothers were interested to see the bow, theyobeyed the command of the sage and went to Mithilawith him. Rama broke the bow but he refused to marrySita without the permission of his parents. Rama said toVishwamithra, “We have come with you for theprotection of the yagna and not for entering into maritalrelationships. I won’t take a step further in this regardwithout the permission of our father.”Vishwamitra was not an ordinary sage. Earlier hewas a great emperor. He wanted to take away Shabala,the wish-fulfilling cow from the ashram of Vasishta byforce. A fierce battle ensued between the army ofVishwamithra and the army created by the cow.Vishwamithra was defeated in the battle and all his sonswere dead. Realizing that material wealth and power wasno match to spiritual splendour and wealth, he becamean ascetic.Rama said, “O Master! The descendents ofIkshvaku always observed the command of theirparents. They would not do anything without thepermission of their parents. Hence it is not proper onour part to act without the permission of our parents.”Rama was steadfast in his adherence to Truth. Healways spoke Truth and never swerved away from it. Itis said,4480Summer Showers - 2002
The world is born of Truth.Everything merges in Truth.There is no place in the worldwhere the power of Truth is not felt.This is the pure Truththat all of you should know 
     (Telugu  Poem)
Encounter with ParashuramaDasaratha and his three consorts, Kausalya,Sumitra and Kaikeyi agreed for the marriage. Aftermarriage, as they were returning to Ayodhya, SageParashurama encountered them on the way. “Who is theone who broke the bow of Shiva?”, roaredParashurama. He challenged Rama for a fight. Ramadefeated him and Parashurama submitted his two kalas(splendours) to Rama, who was endowed with twelvekalas. Rama shone with his own twelve kalas, two kalasfrom his brothers and another two given byParashurama. That is how Rama shone brilliantly with allthe sixteen kalas of the Virat Purusha.Rama defeated Parashurama with love.Parashurama gave away his powerful weapons to Ramaand said to Him, “Rama! You are now shining withsixteen kalas.” Rama was the embodiment of truth.There is no power greater than truth. Hence,Parashurama surrendered to Rama. With the surrenderof Parashurama, Rama’s power became full andcomplete.81Summer Showers - 2002
Brahma’s BoonOnce some sages went to Dasaratha and told aboutthe atrocities perpetrated by Ravana. Dasaratha askedthem to go to Brahma and pray for his help. When theyprayed to Brahma, he said, “Ravana shall die only at thehands of a human being, since I had given the boon thathe would not be killed by gods and demons. You go toLord Vishnu and seek his help.” Moved by the prayersof sages and the people, Vishnu said to them, “I knowall about your sufferings. Very soon I will be born as ason to Dasaratha and then I will relieve you of yoursufferings.” Vishnu fulfilled His promise, which he hadgiven to the sages by killing Ravana ultimately.When Hanuman was about to enter Lanka, Lankini,who was guarding the gates of Lanka said to him, “ Itwill not be possible for you to enter Lanka without mypermission. I am the guardian of Lanka.” Saying thesewords she moved forward to hit at Hanuman. When shewas about to hit him, Hanuman lifted Lankini with his lefthand and threw her down. Then Lankini remembered theprophecy of Brahma, “It would be the beginning of thedoom of Lanka, when a monkey would hit you.” Furthershe said, “Hanuman! Your touch has sanctified me.”Darshanam Papa nashanam, Sparshanam karmavimochanam, Sambhashanam sankata nashanam.(The vision destroys all sins, the touch frees a personfrom consequence of all actions and conversation4582Summer Showers - 2002
eliminates all troubles.)  “It is time for me to leave mybody” saying so she breathed her last.Kausalya felt sad that she was not able toexperience the divinity of Rama. “As he has takenhuman form and born to me, I am unable to considerhim as divine. I will regard Rama as a human till heshows me the sign of his divinity.” That is how Kausalyawas treating Rama as a human. One day Sumitra cameand said to her, “Sister, Rama is not an ordinary boy.Lakshmana, Bharatha and Shatrugna also are notordinary mortals.”Sita was firm in her decision to follow Rama intothe forests. She said that it was her bounden duty tofollow Rama.Bharatha at NandigramaBharatha settled at Nandigrama, twelve miles awayfrom Ayodhya. He installed the padukas of Rama on thethrone and worshipped them with great devotion.The four brothers were the incarnations of the fourVedas. Rama was Yajur Veda, Lakshmana who wouldalways chant the praises of Rama was the Rig Veda.Bharatha who would always sing the glory of Rama wasthe Sama Veda. Shatrughna who wielded the weaponsfor protection of Ayodhya and his brother were thepersonification of Atharvana Veda.Bharatha lived in Nandigrama devoting himselfentirely to the contemplation of  Rama. He was83Summer Showers - 2002
immersed in the contemplation of Rama, forgoing evenfood and sleep. His wife Mandavi was also a greatdevotee of Rama. She also lived in Nandigrama forfourteen years serving her husband. Since Bharatha wasimmersed in the contemplation of Rama, He too shonelike Rama. When he entered Ayodhya with Rama,people could not distinguish between Rama andBharatha. ‘Yad Bhavam Tad Bhavathi’ (As you thinkso you  become). Mandavi was a virtuous lady, whowas devoted to her husband by paying due obedience tothe mothers-in-law and her husband. She shone as anideal to others. She too became an ascetic with her hairin a single plait. When Rama was entering Ayodhyafollowed by three brothers and their wives, people couldnot distinguish between Sita and Mandavi. Sita shonelike an ascetic due to fourteen years of contemplation onRama. Mandavi also shone like her since she was alwaysimmersed in the contemplation of the lord. BrahmavidBrahmaiva Bhavati (The one who realizes the Brahmanbecomes Brahman himself.). As all the brothers hadoneness of thought and feeling, their four consorts alsohad the same. All of them constituted an ideal home.Women are more VirtuousThe other day, the lady from Greece mentionedabout Vishwakutumba (Universal family). God isuniversal. The people of the universe are his kith and kin.The four consorts of the four brothers were the4684Summer Showers - 2002
embodiments of virtues and ideal conduct. In a sense,women are greater than men for, men have only threepowers whereas women are endowed with sevenpowers. As they have four powers extra, they shine withgreater splendour.Was not Savitri who revived her dead husband anIndian lady?Was not Chandramati who extinguished theconsuming flames by the power of her truthfulnessan Indian lady?Was not Sita who leaped into the burning fire toprove her chastity an Indian lady?Was not Damayanti who burnt to ashes the wickedhunter, an Indian lady?Bharath, surrounded by the sea of sacrednessand sanctified by the women of chastity,A land of noble culture,Was indeed the teacher to the entire world.
    (Telugu Poem)
Can you find chaste women like Savitri, Damayanti,etc., anywhere else in the world? India is a great nation.Many eminent men took birth in this country, lived noblelives and stood as examples to the entire mankind.Ramayana is full of ideal men and women who shone asexamples to humanity.Summer Course, Brindavan, 19-05-2002The Ideal Brothers
Saravarupa Dharam Shantham Sarva namaDharam Shivam Satchidanandam AdvaitamSathyam Shivam SundaramAll the names and forms are but the manifestations ofthe Supreme Being who is the embodiment of Peaceand Auspiciousness. He is Existence-Knowledge-BlissAbsolute and non-dual. He is Sathyam, Sivam,Sundaram (Truth, Goodness, Beauty).
(Sanskrit Verse)
THE strength and capacities of the Divineare beyond comprehension; yet, withoutunderstanding this, criticism of Divinity isrife.  One may praise, another may deride, but Divinityremains the same. Neither will criticism diminishDivinity, nor will praise enhance it. The traits of ebbingand rising are that of this world. Divinity is unaffected64786Summer Showers - 2002
by both. Those who hanker after name and fame cannever comprehend Divinity. Thousands of studentshave passed out of this university, having acquired atotally free education. We have not published oradvertised this fact. I derive my joy from their joy andremain contented.Dedication of Rama’s BrothersYesterday we had seen that Bharatha did not gointo Ayodhya with Rama’s sandals. He instead built asmall ashram at Nandigrama and remained there,worshipping Rama’s sandals. His wife Mandavi toospent her time contemplating on Rama’s name and thusgave support to her husband. Rama and Sita spent theirtime roving in the forest. Lakshmana was totallydedicated to their service. But little is said aboutShatrughna. None of the texts mentions much abouthim. Intellectuals are thriving in thousands. People with apower to enquire are also many. Sadly, there are veryfew who tend to enquire into the intricate and delicatespiritual matters.From the times of Dasaratha, Sumantra remainedthe chief minister of the kingdom. He was very loyal toDasaratha and implicitly obeyed him. In such a situation,the legal heir, Rama was in the forest. His representativeBharatha was on a self-imposed exile at Nandigrama.So, who was handling the day-to-day administration ofAyodhya? It is here that we must probe deeply. From87Summer Showers - 2002
dawn to dusk it was Shatrughna who stayed in Ayodhya,enquired into the problems of the citizens and governedthe kingdom. By night he would faithfully reporteverything to Bharatha. Shatrughna carried out everyaspect of administration of the kingdom without causingthe least trouble to Bharatha. Though he did so much,his name appears scarcely in literature.Both the sons of Sumitra always engagedthemselves in serving their elder brothers and fosteringunity among themselves. They never went after nameand fame. Shatrughna dedicated himself totally toBharatha and executed all his commands. He was highlyintelligent, able and powerful. Sadly, such a noblecharacter has not been deeply enquired into. For thefourteen long years, it was Shatrughna who held thereins of the kingdom in his able hands. However, hewould never disturb Bharatha even if he had any doubts.The reason was that he felt he would be responsible fordisturbing Bharatha’s concentration as he was inconstant meditation of Rama.Sumitra had already made a promise to the otherqueens, “Kausalya! Your son may become the king. Myson Lakshmana will become his personal aide. Kaikeyi!Bharatha also may become king. I shall then sendShatrughna to serve him. Both my sons were born toserve and not to earn name, fame or kingdoms.”How noble were the two brothers Lakshmana and4888Summer Showers - 2002
Shatrughna! Without them, both Rama and Bharathawould not have achieved their fame and glory. Theyalways stood by their elder brothers giving them solidsupport. This cooperation caused the brothers toremain very dear to each other.At the time of the battle, when Lakshmana fainted,Rama lamented thus, “If I search, I may find a wife likeSita; I may find a mother like Kausalya; but a brother likeLakshmana can never be found.” Rama was ready togive up anything for the sake of Lakshmana. At thattime, he instructed Hanuman to go and bring theSanjeevani plant. Hanuman was one who alwaysobeyed Rama’s command. He always moved as oneamongst the brothers. He promptly left, but unable toidentify the plant, uprooted the entire mountain andcarried it to Lanka. As he was flying over Ayodhya,Bharatha spotted him. Bharatha was getting regularreports from the forest that the demons were troublingRama.  So he suspected this huge figure to be aRakshasa who intended serious harm to Rama. He tookout his bow and shot at Hanuman. Hanuman alightedalong with the mountain. Paying his respects toBharatha, he said, “Oh! King! Lakshmana has fainted onthe battlefield. I am taking this mountain containing theSanjeevani herb to revive him. I don’t know where theherb is on this mountain. Hence, in order to carry outRama’s command, I am taking away the entiremountain.”89Summer Showers - 2002
Ideal Spouses for Ideal BrothersBharatha was ecstatic at this news. He sent wordfor mother Kausalya and said, “Mother! This messengerhas news about Rama.” He then introduced Hanuman toher who went on to tell her in detail all the news of thebattlefront. “There is a fierce battle going on betweenRama and Ravana. It shall definitely be over in a day ortwo. Lakshmana has fainted and these herbs are meantto revive him.” Sumitra too was asked to come byBharatha. She did not express any anxiety at the newsabout Lakshmana. On the contrary she said, “ I amnever worried about my sons’ welfare. My only concernis that Rama is being put to inconvenience. If my sonLakshmana were to die, I shall definitely send my otherson Shatrughna to serve Rama. My only aim is to seeRama happy. It is with this intention that I had sentLakshmana to the forest with Rama.” Hanuman thenwas taken to Lakshmana’s wife, Urmila. She had spentthe entire fourteen years painting the pictures of Sita andRama. Bharatha approached her and broke the news. Hesaid, “Lakshmana’s life is in danger. I am at a loss forwords and don’t know what to do.”When Bharatha broke the news to her, Urmila didnot show a trace of fear or worry. She said, “Myhusband’s heart is filled with the name of Rama.Therefore, he is perhaps sleeping peacefully. All the painand suffering must be Rama’s alone. No danger can4990Summer Showers - 2002
befall my husband. He will always remain safe.” Whatwe need to recognize here is that, the wives of the fourbrothers were as virtuous and noble as their husbands.The happiness and prosperity of the husbandsdepended on the noble qualities of their wives. Thegood conduct and good actions of the wives were alsoresponsible. Their character gave their husbandstremendous support.After the news was conveyed, Hanuman quicklycontinued his journey to the battlefield. What we need toknow here is that, while as the four brothers spread theirideals to the world, their wives too did not lag behind indoing the same. As her husband Shatrughna ruled thekingdom, Shrutakeerti lent admirable support to him,just as Mandavi stood by Bharatha. They never aspiredfor anything else. Except at the time of dawn and duskwhen they would go to mother Kausalya for herblessings, they never had any other commitments. Thegood influence of such noble characters can be feltthroughout the Ramayana.Ayodhya saw peace, prosperity and securityaplenty. Truth was spoken and righteousness wasadhered to, in every corner of the country. Shatrughna’sable rule assured this. He would not sleep or rest at all,anticipating some problem or other. He used to worrythat any lapse in his administration would bring a badname for Bharatha. Shatrughna was extremely cautious91Summer Showers - 2002
to see that Bharatha’s name was not tainted due to anymistakes of his. He looked after the kingdom with careand concern. He always followed Rama’s command.Shatrughna ruled Ayodhya with such noble feelings.Bharatha did not play an active role in the administrationof the kingdom. He would merely nod and accedeto anything that Shatrughna proposed. What was thereason for this implicit trust? Bharatha knewShatrughna’s selfless love. He also knew thatShatrughna was very capable and would never allow anyenemy to venture into the territory of Ayodhya. True tohis name, Shatrughna could destroy any such enemy.This led to lasting peace in Ayodhya. The principlesfollowed by the ancient Indians were, Speak the Truth,Follow Righteousness (Sathyam Vada; DharmamChara) and pray for the safety of the world. They alsolaid emphasis on unity amongst the brothers. None mustface disrepute. Everyone must live his life with virtueand good name.Though Shatrughna ruled the kingdom on behalf ofBharatha, he could never summon courage to advise hiselder brother. He never talked back to his elders. Whenyou are replying to elders, you must think carefully andanswer. It is a grave mistake to talk to them as you like.Such actions may even lead to some unpleasantsituations. Truth must be spoken. Righteousness mustbe adhered to. Brothers and sisters must live as aclosely-knit unit, with understanding among themselves.5092Summer Showers - 2002
In this way, Bharatha and Shatrughna spent their time inAyodhya and Nandigrama, waiting for the return ofRama.Shrutakeerti is another character in the Ramayanawho is extremely noble. She always tried to lighten theburden of her husband Shatrughna by giving himsuitable advice. She would never utter words that couldharm others. ‘Shruta+Keerti’, as the name suggests,would always listen to good only. In turn, she wouldalways speak what was good and conveyed that whichwas pleasant and pleasing to the ear. She wouldencourage only what was good and beneficial to others.Dasaratha’s daughters-in-law were real gems.However, in our story, only Rama and Sita aredepicted as the lead characters. Not much importance isgiven to the other roles in the epic. If Lakshmana,Shatrughna, Urmila, Mandavi and Shrutakeerti were notthere, the glory of Rama and Sita could not have beenhighlighted. Rama could not live even a minute withoutLakshmana by his side. He would not eat withoutLakshmana giving him company. Rama hencedemonstrated the ideal of unity and coexistence to theworld. In the Vedas, there is a sloka that aptly describesthis idealism.Saha Na VavathuSaha Nau Bhunakthu93Summer Showers - 2002
Saha Veeryam KaravavahaiTejaswi NavadheethamasthuMa Vidvisavahai(Let us all move together, let us all grow together,Let us all stay united and share our knowledge,Let us live together with friendship and withoutdisharmony.)The four brothers displayed such a unity amongstthemselves. Today, if there are four children in thehouse, they take to four different directions.Encounter with Khara and DooshanaIn those days, Kings used to appoint specialmessengers to keep them informed about thehappenings in and around the kingdom. Once, amessage was conveyed to Bharatha relating theenormous trouble that the demons were causing toRama. A particular mention was made of the terrible duoKhara and Dooshana. They were close associates of thedemon king Ravana. They attempted to secretly harmRama, Lakshmana and Sita. Bharatha was informed ofthese developments. It was Soorpanakha who poisonedthe ears of Khara and Dooshana and goaded them toattack the brothers. Bharatha was hence anxiouslyawaiting further news about Rama from his messengers.He was also hesitant to approach the elders with thisnews. Such news was generally conveyed only to5194Summer Showers - 2002
Sumitra. She was a great lady. She would always usesoft words and advise aptly. Therefore, she was reliedupon. Bharatha conveyed this news to Sumitra andsought her advice. He did not mention this to his ownmother Kaikeyi. At this moment of Bharatha’s anxiety,Sumitra consoled Bharatha and said, “Rama will notcome to any harm. He is Divinity incarnate. Therefore,do not give scope for any worries.” She advisedBharatha thus.Khara and Dooshana brought a forty thousandstrong army to fight against Rama. In the meanwhile,Rama had instructed Lakshmana to take Sita into a caveand remain there while he destroyed Khara’s army.Sage Vishwamitra had given to Rama all the mightyweapons he had acquired. Rama discharged one suchpowerful arrow from his bow. That one arrow multipliedinto hundred arrows, the hundred became thousand andthe thousand in turn became forty thousand arrows andannihilated the Rakshasa army in a trice. Demigods fromheaven hailed the victory of Rama and showered flowerpetals on him. When this news reached Ayodhya,Bharata, Shatrughna and the mothers were overjoyed.PanchavatiWhen Rama, Lakshmana and Sita reached thehermitage of Sage Agastya, he also offered him all theweapons that were at his disposal. Moreover, he advisedRama thus: “O Ramachandra! Being a householder, it is95Summer Showers - 2002
not possible for you to stay in my hermitage. There is aplace called “Panchavati” in Dandaka forest which is asuitable place for you to stay during your exile.”Accordingly, Rama, Sita and Lakshmana stayed inPanchavati and spent their time peacefully. It was herethat the demoness Soorpanakha tried to make friendshipwith Rama and Lakshmana. She was attracted by theircharming personality. She assumed the form of abeautiful lady and approached Rama with a request tomarry her. Rama said, “No doubt, you are beautiful.Even my wife Sita is no match for you. But what can Ido? I am already married and my wife is with me. So, itis better that you marry Lakshmana whose wife is nothere at present.” When she expressed her desire toLakshmana, he said, “Rama is my master and I am hisservant. If you marry me, you will have to spend yourentire life in the service of mother Sita. So, it is betterthat you marry Rama himself.”In this manner, Rama and Lakshmana were havingfun. After some time, Soorpanakha became enraged.She thought, “It is because of the presence of Sita thatRama is not interested in me. If she is not there, Ramawill certainly yield to my request.” With such a feelingshe made an attempt to swallow Sita. Immediately,Rama signalled to Lakshmana. He, being highlyintelligent, understood its implication and cut the noseand ears of Soorpanakha. He spared her life as he didnot want to kill a woman.5296Summer Showers - 2002
Soorpanakha ran wailing to her brother Ravana inLanka. She was bleeding from her wounds and lamentedto Ravana, “Brother! There are two princes who are thesons of emperor Dasaratha. They are responsible for mysorry state.” Ravana had a very pertinent question to askher. He said, “Sister! Your nose and ears are separateentities on your face. Both could not have been cut offat the same time. How is it that you did not escape afteryour nose was mutilated? Why did you remain standingtill your ears were also cut off?” Soorpanakha replied,“Brother! I cannot explain this. The moment Lakshmanatouched me; I was lost in a trance. Their handsome andregal bearing enraptured me. It was as if I lost all myconsciousness and remained rooted to the spot.” In thisway, she kept eulogizing the two princes’ noble bearingand virtues.There are several such incidents and descriptionsin the epic Ramayana. Today, we have seen what animportant role Shatrughna played in ably administratingAyodhya for fourteen long years. Bharatha was the rulerrepresentative only in name. The groundwork wascarried out entirely by Shatrughna. He alone wasresponsible for keeping the boundaries of Ayodhyasafe. During the fourteen years, not even a single enemydared to march on Ayodhya. There was no unrestamongst the civilians. Initially, there were fears about anAyodhya without a king. Rama advised Bharatharegarding the duties of a ruler. He said, “Bharatha, you97Summer Showers - 2002
are now the king. Our father was a mighty emperor whoruled his kingdom well. After his death, it is yourresponsibility now. Do not answer back to anyone.Never use harsh words to hurt anyone. Always carry outpleasant conversations. There must be no agitation inour kingdom.” Both Bharatha and Shatrughna receivedthe advice and followed it faithfully.Extend Help without PublicityToday Mariwala has spoken extensively about theachievements of our hospital. I always advise mystudents not to publicise what we do in the hospital.There are several wonderful things that are happening.One patient from Nepal had his heart on his right side!Our doctors have shifted it back to the correct location.The surgery was understandably highly complicated.Still it was carried out. I told my students that no oneneeded to be informed about this. People may accuse usof praising ourselves.  I told them that their main taskwas to make everyone happy. Today, Mariwala hasnarrated so many incidents that he had never briefed Meabout. These boys from the hospital sleep on theground floor while I stay on the first floor. They alwaysdiscuss only hospital related matters. I keep telling them,“Do not speak about them anywhere outside. You doyour duty sincerely. Extend every possible comfort tothose who come.” The other day I was informed that aparticular injection was to be administered to a patient in5398Summer Showers - 2002
order to save his life. That injection costs Rs. 80,000!Mariwala came and asked me whether they could goahead and buy such an expensive injection. I replied thatto save a life, any amount should be spent. I shall bearthe expenses, but get the medicine and save his life.Instantly we dispatched a courier to Bangalore andobtained the required injection. There are several suchexpensive medicines that need to be used in the hospital.No one knows about these details. I believe that, wemust not look at the cost if it can save a life. I tell ourdoctors to continue with their duty and keep the patientshealthy and safe. The patients should not be subjectedto any kind of inconvenience.Summer Course, Brindavan, 20-05-2002
❃❃❃Rama – The Ideal Hero
Sadayam hridayam YasyabhashitamSathyabhushitamKayah parahithe Yasya kalautasya karothikimThe one whose heart is laden with compassion,The one whose words are marked by truth,The one whose time is spent in performing beneficialdeeds for the welfare of others,Such ones are not affected by influence ofthe age of Kali.
(Sanskrit Verse)
Do not Delay Good DeedsEmbodiments of Love!
REALISING that Ravana would pass away ina few minutes, many sages, scholars andnoble men came to Ravana and asked him,“O Ravana! You performed many good deeds as well754100Summer Showers - 2002
as evil deeds. What is it the most memorable thingthat you have discovered in your life?” To this Ravanareplied, “Sirs! Do not delay the noble acts you wantto perform at any time. Put into action whatevernoble thoughts and feelings that arise in your heartinstantaneously. Procrastination is  the thief of time. Itis dangerous to delay. At one time, I thought ofconnecting the earth and heaven with a ladder.  I wishedto turn the saline water surrounding Lanka into sweetwater. I wished to bring comfort and solace to theresidents of Hell.  Though I decided to do these things, Idelayed acting. Thereafter, I could never succeed indoing them. Translate into action whatever good resolvearises in your minds. We waste our time in postponingthe good deeds.  We should be ever ready to put intoaction all the good thoughts that arise in the mind.”  Thisis the noble advice that Ravana gave to the people whocame to him at the fag end of his life.  Since he delayedthe performance of good deeds, it brought disaster tohim.The Story of KabandhaWhile Rama and Lakshmana were moving in theforest in search of Sita, they accosted a strange personwho had his face in his stomach.  Seeing his form, theyconcluded that this person was a demon.  Rama andLakshmana went to the demon and asked him, “Whoare you? You don’t have any head.  How do you live?How is it that you don’t have a neck as other people101Summer Showers - 2002
have?” The strange creature answered, “O sir! Myname is Kabandha.  I have hands that can extend to tenmiles.  They can grasp any prey that I desire to eat.  I fillmy stomach without moving much.  Who are you?  Whyhave you entered this dense and terrible forest? Youseem to be tender beings.  You look like princes.  Towhich kingdom do you belong?”  Rama who alwaysspoke the truth replied, “We have come here inobedience to the command of our father.  I suffer fromthe pangs of separation from my wife.  Someone haskidnapped her.  Can you tell us where she is and whathappened to her?”  Then Kabandha told Rama, “O sir!First burn me to ashes.  I will then give you all theinformation you need.”  They killed him and burned hisbody.  A handsome being arose out of the ashes andtold them, “I was forced to assume this ugly form due tothe curses of sages.  I was told that whoever burnt me toashes was verily God himself. O Rama! Your Sita is inLanka.  She is a lady of great chastity.  Whoever darestouch her will be burnt to ashes.  Very soon you will seeSita in Lanka and will go back to Ayodhya.  My wordsnever fail.  You may seek the help of Sugriva. May youenjoy comfort and solace soon.”  After saying thesewords, he vanished.Alliance with SugrivaRama befriended Sugriva, Hanuman, and otherVanara warriors.  Sugriva rendered all help required to55102Summer Showers - 2002
search for Sita.  He rallied his forces and reached theshores of the sea.  They then encountered the problemas to who would cross the sea and go to Lanka.  Theveterans said that they did not have enough strength tocross over. No one came forward to cross the ocean.Hanuman volunteered to do so and accomplish Rama’smission. He was ever ready to do any work for theLord.In the meanwhile, let us find out about Vali andSugriva. Vali was a very strong and powerful Vanaraking; but he lacked virtue and indulged in evil deeds.Once, Vali fought against a powerful demon Dundubhi.He killed him in the fight and hurled his dead body. Thebody fell on the Rishyamuka Mountain where the sageMatanga was doing penance. The blood dripping fromthe body of the demon fell on sage Matanga anddisturbed him. Enraged, he cursed that whoever killedDundubhi would have his head broken into a thousandpieces if ever he set foot on that mountain. Vali pickedup a quarrel with Sugriva, his own brother, and banishedhim from the kingdom. Sugriva started living on theRishyamuka Mountain for he felt assured that Vali wouldnot be able to touch him if he went to Rishyamuka dueto sage Matanga’s curse. Hence, Sugriva, accompaniedby Hanuman and other well-wishers, settled on theRishyamuka Mountain. He was contemplating on theways and means of defeating Vali.103Summer Showers - 2002
One day Sugriva and Hanuman noticed twohandsome persons walking at a distance in the forest.He wondered as to who they were. Sugriva thought thatthey might have come for hunting. He sent Hanuman tofind out about the two brothers. Hanuman disguisedhimself like a Brahmin and met Rama and Lakshmana.Hanuman’s speech was cultured and gentle. Heintroduced himself as a Minister of Sugriva andvolunteered to carry them on his shoulders and takethem to Sugriva. There ensued a beautiful conversationbetween Rama and Hanuman in Sanskrit. Ramaunderstood from the conversation that Vali was unjusttowards Sugriva. Vali had appropriated the kingdomfrom Sugriva and had driven him out of Kishkinda. Heaccused Sugriva of criminal conduct, of which Sugrivawas not guilty. In his exile, Sugriva was in need of afriend who was stronger than Vali. He wanted to testwhether Rama was stronger than Vali. He wanted tomake an alliance with Rama only if he proved himself tobe stronger than Vali. Sugriva said to Rama, “Rama, mybrother is of great power and strength. I want to find outwhether you are stronger than my brother.” When Ramanodded his assent, he further said to him, “Once mybrother shot an arrow through the Sal trees. It piercedfive sal trees in a row and emerged out of them. It is verydifficult to charge an arrow through a sal tree becauseit is a very hard wood. Shoot an arrow and let itpierce through at least four trees.” Rama smiled and56104Summer Showers - 2002
discharged the arrow. The arrow pierced seven trees.Sugriva was deeply impressed by the strength of Rama.He sought the help of Rama to defeat Vali. He alsopromised to help Rama in searching for Sita. Ramaasked Sugriva to challenge his brother for a fight, butcautioned him that that the fight should take place tenmiles away from Kishkinda.Rama told Sugriva to do this because the rules ofexile prohibited him from entering into cities andvillages.  These rules compelled him to confine himselfonly to the forests.  Hence, Rama wanted Sugriva to callVali out of his kingdom so that he would be able to helpSugriva.As advised by Rama, Sugriva roared and calledVali for a fight.  Tara was the faithful wife of Vali.  Shewanted to restrain him from entering into a fight withSugriva.  She pleaded with him by holding his hands;“You should not go for a fight now.  I have heard thatSugriva has befriended some powerful princes to helphim.  Do not be in haste, it is dangerous.  The wise onespause and ponder before undertaking any task.  Hastecan make waste.  It can be dangerous too.”  Tara spokethese words to Vali and took him back.  She was achaste wife who had many virtues.  She was highlyintelligent.  However, when Sugriva persisted in hischallenge the next day, Vali came out running to fight.Sugriva fought valiantly, but slowly Vali gained an upper105Summer Showers - 2002
hand. He then beat Sugriva black and blue. Sugriva ranaway from the battlefield. He felt disappointed thatRama had not come to his rescue.  Sri Rama explainedto him that he could not distinguish between the twobrothers, as they looked very much alike.  Hence Ramatalked to him sweetly and consoled him. He alsoinfused courage into him and assured him that he wouldkill Vali in the next fight.  But he asked Sugriva that heshould wear a garland around his neck so that Hewould be able to distinguish him from Vali. He askedLakshmana to gather flowers in the forest and stringthem into a garland.  Sugriva put on the garland andchallenged Vali for a fight a second time.The End of ValiA fierce fight ensued between the two brothers.Rama, hiding behind a tree shot an arrow at Vali andbrought him down.  Though Vali fell down, there wasstill life left in him.  Sri Rama went to Vali and said tohim, “ You have sinned against your brother Sugriva,you have appropriated his wife. That is a sin because ayounger brother’s wife is like one’s daughter.  Youappropriated his kingdom, banished him andappropriated his wife.  You blamed him for crimes thathe had not committed. I don’t like to speak untruth. Idecided to kill you and hence I promised your brotherthat I would help him”.  Then Vali said to him, “O Rama!You have come into the forest to keep up the word of57106Summer Showers - 2002
your father.  But you have interfered between my brotherand me. It is unjust on your part to kill a person, hidingbehind a tree.” Then Sri Rama replied, “O Vali!  I nolonger live in Ayodhya.  I am like a hunter moving in theforest and you belong to the race of animals. A hunterkills an animal hiding behind a tree.  He never goes faceto face with an animal to kill it. So I had to kill you hidingbehind a tree”. Vali listened to him and further said,“Rama, you are of great power and strength, you couldhave come face to face to fight with me”. Sri Ramareplied to him, “Vali, I know the boon that wasbestowed on you. You have a boon that whoever fightsyou face to face, half of his strength will enter into you. Iknow this secret”.  Vali entered into a long argument withRama but Rama convinced him of his folly.  Finally, Valisaid, “O Rama! My life is ebbing away. Make a promiseto me that you will make my son Angada, the crown-prince of Kishkinda”.  Rama agreed to this and fulfilledthe promise He gave to Vali.  He crowned Sugriva as theking and Angada as the crown prince.The Three ClashesThere are three clashes amongst brothersmentioned in the Ramayana. They are:  (1) the clashbetween Vali and Sugriva (2) the clash between Ravanaand Vibhishana and (3) the ‘clash’ between Rama andBharatha. Vibhishana protested against the evil actionsof his brother Ravana and incurred his anger. When107Summer Showers - 2002
Ravana banished him from Lanka, Vibhishana soughtrefuge at the feet of Rama. He helped Rama againstRavana.  Rama crowned him as the King of Lanka afterkilling Ravana. Sugriva sought the help of Rama to killVali; he then became the King of Kishkinda.In the first two cases, one brother became the Kingby standing against his own other brother. But the‘clash’ between Rama and Bharatha was of a differentkind!  Neither of the brothers wanted to become King ofAyodhya! Bharatha told Rama, “Rama, you are theeldest and you alone have the right to become the king.”But Rama protested, “ I will not step into Ayodhya as Iwant to respect the promise given to my father. Youhave to rule over the kingdom, as it is mother’s wish”.Thus Rama refused to yield to the request of Bharathaand rule over the Kingdom.  Both brothers wanted toconvince each other to rule over Ayodhya.Rama adhered to truth at all times “SathyaanasthiParodharmah”. For him observance of truth was thehighest Dharma.  He clung to Dharma tenaciously andbelieved that truth would be triumphant at the end.Rama was steadfast in his observance of Sathya andDharma. Ramayana is HIS-Story, it is UniqueAt last the battle between Rama and Ravanastarted.  Rama had respect for Ravana though he washis enemy.  He even praised the virtues of Ravana. He58108Summer Showers - 2002
knew that Ravana was under the curse imposed on Jayaand Vijaya.Rama had to act by public opinion also.  Sincesome people may raise doubts about the chastity ofSita, He had to make Sita undergo the ordeal by fire. Sitawas unhurt by the fire god who said to Rama, “Sita ispure and faultless”.Rama acted justly at every step. We have discussedabout it earlier.  Ramayana was a drama in which SriRama was the sutradhari (director). He was also apatradhari (actor).  The people also had their parts toplay in the drama. Rama performed his role excellently.Ramayana has survived the test of time. It has survivedeven though thousands of years have passed. Sri Ramawas dear to everybody.  He was an ideal that mankindneeds to emulate.The people of Mithila were fascinated by theappearance of Rama.  They went into ecstasy watchingthe conduct and beauty of Rama.  They thought thatRama and Sita made an excellent match.  They sangsongs inviting people to see the marriage of Rama andSita.  One such song goes like this:Welcome to all for Rama’s wedding;together we shall witness the joyous scene.Many have gathered already,decked up in all their finery.109Summer Showers - 2002
With necklaces the ladies are adornedof jewels pure and gleaming.Rama shall tie the knot todayto beauteous Sita, oh what a fine matchthey make.Father Dasaratha has made readybounteous feasts.All learned sages are assembled withVasishta presiding.Oh, what a multitude has assembledto rejoice, hearts with joy overflowing.Wedding of the holy pairRama and Sita, such a sight is indeed rare.The sight shall confer great merit.Rama looks the cool full moon,and Sita is a matching double.The compassionate Rama who loves allwill confer his grace on us all.Come quickly to see the holy wedding ofRama and Sita.                             
(Telugu Song)
People sang songs like this, rejoicing at themarriage of Rama and Sita.  The people of Ayodhya aswell as Mithila were greatly delighted.  They rejoicedimmensely.59110Summer Showers - 2002
There are always some who lack faith and sufferthereby, but those who have faith in Rama and surrenderto Him would never be put to any harm. Ramayana isthe history of Rama. It is HIS-story. The Ramayana isfull of noble characters.  The four brothers and theirwives hold out great ideals for mankind.  The mothers,Kausalya, Sumitra and Kaikeyi were also great women.They were embodiments of virtue and right conduct.People blame Kaikeyi saying that she was responsiblefor the suffering of Rama and Sita.  She was actually adivine instrument in the mission of Rama.  She was notthe kind of lady who would be swayed away by thewords of Manthara. She was instrumental in sendingRama to the forest so that He could punish the wickedand protect the good.  There are great subtleties andsecrets in the Ramayana.  We will try to know them inthe days to come.Summer Course, Brindavan, 21-05-2002
Ramayana - The Divine Masterplan
“That which fosters universal peace,That which destroys all scope for mean thoughts,That which encourages unity and cooperation,Is real Education, this is the education a studentshould acquire.”
(Telugu Poem)
Embodiments of Love!
THE Rama principle attracts everybody. Sucha principle can be explained for days togetherand still cannot be expounded fully. If youkeep hearing the song of the cuckoo it may tire you aftersometime. If you keep drinking, even divine nectar maytaste sour at some point of time. But the story of Ramacan be read or heard any number of times and onewould never feel satiated. He who sings, or reads orhears or gets to read this sacred story of Rama willfind it highly nectarous. No one knows the origin ofRamayana or from when it was being sung in public.860112Summer Showers - 2002
However, based on certain evidences, scholars havemade a few observations. The conversation that Ravanawas having with Sita while abducting her, gives a hint ofthe age of the characters in the epic, in that era. Ravanatold Sita, “My age is now 2000 years, your husbandRama is just 40 years of age and your own age is 39years.”The earth is endowed with several forms of energy.In between Akasha and the earth is permeated by a vastmedium of energy field. The power of planet earth isunimaginable. Hence, earth is considered to be thestorehouse of all energies. Predominant among theenergies is the power of magnetism. Repeatedinvestigations have failed to throw light on the nature ofthis energy.Sita is the daughter of Goddess Earth – Bhoodevi.She is therefore also called Bhoojatha. At the time whenRama went to lift Lord Shiva’s bow, Bhoodevi rejoiced.The various kings and princes who had assembledwere not of the right age for Sita. Their looks too wereof no match to those of Sita. Rama alone lookedextremely youthful. His physical features were beyonddescription. He was extremely handsome. Bhoodevidecided that Rama was the right match for Sita. She sawto it that there was no obstruction on Rama’s path tovictory in the assembly. When Rama lifted Lord Shiva’sbow, he used his left hand as if to indicate that he113Summer Showers - 2002
required just his left hand to accomplish somethingwhich others found impossible. This was actually thegreat strength of mother earth at work. She reduced theweight of the bow and enhanced Rama’s strength.The wonderful powers of the earth areindescribable. However, all the minerals, metals andchemicals that are in the earth are present in man too.Energies like the electric, chemical, magnetic, etc., theseand many more strengths are immanent in man. Onecannot say how many, but every kind of energy andmaterial in the core of earth are already in man. But, thereis no realization in man regarding his great potential. Thepower of the divine in man is extremely sacred. Man istremendously powerful because of this Divinity in him.He can do anything, if only he wills. Today, thanks to theinfluence of science, man has reached the moon. He hasalso brought back dust from the moon. Actually, theseare all expressions of the inner strength of man. It is apity that man cannot recognize his own strength. Atpresent, everyone is asking the others, “Who are you?”Very few ask the question, “Who am I?” All yourproblems get solved when you inquire into this question.In the answer to this question is embedded the answer toall questions.Mandodari, the Ideal WifeWhile abducting Sita, Ravana was taking heracross the ocean to Lanka. He was highly materialistic61114Summer Showers - 2002
and hence wanted to impress Sita with glimpses of hisriches, power, opulence and acquisitions. With thisintention he took Sita into the inner apartments of hispalace. But Sita refrained from looking at any of thesewith utter disdain. Mandodari was very sad at the turn ofevents. She advised Ravana thus, “Oh! Lord! Why areyou inviting your own doom? Rightly is it said that as thetime of destruction approaches, discrimination departs(Vinasakale viparita Buddhi). Why did you have tobring here such a chaste and pious lady like Sita? This isour fate. You are not making attempts to understand thetrue nature of mother Sita. For that you need to knowand control yourself first. She definitely cannot stay inthe inner palace. Instead select a peaceful location andput her there.” Paying heed to Mandodari’s advice, heset up a small house in the Asoka Vana for Sita to live inpeace. Mandodari is ranked as an ideal wife, because,like a minister who warns his king against danger, shegave timely advice to Ravana and made sincere attemptsto dissuade him from going astray. She told him, “Lord!Instead of doing ‘Ramachinta’ (Thoughts about LordRama) you are doing ‘Kamachinta’ (indulging in lustfulthoughts). From now on you will never face good timesagain. Your doom is approaching. This is the reasonwhy you are entertaining such wicked, destructivethoughts. You should never cause a woman weep andmake her shed tears. If you do so, for every tear that shesheds, you will have to shed a thousand. Never hurt a115Summer Showers - 2002
woman.” Thus Mandodari tried her best to makeRavana realize his folly.One day, Mandodari herself went to Sita. Sheimplored, “O daughter of Mother earth! Accept mysalutations. You are a chaste and noble lady. You arehighly sacred and pure. My husband is an evil man. Hisevil deeds are dragging him to his destruction. It is saidthat“With good feelings, man enjoys happiness;With evil feelings, he himself becomes evil.”
 (Telugu Poem)
His bad intentions are making him evil. Pleaseforgive him and save me from widowhood.”This episode of Mandodari pleading with Sita isnot chronicled in any prevalent version of theRamayana.  Meanwhile, Sita was totally lost in Rama’scontemplation. Mandodari’s pleas or Ravana’s threatsdid not even register in her mind.Sita in LankaAt such a time, what was the situation in Lanka?Just like the situation today, people were highly agitated.There was a strange sense of uneasiness and unrestamongst the citizens. They suppressed their sufferingsin their hearts and would not express them freely for fearof persecution by Ravana. Meanwhile, Vibhishana’swife Sarama took upon herself the task of serving Sita.62116Summer Showers - 2002
She had several conversations with Sita and tried to giveher strength. She said, “Mother! I am indeed fortunateto serve such a holy person like you. Your purecharacter alone can lend some peace to Lanka. Ravanais no ordinary king. He is exceptionally wicked and it isour misfortune that you have fallen into his clutch.”Sarama did her best to thus console Sita and lift herspirits.One night Trijata, daughter of Sarama had aforeboding dream. The dream vividly showed Lanka asbeing totally dry and arid. It showed all the trees ashaving withered and fallen. The royal palace was seenreduced to ruins and Ravana was staggering aboutwithout even water to drink. She understood that whatshe foresaw to be Ravana’s fate was a directconsequence of his own wicked deeds. At the sametime, she was helpless and could do nothing but feelingsad.Meanwhile Ravana appeared at the Asoka gardens.He visited Sita everyday to announce the countdown tothe number of days left for her to accept him. Sita wouldremain oblivious to all such threats. One day, Saramaapproached Sita, fell at her feet and prayed, “Mother!This has been a unique good fortune that I have had. Mydaughter also has been blessed by this opportunity. Myhusband is a person of sound character. He is also adevotee of Rama. He has surrendered himself to Rama117Summer Showers - 2002
at the seashore. I am thrilled that our entire family hashad this unique opportunity of being at Rama’s service.”Sita felt a little consoled when she heard this fromSarama; She realized that she had someone she couldtrust, near her.Hanuman in Search of SitaAt that moment, Hanuman entered the scene. Hehad been searching for Sita all over Lanka. He wasconstantly censuring himself at the predicament he wasin. To find Sita, he was forced to look amongst and atthe ladies. He hence entered the inner apartments of thepalace. He could feel the evil vibrations from the crueldemonesses who inhabited the rooms. Their actionswere most grotesque. Hanuman scolded himself, “Alas!What a sin I am committing! Are these the scenes I amexpected to see? These eyes must see the Divine formof Lord Rama and not such ugly scenes.  Yet, I amforced to do so if I must succeed in finding Sita. I mustnot allow these situations to upset me.” So strengtheninghis resolve, Hanuman climbed over the walls of the innerchambers and continued his search.At the time when Hanuman was captured andbrought before Ravana, an interesting conversation tookplace between the two. Ravana was holding court in agigantic hall of the palace. Ravana looked at the captiveHanuman and asked, “You are a monkey. You havedestroyed the entire gardens. Who has sent you here, O63118Summer Showers - 2002
foolish fellow?” Hanuman was no ordinary being! Hereplied using the same harsh language, “Foolish fellow!The same hero who chopped off the ears and nose ofyour sister has sent me here!” Ravana was angry at this.He threatened Hanuman, “You impudent fellow! Noking has dared address me in such derogatory terms!Watch your tongue, or I shall silence it forever!”.Hanuman shot back, “Maybe none has dared to demeanyou like this. I am Rama’s servant and I will definitelytalk to you in this tone for you deserve nothing better!”This was the conversation between Hanuman andRavana. Ravana had already got the news of Hanumanvisiting Sita and the exchange of messages between thetwo. When Hanuman set fire to Lanka and went back,Ravana started worrying that Rama would definitelyarrive, anytime from then. He considered the possibledefeat at Rama’s hands. These were the effects of hisown guilty conscience! It led him to hallucinate all suchscenarios and did not give him a moment’s peace!We shall now go back to Hanuman’s search forSita. Hanuman was on the rooftop of the innerapartments and from a distance, he espied the tall treesof Asoka Vana. He lept and reached the gardens. Andthere under a tree, he finally saw the forlorn form ofMother Sita. Her sorrow was obvious. Hanumanclimbed the tree under which She sat and started singingthe glory of Dasaratha’s son from the beginning. Sitawas perplexed and looked up in astonishment. She119Summer Showers - 2002
wondered, “Who is this monkey?” Hanuman was a totalstranger to her. As an answer to her enquiring look,Hanuman respectfully folded his palms and said,“Mother! I am a servant of Lord Rama. I am here toserve your lotus feet.” Hanuman’s response did nothave any effect on Sita. She did not acknowledge hispresence or his explanations. It was her bitter experiencethat the demons assumed a variety of forms and weremasters in creating illusions. She suspected thatHanuman too was a part of such a ploy.Hanuman jumped down from the tree. Constantlychanting the name of Rama, he addressed Sita,“Mother! Here is proof of my identity.” He then handedover to Sita the ring given by Rama to him. Sitarespectfully pressed the ring to her eyes. She toldHanuman, “Hanuman, how lucky you are! Did RamaHimself give you this ring? This was a gift to my Lordfrom King Janaka at the time of my wedding. Where isRama now? How is he?” She eagerly enquired about theLord in this way. Hanuman gave her courage by saying,“Mother! Be brave, he is coming shortly. He shalldefinitely come and take you back with him. You mustnot worry. If you are anxious, please sit on my back.With a single leap I shall take you to Rama immediately.”Sita smiled and said, “Hanuman, if I was to sit on yourback and go back to Rama, you would be accused ofcommitting the same sin of abduction as Ravana. I donot want you to get such a bad name. Rama himself64120Summer Showers - 2002
must come.  He must kill Ravana and release me fromthis prison. Till then I shall wait and put up with thistorture. Kindly carry this news to my Lord Rama.” Withgreat reluctance and grief, she gave permission forHanuman to leave. Hanuman could not bear to see thesadness in Sita. He decided to teach the demons alesson and proceeded to lay to utter waste, the beautifulAsoka gardens. He was finally captured and broughtbefore Ravana. Hanuman accused Ravana of being asinner and a wicked king. He told that it was themisfortune of the citizens of Lanka to have him as theirking. If the ruler was so wicked, he wondered, whatcould be said about the ruled? Hanuman poured scornon Ravana thus.Hanuman Returns to ReportLater, when he reached Rama he conveyed thegood news to him. Rama, Lakshmana, Sugriva and allother vanaras were waiting eagerly on the seashore.Hanuman landed in front of them. He was greeted withcongratulations and benedictions of victory from theecstatic battalions of vanaras. They praised Hanumanand said, “Hanuman! It is by such timely, helpful andsacred spirit of service to Rama that you have won hisheart. You have indeed brought good news. May allauspiciousness greet Rama from now on.”Before Hanuman took leave of Sita, She gave himher crown jewel. This was one among several that were121Summer Showers - 2002
presented to her by Anasuya.  Rama was aware of thisjewel. The moment Hanuman handed it over to Rama,Rama was both joyful and agonized. He heard the newsthat Sita was safe. This gladdened his heart. Hanumanexplained to Rama everything that had occurred inLanka.“Oh! Sri Rama, listen to my prayers!Accept the sacred jewel Sita has sent for youI have seen Sita shivering like a parrot in a cageSurrounded she is by a number of fiercedemonessesOh! How they scare her by their threats andweaponsPoor mother can only bow her head in fear andanguish.Oh! Sri Rama, listen to my prayers!Firstly, there is IndrajitThen comes the commander in chief PrahastaThe vast courtyards, the palatial bungalowsThe big markets and the dazzling orchidsI have seen them all!Oh! Rama listen to my prayers!”   
         (Telugu Song)
In this way Hanuman described in great detaileverything that he had seen in Lanka. Hearing about65122Summer Showers - 2002
Sita’s plight, Lakshmana immediately grabbed his bowand arrows. He urged his brother to get up and actimmediately. He said, “This is not the time to rest evenfor a moment. Let us proceed immediately and put anend to Mother Sita’s plight and bring her back safely.”Rama calmly replied, “Peace, peace, peace! Oneshould not act in haste. Without proper enquiry,investigations and planning any action can only producenegative results. Let us therefore proceed cautiously.”Sugriva sent instructions to his friends and kinsmento mobilize a huge army. He instructed that the armyenter Lanka, destroy Ravana and return only then.The Vanara Army Invades LankaWith such enthusiasm and vigour, the vanara armycomprising experienced heroes like Sugriva, Hanuman,Jambavanta and others soon reached the shores ofLanka. The entire city was panic-stricken. The vanaraarmy was all over the countryside around Lanka. Theywere on the hills, on the treetops, on the plains andeverywhere! The monkeys were strangers to theLankans till they saw Hanuman. The memory of thedestruction that Hanuman caused during his previousvisit was all too fresh in their minds. They werewondering among themselves.“Oh! Wherefrom has this terrible monkey come?Who has sent this messenger of destruction toLanka?123Summer Showers - 2002
Our houses are in ruins, our families are homelessAll the houses are on fire, oh! Where are we to takeshelter?We hear he is Rama’s messenger come to see SitaHe is contented with the cooling vision of SitaBut his anger has heated up our Lanka!Oh! What destruction! What a calamity!Our city lies in ruins, thanks to the monkey!Oh! Wherefrom has this terrible monkey come?Ravana will face certain ruinHe has abducted chaste and pious Sita,If the messenger be so strongOh! What can one say of the master!” 
 (Telugu Song)
In this way, the citizens of Lanka were terror-stricken. The monkey which had caused tremendousdestruction earlier had now reappeared with more of itskind! Ravana’s ministers, courtiers and allies were at aloss as to what to do.How did the Vanara army cross the ocean? Themighty Hanuman could do it, but what about the entirearmy? Rama propitiated the God of Ocean with anarrow. The deity responded and facilitated the crossing.The Vanaras were raising war cries against thedemons. Ravana could not stand the noise. A fiercebattle was imminent. Ravana was sure to meet his end in66124Summer Showers - 2002
the war. This was also the popular sentiment of thecitizens of Lanka. They all wondered, “Why is it thatthis wicked person is keen to meet his doom? He isaiming to burn to ashes not just himself but his entirekingdom as well”. Everybody was thus criticizingRavana within themselves. None of them entertained anypleasant feelings for Ravana.War commenced. It was a fierce pitched battle.Indrajit, the son of Ravana, who had defeated Indrahimself, entered the battle. He was the eldest son ofRavana. It was the second day of the battle. He wasgeared splendidly in the battle-attire. He was killed byLakshmana in a fierce battle. Then came another mightyRakshasa, whom the Vanaras mistook to be Ravanahimself. He caused a great deal of havoc and destructionin their ranks. There was none in the army equal to him inmight and valour. Vibhishana approached Rama andexplained, “ Rama! You must kill him somehow.  If youkill him, it is as good as striking at Ravana himself. He isa mighty support for Ravana’s army. If you hit histhumb, he is sure to fall”. And so it was done as told.The mighty warrior fell. Vibhishana was observedwiping his tears. Lakshmana was surprised. He askedVibhishana, “ So many have died in the battle. But whydo you weep for this one alone?” Vibhishana replied, “Lord! He was my only son. It is because of paternalattachment that I weep. But in truth, it was vital that he125Summer Showers - 2002
be removed from the scene. Ravana’s arrogance wasprimarily based on his might. There are several moresuch heroes on whom Ravana depends”. In this way,Vibhishana gave Rama a brief account of severalwarriors in Ravana’s army. Gradually Ravana startedlosing each one of his celebrated generals.Ravana KilledFinally, Ravana himself came to the battlefield.Deep within himself he was worried; but he hid it andfought. As each of his head was knocked off, anothertook its place. It was proving to be impossible tovanquish Ravana. It was once again Vibhishana whorevealed to Rama the secret of Ravana’s invincibilityand directed where the arrow had to be shot.  He said, “Rama! There is no sin in betraying such a wickedperson. His death is highly beneficial for the world. I donot aspire for or desire to rule the kingdom of Lanka.But this evil Ravana must be killed.” Rama followedVibhishana’s directions and shot his arrow. Ravana fellon the battlefield.Mandodari came running and wailed in agony,“Lord! I had warned you several times not to meddlewith chaste and pious married women. I told you not tocast lustful eyes on spiritually accomplished women.You are now reaping the consequence of your sins. Youhave accumulated plenty of vices. I tried to dissuadeyou. But you would never pay me any attention.” It isrightly said,67126Summer Showers - 2002
“Good advice is never acceptedThough given with a good heart.Evil counsel is immensely attractive to the earsHow will such people ever realize Me?”  
(Telugu Poem)
Of what use is one’s accomplishment if one doesnot listen to good advice? He is bound to be ruined.Ravana too could not escape this fate and he paid for itwith his life.The Fire OrdealThe vanaras rejoiced at Ravana’s fall. They toohad lost a several of their own members. Sita was beingbrought to Rama. Strangely, Rama would not raise hishead to look at Sita. Sita was highly anxious and eager tocatch a glimpse of Rama. She had been away from herhusband for 10 months and wanted to see him at once.But, Rama did not seem to show any interest. Instead,he ordered Lakshmana to light a fire for Sita to prove herchastity. It was Rama’s intention that Sita pass throughthe fire and prove to the world that She was blemishless,sacred, and pure. It was only after this proof that Ramawas willing to accept her. Rama knew about Sita’s purity– but he was concerned that the world may spreadrumours about her character. If Sita were to proveherself with a trial by fire, none would dare open hismouth. Sita saluted Rama, circumambulated the firethrice and hurled herself into it. The Fire God appeared.127Summer Showers - 2002
He proclaimed, “Rama! Sita is blameless. She is aspiritually enlightened, sacred and virtuous lady. Thereis no need for you to test her further. I am withdrawingand extinguishing myself.” Thus Sita was brought toRama. The monkeys were all agog to catch a glimpse ofmother Sita and fell one over the other in total disarray intheir eagerness to see Sita. Rama accepted Sita as hisown.Back to AyodhyaMeanwhile Vibhishana brought the aerial vehicle –Pushpaka Vimana and put it at Rama’s disposal. Thisvehicle belonged to Kubera, the stepbrother of Ravana.Ravana had vanquished him in battle and usurped it.Rama, Lakshmana, Sita, Vibhishana, Sugriva and allothers boarded the vehicle and proceeded to flytowards Ayodhya.At the same time, Bharatha was eagerly awaitingRama’s arrival. The dead line Rama had given him forhis reaching Ayodhya was over that day. He wasdistraught with anxiety as to whether Rama would returnor not. He had a chariot kept ready to receive Rama andtake him to Ayodhya. Shortly, to his great joy he sawPushpaka Vimana approaching in the sky. The citizensof Ayodhya were overjoyed. Their hearts were drywithout seeing Rama for fourteen long years. The stateof the women was beyond description. They had spentfourteen years in great despair. They were unable to68128Summer Showers - 2002
relish their food. They had all become almost skeletonsin appearance. They had spent their time chantingRama’s name and consoling themselves.Meanwhile, Shatrughna arrived from Ayodhyawith garlands for his brothers and sister-in-law. ThePushpaka Vimana landed and everyone alightedfrom it. And then a wonder occurred. Everyone wasastonished to see that Bharatha and Rama lookedidentical! This wonder was witnessed by one and all.Since Bharatha had spent every moment of the fourteenyears in constant contemplation of Rama, he hadacquired Rama’s features and attributes. Shatrughnawanted to garland Rama, but could not identify who wasRama among the two. As everyone was wondering,Lakshmana came to Shatrughna’s rescue. Rama wasgarlanded and one garland was presented to Sita. Theentire group moved in a procession towards Ayodhya.Jubilant AyodhyaAt Ayodhya, there was gaiety and happiness allaround. Functions were organized everyday. Thepopulace was extremely happy to get Rama back afterfourteen years. This was all due to the power of hisMother’s blessings. Kausalya blessed Rama, “Son!May you pass the fourteen long years like you spent justfourteen minutes. No obstacle will come in your waybecause you are the incarnation of Lord Narayana. None129Summer Showers - 2002
can trouble You. You will definitely reach Ayodhya safeand sound.” She lovingly embraced Rama on his return.It was now Sumitra’s turn. She is a good friend toall. Her virtues cannot be easily described. She too wasthrilled at the victorious return of Rama. She wasconfident all through that none could harm Rama orcause Him an iota of trouble for the simple reason thatno such person could be born. She brought herdaughter-in-law Urmila to Lakshmana. It was fourteenyears since Lakshmana and Urmila had seen each other.She fell at her husband’s feet and said, “Lord! It wasyour total dedication to Rama that has saved andprotected you so far. You would always think of Rama.It was that sacred name that guarded and guided you.”She was overjoyed and applied vermilion toLakshmana’s feet, as was the custom in those days.Sumitra praised her that it was her good wishes andblessings that had kept her son Lakshmana safe andsecure.Kaikeyi too arrived on the scene. She was notwicked, as is commonly depicted. She was fully awareof the purpose of Rama’s incarnation. The house ofDasaratha was indeed fortunate to have four gems ofsons and four equally virtuous daughters-in-law. Sumitragathered the four couples together, blessed themcontently and retired from the scene. She told Rama, “ Ihad spent fourteen years of my life thinking only of you.69130Summer Showers - 2002
It was my cherished desire that I see you after fourteenyears. I have seen you now and sanctified myself. Mylife’s purpose is served.” There was nothing else shewanted from life and she soon died peacefully.Kaikeyi too was highly contended and at peacewith herself. She was subjected to malignant attacks.But she did not heed any attention to them. She was fullyaware of the mission that Rama was to undertake. At thetime Rama was very young, she was teaching himarchery. Rama had then already cautioned her, “Mother!I have incarnated to put an end to the demons. You mustchalk out a plan to fulfil this mission.” This is the reasonthat Kaikeyi went on to ask the two seemingly heartlessboons from Dasaratha. She pretended to succumb toManthara’s wicked promptings and asked Dasaratha tobanish Rama. All that was now past. Rama had returnedvictorious and everybody was singing praises of hisglory. She too passed away, contented with her role inthe masterplan. Ayodhya was decked in all frenzy andrejoiced at the return of Lord Rama.Summer Course, Brindavan, 22-05-2002
God has no Specific Form
A tree can be fashioned without any twist and turn,A stone can be fashioned without any defect.Can we fashion the mind, without any defect?The word of Sai is the word of truth.
(Telugu Poem)
The Three AkashasEmbodiments of Love!
OUR warden has asked me to talk aboutthe three Akashas (infinities). “AkashamGaganam Soonyam.” That which cannotbe seen by the eye, or cannot be heard by the ear orcannot be expressed by words characterizes the realmof Akasha. It cannot be comprehended by the mindeither. The sun and the moon, the clouds and thestars belong to the realm of Akasha. There arethreeakashas:Bhutakasha,Chittakashaand970132Summer Showers - 2002
Chidakasha. The  Bhutakasha  envelops the visibleand the invisible phenomena. For example, some starsare visible in the sky; but there are many more thatremain invisible. The distance between the earth and thesun is about nine crores and eleven lakh miles. TheBhutakasha spreads over an extent that is impossible tocalculate. The sun is a star and there are countlessnumbers of other stars scattered in the cosmos. Theymatch our Sun in size. Since they are so far away, theyappear like tiny stars to us. Each star shines with thesplendour of the sun. The light of these stars travels atan incredible speed of 1,86,284 miles per second! Thereare other stars whose light has not yet reached the earth.The light emanating from the stars is stupendous inits intensity. The brilliance cannot be withstood byanything or anyone on the earth. Our sun imparts only aportion of its radiance to earth. Neither the huge starsnor the sun and the moon are capable of generating thiseffulgence on their own. There is a fundamental powerthat is the basis of all this. Its is the basic illuminationfrom which the rest of the brilliance originates. Thisprimordial power is that of the Atma. It allows the stars,sun and moon to shine.Chittakasha is a Reflection of BhutakashaAll these mentioned above are encompassed in theBhutakasha. What is Chittakasha then? Sinceeverything that is visible is Bhutakasha, it cannot be133Summer Showers - 2002
argued that those invisible belong to Chittakasha. Thereis a power that is invisible, silent, imperceptible andeternal. This power is the Chidakasha. In Chittakashais reflected or imprinted everything that is seen inBhutakasha. The span of the Chittakasha is very smalland subtle. On the other hand, the gross and visibleBhutakasha spans a terrific extent. Yet, the entirecontents of Bhutakasha appear in the Chittakasha assmall blips! For example, you see a huge mountain.When you close your eyes after seeing it, you will beable to visualize the image of the mountain from theChittakasha. Similarly, the stars and sky and all that isseen are permanently etched on the Chittakasha.The exact physical extent and dimensions of theBhutakasha have not been estimated to date. Butsomething can be known of the Chittakasha. The entirevisible creation is stored in Chittakasha in a subtleform. Every form and sound in the Chittakasha isa reflection of some entity in the Bhutakasha.Bhutakasha is physically perceptible. That which ismentally perceptible is Chittakasha.Chidakasha or Atma Encompasses AllThe third is called Chidaksha. It is alsocalled Atma. Atma has no form. It has nomovement.Nirgunam, Niranjanam, SanathanaNiketanam, Nitya, Suddha, Buddha, Mukta, NirmalaSwarupinam (attributeless, pure, final abode, eternal,71134Summer Showers - 2002
unsullied, enlightened, free and embodiment ofsacredness). He who has seen this Chidakasha isone who has had the experience of Atma. Noeducational qualifications, scholarship or specialabilities are required to see Chittakasha. On the otherhand none can see even the reflection or shadow ofChidakasha, however strenuous the effort.The distance of several stars from the earth ismeasurable. But there are many more which are so faraway that they are beyond any human estimation.Scientists have made several attempts to investigatesuch a phenomenon. They attempted to reach theChidakasha with their scientific examinations. All theirefforts can take them at most till the Chittakasha onlyand not a step more. Chidakasha could not beadequately described even by the Vedanta. Science toofails in its efforts. However, pointers are to some extentavailable from Vedanta on Chidakasha. The reflectionof Bhutakasha is Chittakasha. That which reflectsChittakasha itself is Chidakasha. The relation betweenthe three is explained as follows:1.The one you think you are, which is Bhutakashabecause it contains all that you see, hear and experience.2. The one that others think you are, which is theChittakasha, because, it reflects in your mind’s eyewhatever you contemplate on.135Summer Showers - 2002
3. The one you really are, which is the Chidakashaor the principle of Atma – your true nature. It is DivineBliss. Bliss, I, reflection of Divinity and Atma all meanthe same. ‘I’ is related exclusively to the Atma. ‘I’ is asingle lettered word. The Vedas declare “Ekam SatVipahraha Bahuda Vadanti”. ‘I’ is the truth. It isinterpreted in several ways by scholars. I may call ‘AnilKumar’ and the reply comes ‘I’. I may call ‘Girigaru’ –once again the reply comes from the other side ‘I’. Inthis way I may call out the names of several lakhs ofpeople; the reply is always ‘I’. This unity in diversity is‘I’. It is the Atmatatwa. It cannot be explained as beingthe sky or earth, etc. It is so infinitely expansive that ithas no measure at all. Scholars therefore say, “AkashamGaganam Soonyam.” There is nothing but empty spacein which you may see a few stars and clouds. But, towhat extent can you see them? Only upto a certaindistance. Anything beyond that is invisible to your eyes.That which cannot be seen but only visualized isChittakasha. ‘I’ also cannot be visualized. None cangive its true meaning.However, Vedanta always propounds unity indiversity through all its teachings. For instance thephrase “Aham Brahmasmi” translates to ‘I amBrahma’. The word Brahma follows the single letter ‘I’.Any other word has to follow Aham. Without the letter‘I’ the word Atma cannot appear. Therefore the letter ‘I’signifies the primordial principle.72136Summer Showers - 2002
The Vedanta advises that though one may haveread scriptures and texts, he should still make everyeffort to find out his true nature. He should repeatedlyask himself: ‘Who am I?’ This question cannotbe answered with your scholarship or practicalapplications. When asked ‘Who are you?’ you reply, ‘Iam Anil Kumar’. To whom is the name ‘Anil Kumar’given? Your parents have given that name to your body.What was your name before you were so named? Thereis no answer. Therefore all names are only given, noneof them is born with you. They were all added to you atthe time of your birth or later for identifying you in thismaterial world. They do not establish your true identity.Atma has no fixed name. It is its own identity. It has noother form.Chidakasha is AttributelessBhutakasha and Chittakasha can be discussedand studied upto some extent. However Chidakashahas no form or attribute. What form and name can youassign to the formless one? It is therefore its ownidentity. No one is able to comprehend the true meaningof the word ‘I’. Aham (I) should not be confused withAhamkara (ego). Ego has form, but not ‘I’. Vedantadescribes ‘I’ by negation. It is not ether, ego, sound orany such thing. A master once asked his disciple to findout who he really was. The next day the discipleappeared and said, “Sir, I’ve found the answer. My137Summer Showers - 2002
name is Ramaiah.” The master once again asked him,“Who are you?” After further enquiry, the answer came,“I am the son of Mallaiah and my mother’s name isPullamma.” These are all names of various bodies. Noneof them is your true identity because names relate to thebody. They are useful for you to introduce yourself inthe physical world. Only one name was born with youand not given. It is ‘I’. Atma, ‘I’ all mean the same.Make efforts to realize the nature of ‘I’. That is trueSadhana. There is nothing else you need to knowfurther. There is no need for you to say, “I am Ramaiah”when announcing your true identity. ‘I’ is itself enough.No other words need to follow ‘I’ to reinforce youridentity. ‘I’ is unique and always single. Realising this isthe secret contained in all of Vedanta.God is Formless – an AnalogyChidakasha has nothing to do with reflections,reactions and resounds. It is beyond all the three. Itcannot be identified or comprehended with any name orform. At one point of time, in Uttar Pradesh, there was abangle seller on the banks of river Ganges. One day aradiant form emerged from the Ganges and asked him, “Sir, will you please sell me some bangles?” The bangleseller complied and taking out some bangles for her size,he made her put them on. She said, “ I don’t have themoney for these bangles with me. However, I will giveyou an address and directions to reach the house. Go to73138Summer Showers - 2002
the person and collect the money from him. He is myfather. Tell him that money is kept in the locker.” Thebangle seller then asked her, “Mother, what is yourname? I will need to identify you at your house forcollecting the money.” The form replied, “You can tellthem that my name is Ganga” and then vanished.As directed, the bangle seller reached the houseand told the owner that he had come to collect themoney due to him from the owner’s daughter Ganga towhom he had sold some bangles. The astonished houseowner replied, “I am not even married. How can I thenhave a daughter and how would she buy bangles?” Thebangle seller replied, “ The lady was certainly telling thetruth. How else could I have discovered and found myway to your house? She even identified your name forme. Is this your name or not?” The person agreed that itwas so. The bangle seller argued, “ If all this is true, thelady certainly was not lying.” The house owner did noteven know that he had the amount with him. Hesearched in his locker and was astounded to find theamount there exactly as predicted.This person was an ardent devotee of motherGanges. He was thrilled and told the bangle-seller, “Sir!I worship mother Ganges. She is my patron deity. I haveoffered myself to her and have hence chosen to remainunmarried. I am eager to see the sacred spot where yousaw my mother Ganges. Let us go!” The bangle seller139Summer Showers - 2002
obliged and soon both arrived at the banks of the river.The bangle-seller ardently prayed, “Mother! Youappeared to me and took the bangles. You guided me toyour devotee’s house to take the payment. Will you notappear again and show me your form? I have come toyou with gratitude to tell you that I have received thepayment due to me.” A voice replied, “Here is theblessing that I confer for your gratitude” and a handemerged from the river, with the newly bought banglesadorning it! The devotee saw the hand and was ecstatic.He exclaimed, “Mother! Will you not show me your trueform and sanctify me?” He thus kept pleading andpraying. The voice replied, “Son! I cannot show anyform to anybody. That is because I do not have aparticular form. All forms that you can see are God’sforms only! God can appear in any form that a devoteeprays to Him to appear in. God Himself has no specificform or attribute. I showed you my hand filled withbangles just as a proof that I have indeed bought thebangles and you must pay the bangle seller.” Thedevotee saw the hand; he was thrilled at the graceconferred on him and said, “Mother! I have seen at leastyour hand and have been sanctified! I do not wantanything else in life”. He then fell into the Ganges andbreathed his last.Ramakrishna’s DilemmaDivinity always assumes the form that a devoteevisualizes and prays for. None can actually fix and74140Summer Showers - 2002
estimate what Divinity looks like, because there is noform at all! Ramakrishna Paramahamsa too had a similarexperience. He was staying at Kamarpukur. He wasgripped by a strong desire to have darshan of GoddessKali. Unable to bear the pain of separation anymore, heattempted to commit suicide by jumping into theGanges. Surprisingly, however far he walked into theriver, he found that the water came only up to his knees!He prayed, “O’ Mother of the universe! Why are youtesting me so? Why do you not reveal your form to me?Why do you not allow me to merge in you? I am unableto bear this tortuous pain.” The mother Goddessreplied, “Son! I can show you my form if I had one inthe first place! I have no form for you to see. My onlyform is that of Atma. So, contemplate on the principleof Atma. You can see God in any form that you think of.All the forms that you attribute to God are products ofyour illusion. None of them can be taken to be the trueidentity of Divinity.”Be Attached to AtmaYou say that Rama or Krishna or Sai Baba hasappeared before you. Several people make such claims.These are all figments of one’s illusion (Bhrama). Aslong as you have Bhrama you will be far away fromBrahma (Divinity). On the other hand if you haverealized Brahma, Bhrama can come nowhere near you.The need of the hour is therefore to overcome this141Summer Showers - 2002
illusion. Get rid off the body attachment. Cultivateattachment to the Atma instead. Your true identity isAtma. It has neither a name nor a form. It is theembodiment of bliss. Atma is therefore describedas, “Nityanandam, Parama Sukhadam, KevalamJnanamurtim, Dwandwateetam, Gagana Sadrisham,Tattwamasyadi Lakshyam, Ekam, Nityam, Vimalam,Achalam, Sarvadhee Sakshibhutam, Bhavateetam,Trigunarahitam” (God is the embodiment of eternalbliss, He is wisdom absolute, the One without a second,beyond the pair of opposites, expansive and pervasivelike the sky, the goal indicated by the MahavakyaTattwamasi, the eternal, pure, unchanging, the witnessof all functions of the intellect, beyond all mentalconditions and the three Gunas of Sattwa, Rajas andThamas).These are the various names and descriptions ofthe Atma. However, it has no form. Hence do not aim tosee the form of God. Instead consider all the forms thatyou see to be that of God. Do not fix various forms asunique to God.Atmic Bliss Alone is EternalThe feature of Bhutakasha is that, it encompassesthe sun, the stars and all the galaxies in it. Do not takethese to be the permanent attributes of God! They willall perish someday, pass on or change forms. They willwithdraw themselves and disappear from creation itself75142Summer Showers - 2002
at some point of time. There is only one thing that willalways be with you, in you, around you, above you andbelow you and that is bliss.Bliss has no form. There is only one way to knowit. People think that bursting out into laughter is bliss!Even laughter should not be a guffaw. The bliss ofdivine personality is expressed by a delicate smile. Nosound accompanies this smile. It is not a guffaw; but itconfers plenty of joy to those who see it. Loud laughteris called a “prahasan” while the soundless smile iscalled “hasan”. God always smiles and never indulgesin loud laughter. What you see in cinemas is an exercisein histrionics that is passed on as laughter. Seeing this,people imagine that God too must be laughing like this!Identify God by Expressing GratitudeThere is one aspect that you can use to identifyDivinity and show your gratitude. God is giving you somany things. When you are not well a doctor comes andgives you an injection. You pay the doctor his fees. Yourexpression of gratitude ends there. When you arehungry you tell your mother that you would like to eatsomething. Your mother gives you some food that yourelish with great joy. This itself is an expression ofgratitude to your mother. You may be suffering. Whensomeone comes and consoles you and gives youstrength, you express gratitude to him. In this way, allhelp rendered is gratefully acknowledged without fail.143Summer Showers - 2002
This should be the custom. Unfortunately, there is nosuch tradition today.God is giving you so much. You are getting freeeducation, free medical aid and free water. He is talkingwith you so freely and moving about amongst you sofreely. He is giving you everything so ‘free’! How doyou express your gratitude for all these? You must giveup your ego and spread happiness like He does. Thatwill be the right thing to do. As it is said,“That heart which you have given me, O Lord!I give it back to you, O mighty one!What else can I offer you, my Master!I offer my prayerful salutations with tears ofgratitude. O Lord!Accept them all with my heart.” 
             (Telugu Poem)
Offer your salutations to God. Without doing this,you will become an ungrateful wretch. You will collapseinto the endless cycle of birth and death. Suffering andagony will cling to you. Your tears of gratitude willliberate you from all such problems. You will always beblissful, with cheerful smiles. This is the result ofconstantly expressing your gratitude to God.Once, there lived a devotee of Lord Krishna whospent his time ceaselessly contemplating on Krishna’sname. But he had a problem! Krishna was depicted invarious ways in different pictures. Which form to select76144Summer Showers - 2002
while contemplating on Lord Krishna? He could notdecide. These photographs are artificially created ones.It is said, “Daivam Manusha Roopena” – God is in thehuman form. The crowns and jewels in the pictures areadditions provided by artists; they are not his true form.His true nature is that He is ever smiling and is alwaysmaking others smile! He is always blissful and presentsbliss to others. That is the true hallmark of LordKrishna. ‘Be happy; make others happy.’ It is a give andtake philosophy! Give bliss and accept bliss in return.That is the only true form of gratitude you can expressto God.Without expressing your gratitude, you cannot aimto please God with anything that you may do. You willnot attain any happiness in return. When you see yourpresiding deity, give a smile. Do not stand with afrowning face! With such a serious face, you can neverhope to experience bliss. You must always be happybecause bliss is your true nature. Always maintain apleasant smile on your face. You may definitelyencounter problems and obstacles in life. Grief andsorrow may sometimes assail you. Do not break downand cry. These are things that come and go. They arepassing clouds and will never stay permanently totrouble you. Do not yield to them; face them head longinstead. A steady faith in God will give you thesatisfaction of being a true devotee.145Summer Showers - 2002
Merge in ChidakashaToday, you worry about your mother, father,kith and kin. How do you expect to attain happinesswith so many worries? Who are your parents? They arethe ones who gave you a physical body. Whose body isit? It is only a physical entity. Forget the body.Contemplate on Divinity instead. This is true devotion.Ignore Bhutakasha entirely, though it is what youactually see. Chittakasha can be relied on to the sameextent. Once you assimilate everything in Chittakasha,you will reach Chidakasha. Hence, develop thecapability to completely merge in Chidakasha.How will you visualize and merge intoChidakasha? I shall explain it in detail later. In thisworld, several scholars and experts explain Divinityquite extensively. However, Divinity that can beexplained is not the true Divinity! These are onlydescriptions and pointers to Divinity. They can easilymake you happy or even delude you. But you must gobeyond these and aim to see the reality that is ‘Tat’. ‘TatTvam Asi’ – Thou Art That. ‘Thou’ means ‘this’.‘That’ is ‘Tat’. Both should therefore become one.In response to Narasimhamoorthy’s prayer, Ihave explained the three Akashas of Bhutakasha,Chittakasha and Chidakasha to you. True ‘Akasha’ is‘Hridayakasha’ – the heart. Chidakasha is vital and77146Summer Showers - 2002
ultimate. Every attempt should be made to know itsnature.Summer Course, Brindavan, 23-05-2002
Reduce your Desires
Nasthi lobho samovyadhiNasthi krodha samoripuhuNasthi daridriyavath dukhamNasthi jnanath param sukham“There is no disease greater than greed,One’s anger is his greatest enemy,There is no sorrow deeper than poverty,There is no greater peace than wisdom.”
(Sanskrit Verse)
God Permeates the UniverseEmbodiments of Love!
LOVE, Aham, Atma, I – these are allsynonyms of the same entity. Every personcommonly uses the word ‘I’. It means he isrevealing his true identity of being the Atma. Sarvam1078148Summer Showers - 2002
khalvidam Brahma (The entire creation is Divinity).Whatever you hear, see or experience is all Brahmaalone. Brahma is yet another synonym for ‘I’. Einsteinonce said, “The entire creation is permeated with energyand energy has no form”. He discovered this truth in thisage, after strenuous investigations. A few thousands ofyears earlier, the seven-year-old Prahlada came tothe same conclusion without any experimentation. Hestated, “It is not possible to decide that God is presenthere and not present there. He is everywhere and therecan be no doubt about it. You can find Him whereveryou search for Him”.How did the young lad have such an experience?His own father Hiranyakasipu tried to have him killed bythe bite of poisonous snakes. All Prahlada did was tochant the Lord’s name, ‘Om Namo Narayanaya!’ and,lo and behold, the serpents turned into garlands!Hiranyakasipu then ordered that Prahlada be choppedinto pieces. Several swords were used, but Prahladakept chanting ‘Namo Narayanaya’, and the swordscould not make a scratch on the boy. They then decidedto make him drink poison. Prahlada kept repeating, ‘OmNamo Narayanaya!’ He did not have any other nameor thought in his mind. As a consequence, the poisonchanged into nectar. Seeing the futility of theseprocedures, they hurled the boy from the hilltop into theocean below. Prahlada kept chanting the Divine name,149Summer Showers - 2002
‘Om Namo Narayanaya!’ and smilingly fell into theocean. The deity of the ocean himself rescued the boyand brought him to the shore.The inner significance of these events is that faith ishighly essential. Faith is the basis. Without it, chantingthe Lord’s name any number of times will be of no avail.It is like as a tape recorder repeating God’s name.Prahlada was tuned into the primordial sound ofBrahma Tatva.Man’s body is a powerful dynamo. All the limbsand the body constitute a generator. There is a steadysupply of current from the body. Everything in man isDivine power. Prahlada experienced this current andtherefore firmly believed that God could be foundwherever He was sought.Today’s scientists have performed severalexperiments to ascertain Einstein’s statement regardingmatter and energy. They came to the same conclusion –Energy can neither be created nor destroyed.Newton too echoed similar sentiments. He haddedicated his entire life to investigate the attractivepower of the Earth. He realized that the power of gravitycould not be destroyed. It had no specific point oforigin or destination.“He is eternal without birth or death,He is ancient without beginning or an end,79150Summer Showers - 2002
He doesn’t die, he doesn’t take birth, he isblemishless,He remains the eternal witness.”     
(Telugu Poem)
Newton investigated in great detail about such aDivine power. He was a great scientist who understoodthe force of gravity associated with earth. How did helearn this? It is because he discovered aspects of thisattractive power wherever he looked. He saw the‘magnetic’ power in everything; he too concluded thatthis energy could not be created or destroyed byanyone. However, it could be transformed from oneform of energy to another. For example, the magneticenergy can be transformed into electrical energy.Electrical energy can be transformed into light energy.Though the basic magnetic energy can be converted intoany type of energy, it itself retains its original identity. Itcan vary its intensity – ebbing and growing as necessary.It changes all the time but never diminishes away. Aslong as the earth is there, the magnetic strength remains.It attracts our steps; it attracts our vision and ourhearing.Desires Overshadow the Divinity of ManMan when born, is without any desire. At that timehe is in a pure and pristine state. He is steady andpeaceful. All the strengths of man are at their highestintensity. In the eyes of every man, there are crores oflight rays that enable him to see. On his tongue, there arelakhs of taste buds. There are a few lakhs of cells in his151Summer Showers - 2002
ears that help him in his hearing. The entire body of manis full of divine energy. It is said, ‘Sarvam KhalvidamBrahma’ (The creation is entirely Brahma alone.)Ancient man was so pure that when he touched anyobject, the object would get stuck to him!  Such was theextent of Divine powers that pulsated through his bodyfrom head to toe. As desires gradually multiplied, theseDivine powers in him started to decrease. You need notthink so deeply to understand this concept. You can testthis idea now itself. You have several desires. Let us saythat you have ten such desires that are to be fulfilled. Outof the ten, eliminate three completely. You can easily feelthe difference in the energy flowing through the body!Your memory too increases. The sages of yore couldeasily recount from memory incidents that hadhappened long ago and recite things learnt a long timeago. This was because they had minimal desires in them.They glorified God as the embodiment ofeight essential features. These eight names areSabda Brahmamayi, Characharamayi, Jyothirmayi,Vangmayi, Nityanandamayi, Paratparamayi,Mayamayi and Sreemayi (God is the embodiment ofsound, mobility and immobility, light, speech, eternalbliss, supreme majesty, delusion and wealth).Faith Alone can Help Visualize GodThe sages explained, Vedahametham PurushamMahantham Adityavarnam thamasah Parasthath80152Summer Showers - 2002
(O Citizens! We have visualized the Divine form shininglike a brilliant sun beyond thamas.) The citizens werenaturally curious to know where they had seen Divinity;was it inside or was it outside? The answer cameAntarbahischa Tatsarvam Vyapya Narayana Sthitaha(he is there inside, outside and everywhere.) He can beseen wherever He is looked for. Divinity is therefore allpervasive. A consequence of this all pervasiveness wasthat the Rishis or sages would not travel around. Theywould remain seated at one spot and spend their timecontemplating on the Lord. It was their constant worrythat if they travelled about, they would stamp upon thisall pervasive God! They did not wish that they shouldstep on divinity with their feet. Such was the sacredfeeling with which tasks were carried out by the sages ofyore. Such sentiments were responsible for the highlyidealistic characters developed by the people of yore.What a far cry it is today! With deliberate audacity,one does not mind placing his legs on the idol itself!These are all extreme perversions in action. Why havethey arisen? The saying goes, Vinashakale ViparitaBuddhi (as one’s doom approaches, good sense takesleave). In those days there was a pious environment andtherefore pious feelings abounded.Is it possible to have such an experience and shareit with others today? Most certainly, yes! Will you everbe able to grasp such a power in your hands? Certainly!153Summer Showers - 2002
All it needs is to develop the required faith. Where is thisfaith? Man does not have faith in himself, how can youexpect him to develop such strong faith in God?Where there is faith, there is love,Where there is love, there is peace,Where there is peace, there is truth,Where there is truth, there is bliss,Where there is bliss, there is God.Such a feeling of love needs to be fostered.Without love, where will you even experience the truth?If there is no truth, peace can never be obtained. Andwithout peace, bliss is a far cry.The sages and hermits walked and lived all alone indense and fearsome forests. What gave them thecourage to do so? What weapons did they possess?Guns and bombs were obviously unheard of!Effectively, they had none of these with them, but theyhad a great deal of faith in God. This faith was like apowerful weapon in their hands. Their faith enabledthem to accomplish many things.India has remained rock steady down the agesbecause of the faith that our people had had in God. Anotable feature of those times in India was the extremelyyoung age at which people would take to the forests.Children below the age of nine were active in performingpenances. What was the age of Dhruva when he did81154Summer Showers - 2002
penance? He was just 6 years of age. He was motivatedby the humiliation he had suffered at the hands of hisstepmother. He took his mother’s blessings saying,“Mother! I shall obtain the grace and blessings of theLord and then only return.” He selected a spot that wastotally deserted and isolated. It was a totally peacefuland silent locality. There, the forest was so thick that onecould not even take a step on clear ground. Movingabout was out of question. At such a place, little Dhruvastood on one leg and carried out a determined penanceby chanting, “Narayana! Narayana!”The Lord appeared and asked him, “Child! Whatdo you want?” The intelligence of  child Dhruva cannotbe matched even by the grownups and educated lot oftoday! Dhruva replied, “I am a small boy. I am here in atotally isolated area and yet you found me. It is only youwho could have known about my presence here. Youwho know where I am will definitely know what I want.”The Lord replied, “Son! Manasyekam, vachasyekam,karmanyekam, mahatmanam. You must become anoble person by harmonizing your thought, word anddeed. You have determined in your mind to do penanceand obtain the Lord’s grace. Accordingly youcommanded your body, came and did severe penance.Your thought and your action are hence in cohesion. Butyour words are yet to be ascertained and have not beenexpressed yet. This is the reason why I am asking youwhat you need.” Dhruva replied, “When I started out I155Summer Showers - 2002
desired a cheap trinket of a glass piece. But now I havegot a priceless diamond instead. Once I got thisdiamond why should I desire the glass piece? I hadcome to do penance with a great desire that I become aprince and sit on my father’s lap. Now I don’t have anysuch desires. I want only you.” The Lord replied, “Son!I am ready to give you anything. But I must first sanctifyyou. You had thought of something and actedaccordingly. So your words are not in harmony withyour thought and action. Your desire will be fulfilledonly if all the three are in harmony. Therefore you shouldnow set about to achieve this harmony. I shall thensatisfy what you have now wished for.” Obeying theLord’s command Dhruva returned home.What a high degree of intelligence was there amongthe children in those days! Such sacredness in theirthought! What a noble path they chose to tread!Prahlada was a great devotee of the Lord. He had steadyfaith in Lord Narayana. He did not rely on his own fatheror his mother. He knew that mother and father wererelated to him through physical attachment. He used tosay, “Lord Narayana is related to me without anyattachments. The Lord is not related to me with somedesires in mind. His only aim is to cause myemancipation. I hence desire for only that being who hasno desires in him. I should express my desires only tosuch a one who himself has none.”82156Summer Showers - 2002
Curtail your Desires for PeaceIt is therefore advised that desires must begradually curtailed by everybody. As desires multiplyattachment increases. This leads to more and morebondage. Bondage causes man to suffer in severalways. Where does bondage come from? Your owndesires create your bondage. Your sorrows are yourbondage. Reduce your desires and you will be peaceful.You will not face any danger. Therefore reducing desireswill give peace to man. It is rightly said, “Less luggage,more comfort.”Today desires are growing at an alarming pace.Even if he is about to die in a couple of minutes manexpresses some desire or the other!  What are thesedesires? What are you gaining from them? Nothing! Onthe other hand, when you do not have any desires youwould be so very peaceful. You may believe it or not, Ihave no desires in Me. That is why I have no worries.Follow Me! When you too have no desires your heartwill be blissful. Desires only imprison you and they donot set you free as you imagine.When your wishes are fulfilled, you praise Me skyhigh;If your wishes are unfulfilled, you censure Meseverely;You commit sinful acts and pray for good results;Crying to me to pull you out of the mess157Summer Showers - 2002
And save you, you put the blame on MeFor misfortunes of your own making! 
(Telugu Poem)
You commit several sins; but ask for fruits ofmeritorious deeds in return! This is not proper. Youmust not commit sins in the first place. Always engage invirtuous deeds. As far as possible we should be ofsome help to others. God Himself is always helpingothers. Can you not do at least a fraction of this goodwork to others?Follow the MasterFace the devilFight till the endFinish the game.Make it a point to follow the Master. You will thenreceive His abundant grace. You have been worshippingme for several years with devotion. You sing bhajansunfailingly. Has at least an iota of dirt in your mind beenwiped out? On the contrary it is increasing day by day.Are you able to experience at least a moment of blisswholeheartedly? Definitely not! If yes, why then haveyou so many desires? What do you gain by desiring forprogeny? No doubt, you have to discharge your dutytowards your family. But leave everything to God. Hewill take care of them. You need not entertain worries.Today, you are engaged in looking after their welfare.What is the result? Is it not much better to offer the83158Summer Showers - 2002
responsibility to God and let Him handle it? You will behappy and so will they be.Therefore, we should not ride on our desires. Theyshould be gradually reduced. Lesser the desires, morethe happiness. First make efforts to understand thenature of God. When earth was first formed there wasonly pitch darkness everywhere. Nothing was visible. Itrained heavily for crores of years thereafter. It is as aneffect of this deluge that the oceans were formed. Afterthe rains the clouds cleared. Gradually the starsappeared.  The sun too shone and showered its rays onthe earth. The light enabled man to go about his dailylife, grow crops and eke out a livelihood. When therewas total darkness man had no desires. As lightgradually appeared so did man’s desires, because hecould now see the creation. Today, his day begins withdesires! However, during the night he is not assailed bydesires. Hence, darkness appears to give no scope fordesires. On this count at least one should welcomedarkness!At the time of Rama’s birth, for 15 days there wasno sunshine. It was darkness all around. Consequently,the moon was agitated. It lamented, “Alas! I am unableto have a glimpse of Lord Rama!” After the passing of15 days the sun itself was curious to see Rama. Hegradually started rising. Consequently, the moon toostarted its lunar phases. The sun and the moon started159Summer Showers - 2002
executing their assigned tasks. This caused day andnight to appear on earth. If you investigate the mysteryof nature you will find that man plays no role anywherein it.Today, man is inventing medicines to control thepopulation. Such a thing is not possible throughmedicines. When desires go down, automatically themind is turned towards God. What is first required issense control.This day people from several countries havegathered to spread the message of Lord Buddha to theworld. You must all listen to the nature of Buddha anduse it to control your mind. Today, controls are beingexercised on everything except the mind and desires. Itis the desires that must first be controlled. This will giveyou a great deal of peace. You will be surprised to seeso much peace in yourself. Peace is natural to man andwill arise on its own once the desires are controlled.Peace is everywhere. Truth and love are everywhere.You are the very embodiment of love. You are theembodiment of peace and truth. You are theembodiment of God. Realise this truth first. Truth is notat some far off place. Truth is here itself! Where there istruth there is God. We chant shanti three times. Outsidewhat you will find is only pieces. Peace is God’sproperty and is available only with Him.84160Summer Showers - 2002
Be Aware that God is the Resident of your HeartDevelop the feeling that God is in your heart.Believe in the truth that God is always residing in yourheart. When you have faith in this truth, peace willdefinitely dawn.God created everything from truth.Everything will merge one day in this truth.There is no place that is not pervaded by truth.This is the highest and purest truth, realise that!
(Telugu Poem)
We need not set out to search for God. Whereverthere is truth, God appears. Where Narayana appearshis consort Lakshmi, the goddess of plenty andprosperity, too appears. Hence, if you want wealth, youhave to take the first step! When you succeed ininstalling Lord Narayana in your heart, goddess Lakshmitoo follows her Master into your heart.With noble thoughts, good deeds and constantcontemplation of God, undertake good actions. Helpothers. Never entertain jealousy. Jealousy leads to totalruin. It makes man totally useless. Unfortunately today,jealousy thrives. Some people even cry when they seesomeone else better off! They cannot tolerate the otherperson being happy. This is a very bad trait. You mustfeel happy at others’ happiness. You too will then enjoysuccess and gain bliss.161Summer Showers - 2002
There is plenty of grace that God can give you. Butit is at a depth! Some effort is required to obtain it. Ifyou need to fetch water from a well, you need to tie arope to a bucket, lower it into the well and draw thewater out. You are neither tying the rope to the bucketnor are you lowering the bucket into the well. The wateris therefore not reaching you. The rope to use is that ofdevotion. This rope must be tied to the vessel of yourheart and lowered into the well of God’s grace. Whatyou receive from the well, when the water is drawn out,is the water of pure bliss. The well is that of God’s grace(Anugraha) and not that of desire (agraha) or jealousy(asooya)!Get rid of the bad qualities in you. In this sacredenvironment, why do you give scope for bad habits? Bydeveloping bad habits you are leading yourself to a badfate.Embodiments of Love!Live in love with everybody. Once you earn thislove, everything else will be added unto you.Summer Course, Brindavan, 24-05-2002
❃❃❃85
Sense Control is theHighest Sadhana
Sarvarupa Dharam ShanthamSarvanama Dharam Shivam Satchidanandam AdvaitamSathyam Shivam SundaramAll the names and forms are but the manifestations ofthe Supreme Being who is the embodiment of peaceand auspiciousness. He is Existence-Knowledge-BlissAbsolute and non-dual. He is Sathyam, Sivam,Sundaram (Truth, Goodness, Beauty).
(Sanskrit Verse)
Embodiments of Love!
MAN makes frantic efforts to attain happi-ness. He reads scriptures, visits noblesouls, undertakes spiritual pursuits andsearches everywhere in the outer world to findhappiness. But he fails to find happiness anywhere.1186164Summer Showers - 2002
Buddha too made similar efforts to find the source ofhappiness. He searched everywhere and at last foundthat happiness was within him and not in the outerworld.  He realized that he himself was the embodimentof Ananda (bliss).  The ephemeral happiness derivedthrough the senses is not true happiness at all.Bliss Results from Sense ControlGod permeates the entire universe in the form ofSat-Chit-Ananda (Existence-Knowledge-Bliss). Thefive elements, earth, water, fire, air and ether are theembodiments of God, who manifests in the entirecreation as Sathyam, Sivam, Sundaram. Every humanbeing is therefore a manifestation of Sat-Chit-Ananda.God manifests as sound, touch, form, taste and smell inthe elements – ether, air, fire, water and earth,respectively. Since He permeates all the five elementsand the entire creation, the Upanishads declare,Isavasyam Idam Jagat (the entire world is permeatedby God). God is omnipresent. There is no place in theworld where He does not exist. Sarvata PanipadamTat Sarvathokshi Siromukham, Sarvata SruthimallokeSarvamavruthya Thishthati (with hands, feet, eyes,heads, mouth and ears pervading everything, Hepermeates the entire universe).If God is present everywhere, people ask why weare not able to see Him.  The ocean water reflects thesun above. When the water is disturbed, the reflection of165Summer Showers - 2002
the sun is also disturbed. Similarly, God is in every man.But he is not able to see Him because of his disturbedmind. A disturbed and vacillating mind can neverreflect God. A disturbed mind causes confusionand depression. As Arjuna says in the Bhagavadgita,Chanchalam Hi Manah Krishna PramathiBalavadrudham (this mind is very unsteady, turbulentand is agitated strongly), the mind is highly fickle andvacillating. All the Sadhana that man performs aims atmaking his mind steady.  There is no use doing Japa,Dhyana and Yoga if the mind is not steady. Once youhave the five senses under control, you can experienceGod. He is not far away from you. He is in you, belowyou, above you and all around you. God, in fact, is theindweller of man. Yet man is not able to see Him. Whatis the reason? Man’s limitless and wayward desiresprevent him from seeing God. Desires are the root causeof man’s disturbance. Sense control and ceiling ondesires will help him to see God all around andexperience bliss. So, we have to keep our desires undercheck. We should not be worried by the evil talk inwhich others indulge in. We should not be affected bycalumny and criticism.Attain the Supreme State of Desirelessness likeBuddhaBuddha wanted to control the five senses. Hedecided, first and foremost, to acquire Samyak Drishti87166Summer Showers - 2002
(right vision). Man today is not able to control his visionbecause of the fickleness of his mind. Cinema, video,TV, etc., have polluted the mind of man. He does notsee good and hear good. Man is the cause of hisown restlessness. Besides Samyak Drishti, Buddhaemphasized the need for Samyak Sravanam (righthearing), Samyak Vak (right speech), Samyak Bhavam(right feeling) and Samyak Chintanam (right thinking).Due to lack of these, humanness is fast giving way todevilishness and beastliness. Animal qualities are fastincreasing in man. Animals have a season and a reasonbut man has none. Man today has become worse thananimals. Human qualities like compassion, kindness,love and forbearance are absent in him. He should befree from evil thoughts which are the root cause of hisworries. This requires Abhyasa (constant and sustainedpractice). Man can control the mind and attain peace byAbhyasa. It is only in a peaceful mind that noblethoughts arise. The mind should be under the control ofman. Master the mind and be a mastermind.Unfortunately, instead of controlling the mind, man hasbecome the slave of his senses. That is the main causeof his unsteadiness. Moreover, he has body attachment(Dehabhimana). This is the reason he gets easilydisturbed if people find fault with him. Why should heworry about the body when the body is like a waterbubble? You should get rid of body attachment.Man today has unlimited and unnecessary desires.Take, for example, a person who wants to become the167Summer Showers - 2002
President of a Village Panchayat. If he is elected, hedesires to become a minister, then the Chief Minister ofthe State and later the Prime Minister of the country.What are these positions after all? What does a man getfrom these posts of high status if he has only evildesires? The outcome of evil desires is evil. So, manshould not give room to evil desires and thoughts. Theirreaction, reflection and resound is also evil. Evil desirescause evil and sinful thoughts in man. First of all,Buddha developed pure, steady, sacred and selflessvision. He made a great sacrifice by renouncing allworldly comforts, his family and even his tender son. Hethen gradually reduced body attachment and finally cut itoff completely. That is how he attained the state ofdesirelessness.Body Attachment is the Cause of Man’s DelusionIt is a mistake on our part to identify ourselves withthe body. When we say, “This is my body, my mind, myBuddhi, my Chitta, my Antahkarana”, it means that weare separate from the mind, body, Buddhi, etc. It is aBhrama (delusion) to think that we are the body. As wego on cultivating Bhrama, we distance ourselves fromBrahma (God). The more we leave this Bhrama, thecloser we go to Brahma. Buddha approached manyGurus and listened to their teachings. He studied sacredtexts. He realized that this was only a wasteful exercise.Modern students go abroad for higher studies,spending a lot of money. This craze for foreign88168Summer Showers - 2002
countries is utter foolishness. The parents tooencourage their children to go abroad by fanning theirdesires. They feel proud that their children have gone toa foreign country. They actually spoil their children. It isbetter to work hard in your own country than to go like abeggar to a foreign land just for the sake of earningmoney. What do people earn there? When they return toIndia, they bring with them only the Papa (sin) they earnthere. Stay in your country and earn Punya (merit)instead. Unlimited ambitions of man are the cause of thiscraze for going to foreign countries to earn money.For the last several decades, people of manycountries have been inviting me to their countries. But Ido not like to go anywhere. They say, “Swami, come tomy country.” But which is your country? You do notbelong to any particular country. Nothing is permanent.Your body itself is not permanent. The body hashowever to be maintained. But there should be no bodyattachment, which leads man to endless cycle of birthand death. That is why Adi Sankara said:“Punarapi Jananam Punarapi MaranamPunarapi Janani Jathare SayanamIha Samsare Bahu DustareKripayapare Pahi Murare.”(I am caught up in this cycle of birth and death; time andagain, I am undergoing the agony of staying in themother’s womb. It is very difficult to cross this ocean169Summer Showers - 2002
of worldly life.  Oh Lord! take me across this ocean andgrant me liberation.)Worldly life is full of sorrow and suffering. LordKrishna said, “Anityam Asukham Lokam Imam PrapyaBhajasva Maam” (as the world is temporary and full ofmisery, contemplate on Me constantly). Having takenhuman birth, you must find fulfilment in life. You mustpursue a noble path. Do not be inflated by praise. Youshould be above praise and blame. Foster peace. Whereis peace? It is not available in the market for you to buy.Peace is inside. Outside you find only pieces. In fact,everything is there in you.You are the embodiment of peace,You are the embodiment of truth,You are the embodiment of love,You are the embodiment of God.What a pity that man goes here and there in searchof happiness ignoring the divinity within! It is the resultof sins committed over many lives. Why do you want toearn sin in the outside worldly life? Better direct yourvision inward. You will find Ananda (bliss) there. Blissis your property. You cannot live without bliss even for amoment. Bliss is your true nature.Supreme Sacrifice of BuddhaEmbodiments of Love!Buddha was not an ordinary person. He was bornin a royal family and brought up amidst princely89170Summer Showers - 2002
comforts. But  he renounced everything overnight.He performed a supreme sacrifice. Na KarmanaNa Prajaya Dhanena Thyagenaikena Amrutatva-manasu (immortality is not attained through action,progeny or wealth; it is attained only by sacrifice).Buddha followed this Vedic injunction. He had noattachment. Hence, he could detach himself from hiskith and kin. His father suffered because he hadattachment.Buddha travelled far and wide. He carried on hisascetic practices. Once a lady wanted to offer food tohim. Buddha said, “This is not the food I want. I wantJnana Bhiksha (food of wisdom). I am wandering insearch of the food of Jnana, not this worldly food.”One day he saw a farmer distributing grains.Buddha went to him and asked, “Where is my share ofalms?” The farmer said to him, “Oh lazy monk! Whyshould I give you alms? I give food to those who workhard. I also work hard. I till the soil. I sow the seeds,remove the weeds, water the fields and harvest thegrains. But you do not do anything.” The farmer thoughtthat he was working hard. Buddha replied, “I cultivatethe land of the heart, I water it with love, I remove theweeds of bad tendencies, I harvest the grains of wisdomand I get the fruit of bliss.” There are many such storiesrelated to the life of Buddha. In fact, they are notmere stories but his personal experiences. He made171Summer Showers - 2002
tremendous sacrifice at a young age. The joy that youderive from sacrifice is immeasurable. Experience thejoy of sacrifice.The joy you get by singing Bhajans and byperforming worship is temporary. But you will geteternal joy by experiencing the Soham Mantra. Sohamis also known as Hamsa Gayatri. “So” means “That”(God), “Ham” means “I am”. “I am That” is themeaning of Soham. You should experience it with everybreath. When you breathe in, you listen to the sound“So” and while exhaling, you hear the sound  “Ham”.Watch your breath carefully and experience the reality ofSoham with every breath. The word WATCH has animportant message to convey. WATCH meansW – Watch your WordsA – Watch your ActionsT – Watch your ThoughtsC – Watch your CharacterH – Watch your HeartThe watch you have may break some day or theother. But this “watch” is unbreakable. So, possess this“watch”. Watch whether you are speaking good or bad.Watch whether you abuse others or appreciate them.You should not use your tongue to abuse others.Abusing others is a sin. Do not let your tongue indulge insuch sins. You cannot escape the consequences of your90172Summer Showers - 2002
sinful acts. Everything has reaction, reflection andresound and it comes back to you in some form or theother. Hence, exercise control over the tongue.Buddha observed Mounam and became quiet.Every sacred act has manifold rewards. By being quiet,Buddha began to experience Soham within him. Youmay chant the Names of Rama, Krishna, Govinda,Buddha and Sai to steady your mind. Once the mindbecomes steady, you do not need to chant. Observetotal silence. That is why it is said, silence is golden.Once words become less, the activities and vagaries ofthe mind also become less. As words increase, thevagaries of the mind also increase.  Annihilate the mindby quietude. However, it is easier said than done.  Manmay die but the mind will not die. The mind vanisheswhen words vanish from it. Observing Mounam(silence) is one of the ways of silencing the mind. That iswhy our ancients practised Mounam. We should notallow the mind to go wherever it likes and do whatever itlikes. We should not allow the mind to ridicule, hurt andhate others. If you hurt anybody, you will be hurt tentimes more. You may take pride that you have abusedsomebody. But there will come somebody who willabuse you also some day. The sin you commit todaywill bring retribution to you later amplified manifold.Embodiments of Love!We have taken human birth. What should we dohaving taken birth as a human being? Should we use173Summer Showers - 2002
human birth for earning wealth? No, not at all.  Weshould earn the wealth of virtues. Modern students areinterested in acquiring wealth, power and friendship butnot virtues. What is the use of leading a life withoutacquiring virtues?“In spite of his education and intelligence, afoolish man will not know his true Self and a mean-minded person will not give up his wicked qualities.Modern education leads only to argumentation,not to total wisdom.  What is the use of acquiringworldly education if it cannot lead you toimmortality? Acquire the knowledge that will makeyou immortal.”
    (Telugu Poem)
The body is temporary like a water bubble. Thebody comes and goes as the water bubbles arise andburst.“This body is a storehouse of dirt, and prone todiseases; it cannot cross the ocean of Samsara.  Omind, do not be under the delusion that body ispermanent.  Instead take refuge at the Divine LotusFeet.”                                                   
 (Telugu Poem)
First and foremost, we should develop the spirit ofsurrender. Perform all deeds with a spirit of devotion toGod and as an offering to Him. Then every action willbecome divine. This is the teaching of Buddha. In thisworld, the five senses of man play a most importantrole. Buddha gave utmost importance to sense control.91174Summer Showers - 2002
To control the mind, we should control the five senses.Only then will we be able to realise God. Everything canbe acquired by love alone. Love is God, live in love. Wecan understand spirituality only by cultivating love. Thatis why I often say,“Start the day with love,Fill the day with love,Spend the day with love,End the day with love,This is the way to God”.Everything is possible by the power of love. Loveis everything in this world. The world cannot existwithout love. Do not entertain bad desires. They willbring about your ruin. Those having bad desires cannothave a peaceful death. We must keep the mind peacefuland sacred. We can acquire peace of mind only by lovefor God.Embodiments of Love!You have come here from distant countries bearingmany difficulties and inconveniences. Lead a life full ofpeace and bliss. You may have troubles. But you shouldnot allow the troubles to gain hold over you. You canhave peace only when you ignore the troubles. Sing theglory of God with love. It is not enough if you pray toGod. You should consider that you are God. Sayemphatically, “I am God” and contemplate on it175Summer Showers - 2002
incessantly. Buddha also declared that man was divine.God is always in you, with you, around you, below you,above you. See, for example, the word ‘GOD’. If youstart with the letter ‘G’, you read it as God. But if youstart with the letter ‘D’, it becomes ‘Dog’. Thedifference lies in your vision. Everything in this world isdivine. So, cultivate the feeling of oneness with God.Body is the Temple of GodYou have come here from different parts of theworld. I bless you all that you go back home safe andsound full of peace and bliss. Cultivate the faith thateverything happens by the Will of God. Buddha trieddifferent kinds of Sadhana. He studied sacred texts.But no literature explained clearly the nature of the fivesenses. Ultimately, he came to the conclusion that therewas no other Sadhana superior to sense control. Herealised that the control of the five senses was the realspiritual practice. We should not allow the senses to gowayward. Senses can be controlled only by love.Always live in love. Make others happy by your love.Never harbour hatred or ill-will towards anybody. Thequintessence of Vedanta is: Help ever, hurt never. As thescriptures say, Paropakara Punyaya, PapayaParapeedanam (one attains merit by serving others andcommits sin by hurting them).Your mind will remain steady once you believe thatGod is in you. In the beginning, your Sadhana may not92176Summer Showers - 2002
give you immediate results. But if you continuecontemplating on God within you, you are sure toachieve peace and bliss. God is not present in temples,mosques and churches. Body is the temple of God.“God does not exist in a foreign land, He is in you.Sin is not elsewhere. It is there where a wrongaction is committed.”                           
(Telugu Poem)
Everything is within you. You do not need to studyscriptures. All that you need is self-confidence. Self-confidence is most important for spiritual development.Where there is self-confidence, there is truth.Where there is truth, there is bliss.Where there is bliss, there is peace.Where there is peace, there is God.Hence you must cultivate self-confidence.Otherwise, there will be utter confusion. Take, forexample, this very building. It stands on its foundation.The building cannot exist without the foundation.Similarly, self-confidence is the foundation foreverything in life. You can achieve everything with self-confidence. Perform your duty with sincerity and self-confidence and follow the ideals set by Buddha.Buddha had all the luxuries at his command. But herenounced everything. Bliss lies only in Thyaga(sacrifice) and not in Bhoga (sensual pleasures). Onceyou take to the path of sacrifice, you will attain bliss.That is the sacred teaching of Buddha.177Summer Showers - 2002
Embodiments of Love!First and foremost, reduce your attachment to thebody. As your attachment to the body increases, yoursuffering also increases. The body is the temple of God.Think that this is not your body but the temple of God.The body is sacred as God resides in it. It is God’s giftto man. Hence, use the body for performing sacreddeeds and attaining bliss therefrom. When you sharebliss with others, you will experience divinity. Continueyour spiritual practices. But remain always suffused withthe feeling that God is in you, above you, below you,around you. Never think that God is away from you. “Iam not alone. God is with me.” Strengthen this feeling inyou and shape your life accordingly. Lead your life withlove.Summer Course, Brindavan, 26-05-2002
❃❃❃93
Health is Wealth
Do realize that man has no contentmentDespite acquiring plenty of riches and luxuriesPeace and contentment will accrue to manOnly when he attains conciousness (Atma Tatva)Students, boys and girls!
FOR man health is the greatest wealth. Fromtime immemorial, many countries have beendelving into the ways to preserve good healthand disseminating the knowledge among all. In theabsence of sound health, human aspirations becomefutile. Unable to realize this truth, man is losing hiswealth by wrong habits. Right from ancient times,Indians and Romans have been espousing the cause ofgood health and endeavouring to achieve it.  Of course,several other nations have also been conscious of theimportance of health. Realising that health was indeed1294180Summer Showers - 2002
the greatest wealth, they went on to treat each limb of thebody like the head, the mouth, the nose, the eyes, etc.,as a separate unit in itself. Thus, focusing on eachpart, they adopted specific modes of nurture for each.Such well-nurtured state of health among mankindhas gradually deteriorated now. In France, for one,discipline in respect of food was practised meticulously.Not because they thought that body was all-important toman, but because they had visualized that soul residedwithin the body. And when the house is safe, theresident will be peaceful and comfortable.So, you may be thinking that this body wouldanyway perish, today or tomorrow.  It may indeed be awater bubble. But many are the legendary personswho used this water bubble to lead an ideal life,accomplishing monumental deeds and studying profoundtheories.  Here Deha, the body, became essential meansfor Desha, the nation, to reveal sacred ideals.  Principlesof perfect life were propagated to other countriesthrough the virtuous lives and meritorious deeds of theindividuals in the nation.Cultivate Healthy HabitsToday’s youth do not understand this secret of life.Dawn to dusk they adopt unhealthy ways of living andface miserable consequences.  Scholars, noble men andmany such intelligent people carried out a variety ofexperiments and discovered ways to free this body from181Summer Showers - 2002
disease and illness. When body is ridden with diseases,health wanes and one is afflicted by all kinds of miseries.In the modern times in particular, Romans evolved aperfect model for health, aiming to mould each limb ofthe body into a strong and well-nurtured part.  Besides,the youth strove to develop the three important qualitiesof character, courtesy and gentleness. Consequently,they continued to have long lasting strong bodies andremained self-reliant.  Even at the age of ninety years,they were independent and looked after themselveswithout anybody’s help. They also gave importance tobeauty along with health. The body possessed charmand good looks only when it was healthy. So, to retainbeauty we should pay great attention to health.Nowadays, why does a teenager of 16 years looklike a decrepit of 60 years?  The unhealthy practices thatthey are used to in their daily lives are the actual reasonfor this.  As soon as we wake up in the morning, weshould cleanse our mouth. The inner and outer sides ofteeth should be brushed well. Surface of the tongueshould be cleaned thoroughly. For, mouth is the frontentrance, the gateway for all diseases. While talking toeach other we should be cautious of unpleasant odour.Health should thus be protected through hygiene. Notonly this, each working  part of the body should be fitand robust.  We should always be aware of the truth thatdivinity is inherent in each limb and organ of the body.That is why Vedas extol God as “Angeerasa”, the95182Summer Showers - 2002
essential fluid in the limbs. Each part of the body hasits intrinsic characteristic goodness.You should learn from Mahabharatha, how strongwere the Indians who protected their health in thismanner.  At the time of the great war, Bhishma’s age was115 years and he was Commander-in-Chief. Similarly,Krishna was eighty-six and Arjuna was eighty-four.Such were the mighty warriors of those days who livedwith health and happiness. Thus by preserving health,the men and women of those times were able to beexemplars for many ideals to the nation.  They ate andslept in time. Ate lightly; never partook of anything outof schedule.  The other day I told you a poem:From the time you wake up till you go to bedYou spend your life, irresponsibly, for eking out livelihoodHaving forgotten God, and misutilising yourlearningWhat heights of happiness have you reached? Dothink honestly, O man!                        
(Telugu Poem)
(Swami then sang a Telugu rhyme on good habits forstudents)As the cock crows, get out of bed;Brush your teeth and relieve yourself,Bathe, dress up and breakfast.183Summer Showers - 2002
It’s good to eat light and chew wellAs you relish your favourite dish.Off to school for serious studies;And the good remarks of being a humblechild.Don’t get wet and don’t play in dirtypuddles.When it’s play timesprint, jump or dribble the ball.If you follow the above directionsYou will enjoy the wealth of health.Nowadays none wakes up when the cock crows,nor when the loud whistle of train blows, but get up latein the morning at eight or nine. What is the reason? Theygo to sleep late at night.  Are they at least using the nighthours for studies? Not at all.  They put on Television orRadio, thus polluting their own minds besides wastingtime.  Much of what is seen on the television are thingsthat are lewd, disgusting, immoral and vile. Such are theundesirable things being shown. I wonder what pleasureor profit accrues to Government out of all this.  On theother hand Government promotes this as a greatmedium. So it is Government which is spoiling thechildren.  It turns the pure, steady and selfless hearts ofthe youth into impure, wicked and repugnant.  On top ofit, it seeks for more import from foreign countries.96184Summer Showers - 2002
Instead of habituating children to such evil traits, canone not encourage good practices? Can they not beshown good stories which promote good behaviour inthem?  None protests against this evil, neither parentsinside house, nor the teachers, the educated persons andthe elders in the society.  The reason simply is that theytoo have succumbed to this addiction.  So if they try tocorrect children, they would have to face the question“What about you?” Such are the elders of to day towhom children would give a piece of mind.  They in factare the ones who occupy the front seats in front of TVsets.  Let me tell you what some of these elders are upto.  They tell our students when they go home onvacation, “Son, it is an year since you watched TV ormovie, as you were at Puttaparthi.  Now go ahead andwatch them to your heart’s content”. Mothers evenserve meals to them in front of  the TV set itself.  Shouldany mother interested in the well-being of her child dothis?  Certainly not.  But unfortunately they are all outto spoil their own children. And Government only addsto the problem, mindlessly. The government servantsthemselves are glued to TV as soon as they return homefrom offices.  Or they go to clubs where they drink, fillthemselves with unhealthy food and gamble. It isprecisely due to these bad habits, evil traits andunhealthy activities that today’s citizens are turning intocruel people.  Even their speech is not soft and pleasantbut is very rude.  That is why I often tell you, ‘You185Summer Showers - 2002
cannot always oblige, but you can speak obligingly’.One should speak obligingly with all humility andmodesty.  Today even these virtues are disappearing.  Inaddition to all this they squander away money in idlepursuits.When wealth increases so does pride.With prosperity grow vices galore.With moderate prosperity there is less scope forpride.With increasing humility virtue grows.  
(Telugu Poem)
Wealth  is the source of all evil ways of life.  Astudent has come here from America.  Today in themorning I called him for an interview.  There in theinterview I asked “ My son, how much do you earn”. “Iearn $30000 in a month”, he said. “ How much do yousave”, I enquired.  “I couldn’t save anything” he replied.Then I chided him, “you have degenerated into ademon. How can you waste so much money? Is this thepurpose for which you went abroad? I never showmercy on any one who wastes hard-earned money inevil indulgences”. I even told his wife that she wasbehaving like Soorpanakha by accepting and joininghands with her husband in his extravagant evil life style. Itold them,  “You both are burning away your lives. Thisis not acceptable. Having been abroad you should returnwith the ideals you picked up there”.97186Summer Showers - 2002
Why go Abroad for MoneyWhere do you find ideals but in the country ofBharath?  Yanna Bharathe Tanna Bharatha.  What isnot in Bharath is not of lasting value.  There are as manythings to learn as you wish  in Bharath.  Why then doyou go abroad?  Is it for money?  Then are you able tosave any?  You squander it away.  Ultimately, having runout of the monthly salary you take to dish washing orselling of newspapers for survival.   Back at home yourparents feel proud that their son is in US but would beashamed to know what menial jobs you do there.  Whystay in US and take up menial labour? You should ratherearn well and return home to share with your parentsand lead a happy life.  Matru Devo Bhava, Pitru DevoBhava.  Parents are like God.  You should indeed helpthem for they struggle to raise you.Students make frantic efforts to obtain visa forsome western countries as soon as they pass theexaminations.  They struggle to reach there to makemoney but return with empty hands.  But this situationwill not last for many days, I must tell you.  Those whohave gone to America are going to come back withinfive or six years.  It will not be possible for them tostay on there. The situation is turning dangerous.Motherland is the right place. Swadharma, one’s innateobligation, is appropriate to discharge.  Paradharma,alien values, always cause fear and insecurity. Enjoy187Summer Showers - 2002
what is your own. Wherever you may go be proud to bean Indian.Is there a living  human on this earthwho wouldn’t brace up and say:This is my motherland,This my beloved mother tongueThis faith is ours.        
              (Telugu Poem)
Parents are dreaming big and feeling great that theirchildren are earning well.  But do take a look at the evilsthat befall them in this mad rush to make money.  Evenas they arrive in the foreign country, children are born,sometimes, a number of them. They do not know howto raise the children. And the children go astray. As inthe case of the wicked monkey which wrecks the wholegarden, they are spoilt and they spoil their children too.Neither should you be spoilt nor should you allowothers to be spoilt.Bharath is a sacred land.  The syllable Bha in thename means radiance (in Sanskrit).  So Bharath spreadsradiance, that is, it spreads the light of wisdom.  It issaid, ‘God, having some affinity, takes birth in Bharathagain and again to teach the nature of its reality tohumanity’.  It is only in Bharath that all Avatars takebirth. Only in Bharath, Dharma is propagated. SathyamVada, Dharmam Chara: Speak Truth and BehaveRighteously.  These two ideals are to be cared for as thetwo eyes in life.  I am stating facts and not just praising98188Summer Showers - 2002
when I say that, more or less, the students of Sathya Saicolleges and schools are found to possess these ideals.When you see their counterparts elsewhere you feelashamed. It is an awful situation. What would happen tothem in the future, none can conjecture. Parents arescared to even talk to them. If a father tries to talk aboutthe son’s smoking habit, he would promptly be asked toshut up.  Not stopping at this, the son would pull out acigarette and smoke right in front of the father.  Smokehe may, but is this not an insult to the father who broughthim up. Who benefits from the birth of such an ill-mannered son?  It is better if such a son without respectfor the father should be dead.  So you must respect yourparents and earn them a good name.Strive for UnityStudents! Cultivate good habits. Awaken noblethoughts. Unity can be achieved through love alone.The country will be torn apart into pieces if there is nounity. Today, political parties are all-powerful and anumber of them are mushrooming with different names,patronages, and partisan views.  They are breaking upthe nation and its villages and distributing the fragmentsamong themselves. What is happening to the sacredland of Bharath! Today, when one says he is from India,he will face a volley of probing questions about thestate, the district and the town that he particularlybelongs to. This was not the case earlier, for entire189Summer Showers - 2002
Bharath was one place, like a big home.  With such loveand unity did Bharath prosper? With the advent ofpolitical parties, each and every village has beenfragmented into factions. What are these parties, and forwhose advantage are they doing this?  Purely for theirselfish ends! You can see nothing but selfishness fromtop to toe in these political leaders.  And they havehoards of yes-men as followers. This is not the properway. You must strive to unite the country. India is one;all Indians are brothers and sisters; Brotherhood of manand Fatherhood of God – such feelings of unity weshould foster.  Never think of dividing the country.  Whyeven differentiate the states based on the languagesspoken?  One can learn any language anywhere, so whyhave such differences?Students, boys and girls!  Never give chance tosuch differences whosoever may advise you.  Declarefearlessly that you are all children of Bharath.  You neednot follow the senseless elders who divide the country.They do this as they lack intelligence, but do you alsolack?  Society is a train in which all of us are travelling.Those who have lived their time get off at the nextstation or the following.  But you as youth have a longjourney to undergo.  Such long journey demands fromyou great amount of courage, confidence and idealism.There is none who tells children such good points.When Sai Baba does so others criticise Him.  I do notcare about any criticism or praise.  I have nothing to lose99190Summer Showers - 2002
if they criticise, nor anything to gain if they praise.Whatever I say is for common good.  Let all be unitedlike brothers and sisters. If they do so this countrywill achieve great fame. Right from ancient timesBharath’s splendour shone brightly. You should againstrengthen and develop the country. Brush asidepersonal animosities if any. Stay together like brothers.It is only when you do that will you find true devotion,true fervour and true liberation.  Devotion never divides.It sees unity in diversity.Always Have Pure Thoughts and FeelingsStudents, having studied in our educationalinstitutions and having undergone the summer course,you should show the benefits of the ideal education youhave acquired.  Live cheerfully. Never put on a longface. Negative thoughts show up as ugly expressions.Pure thoughts and feelings will always keep us cheerful.I am always cheerful.  People wonder how Sai Babacould always be smiling.  I cannot but smile.  I have nonegative feelings, no bad traits, no bad thoughts nor anybad habits. I am always pure. You too should followthis.  Follow the Master, Face the Devil, Fight to the Endand Finish the Game.  Follow Me. Be happy like I am.Be cheerful. That makes me very happy.  However,some people indulge in meaningless laughter, which isloud and comical.  Just like the way they laugh inmovies.  Such laughter is no better than crying – it is not191Summer Showers - 2002
true cheerfulness. So lead a cheerful and ideal life.Do not harm anyone under any circumstances. HelpEver and Hurt Never. That is the ideal historicallyupheld by Bharath. Paropakara Punyaya PapayaParapeedanam.Students!  What you have learnt in these fifteendays should bear fruit.  I am worried you may finallywaste this whole effort of providing hospitality, servingyou sumptuous feasts, looking after every need andplacing before you words of wisdom. You must makebest use of all these and tread the path of idealismwith good behaviour, good actions and good thoughts.Will you promise me that you shall do so? Willyou? (The whole assembly exclaimed in affirmationspontaneously). Good boys. Good girls. Just do that.That’s all I expect of you. In fact, I had no plans ofgiving a discourse today.Firstly, preserve your health. Bad habits are theroot cause for ill health; so eschew bad habits totally.Where the young children should have chubby cheeks,you see today faces looking shrunken. You must buildup good health. Good health enables you to carry outmeritorious deeds. You will derive happiness out ofsuch deeds. Thus happiness is a product of goodhealth. So take proper care of your health to findhappiness. Happiness is your greatest wealth. Health isyour greatest wealth.100192Summer Showers - 2002
Eat your meals on time.  Have your fill.  Relish andenjoy the food provided by your parents which theyhave secured through much hard work.  Never find faultwith it or refuse it.  If you relish fondly, it nourishes yourbody well.  Then the body can do any amount of work.Be Ideal Students, Shun VicesBoys and Girls! What you have learnt here today isdifferent from the kind of studies you did earlier. Youmust find the essence of education and live by it.  Neverabuse anyone with harsh words.  Today if you hurt thefeelings of others with harsh words, tomorrow manyothers will hurt you with harsher words. You cannotescape this law of reaction, resound and reflection. Sospeak kindly and receive kind words. Do good to othersand get good in return. I expect you to become idealstudents and uphold the above ideals.  No other joy do Ineed for myself than this.  For this pleasure I amprepared to sacrifice everything. How many crores ofrupees am I spending for your sake! Look at any othercollege. Does it compare in beauty to ours?  Thenthe facilities I provide!  Over and above, I create idealenvironment. I never touch a single paisa of yours. Ifanyone is not well off, I grant them scholarships tocover personal expenditure. I shall give anything to seestudents become good.  But some of them still cling onto vices, even after having spent a long time here.193Summer Showers - 2002
Students!  I am indeed begging of you:  please shunyour vices, give up bad habits, develop virtues, cultivategood habits, take to right path and enjoy an ideal life.  Ifyou have both health and happiness, you need notacquire anything else.  Money can always be earned, butwhat is really important is earning of virtues.  Moneywithout virtues is of no use, for, it is virtue that giveshappiness in life and not money. Make your parentshappy. If they are into bad habits and try to pull you in,tell them as follows: “These things are not good.  Theyspoil us.  We know that you wish our well-being but youare showing to us wrong ways of life.  Swami told uswhat is good for our well- being; allow us to do that.”Do lead a sacred life on the sacred path with goodbehaviour.  All of you be happy and I shall tell you manymore special things.Summer Course, Brindavan, 27-05-2002
❃❃❃101
Fundamental Principlesof Indian Culture
Embodiments of Love!
THE Atma is present in the body of eachhuman.  One who realizes and lives out thetruth that the two – the Atma which iseverywhere and the Atma within himself – are one andthe same, is a real spiritual practitioner.  Whoever hemay be – a householder, a recluse, a renunciant or acelibate, when he realizes the truth that the divinity inhumanity is one, God shall always be with him andprotect him. Bharath is a holy land. The wind that blowshere has truth in it; the dust that rises is pervaded withrighteousness; the waters that flow are suffused withlove.  Every individual born in this land has the qualityof forbearance. A country having such sacred being,aims, wisdom and stature is not to be found all over theworld.  That is why the ancestors saluted this land byacclaiming justice, embracing honesty and enthroning13102196Summer Showers - 2002
righteousness.  But the state of affairs in Bharath todayare bizarre in contrast with the sanctity it had enjoyed inthe past. Even today there are thousands in India whoare aware of this truth. However, how many among themcould attain Divinity?  Man can attain sanctity only whenhe actually experiences the oneness of Atma.The Glory that is BharathYou cannot find in India a tongue that does notpraise God or a hand that does not perform acts ofcharity.  The hands of every Indian are those that give.The heart of every Indian is one that delights in God’snames.  Indeed, those who are unable to appreciate theglorious legacy of Bharath can only be called fools.When Vivekananda was in America, he declared,“God’s hands, feet, eyes, heads, mouth and ears areeverywhere. There is no place in the land of Bharathwhere God’s presence is not felt.  His footsteps areheard wherever one goes.  The melody of God is heardwherever one pays heed to.  The joy of God is felt inevery heart.  I must return to Bharath. Earlier, I hadshown a little indifference. Now I shall go back andproclaim emphatically that every atom in Bharath issuffused with divinity.  I shall sprinkle her dust on myhead.  I shall feel the love that stirs in every drop of riverGanges”.Bharath is the land which is filled with Divinenature, and glows and grows with it. Bharath is the197Summer Showers - 2002
birthplace of truth and righteousness.  It is the home ofpeace and non-violence.  In fact, there is nothing that isnot available in Bharath.  The Vedas proclaim, “YannaBharathe Tanna, Bharatha”. That which is not presentin India is not present elsewhere.  It is as if the wholeworld is bundled together and placed in Bharath. Unableto realise the mighty power and potential of their land,Indians visit foreign countries, and feel weighed downwith inferiority at what they see there.  Where there isself-restraint, there will be no place for violence. Bharathproved this time and again. Many covet such self-control which is natural to Indians.People undertake spiritual practices for innerhappiness.  People consider the nine types of devotionto God as spiritual practices, namely, Sravanam(listening),Kirtanam(singing),Vishnusmaranam(contemplating on Vishnu), Padasevanam (servingHis Lotus Feet), Vandanam (salutation), Archanam(worship), Dasyam (servitude), Sneham (friendship),Atmanivedanam(Self-surrender). However, Indianculture did not consider these as real spiritual practices.It sought the eternal and ultimate Reality, which is butone.  Truth is one wherever one searches for it. It isdescribed that Brahman has the appearance of Truth andis replete with Truth. Truth shines resplendently at alltimes.  Truth is all-pervasive at all times.The hearts of Indians are suffused with Kshama(forbearance). India encountered many setbacks and103198Summer Showers - 2002
sufferings since the beginning of history.  But Indianswere not perturbed.  They extolled, “Forbearance istruth, forbearance is righteousness, forbearance is theteaching of the Vedas, forbearance is non-violence,forbearance is compassion, forbearance is sacrifice,forbearance confers happiness and heavenly bliss. Infact, it is everything in all the worlds.” (Telugu Poem)Forbearance is their life-breath.  They inhale and exhaleforbearance.  Forbearance is the greatest strength ofBharath. This is the reason for its stability despite somany sufferings and losses.  No amount of difficultiescan unsettle a person of forbearance.  He who has noforbearance will face unprecedented difficulties. Onewho believes in forbearance remains unmoved anduntouched in the face of difficulties.  The Bharathiyasare filled with such forbearance.  Another form offorbearance is love.  Love is also synonymous withpeace. Thus, forbearance, love, peace – all mean thesame.  Manava (human) is referred to as love byUpanishads.  Bharathiya is one who possesses love ashis nature.  Indians today give up Indian culture and runafter worldly, materialistic and transient things whichcause misery. If you ask what is the power offorbearance, it is too great to put in words.  It cannot bemeasured by mind and speech.Such is the sacred culture of Bharath which peopleof other countries extolled. As India disseminated199Summer Showers - 2002
this culture to other countries, they too found happiness.Loka Samastha Sukhino Bhavanthu (May all thepeople of the world be happy!). Whoever keepsthis principle in mind will always be happy. Themost influential aspect of Indian culture is to seedivinity everywhere. Unable to understand such sacredprinciples of Indian culture students are hankering aftervarious material acquisitions. This is folly. Indian culturehas many subtle ideas and words.  If you ask what is thefastest thing, the scientists of today would say it is thelight or suchlike. But Indian culture would not settle forthis. The fastest and quickest thing is human mind, itsays. What is the mightiest thing in the world?  Itcheerfully responds, mother is the mightiest of all.Nothing is greater than mother in this world.  Mothers’might is nation’s might. That is why India is addressedas Bharath Matha (Mother India).  We call itmotherland and not fatherland.  Only mother has suchpower.  If you ask who speaks to you with affection andcourtesy in a foreign land, it is the mother tongue.Wherever one goes, words in mother tongue soundnearest and dearest.  So the speediest thing is not someaeroplane but the mind.  The mind has its presenceeverywhere. It is a tool for bondage as well asliberation. Mind can take you right up to salvation.What else can be faster than mind then? Such similes areinnumerable in Indian tradition.  Many more are therethat students should know.104200Summer Showers - 2002
Understand the Nature of LoveThere is nothing greater than Love.  It isforgiveness and peace.  You should understand thedistinguishing characteristics of love.  Love is never sad.It is always cheerful and knows not what sorrow means.It does not hurt others nor is hurt by others.  Love is theblessed thing that would get through any situationwithout causing hurt or getting hurt.  That is love in theform of communal coexistence.  You say God is angrywith me.  In fact, God has no anger.  He is trying till dateto know what anger is like.  It is always love and lovealone for him.  God has no hatred.  He even searched indarkness but could not find it.  For, there is no placewhere love is not present.  Love has no hatred orjealousy.  Love alone is match for Love.  Love is Love.It is infinite, immortal and has nothing similar to it.  It hasno death.  It is wrong to think that love is not visible.  Bigmistake!  Unable to see love within ourselves we searchall over.  How can one find it outside?  For instance, ifyou want to see this kerchief, look for it where it is lying.You cannot find it where it is not there.  On the otherhand, love is everywhere.  There is no place or thingwithout love. So how can one say he cannot see love?How can such love get angry?  When something isagainst our wish, we consider it as anger.  There isnothing in this world that is against God’s wish.  So howcan he get angry?  Just not possible.  He is by your sidealways.201Summer Showers - 2002
So, without trying to comprehend the nature oflove, it is a mistake to think that love is presentelsewhere.  Indian culture is all Love.  How is culturedefined?  It is defined as the process of refinement.This kerchief is a product of culture.  Where did it comefrom basically?  From cotton.  Cotton is separated fromseed, yarn is spun out of it, mounted on a loom andwoven into a fabric.  Only after performing so manyprocesses of refinement that cotton takes the form ofcloth.  Similarly take a silver plate.  Initially it is justmetal.  The metal is given to a silversmith who melts itdown in a furnace.  The molten silver is then poured intoa mould to set to the shape of a plate.  After goingthrough this difficult process that the silver platebecomes usable. So, if such extensive refinement isrequired to make silver into a plate, then how muchrefinement is needed to transform an ordinary man into adivine person!  No one makes any effort to undergo theprocess of refinement. Man wants to become Godinstantly.  Yes, he can if only he has the required faith.You should have total faith. How can a person who hasno faith, but pretends to have, ever find love? God is thepersonification of love. He is all love.  It is right to matchlove with love. You have to engage love with love only.That is the real refinement process required.Love is your GodMany people undertake enquiries about Godin today’s world. They even indulge in spreading105202Summer Showers - 2002
‘Message’. Such ‘Message’ is resulting in ‘Miss-Age’.What is this message?  If one really seeks God he neednot search for him.  Wherever he sees, God is foundthere.  Like the child-devotee Prahlada told his father,Have no doubt, O king of demonsThat God may be here but not thereGod is omnipresentWherever you look for him, He would be there.
(Telugu Poem)
If one fills his mind with doubts and wants to findGod, is it possible?  God is the form of truth. If youlook for him by means of truth, he appears at once.If one studies how noble, sacred, holy and gloriousIndian culture is, it reveals itself to him.  Studies aremade, but in ‘reverse’ direction.  Once upon a timeseveral scientists embarked on an exploring mission tofind God.  After much efforts they were told in a church“O poor fellow! You are looking around everywhere forGod.  First understand who you are. Conquer yourself.You will find that God is within you.”  Ignoring this fact,you go to Japan, America or Germany to discover God.No need to go anywhere.  You have to move hardly halfan inch to reach into your inner space.  He will appearto you there.  If you develop outward vision and want tosee the indweller, how can He be seen?  First andforemost, develop inner vision then you can see himwith your own eyes.203Summer Showers - 2002
Embodiments of Love!Love is your God.  Love is everything for you.Beget love through love.  How do you visualise Love?The Gopikas prayed to Krishna as follows:Play sweet music with your divine lips on yourdivine flute,Make the shower of love fall and flow in thisloveless barren land,Sow seeds of love and make them sprout, andardent love flourish there.                 
   (Telugu Song)
The nature of Love was best revealed in DwaparaYuga. The Gopikas saw Krishna everywhere. They werevery much attached to Krishna’s form. When onevisualizes God in a form and contemplates on it, theform manifests before him. Initially they too did notrecognize Krishna’s real nature. They thought, “Oh!That naughty son of Yashoda, who indulges in silly actslike stealing butter from one house and dropping it inanother.” Why should Krishna indulge in ‘cheating’?You may consider it as ‘cheating’.  Not at all. There issomething mysterious about it. What exactly is butter?When milk is churned in different vessels and theessence is extracted it is in the form of butter.  Similarly,to bring out God, who resides in all forms of life, suchchurning has to be carried out.  There is divinity in suchunity.  Consider a simple illustration:  Take milk and heat106204Summer Showers - 2002
it on a stove. When it boils over, sprinkle a little waterinto the milk. Immediately, it recedes to the bottom ofthe vessel.  If you ask the milk why it subsided, it wouldsay “I made friendship with water all this while. Aftercoming in contact with fire, the bond broke and waterleft me.  I could not stay alone so I rose from the vesselto follow my fellow into the fire.” See what intricaciesexist in simple relationships! These are the secrets whichhelp to discover divinity.  Coming to Krishna’s acts ofstealing butter, many call him a thief.  This is a mistakenperception.  If he were to be a thief, why would he leavetraces of butter sticking all over his face? Yashodaherself had this doubt, and asked, “O Krishna! Yousmell butter, the whole village is agog, and there arecomplaints galore.  You are so small.  How can youcause such trouble, my dear?  What is all this?  Is thereno butter in our house?  Wont I give you as much as youwant?  Why should you take butter from other’shouses?”  Krishna replied, “Mother! It is not that we donot have butter in our house. Butter represents heart.The butter inside the hearts of those people is verysacred.  Our own butter may not taste as good.  Theirbutter is very pure and has sacred aroma.”  Thus, whenmother Yashoda pleaded with Krishna not to go out butenjoy the butter available at home, he said no to her, ashe found something special about the butter in Gopikas’houses.  He assured her, “I am not stealing. I am taking itaway right in their presence.”  That is why devotees sing205Summer Showers - 2002
“Bada Chitta Chora, Brindavana Sanchara”.  Theycall Krishna Chitta Chora (the thief of hearts).  Whencalled so Krishna used to feel very happy. Actually ifyou call someone a thief he would get into a fight withyou.  But Krishna enjoyed when he was addressed asthief of hearts.  And even more when you merrily singsuch songs.  So God indeed is the thief of hearts.  He isthe indweller of everybody’s heart and conscience.Chitta is the butter hidden in the hearts.  Krishna is theone who steals such hearts.  In divine tales even nameshave mystery in them.  The word Krishna is derivedfrom the Sanskrit root words which variously mean,‘one who enjoys’, ‘one who makes others happy’, ‘onewho cultivates’, etc. These names have much innersignificance such as ‘the one who cultivates the fields ofhearts’.  Similarly, he adds the curd of love to set themilk of your heart into curds. Curds are added to curdlemilk.  Through love alone you can get God whose formis love.  God is captured by love alone.  See, what yogicmysteries are available in the culture of Bharath!Culture is the Essence of SpiritualityStudents! You are undergoing the Summer Coursein Indian Culture and Spirituality.  There is no differencebetween spirituality and culture.  Culture is contained inspirituality.  That which refines is culture.  We have goldwith us.  It is given to goldsmith who melts it in fire,administers hammer strokes, cuts designs into it and107206Summer Showers - 2002
finally turns it into a bangle.  How much refinementprocess is needed to make a bangle!  Similarly, we bringhome paddy harvested from the fields and store in thehouse.  Do we eat it straightaway?  We first remove thehusk, add water and boil it.  Once it is cooked well, wepartake of it.  You can never make use of something assoon as it comes into being.  You have to refine it andthen enjoy its use.Students! You cannot master all knowledge assoon as you are born.  Gradually, you learn to recognisealphabet, spell words, form sentences and then to write.Is it not?  That is how culture is. Once Ravana felt veryangry.  He could not control himself.  He went to LordShiva and said, “O Lord, how biased you are!  Hownarrow-minded you are!  You endowed ladies with suchbeauty, charm and exquisiteness and created man like ashapeless log of wood.  What is the reason for this?Then Lord Shiva laughed and said “O madcap!  You aredrawing such comparisons only because you don’tknow what beauty means. Tell me, where in women isthe elegance of man?  Where is the elegance ofpeacock’s feather in the peahen?  Where is the grandeurof the humped back of bull, in the cow?”  Hearing thisRavana shut his mouth.  Therefore, God bestowsbeauty where it is required and to those that require it.Beauty is related to the heart. If your heart is pure, youwill look beautiful in the eyes of all and give happiness toall. If your heart is impure, only profane things will207Summer Showers - 2002
attract you.  I had mentioned earlier while speaking onRamayana that, once upon a time Soorpanakha whodeemed herself most beautiful, approached Ramasaying, “ Rama! Does Sita possess the beauty that I do?She looks emaciated.  Look how beautiful I am.  Ramaand Lakshmana laughed within themselves at this.Everyone considers himself/herself good looking butmay appear ugly to others. So, they did not want toargue with her.  They told her “We don’t match yourgood looks.  Please find someone who is as beautiful asyou are.” It is easy to criticize but very difficult toanalyse.  But in this world many criticise divinity in manyways.Embodiments of Love!Every aspect of Indian culture radiates beauty andjoy.  There is beauty in joy and joy in beauty.  Beauty isjoy and joy is the nectar of life.  Some great booksdefine the nature of God in particular ways. You mustread everything about Indian culture with reverence andinterest.  Indian culture does not differentiate one faithfrom another.   All faiths are one.  All forms are one.  Forinstance everyone pays homage to the dead body whensomeone passes away.  Why do they do that?  If youask Mohammadans they would say “Sir, the soul whichhad permeated this body was precious and beautiful.Since such soul had lived in this body, we salute it.”Similarly, Christians would say, “We had ignored when108208Summer Showers - 2002
the beautiful soul was present in the body.  Today sincethe soul has left, we honour this body.”  They performvarious funeral rites religiously.  Since every religion hasthe belief of treating human body with respect, we toomust do it.  What does human body represent?  DehoDevalaya Proktho Jeevo Deva Sanathana (body is thetemple and the eternal indweller is God).  This body isindeed a sacred temple.  We should realize the divinitywithin.The Purpose of Summer CourseIt is in order to teach you such ancient ideals ofIndian culture that we started these summer classes.The idea is also to wean you away from wrong practicesin day-to-day life, inculcate good habits, initiaterefinement, and to make this refinement the goal of yourlife.  To develop refinement is a great act.  Student is notthe one who merely studies. Studies should becomplimented with refinement. Education is uselesswithout refinement.  So, it is to protect you from themindless activities, frivolous sights and meaninglesschatter, which you indulge in at home during holidays,and to give you an experience of culture and thuschanging your minds for the better, this course isdesigned.Guru Nanak first started the practice of communitysinging.  When many voices join together and pray as asingle voice, it is called community bhajan. He started209Summer Showers - 2002
this and it spread throughout the nation.  Such holypersons took birth in India and taught many such goodthings. How delightful is the sound when so many singtogether in unison.  That is nothing but unity in diversity.We must do the same and enjoy real happiness.  Bhajansmay also be sung by getting together family members ora small group of people, and derive happiness from it.Summer Course, Brindavan, 29-05-2002
❃❃❃