Does Sai Speak ? 


Sathya Sai Speaks 


Does Sai speak these words into avid ears and arid hearts? No!... It is our Mother that speaks, 
caressing, cajoling, crooning lullabies to relieve the pain, bless with bliss, Mok-shayisbyaami, 
maa suchah! (I will see that you are liberated, don't worry). Don't weep, she cradles us ! She 
leads us softly along the road, over pebbles, thorns. When the path is bitter, uphill, hard, she 
sings us through Yogakshemam vahaamyaham (I bear the responsibility of your welfare))--- our 
Mother speaks. 


Sathya Sai Speaks 


Does Sai speak these words into tingling ears and twinkling hearts? No!... It is our Father that 
speaks, refining, revealing, reminding our name to us, long forgotten, long begotten! Abhayam 
Sarva bhoothebhyo! (I protect all the creation). Don't fear, He armours us. Upward, onward, 
goodward, Godward---guides us, guards us. When the path is tortuous, twisted, He pulls us 
through. Na Sukhaal- labhyathe sukham (without good times happiness is not possible) --- our 
Father speaks. 


Sathya Sai Speaks 


Does Sai speak these words into mazy ears and crazy hearts? No!... It is our Master that speaks, 
advising, admonishing, heating us crucibly, treating us crucially, leading to God within. 
Eesaavaasyam idam sarvam! (Lord is in everything...the whole world is His). There's no two; He 
opens the lid of Divine Box, with treasures encased in kosas (sheaths) five, Sathyam (Truth), 
Jnaanam (knowledge), Aanandam (Bliss), Brahman (God)---the Master speaks. 


Sathya Sai Speaks 


Does Sai speak these words into searching ears and seeking hearts? No!. It is God that speaks, 
stilling the mind of waywardness, Brahmavid brahmaiva bhavathi! (Knowledge of Brahman or 
God makes one merge with Him). Become and be, He wakens. "Dear wave! emerging; merge; 
dear ray! run back". He calls. "Dear spark! re-enter fire; You are I, I am you". Soham loses '‘sa' 
and ‘barn’; Om alone is He and We, Ekam-eva-ak-sharam Brahman (Brahmam is symbolised by 
ONE syllable Om). 


This is how Sai speaks. 


1. Heroes, not Zeros 


PANDITH Sathyanaaraayana Avadhaanulu could have spoken for some more time, but he 
stopped rather suddenly perhaps to give Me more time. You must not grow listless when others 
speak; for, whoever speaks here, he is giving you the nectar of the Vedhas or Shaasthras 
(scriptures) and that is sweet and liberating ever. Moreover, he said that this evening, we have 
met here since it is New Year Day, the first of January 1964! Well. This is a delusion within the 
larger Delusion! This Day is welcomed as marking some big change, as if yesterday was 
something quite different for it belonged to 1963 and today is something quite distinct, for it is 
1964! This day is celebrated by people, in picnics, in gambling, in drinking and feasting; they 
attend cinema shows, wear new clothes, give presents, to each other and greet all with joy and 
hilarity. They exhaust their money and their energy in the pursuit of frivolity, thrill and 
excitement. 


All this is due to the custom that views tiffs day as something unique. In fact, the 'year' is just a 
convention. There are as many New Year Days as there are days in the year; many communities 
and countries have their own distinct calendars. It is not the first of January or the first of 
Chaithra (first month of Thelugu New Year) that is unique. The year is just a name to indicate a 
number of months, the month a number of days, a day to indicate a number of hours, the hour is 
a period of time counted in minutes, and the minute is a name for sixty seconds. Each second is 
new. It is a gift, a chance, an opportunity, a thing to be celebrated, to be used for your uplift. That 
is to say, each second is a fresh chance given to you for training the mind, refining the intellect, 
purifying the emotions, strengthening the will, for getting confirmed in the conviction that you 
are the deathless Aathma (Self, the Infinite Consciousness). 


Be like the lotus with head high above waters 


Be thankful to the Lord that He gave you Time, as well as action to fill it with. He gave you 
food, as well as hunger to relish it. But, that does not entitle you to engage yourself in action 
indiscriminately. When you build a house, you install a door in front. What is the purpose of the 
door? To admit all whom you welcome and to keep out all whom you do not want. It has a 
double purpose; you do not keep the doors wide open, for all and sundry to come in as and when 
they like. So too, select the impulses, the motives, the incentives that enter your mind; keep out 
the demeaning, the debasing, the deleterious. Admit the highest wisdom of the scriptures, the 
wisdom culled out of the crucible of experience, called anubhavajnaanam. 


All water is not potable; the stagnant pool is to be avoided, the flowing river is better. Select and 
drink. Use the mosquito curtain, but, see that the mosquitoes do not get in when you go to bed. 
Keep them out; do not imprison them inside the net. Sail in the boat that floats on water but, do 
not allow the water to enter the boat. Be in worldly life, but, do not allow it to get into you. Use 
the doors intelligently, to let in those whom you want, and keep out those whom you do not 
need. The lotus, born in slime and mud, rises up through the water and lifts its head high above 
the waters; it refuses to get wet though water is the element which gives it life! Be like the lotus. 


By action, done with all this care, the Vision gets clarified. Man is blinded by the objective world 
and he believes that world to be real, meaningful and worthy of pursuit. The cataract grows in 
the eye and robs it of its efficiency. The cataract is the enemy of the eye. Ignorance, the cataract 
of the inner eye, blinds the intellect and robs it of its efficiency. So, it cannot see the Divinity that 


is your real nature. It misleads you into the impression that you are a man (Maanava), whereas 
you are really God (Maadhava). 


Tread the path of Liberation 


The rope is mistaken to be a snake and the perceiver flees in fear. The truth is, it is not the organ- 
eye that sees; there are many whose eyes are good, so far as doctors can discover, but they 
cannot see! The eye sees because it is illumined by a microscopic spark of the rays of the Sun. 
The scripture says: "Chakshos Suryo ajayatha": From the eye, Surya was born. The soul is the 
motive force of all the senses; the eye is but a window through which the soul peeps out at the 
external world. Of what use is the eye, when the vision is not correct? That is to say, when you 
have no Samadhrishti. Samam means Brahman, the Absolute Reality; Samadhrishti means, 
seeing only Brahman, the One, in all things at all times. This Ekathwam (Oneness) is the basic 
truth. All other experiences are partial, distorted, false. Dwell on that, in your 


meditation. Fix it in your inner consciousness. That is the path of Liberation, which you must 
start treading and, today is as good a day as any, for deciding to do so. You have meditated too 
long on riches, status, salary, children, relatives, fame and the standard of living. They are all of 
minor interest, momentary value, dubious profit. Meditate, fix your urge on the Nithya, the 
Sathya, the Nirmala, the Nischala---the Eternal, the Real, the Pure and the Immovable. 


The Eternal Charioteer 


Pandith Avadhaanulu referred to some incidents mentioned in the Mahaabhaaratha and so, I too 
shall mention just one point which will make you appreciate the Mahaabhaaratha more. The 
Lord had Maayaa (Illusion) as His Consort, so to say, and He had a son, called Manas (Mind). 
This Manas, to continue the parable, had two wives: Pravritthi and Nivritthi---Attachment and 
Detachment. Of course, Attachment was his favourite wife, and she had a hundred children. 
Detachment was ill-treated and neglected and she had five children. That is the symbolism of the 
Kauravas (hundred sons) and the Paandavas (five sons) of Mahaabhaaratha. Though the children 
all lived in the same kingdom, ate the same food and learnt from the same teacher, their natures 
differed widely from one another; the Kauravas, children of Attachment were greedy, cruel, self- 
centred and vain; the Paandavas, the five of them, each one represented a supreme virtue, so that 
they could be said to symbolise sathya, dharma, shaanthi, prema and ahimsa (truth, 
righteousness, peace, love and non-injury). Since they were so pure and born of Detachment, the 
Lord became their guide. In fact the Lord will be the Guide of whoever installs Him as his 
Saarathi (Charioteer). He will not consider that position inferior. He is the Sanaathana Saarathi 
(Eternal Charioteer) come to be the Charioteer of all. He is the Lord, for all who seek a Master, a 
support. The soul is the Master in every one and Krishna is the Universal soul, personified. 


Let the Lord shape your mind 


There are two birds sitting on one tree, the Upanishadh says: the jeevaathma and the 
Paramaathma---the individual soul and the Supreme Soul--on the tree of this body, this World. 
One bird eats the fruits of that tree, while the other simply looks on, as a witness. But, the 
wonder is, the two birds are really one, though they appear as two; they cannot be separated, 
since they are two aspects of the same entity. Steam in the air cannot be seen; it has no shape or 
form; but it is the same as ice, which is hard, heavy and cold. Niraakaara and Saakaara (without 
Form and with Form), are just two ways in which the One manifests Itself. 


The minute hand of the dock is the individual soul the bird that eats the fruits. It goes round and 
round but, the hour hand moves silently and slowly, with a certain dignity. The hour hand can be 
said to be the Supreme Soul. Once an hour the two meet, but, the individual soul does not get 
that consummation fixed for ever. It loses the precious chance and so has to go round and round 
again and again. Liberation is when the two merge, and only one remains. 


When the obstacles in the path of truth are laid low, deliverance is achieved. That is why moksha 
(liberation) is something that can be won, here and now; one need not wait for the dissolution of 
the physical body for that. Action must not be felt as a burden, for that feeling is a sure sign, 
indicating that it is against the grain. No action which helps your progress will weigh heavily on 
you. It is only when you go counter to your innermost nature that you feel it a burden. A time 
comes when you look back on your achievement and sigh at the futility of it all. Entrust to the 
Lord, before it is too late, your mind and let Him shape it as He likes. 


Assign to your mind the task of serving the Lord and it will grow tame. You do not hand over the 
goldsmith an ornament that is quite nice; you give him for repairs or reshaping, the ornaments 
you feel have been broken or dented or gone out of fashion. So too, give the Lord your mind that 
certainly needs repair, if not complete reconstruction. 


Man should have no fear 


The blemish that affects the mind is illusion. It is like a fierce dog that will not allow any one to 
approach the Master. You can manage to by-pass it, only by assuming the rwupam or Form of the 
Master, which is called Saaruupyam, or by calling out for the Master so loudly that He comes 
down and accompanies you into the house, that is to say, by winning His Grace, Saameepyam 
(proximity). Illusion is His pet and so, it will not harm you if He orders it to desist from harming 
you. 


The Master comes to save not one good man from Illusion, but the whole of mankind. Of course, 
He has to come assuming a Form that man can love, revere, and appreciate. He can give joy and 
courage, only if He speaks the language of human intercourse. Even as it is, many are afraid to 
approach Me, for they know I am aware of their innermost thoughts and deepest desires. But, let 
Me tell you, only helpless animals have fear. Man, who is child of Immortality, should have no 
fear. People pray before stone images of the snake god, but when the actual snake appears in 
answer to their prayers, they run away terror-stricken from the shrine! The Lord manifests 
Himself only to shower Grace, never to strike terror. 


On the banks of the river near Lucknow, there was a sage who addressed dogs, crows and men 
equally as God; he had realised the unity of all in the Divine Essence. That is the result of Divine 
knowledge, or intense Bhakthi, where you do not see anything other than your /shtadevatha 
(Chosen Deity), wherever you turn. Be ever in that Divine Bliss, the bliss that comes from God- 
consciousness, always and everywhere. That is the Eternal Bliss (Nithyaanandha) which the wise 
enjoy. 


Like the silk-worm that spins from out of itself the cocoon that proves to be its tomb, man spins 
from out of his own mind the cage in which he gets trapped. But, there is a way of escape, which 
the spiritual teacher (Guru) can teach you or which the God in you will reveal to you. Take to the 
spiritual practice which will bring relief. Away with the roles of clown and clout, which you 
have acted all the ages. Take on the role of the Hero, not the Zero! Forget the past, do not worry 
about possible errors or disappointments. Decide and do. 


There are some spiritual teachers who advise you to keep a daily diary, where you note down 
every item of evil that you did; they ask you to read it as a spiritual exercise and resolve to 
correct yourself. Well, reading it, and writing it will only tend to impress it more effectively on 
the mind. It is better to substitute good thoughts for the bad and cleanse the mind of all evil by 
dwelling on righteous deeds and holy thoughts. Forget the things that you do not want to 
remember. Bring to memory only those things that are worth remembering. That is the sane way 
to achieve spiritual progress. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 1-1-1964 


2. Names do not matter 


TODAY is a holy day because people honour it as such. Every day is holy for those who utilise it 
for holy purposes; but there are some days set apart as specially significant and Makara 
Sankraanthi is one such. Sankraanthi is so called because the day takes you from darkness to 
increasing light; the path of light is open from today. The Sun enters upon the Uttharaayanam 
(journey towards North) this day; he moves from the Makararekha in the Madhyarekha. 
Bheeshma waited for this day, spending 56 days on the bed of arrows in pain, because he felt that 
death, when the Sun starts the journey towards north, is auspicious. He wanted to offer his life at 
the Feet of the Lord at an auspicious moment. 


Man must proceed ever towards bhalam (strength); he should not take to untruth, wickedness, 
crookedness--all of which denote a fundamental fatal trait of cowardice, weakness (balaheenam). 
Weakness is born of accepting as true a lower image of yourself than what the facts warrant. You 
believe you are the husk, but, really you are the kernel. That is the main mistake. All spiritual 
practice must be directed to the removal of the husk and the revelation of the kernel. So long as 
you say, 'I am,' there is bound to be fear, but, once you say and feel, 'Aham Brahmaasmi' (I am 
Brahman), you get unconquerable strength. 


The body is the field (kshethra) of the Master who knows all kshethras. One day, when 
Vivekaanandha was in his room, at night, sleepless because he was tossed about by conflicting 
thoughts, Raamakrishna who was 'asleep,' was talking as if in a dream but his talk was clearly 
heard by Vivekaanandha. He said, "O Manas! (O Mind)! O Maanasa raajahamsa (Royal swan 
of the mind)! 0 Nithya-aanandha rasaika nilaya (Repository of Etenal Bliss only)! You are 
Divine in nature---Daivaswaruupa. Sport in the pure lake of meditation of the Divine; instead, 
why do you crave for the dirty pond of sensual pleasure!" That was the advice of the Guru to 
Naren. Naren immediately resolved to take that advice to heart. 


Characteristic of Incarnations 


The influence of the Divine is such that while you are contemplating it, all traces of envy and 
greed will disappear from the mind. The boy Krishna had entered a Gopee's house and was just 
standing beneath the pot of curds when she discovered Him. Krishna ran out into the street and 
the Gopee pursued Him, and wanted to catch Him soon, for she was so pained that the boy was 
running in the hot Sun. She never worried about the loss of curds or milk or butter, but the very 
thought of Krishna's tender feet walking over the hard stones in the Sun was something she could 
not bear. The divine love that Krishna showered, made every one forget everything else. He too 
gave such disarming replies to the queries of the mother and the Gopees (cow-herd girls) that no 
one could have anything but divine love towards Him. That is the characteristic of Divine 
Incarnations, at all times. 


"She was carrying the milk to the temple to be offered to God; perhaps God Himself took the 
vessel away from her," He would say, announcing indirectly His own Reality. "I was sleeping by 
your side, Mother. How then could I have gone away to their houses, to steal their butter?" He 
would plead--suggesting that He could be in more than one place at a point of time. When caught 
in the act of searching for butter, He would say that He had put His hand in the pot, just to find 
out if a calf that had run away was inside it! With such lovely retorts, He won a place in every 
heart and the Gopees vied with each other in fondling Him and serving Him. 


Tread the path of Gods 


Krishna was the same Premaswaruupa (Divine love personified) even for the Grandfather 
Bheeshma. The illiterate simple Gopees and the old revered warrior Bheeshma, persons of all 
types, grades and professions found in Him their chief source of Wisdom, Grace and Inspiration. 
That is the sign of the Incarnation. When he waited for the northward movement of the Sun to 
come, Bheeshma was giving man a valuable message: the Sun is the presiding deity of intellect 
(buddhi) and when in the hridhayaakaasha (space in the heart) the Sun takes a northward turn, 
that is, the Utthara-ayanu or the Utthama-ayana (the Superior Path), the path which leads to God 
instead of the downward path to the objective world, that period is best for the journey of the 
soul too. So, what you should also do today is to resolve to tread the path of Gods (Deva-ayana). 
Have the resolve to begin remembrance of the Supreme Lord's Name, Ritual Worship, and 
Divine Service (Naamasmarana of Paramaathma, archana and aaraadhana). The day on which 
you begin these, and thus inaugurate the Superior Path for your intellect, that day is 
Uttharaagana for you. Do not wait for the almanac to tell you the date. 


The most dangerous illusion 


The very first lesson I gave when I declared My Identity at Uravakonda was: "Maanasa bhajare 
Gurucharanam, Dusthara bhava saagara tharanam." That is to say: First know that you are in 
this cycle of birth and death, the ocean of worldly life (bhavasaagaram),; then, resolve on 
crossing it (tharanam); then fix on a Guru or the Name and Form of God which appeals to you; 
lastly, dwell on His Glory, do bhajan, but do it with all your mind. He, who is deluded by this 
relative reality is the worldly person (samsaari); he who is aware that it is only relatively real is 
the spiritual practitioner (saadhaka). 


Egoism is the most dangerous illusion that has to be exploded and destroyed. Bheema had it, but 
when he could not lift and lay aside the tail of an old decrepit monkey, who was really Anjaneya 
Himself, that bubble was exploded. Arjuna had it; one day, after the battle, when Krishna 
brought the chariot back to camp, he wanted that like all charioteers, Krishna should get down 
first; the master must get down later, after the charioteer opens the door for him, is it not? 
Krishna refused, and insisted that Arjuna should alight, before He Himself should. At last 
Krishna won. Arjuna got down and then, as soon as Krishna left His seat and touched the ground, 
the chariot went up in flames! If only Krishna had got down first! The fact was that the various 
fiery arrows that had the power of burning the chariot had hit the target, but due to the Presence 
of Krishna, their igniferous powers could not manifest themselves. Knowing this Arjuna was 
humiliated; his egoism had a rude shock. He knew that every action of Krishna was full of 
significance. 


Krishna was the Avathaara (Incarnation of Vishnu) come to destroy evil; but now, the evil is not 
identifiable in certain persons alone; it is widespread. The scorpion has poison only in its tail; the 
cobra only in its fangs; but, man has poison all over! He has in his eye, his tongue, his mind, his 
intelligence, his gait, his brain---everywhere. You may ask, O when will this poison be 
counteracted and destroyed? It will disappear, do not doubt it. That is the very purpose for which 
I have come. Bring your 'flower of the heart' (hridhayapushpam) to Me, rid of all the pests that 
infest it, the Six Enemies of Man---desire, anger, etc. 


There is a Destiny that shapes events 


No one is prepared to make the effort for spiritual victory. If you demand the job of a Collector 
to be given to you straightaway, how can it be done? There are certain qualifications---age, 
scholarship, efficiency, talent, experience. The flower must become the fruit, the fruit must ripen, 
the ripeness must be expressed in sweetness. It all takes time. Even an atheist must accept a 
superior or mysterious power which guides things and events. The argument that you have not 
seen it and therefore you will not accept it as true is not quite intelligent. The eye is at best a poor 
instrument. Again, you need not yourself see a thing; others who have seen it, if they are 
unprejudiced and wise, can be believed. 


An old man was warned when he proposed to go through a narrow road that there was a cobra on 
the road side; but, he said that he had not seen it and so, he was not prepared to believe it. He had 
to believe it when it bit him, but then it was too late to benefit by that knowledge! Nagayya said 
just now that recently in one of his speeches Nehru had to acknowledge that there is a Destiny 
that shapes events, irrespective of individual efforts. Well, everyone has to come to that 
conclusion, sooner or later, for, there is a limit to the capacity of man to control events. Beyond 
that, an unseen hand takes over the wheel of events. You may call it Destiny, another may call it 
Providence and a third, Go. Names do not matter. It is the humility that matters, the wonder, the 
sense of awe that matters. 


Result of extreme miserliness 


Then there are some who say that having a trait in the mind, revering it as valuable, is enough; 
practising it is not so necessary. It is like saying, it is enough that food is in the dish, it need not 
be eaten and assimilated! Two brothers were famous for their miserliness; the elder was the 
worse culprit. One day, he had to go some distance to another village. So, he rose early and 
moved out of the house. Half way along the road, about five miles off, a doubt arose in his mind 
whether his younger brother had put out the oil lamp at home as soon as he left. So, he returned 
fast and asked the brother inside. He said, "Do you doubt my intelligence? I put it out as soon as 
your back was turned; but, pray, why did you walk back? Consider how much your chappals 
have worn out by these extra five miles!" The elder brother replied, "What? Do you doubt my 
intelligence? I have tucked the chappals under my arm; I walked back barefooted." But, do you 
know the result of their miserliness! The younger brother was stung by a scorpion in the dark; 
the elder was bitten on the bare foot by a cobra on the road! 


This Nagayya when he acted the part of Thyaagayya in the film, never forgot that he was 
Nagayya. If he forgets that, the film will fail. So too, never forget that you are the Infinite 
Consciousness (Aathman); with that consciousness, you can play any role on the world stage. 
This fact will get stablised in you, if you read the Geetha in the light of Krishna's actions in the 
Bhaagavatha and the Mahaabhaaratha. Fill your mind with Divine plays of the Lord and His 
glory. Once, He and His comrades stole into a house and brought down the vessel of curds. 
When the mistress of the house came in, "Why did you come in?" she asked. "My mother had a 
stick in her hand; so, I ran in here out of fear," Krishna replied. "Who are these boys?" she asked. 
"I brought them to bear witness to what I say," replied Krishna. "Why have you placed that 
vessel between your legs?" she asked in feigned anger. "So that these fellows may not get hold of 
the butter," was the answer! "Why do you go from house to house and eat the butter from their 
stores?" asked Yasodha. "I like only things I select and choose; I do not like to be fed," replied 
the Boy Krishna. Krishna could not be confined to one house or to one routine. He is All- 


pervading (Sarvavyaapi); He loves the devotees (Bhaktha Vathsala). Make your heart the Seat of 
the Lord; then it will have value. Soil which has veins of mica is valuable; but, that which has 
veins of gold is even more precious. The soil is valued according to the preciousness of the metal 
which it has in its fold. So too, hearts are evaluated by the contents. Keep God in your hearts; 
they will then be most precious possessions. 


Youth must realise the depths of their personality 


If God is implanted in the heart, you will see only God everywhere, even in the objective world. 
For, Sarvam Brahmamayam (all is Brahman), is a fact. Resolve this day to engage only in 
virtuous deeds, good thoughts, good company. Let your mind dwell on elevating thoughts. Do 
not waste a single moment of your waking time in idle gossip or vain boasting or demeaning 
recreations. Death stalks behind you to fell you and carry you off. Consider Kennedy, how death 
was lurking around, waiting for the chance! Did he not have men to guard him, soldiers, security 
men, bodyguards? But, it was all in vain. So while life persists, do good things, speak soft and 
sweet, never injure or insult another, serve those in need and keep the image of God ever before 
the mind's eye. 


The secular state is hesitating to teach the principles of Eternal Religion (Sanaathana Dharma) 
to young children and students in schools, though those principles are of universal application 
and do not go against any particular religion. The Shri Prakaasha Committee may, it is said, 
recommend a course of moral instruction! But if it is not emphasising the superconscious basis 
of the individual, much of the invigorating strength of Sanaathana Dharma would have been 
lost. A regular course in the discipline of meditation must also be given to youth, so that they 
may realise the depths of their own personality and its infinite possibilities for ensuring peace 
and happiness (shaanthi and soukhyam). 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 14-1-1964 


Freedom is independence from externals. Perfect freedom is not 
given to any man on earth. Lesser the number of wants, the greater 
is the freedom. Hence perfect freedom is absolute desirelessness. 


Shri Sathya Sai 


3. The house of the Lord 


I HAVE been coming off and on to Trichinopoly since fifteen years but this is the first time I am 
imparting Aanandha to such a large number of the citizens. The Grihapravesham (entering the 
new house ceremonially), for which A.K.C. Nataraajan is glad I have come, is just an excuse; 
giving you all this happiness was the primary purpose of My coming over. Your joy is My joy. 
Today A.K.C. entered the new house that he built for himself; I want that you should all build 
new houses for happy living, and install the Lord therein. I do not mean houses of brick and 
mortar, but houses of good thoughts, good words, good deeds and good company, where you 
could live calm and collected. Invite Me for the Grihapravesham of such houses and I shall most 
readily agree. In fact, then, the house is Mine already and I do not need even an invitation to 
come and enter it. These houses are for worldly comfort; that house is for spiritual joy. And My 
Place of Residence is the pure, aspiring heart. 


‘Deho devaalaya': the body is the temple, it is said. That is the real house of A.K.C. and of each 
one of you. You are going about with a temple, where God is in the innermost shrine. The body 
is not a mass of flesh and bone; it is a medium for manthras (sacred words or formulae) which 
save when they are meditated upon. It is a sacred instrument earned after long ages of struggle, 
equipped with reason and emotion, capable of being used for deliverance from grief and evil. 
Honour it as such; keep it in good condition, so that it might serve that high purpose; maintain it 
even more carefully than these brick houses; and, always preserve the conviction that it is an 
instrument and nothing more. Use it for just the purpose for which it has been designed and 
given. 


Feel strong with faith and devotion 


Above all, at this moment, it is urgent that every one should inquire into the true, the pure and 
the permanent. For, there is at present a delusion about values. Even the leaders of people are 
hugging the false hypothesis that happiness can be got by means of wealth or health, or housing, 
or clothing, or the cultivation of skills in handicraft and manufacture! The bird sits upon the 
bough that sways in the storm, confident of its wings, not confident of the bough whereon it sits! 
So, you too should feel strong because of the bough of the objective world, whereon you have 
perched. 


You know from the experience of the Cauvery river floods that nothing can save a man from 
drowning in the floods, neither status, nor caste, nor wealth nor even health, unless he knows the 
simple art of swimming. Need I say that crossing the ocean of worldly life, reaching the other 
shore of the sea of Birth-Death, is similarly possible only for those who know the art of spiritual 
discipline? Those, who are trying to build the human community on a foundation of wealth 
(dhana), are building on sand; those are who seek to build it on the rock of righteousness 
(dharma) are the wise. 


Practise a fraction of what you preach 


Dharma moolam idham jagath: Righteousness is the root of this world. Obey it and you are 
happy. The evil man is a coward, haunted by fear. He has no peace within him. Respect for the 
parents who started you in life and brought you into this world, to gather the vast and varied 
treasure of experience, is the first lesson that Dharma teaches. Gratitude is the spring which 
feeds that respect. It is a quality that is fast disappearing in the world today. Respect for the 


teacher, for the elders, for the wise---all these are on the decline. That is why righteousness is 
fast disappearing and losing its hold. 


People talk loud and long from all kinds of platforms about right conduct, divine love, peace, 
compassion, truth (dharma, prema, shaanthi, dhaya, sathya), etc.; this gets published in the 
newspaper next day and there their purpose ends. The paper of today is waste paper tomorrow! It 
is used for packing, thrown into the dust-heap, and burnt as refuse. That is the story of all 
platform professions. Put into practice a fraction of what you preach. 


Just as the body is the house you live in, the world is the body of God. An ant biting the little 
finger of your foot is able to draw your attention to the spot, and you react to the pain, making an 
effort to remove the tiny enemy. You must similarly feel the pain, misery, or joy or elation, 
wherever it is evinced in the entire land; you must make an effort to protect the land from the 
enemy, however remote may be the place where the enemy has presented himself. Be kind with 
all your kin. Expand your sympathies, serve others who stand in need to the extent of your skill 
and resources. Do not fritter away your talents in profitless channels. 


Every person consumes quantifies of food, but does not stop to calculate what he does in return 
to the society that helped him to live; the food must be transformed into service, either of one's 
best interest, or of the interests of others. You should not be a burden on others or an enemy of 
yourself. Mere care of the body is profitless, for the body is only a container, a despised 
container, when the spark of Divinity which it contains goes out. No one will take in a corpse, if 
rain interrupts the funeral; a wayside shop may permit you to keep your shoes for a while, while 
you go into the nearby temple; but the corpse never! That is something disgusting, whose sight 
has to be avoided. 


Start the first step with Naamasmarana 


Turn the key in the lock to the right, it opens; turn the same key to the left, it is locked. So too, 
turn your mind towards the objective world, it is locked, caught, entangled. Turn it to the right, 
away from the objects of the senses, the lock is loosened, you are free, deliverance is at hand. 
How to turn it right? Well, begin with remembering the Lord's holy name (Naamasmarana), as 
the first step. All journeys start with the first step. That will itself take you through the second 
and the third, to the very goal. 


I have to tell you one other point. I find that certain devotees have announced that I will be going 
from here to their places and even arranged processions and public meetings, without My 
permission. You have seen here itself how the Municipality had to present their Welcome 
Address to Me, at the Pandal here; I was not consulted about this programme before, nor had I 
agreed to it. Tens of thousands had gathered at the Municipal Hall. At Salem and a number of 
places between this town and Bangalore, people have organised such functions. When I have 
given My word, I keep up to it. That is why I came all the way from Thirupathi, starting at 11 
a.m. and motoring till 10 in the night. I knew that A.K.C. had announced here that I would reach 
by 10.30 p.m. and so I stopped for about an hour some miles away on the road, so that his guess 
might prove true. A.K.C. was wondering when I came, how I came exactly at 10.30 as per his 
announcement over the mike a few hours previously. Perhaps he forgot that I could hear his 
announcement miles and miles away. And who prompted him to make it, may I ask? When I say 
that I am coming, I do come; but, these over-enthusiastic devotees at Salem and elsewhere are 
causing great hardship to the thousands whom they mislead. Please hereafter do not be led away 


by all kinds of rumours that I am visiting this place or that, on My way to this place or that. Test 
the authenticity of each such piece of news before you believe. 


Trichinopoly, 3-2-1964 


What are problems? 
Whatever they are, they are all transient 


In relation to eternity and of no lasting consequence. 


What are thoughts ? 
They are creative force within man, and represent the 


free will given to man by God. 


Life should be full of joy and it will be, 
if you live your life in complete harmony with God. 


SHRI SATHYA SAI 


4. Brahmaanda Linga 


PANDITH Umaamaheshwara Shaasthry and Veerabhadhra Shaasthry both spoke on the 
Principle of Godhead, (Bhaagavath-thathwam), as far as they had grasped it, and as far as 
language can express it; for, it is something beyond expression and explanation. It has to be 
experienced and once experienced, the richness, the fullness, the extent, the depth of that 
experience can never be communicated to another. Man must feel that his highest destiny is to 
have that experience. He is not a despicable creature, born in slime or sin, to eke out a drab 
existence and be extinguished for ever. He is immortal; he is eternal. So, when the call comes 
from the region of immortality, he responds with his whole heart. He refuses to believe that he 
will die. He laughs at Death and treats him as a harmless casual visitor. For, there is something in 
him that whispers a challenge to death. He is a mixture of deha and deva---of the mortal and the 
immortal. If liberation means the stoppage of grief and the acquisition of joy, then, it is easy. 
What you have to do is to place all your burdens on God; that makes you care-free, grief-free. 
Then, when you take everything as the Lee/a (Divine play) 


of the Lord you love, you clap your hands in bliss whatever may happen, for it is all His Divine 
Play and you are as happy as He is, when His Plans are going through! 


The genuine status of Man 


"Eashwara sarvabhoothaanaam hriddese Arjuna thishtathi." "O Arjuna, the God resides in the 
heart of all beings," says Lord Krishna in Bhagavadh Geetha. He is not to be found specially in 
cities like Amarnaath, Kaashi, Thirupathi, Kedharaam or Gokarnam. Just as every drop of the 
ocean has the salty taste, the composition and the name of the ocean, so too every single being 
has the Divine taste and composition, and the name of the Lord. Only you do not realise it so 
clearly. The river Godaavari realises itself by reaching the Sea; man realises himself by merging 
in the Absolute. That which merges with the goal is Lingam: Leeyathe gamyam ithi lingam. 


The space encased in the pot must become one with the Space that traverses the entire Universe, 
by the negation of the attachment, which is just an artificial creation of the deluded mind. That 
attachment must disappear; that inferior status of manhood that now satisfies him must give 
place to the status of Reality of God (Vaadhavathwam) which is the genuine status. That is the 
task for which Sai is calling you; that is the work for which I have come. A Judge of the 
Supreme Court may, while at home, play with his grandchild and bend on all fours for the little 
fellow to mount his back and then He may crawl on the floor when the child cries "Holla"; but, 
all the while his status as a Judge does not suffer diminution, nor does he forget it. So, you too 
must always be conscious of the high calling on which you have come; you should not disgrace 
it by any mean or meaningless act or word or thought. I have come to give you the courage to 
conceive yourself as the Supreme Truth (Paramaathma) you really are; to give you the 
intellectual power (dheeshakthi) to grasp the reality. That alone can destroy the delusion born of 
ignorance. 


Have the deliberation first 


Step by step, you reach the end of the road. One act followed by another leads to a good habit. 
Listening, listening, you get prodded into action. Resolve to act, to mix only in good company, to 
read only elevating books, to form the habit of remembering the Lord's name (Naamasmarana) 
and, then ignorance will vanish automatically. The Divine Bliss that will well up within you by 
the contemplation of Aanandhaswaruupa (Bliss Personified) will drive out all grief, all worry. 


Shiva, it seems, laughed when He took a good look at the Chariot that was provided for Him 
when He started out to slay the Thripura-asuras, the demons of the three bodies, Sthuula, 
Suukshma and Kaarana---the Gross, the Subtle and the Causal. Vishnu, the Charioteer, was 
mostly in Yogic Sleep (Yoganidhra), the stable Earth was the Chariot, and the two wheels were 
the Sun and the Moon, two spheres which never revolved in unison! That laughter laid the 
demons low; there was no more need to proceed against the demons. How did the evil forces that 
dwelt in the three bodies die? They could not exist where there was Divine Bliss; for, they are 
products of grief. Develop Aanandha; then evil impulses and tendencies will vanish, for they 
will not get any foothold in the heart. 


Move forward towards the Light and the shadow falls behind; you move away from it and you 
have to follow your own shadow. Go every moment one step nearer to the Lord and then, 
Maayaa, the shadow (illusion) will fall back and will not delude you at all. Be steady; be 
resolved. Do not commit a fault or take a false step and then repent! Have the thaapam (the 
deliberation, the decision, the discipline) first, that is better than paschaath-thaapam, (regret for 
the mistake made). Arjuna had thaapam, he saw the consequences even before the battle began 
and wanted Krishna to advise him what to do. But, Dharmaraaja, the eldest brother, had 
paschaath-thaapam, sorrow after the war was over, repentence after the loss incurred. Reason 
out and discriminate 


Above all, you must take every step in spiritual practice or in the worldly life, only after deep 
deliberation and satisfying yourself that it will be for your good. Otherwise, it will be like the 
story of the weeping city. One day, a close female attendant of the queen came to the palace 
weeping in great sorrow, and so, the queen began to shed tears. Seeing the queen in tears, the 
entire female attendants wept and the weeping spread to the male attendants also. The king, 
finding the queen inconsolably sad, also wept profusely in sympathy, and the sight made the 
entire city weep loud and non-stop. At last, one sensible fellow set in motion an inquiry, which 
passed through person after person until the queen herself was accosted. She said that her 
attendant was in sore grief, and when she, a washerwoman by caste, was interrogated, she 
confessed that it was all due to the sudden demise of her favourite ass! When this news spread, 
the weeping ceased and there was wide-spread laughter and shame. Reason out, discriminate; do 
not rush to conclusions or be led away by mere hearsay. 


I have come to re-form you: I won't leave you until I do that. Even if you get away before I do 
that, do not think you can escape Me; I will hold on to you. I am not worried if you leave Me, for 
I am not anxious that there should be a huge gathering here, around Me. Who invited you all 
here? There was not even a little notice in print, but yet you have come here in thousands. You 
attach yourselves to Me. I am unattached. I am attached only to the Task for which I have come. 


But, of one thing, be assured. Whether you come to Me or not, you are all in Mine. This 
Shivamaatha, this Sai Maatha (Mother of all) has the love of a thousand mothers towards Her 
children; that is why I do so much laalana (fondling) and so much paalana (protecting). 
Whenever I appear to be angry, remember, it is only love in another form. For, I have not even 
an atom of anger in me; I just evince My disappointment that you do not shape as I direct. When 
I direct you along a line of action, reflect on My advice; you have full liberty to do so; in fact, I 
shall be happy if you do so; I do not like slavish obedience. If you feel that it will help you to 
reach the goal, follow it; if not, go to some other place; but, let Me tell you one thing: Wherever 
you go, you meet only Me. I am everywhere. 


Have you heard the story of the rabbit that had borrowed from Mother Earth four naye paise? 
She thought that if she moved into a new region she would be free from the obligation. So, one 
day she ran as fast as her legs could carry, her and went far far away from the place where the 
amount was originally received. At last, she sat down in great relief and said to herself, "Now no 
one will ask me to repay." What was her surprise when from the ground underneath she heard a 
voice, "Mother Earth is right under your feet, here. You cannot escape from me, however far you 
run!" 


So too, you cannot run away from Me. I will demand good conduct, good habits, good thoughts, 
good company, wherever you go seeking for refuge! And what reason have you to leave? Only 
those who ignore the joy, the consolation, the courage, the love and the blessing they have 
received here, will do so. Only those who believe the ear and not the eye, will do so. In a short 
time, you will be witnessing the emergence of the Linga that is formed within; the auspicious 
time for the emergence for the Linga is approaching; you see it and you receive the blessings; 
but, yet, there will be some among you who will doubt it and deny it. That is the karma of such; 
what else can they do? (Here, Baaba stopped the discourse; the movements started, first in the 
region of the abdomen, then the chest and the throat; Baaba swayed from the side; leaned on the 
table; drank water; and finally, after about twenty minutes, an eggshaped pink Linga emerged 
from His mouth. Holding it between the thumb and forefinger of His right hand, Baaba 
discoursed further about it). 


Ah! This is the Brahmaanda Linga! Symbol of the Universe. Inside it, the nine planets 
(Navagrahas) revolve; the entire Universe is represented herein, all the planets and their 
satellites, the primal fire, the clouds of primal dust, and over the anda, there is an eye imprinted, 
the Jagadekachakshu (the Eye of the One Eternal Witness). You are indeed blessed, the merit of 
many births has brought you here to see the Great Phenomenon, this rare Creation. Years of 
worship, or ritualistic vows and fasts, may not give this unique chance which you now have had, 
remember. Use this good luck to hear good Godly advice, to select good company and to strive 
more earnestly to reach the Goal. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, Shivaraathri, 1 1-2-1964 


5. The Mani Mantapa 


KUPPU Bairaagi Shaasthry and the Srouthi from Mysore gave you the pleasure of hearing both 
Vedhaantha (system of Hindu philosophy based on Vedhas) and Vedha, while Veerabhadhra 
Shaasthry selected as his subject the Dolothsavam (swing festival) of Krishna, evidently because 
today; these devotees from Bangalore, mostly florists and decorators who have been attached to 
Me for more than twenty-two years, insisted on My sitting for some time in this jhoola (swing) 
they have constructed with such care and devotion. I shall speak only for some little time, for, 
there is a Harikatha (musical discourse) later and as I have often told you, you must learn to 
respectfully listen to whosoever addresses you here, for they speak only of things that elevate 
you and strengthen your spiritual discipline. 


What exactly is the aim and purpose of all the Shaasthras (scriptures), the Bhaagavatham 
(containing tales about Avathaaras of Vishnu), the Puraanas (mythological tales), these 
discourses and the Harikatha? Just try to answer that query. It is to tell man the truth about 
himself. There is no plot to mislead you. That is not the desire of the sages who wrote down 
these annals and their own experiences. You know only the present, what is happening before 
your eyes; you do not know that the Present is related to the Past and is preparing the course of 
the Future. It is like the headline and titles of a film on the screen; as the letters gleam one after 
the other, you read them and pass on to the next that comes to view. Each new letter or word 
wipes out the one already before your eye, just as each birth wipes out the memory of the one 
already experienced. 


All have to merge finally 


Man does not realise that the end of this cycle of birth and death is in his own hands. The tree 
came from the seed and the seed from the tree and so on, from the beginning of time. Yes; you 
may not know which came first, tree or seed; but, you can easily put an end to the cycle, by 
frying the seed. It won't sprout again. Being extraordinary, man is now descending to levels 
which are below ordinary. The marshy lake. Like the animals of the desert, he is running towards 
the mirage to slake his thirst. He claims to have mastered the senses and all low desires but they 
sprout at the first chance, like grass after the first shower after summer. 


Just as you seek the udder of the cow for the milk it gives, seek the Lord and His Glory only in 
nature. As a matter of fact, Nature is useful only when it adds to the wonder and awe that it is 
able to provoke and sustain. Everything is an image of the Lord. Krishna revelled in seeing His 
own images in the Mani Mantapa (pavilion set with precious stones) of His house, when He was 
a child. Just as the Lord is pleased when He sees Himself in His manifestation called Nature, 
there is such joy welling up in all when they hear the story of the Lord and how He calls all to 
Himself. It is the call of the b/tuba (object] for the prathibimba (image); to merge in it. So, all are 
entitled for merging; all finally have to attain it. Otherwise, there is no meaning for the yearning 
to become greater and greater. 


You might ask Me to speak about my own mystery. It is not easy to understand it. When you 
have the chance, gather all the joy you can. There is no use .of bolting the door after the thieves 
have robbed and fled. Seize the chance and do not repent later that you missed the opportunity. 
Remember, you have to come to Me, if not in this birth, at least within ten more births! Strive to 
acquire Grace; Grace is the reward for spiritual practice; the highest spiritual discipline is to 
follow the instructions of the Master. 


Years of rigorous training make the soldier, who can then stand all the rigours of warfare. The 
heroic fighter is not made in a day. So too, the practising spiritual aspirant (saadhaka) who can 
win victories, is not made in a day. Restrictions and regulations, drill and techniques have been 
laid down for him also. Follow them sincerely and steadily and victory is yours. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 12-2-1964 


Pain is a gap between two moments of happiness. 
Happiness is an interval between two moments of pain. 


SHRI SATHYA SAI 


6. Kaashi and Badhri 


LIFE is only relatively real; until death, it appears to be real, that is all. For the procession of the 
bride and groom, the father of the bride had brought an elephant or rather the model of an 
elephant, correct to the minutest detail; the model was taken by all who saw it to be alive. Then, 
while all were admiring the wonderful work of art and arguing that it was alive, it exploded, 
shooting forth lovely little stars and snakes of light that gleamed through the sky. It was filled 
with fireworks and when it was lit, the entire stock filling the inside emerged, with a burst of 
noise and a brilliant riot of light and colour. Man is like that elephant, true, until the explosion! 


Before that explosion happens, man must realise himself. The fireworks are desire, anger, 
delusion, pride and jealousy etc., and they now fill this artificial animal, useful only for the show. 
Man is saved from such calamity by Vedhaantha, which is like the roar of the lion; it gives 
Courage and Enterprise; it makes man a hero. It does not whine or howl or cry. It drives 
cowardice away; instils the highest types of self-confidence. It is the strongest armour against the 
arrows of fate. It acts like a waterproof against the hailstorms of sensual pleasure. It is a curtain 
keeping out the mosquitoes of worry, which would otherwise rob you of sleep. With 
Vedhaantha-saturated heart, you are a rock on the shore, unaffected by the waves of temptation. 
Vedhaantha challenges your spirit of adventure, your own reality. Get into the train of spiritual 
discipline now; station by station, you will reach the terminus, which is jnaana (realisation) of 
you and of all this. Go to Penukonda, purchase a ticket for Bangalore and sit in the train. Do not 
get down in the middle when some station attracts you. The stations are karma, upaasana 
(action, contemplation), etc. You have to pass through them, but remember they are not the 
termini. The terminus is Realisation. 


Harmonious outlook essential 


Man is now possessed by the ghost of Delusion; he is prating a language which is unbecoming, 
behaving like an animal moving in a zigzag manner, climbing and sliding. I have come to 
exercise the ghost; that is part of My work. This delusion, that the man who is possessed is really 
intelligent, has caused great harm. For example, Pandiths spend a good deal of time to argue that 
Raama is superior to Krishna or that Krishna is superior, whereas the truth is that each of them 
reveals a certain phase of Divinity. The comparison itself diminishes the integrity of the inquirer. 
If he has any reverence, he would not attempt an intellectual estimate; he would try to get an 
intuitive experience, as Raamakrishna Paramahamsa did; and, then he would realise that one is as 
sweet as the other. Saint Thyaagaraaja discovered this because he was a mystic, one who 
experienced, instead of arguing over it. He sang that Raama is composed of two sounds, ‘Raa’ 
taken from Naa-raa-ya-na and 'Ma' taken from Na-ma-sshi-va-ya; that Raama is the 
harmonisation of Vaishnavism and Shaivism (worship of God as Vishnu and worship of God as 
Shiva). Harmony is the test of any religious outlook; if it breeds hate or faction or pride, the 
outlook is definitely evil. Keep away from such, if you are interested in your spiritual practice. 


Regulate love with virtue and service 


I am not attracted by learning or scholarship, which does not lead anywhere except towards 
egoism and pride. I am drawn only by devotion. Bring to Me whatever troubles you have; I shall 
take them on and give you Aanandha. When I like My devotees, I like their faults too, though 
some here turn up their noses and laugh at the peculiar follies and foibles of people who come 
from all the various States. I am drawn by the Love which brings you here from long distances 


through great difficulties, which makes you happy in spite of the want of the comforts to which 
you are accustomed, which makes you put up with the life under the trees or in the open sheds. 


I know that you do not go to the old mandhir (temple) in the village, for as you say, from there 
you cannot see Me whenever I happen to pass from this side of the building to the other! I am 
here since three hours and you are having sight of Me (darshan) so long; but, yet, as soon as I go 
up into My room, you rush to the Nilayam to get another darshan, as I come out into the 
verandah! What greater sign of devotion is needed than this yearning for darshan? 


But, this love alone is not enough. In fact, it does not mean much at all. What is wanted is the 
regulation of that Love, in the form of virtue and service. If you achieve that, then there is none 
to equal you, in this age. As the seed, so the sapling; as the status, so the behaviour; as the 
teacher, so the students; as the food, so the belch. Here, renunciation and divine love from the 
atmosphere, and silence is the discipline. Do not criticise others; criticise yourselves rather. Have 
the name of the Lord on your tongue; the form of the Lord before your eye. If you shape yourself 
this way, the place where you stand will become Kaashi, the house which you inhabit will 
become Badhri. Let all your activities be directed towards the purification of your hearts. You 
have My Blessings in this endeavour. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 3-2-1964 


The play is His, 

The role is His, 

The lines are written by Him. 
He directs, 

He designs the dress 

and decoration, 

the gesture and the tone, 

the entrance and exit. 

You have to act well the part 
and receive His approbation 
when the curtain falls. 


Shri Sathya Sai 


7. Beacons of light 


I AM glad I am speaking to a gathering of artists, poets and literary men, as well as those who 
are interested in promoting the fine arts. You have met here to commemorate the Coronation of 
Krishna Devaraaya, the Vijayanagara Emperor who patronised poetry, drama, sculpture, 
painting, music, dance, and literature and revived Hindu Dharma through all these media. The 
culture of Bhaarath (India) that has grown from the ageless Vedhas (the four ancient books of 
Hinduism) was for some time overwhelmed by the influence of Western standards of life and 
thought, on account of the artificial support they got when Westerners ruled over this land. Now, 
it has to be re-discovered and re-established, mainly through the removal of the weaknesses 
among the people of Bhaarath. People have become too weak to be the recipients of the 
tremendously powerful Message of the Eternal Religion, Sanaathana Dharma! The individual is 
called by us, vyakthi, do you know why? Because we expect him to make vyaktha, that is to say, 
to manifest his Divinity! Zshwarassarvabhuuthaanaam hrddese, Arjuna, thishtathi' "The Lord is 
residing in the heart of all beings, O Arjuna!" thus said Lord Krishna to Arjuna in the Bhagavadh 
Geetha. Demonstrate that it is true, realise Him within your heart, let Him become manifest, that 
is the obligation of the individual. 


The Kings of Vijayanagara had virtue, courage, patriotism, love of Dharma, generosity, vision, 
statesmanship. They built many temples; they restorted dilapidated ones; they constructed many 
tanks and towns. It is good to remember them and be grateful for what they did. But, there is one 
mistake which you should not commit: do not be contented merely with the contemplation of the 
past. Why survey the road which you have traversed already? Why allow the achievements of the 
past to curb enthusiasm in the present? You ask, can we today carve or build or paint or sing as 
well as they in the Vijayanagara Empire did? That is a sign of weakness, being benumbed by 
fear. 


Give no room for cowardice 


A hermit once met the Cholera Goddess on the road, returning from a village where she had 
thinned the population. He asked her how many she had taken into her lap. She replied, "Only 
ten." But, really speaking, the casualties were a hundred. She explained, "I killed only ten; the 
rest died out of fear!" Man is Aathmaswaruupa (Self-embodied), that is, Abhayaswaruupa 
(Fearlessness-embodied). If he knows his real nature, he will give no room for weakness or 
cowardice. 


That is the main aim of culture, to cultivate mental calm, mental courage, to make every one feel 
kinship with every one else. You are born with the cry, ‘koham' (who am I?), on your lips; when 
you depart, you must have the declaration, ‘Soham’ (I am He), on your smiling face. This is the 
message of the Dharma which Krishnadevaraya fostered. Take that lesson home from this 
meeting. You are now seeing with the EYE---a three-lettered physical apparatus, the three letters 
representing the three qualities: Sathwa, Rajas and Thamas (purity and poise, restless activity, 
ignorance and inertia). See with the clarified, unperjudiced, unattached ''; then, you see only 
One, though you see yourself you are indeed everything that refers itself as 'T'. 


Win the title the Upanishadhs proclaim 


It is because this single aim (/akshya) has been given up, that all this confusion (avalakshana), 
has come about! Bezwada Gopala Reddy said just now that the Pandiths who have specialised in 
the ancient scriptures and sacred texts are the Maanasa-sarovara (the holy lake where the holy 


river Brahmaputhra arises) of our culture; but, very few honour such men today. There is a 
general neglect of the higher aspects of culture. People know more about the details of the 
personal lives of film stars; more and more of them are getting interested in such trash. They do 
not care for the Pandith toiling in the same street; they do not know the names of the poets and 
the painters of their own town. That is the tragedy of the educated classes; they have no sense of 
values. 


This day, when you have called here literary men like Puttaparthi Naaraayanaachar, I feel it is a 
day of Aanandhodhayam (dawn of Bliss) for every one; for, literature gives, or ought to give, 
bliss and peace. You honour a ruler for promoting culture and literature; well, you must 
recognise, therefore, that the rulers have a responsibility even today to continue the tradition. 
They must canalise the energy of the people and their intelligence into, moral activities and 
socially harmonising programmes. I always encourage religious, social and cultural activities 
(Sanaathanam, Saanghikam and Saamskrithikam) the three S's; if it is reviving the values 
recognised as great by time or recreating the damaged structure of the good society, or restoring 
rigour to some fine art that is declining, you can count on My Blessings. I always exhort people 
to win, not the titles that come to those who canvass support, but the title that the Upanishads 
proclaim as the highest decoration for spiritual aspirants: Amrithasya Puthraah, Children of 
Immortality. 


Of what use is it if a man boasts that his grandfather was a great scholar? Manuja, the Sanskrit 
word of Man, implies a noble ancestry, from Manu Himself. Boast of your inner Divinity which 
is your greatest treasure. I must say this to the poets and writers who are here: Saraswathi is a 
Goddess, the Consort of Brahma, the creator, you are the votaries of a Goddess, whom every one 
worships; She confers wisdom and liberation. Be true to the highest boons She confers. Do not 
be contented if you give some food for the worldly hunger of the senses. Do not lower your 
ideals for the sake of cheap fame or vulgarise public taste. Instead of loukika sringaram (worldly 
enjoyment of sex), give aloukika Aathmaanandham (Bliss of the Self). Contribute to the 
expansion of love, the purification of motives, the enlargement of sympathy, the tolerance of 
difference, the respect for individual striving. 


By all means, pay gratitude to the heroes of the past and the benefactors of the present. But fill 
yourself with enthusiasm to reach the Goal, by means of good thoughts and good deeds and good 
words. Kalluru Subba Rao spoke of the 25 years of struggle he has had, to celebrate this Festival 
in various parts of Rayalaseema, the struggle he had to change the name of these districts into 
Rayalaseema, instead of the old name, Ceded Districts or Dattamandala. He must be helped 
much more, not by means of maatalu (words) but by mootalu (bags of money). Festivals like this 
have to be celebrated more frequently, and I too shall join you more frequently. 


In fact, Puttaparthi is just 16 miles off;, still, I have come like this to Penukonda only twice--- 
once when Krishnarao brought Me to preside over the District Athletic Competitions and now, 
when Krishnadevaraya brought Me! I am looking forward to share My joy with all and so, I feel 
that you have but to invite Me and I shall be with you. I know that you have not understood Me 
yet; you only see Me from a distance, see Me through the thousands who pass through your town 
to come to Me. If only you catch a little of their faith and joy, you will be amply rewarded. I 
have been worried--if worry is the name for that feeling--that while people from the farthest 
corners of this country and even from foreign countries are benefiting, the people of Penukonda 
are denying themselves the chance of sharing My Aanandham. 


Penukonda, the town that derives its name from the mountain, has been too long a heap of 
stones, albeit a huge heap. Your hearts must become kondas, that is, huge mountain peaks, and 
on the top, as in Arunagiri, the Jyothi (light) of knowledge must shine like a beacon. Learn, 
experience, and be happy. Control, canalise and secure. It does not matter a bit if you have no 
faith in Me or in God. Have faith in yourselves, that is enough. For, who are you, really? Each of 
you is Divinity, whether you know it or not. 


Penukonda: Jubilee Celebrations of the Coronation of Krishnadevaraya of the Vijayanagara 
Empire, 17-2-1964. 


8. Dharmakshethra 


THIS is the Inaugural Meeting of the Prashaanthi Vidwanmahaasabha established to promote the 
knowledge and practice among all mankind of the fundamental truths, beliefs and disciplines of 
Sanaathana Dharma (Eternal Religion). The Raaja Saheb just now gave expression to his great 
joy and satisfaction that the Wheel of Revival is being set in motion by Me at this place, from the 
Palace, in spite of the claims of many other places for that honour. It was at Rajahmundry last 
year, on Shri Raama Navami Day, that I announced to the Pandiths gathered around Me on the 
sands of an island in the river Godaavari, the aims and objects of this Sabha. Naturally, devotees 
resident there were hoping and preparing themselves in that hope, that the Inaugural Meeting 
could be arranged in their town. Without doubt, Rajahmundry is a place competent to bear that 
honour. With its historic past and large number of Aasthika Sanghas (Associations of believers) 
and institutions that it is fostering, it ranks high among the upholders of tradition. But, like all 
good things and all lucky chances, this too is won, not so much by effort, as by merit—merit 
accumulated through years, and even through centuries and ages ! 


The Godward path is Karma based on Dharma 


This is an epoch-making event. For, it is no less than the Dawn of the Golden Era of the 
Liberation of Humanity. Venkatagiri has been for centuries the seat of a Royal Family dedicated 
to the support, protection and promotion of Dharma and so, it has earned this honour. 


Consider how many temples were built or renovated or maintained by the Raajas of Venkatagiri! 
Take count of the number of Pandiths they have patronised and encouraged, the number of 
religious books their donations have helped to see light! Consider the atmosphere of Dharma 
which they established in this State for centuries. See the interest the family is taking even now, 
when their State and status have been swept away by the storms of political change. 


Bhaarathavasha (Mother India) has kept before her this ideal of Dharma. That is the taproot of 
her culture, the source of her vigour and vitality. The Godward path is action based on 
righteousness (Karma based on Dharma). That is the path, also towards joy, contentment and 
therefore of strength. Now, the path has become hidden by an overgrowth of briar and bush; the 
bridges and culverts are in disrepair. People have forgotten the goal, the path, and the habit of 
walking on it. That road is the only refuge; it must be trodden tomorrow, if not, today, for the 
goal lies at the end of that road. It was laid down centuries ago, beyond the memory of history, in 
the Vedhas. Sathyam vadha, Dharmam chara---"Speak the truth, practise righteousness," the 
Vedhas call on 'you. These Pandiths well versed in Vedhas and Shaasthras know what Dharma 
is and they can explain it to you without distortion. That is why you have to go to them 
reverentially and seat them amidst you and get enlightened by them. Knowing is not being. You 
must try to translate into daily life what you learn from them. The moral life is the best 
prescription for joyful life. 


Learn to live in His Glory 


Every one's heart is a Dharmakshethra (the scene of Mahaabhaaratha war) where the battle 
between the forces of Good and Evil is fought. Why, the whole country is Dharmakshethra. So, 
the mothers and children of this land must be devoted to Dharma, above all. The Geetha begins 
with word, Dharmakshethrae, and ends with the words, Sarva Dharmaan parityajya: through 
Dharma, you have to transcend Dharma. That is why Kaushalya exhorted Raama when he went 


into the forest, "May the Dharma which you are upholding by this act, be your guardian when 
you are in the forest, as an exile." And, Raama too upheld Dharma even under the most trying 
circumstances. When, after the death of Raavana, Vibheeshana's Coronation was arranged, he 
prayed that Raama himself should crown him in the city of Lanka. But, Raama declared that His 
vow and His father's orders did not allow Him to set foot in a city during the years of exile. That 
period was not yet over, He said. So, the function was attended only by Sugreeva and others. 
Raama thus demonstrated by His actions how scrupulously Dharma had to be observed. We want 
mothers who are so wise, and children who are so steadfast in the practice of Dharma. 


Practice---that is the real thing in spiritual matters. Scholarship is a burden, it is very often a 
handicap. So long as God is believed to be far away, in temples and holy places, man will feel 
religion a burden and a hurdle. 

But, plant Him in your heart and you feel light, burdenless, and even strong. It is like the food 
basket; when carried on the shoulder, it feels heavy; you are too weak even to carry it. But, sit 
near a stream and eat it. Though the total weight has not decreased, you feel lighter and stronger. 
That is the consequence of taking the food in: do likewise, with the idea of God. Do not carry it 
on the shoulder, have it 'in.' 


Keep the memory of the Lord and His Glory always with you; that will quicken your steps and 
you will arrive soon at the Goal. The mother, coming from the well, with a pot of water on her 
head, another on the hip and a third in her hand, hurries home, since she is always conscious of 
the infant in the cradle. If she forgets the infant, her gait slows down and she wanders around, 
chatting with all her friends. Similarly, if God, the Goal, is not cherished in the memory, one has 
to wander through many births and arrive home late. 


God is the life-breath of every soul. So, learn to live in His Glory, in His Memory, in His 
Contemplation, every moment. That is what the Vedhas and Shaasthras teach. 


Venkatagiri, 18-2-1964 


If there is righteousness in the heart there is beauty in character. 
If there is beauty in character there is harmony in the home. 

If there is harmony in the home there is order in the nation. 

If there is order in the nation there is peace in the world. 


Shri Sathya Sai 


9. Yanthram & Manthram 


MAN has immense capacities latent in him, waiting to be tapped and used. He has many talents 
which he has to bring to light. He feels the urge to love all beings, to share his joys and griefs 
with his kind, to know more and satisfy the curiosity of his intellect, to peep behind the awe and 
wonder that Nature arouses in him. He is able to gather information about all kinds of things 
from all comers of the world, but, he is unaware of what happens in the comers of his own mind. 
He knows who is who among all the rest, but, he does not know the answer to the simple 
question, "Who am I?" 


The fact is, he has to ask it himself and seek out the clue to the enigma himself. He has not felt 
that it is essential to know the answer; he is content to move about blindly in the world, groping 
his way in the dark. Without knowing who he himself is, he is rashly judging, labelling and even 
libelling other men! This is the fundamental reason for the hollowness of human life today, for 
the hate and fear that stalk the world. 


The Vedhas and Shaasthras of India have the key to that answer; they can teach you the process 
by which you can discover it for yourself if you are so inclined. There are only twenty-six letters 
in the English alphabet; yet by combining them in various ways, thousands of books are written. 
So too, the ideas and hints given in the Vedhas may be a few-, their application explains the 
entire literature of Akshara, which means both 'letter' and ‘indestructible.’ Every person born in 
Bhaarath must be an exemplar of these disciplines; for, 'Bhaa' implies 'splendour,' prakaasham, 
the splendour that is encased in man, and ‘Rathi’ implies 'the desire to manifest it, to taste it.' Live 
up to that glory and you will all be transformed into fullness. 


The Divine Principle 


You are the Formless (Niraakaaram) come in the form of Man (Naraakaaram), the Infinite, 
come in the role of the finite, the Formless Infinite appearing as the formful infinitesimal, the 
Absolute pretending to be the Relative, the Aathma behaving as the body, the Metaphysical 
masquerading as the merely physical. The Universal Aathma (Self) is the basis of all being. The 
sky was there before houses were built under it; it penetrated and pervaded them for some time; 
then, the houses crumbled and became heaps and mounds; but, the sky was not affected at all. So 
too, the Aathma pervades the body and subsists even when the body is reduced to dust. 


The same inexplicable, invisible, electric current, when it enters a bulb, a fan, a stove, a cooler, 
or a sprayer, activates each one of them or all of them together. Similarly, Jshwara sarva 
bhoothaanaam' the Divine Principle activates all beings. That is the inner core, the Divine Spark, 
more minute than the minutest, more magnificent than the most magnificent. To observe the 
minute you must use a microscope; to bring the 


remote nearer your eye, you seek the help of a telescope; these are Yanthras (material 
instruments). The instruments that help you to visualise the Core that has such strange 
contradictory attributes are called Manthras---formulae that save you when you meditate on 
them. They are also called Thanthras (Ceremonies and rites) when their practical application has 
to be emphasised. Faith in the efficacy of these Manthras and in the utility of the procedure 
prescribed, as well as in the existence of the Core are all essential for success in the great 
adventure, just as faith in the efficacy of the Yanthra, in the correctness of the procedure, and in 
the existence of the material he is seeking to know more about are essential for the scientist. 


"The liberation from night" 


You must tackle this problem, straight from where it starts. Ignorance can be cured only by 
knowledge; darkness can be destroyed only by light. No amount of argument or threat or 
persuasion can compel darkness to move away. A flash, that is enough; it is gone. Prepare for 
that flash of illumination; the light is there already, in you. But, since it is heavily overladen by 
repressing factors, it cannot reveal itself. "The liberation from night" which happens when the 
light is revealed, is called Moksha. Every one has to achieve it, whether he is striving for it now 
or not. It is the inevitable end to the struggle, the goal to which all are proceeding. 


But, please do not be afraid of reaching the goal of liberation (Moksha)! Do not conceive that 
stage as a calamity. It is the end of calamity. It is death to all grief; the birth of joy---a joy that 
knows no decline, the death of grief, grief that will never more be born. 


Well, how do you prepare yourself for the stage? I must tell you that the answer is in that very 
word Moksha, itself. It is self-explanatory. 'Mo' indicates Moha (delusion; being deluded by the 
scintillating, the gaudy, the transitory, the temporary trash); and, 'ksha' means kshaya (decline; 
disappearance, destruction). It requires you to keep the flights of your mind away from these 
deluding attractions, and on the straight path towards liberation. 


Avoid illusion by denying it 


See how the insufferable heat of the Sun is controlled and modulated and reduced by your bodily 
mechanism to the congenial temperature of 98.4 degree; so, you too should keep the destructive 
force of your elemental passions born out of the clamour of sabdha, sparsha, ruupa, rasa, 
gandha (sound, touch, form, taste, smell) rigorously in check and bring it down to tolerable 
levels, yielding comfort and congenial living. You yourselves create the illusion of which you 
are the slave; deny it, don't give it a chance to Lord over you, then it will not harm you. Someone 
was told, "There, inside that well, lies your shadow." He said, "No; it cannot be." But, he 
decided, nevertheless, to go and verify the fact. He walked up to the well and peeped in. And, lo, 
he found it was true. The well had his shadow inside! Poor fellow, he did not know that the 
shadow would be there only when he looked in! Do not test Maayaa. Try to locate it, it will 
present itself. You can avoid it only by denying it; you can escape only by concentrating on the 
substance; do not attach any value to the shadow, whether inside the well or outside it. For, after 
all, it is just a shadow! 


Illusion haunts man as kaama or thrishna (desire). Desire calls for sabdha, sparsha, ruupa, rasa, 
gandha---the qualities of the Five Elements of which man is the complex; sabdha of Aakaasha 
(space), sparsha of Vayu (air), ruupa of Agni (fire), rasa of Jala (water), and gandha of the 
Earth. Man is prompted by the element of Space in him to seek sweet sounds that satisfy the ear, 
by the element of Air in him to run after smooth and soft things that yield pleasure to the skin, by 
the element of Fire in him to pursue things that by beauty of form appeal to the eye, the Water 
element in him to crave for food and drink that are tasty to the tongue, and by the inner urge of 
the element of Earth in him to cater to the nose, by trying to enjoy perfume and fragrance and 
pleasant smells. Kaama (desire) has a two-headed son, Arodha-lobha by name, the twin-headed 
monster anger-greed. Through the malignant designs of these three, you are robbed of lasting 
happiness. 


Be the Prince you really are 


Unaware of your Divine Status, you revel in low company;, you toil and sweat as the slave of 
mean passions which drag you into disgrace. Be the Prince you really are. Be like the lotus, 
which though born in the slush at the bottom of the lake, by sheer will-power rises above the 
waters to see the Sun and be inspired by its rays. The lotus discards contact with water, though it 
is born and bred in that element; so, you too should avoid being attached to the elemental 
passions, that the elements constituting you urge you into. How long are you to sit content with 
the minor role of a clown or a clout? Are you not ashamed? Have you no ambition? Why 
smother your genuine talents under a self-imposed mask? All these are zero roles; take on the 
role of the hero which is your right, and shine! 


I shall tell you how to deserve that role, how to earn it from the Suuthradhara, the Director of 
this play. Enter on a course of spiritual discipline; your experience itself will tell you the validity 
and the value of that course. Instal a radio receiver, select the wavelength of the station you 
propose to listen to, switch on correctly to that wavelength, and you hear the programme clear 
and distinct. Your ear will tell you the accuracy with which you have tuned. Similarly, take on a 
form of manthra (manthraswaruupam); pronounce it and meditate on it with accurate care and 
steady attention; tune in to the Voice of within you. One of the obstacles in the way of the 
spiritual aspirant is the satire and criticism poured on him by quacks that crowd round him. Do 
not pay heed to their advice or their barbs. They are experts only in the silly short-lived 
trivialities of social life or sensual pleasure. Most people nowadays are more interested in the 
history of film stars than in the history of Yogis and Paramahamsas (ascetics of the highest 
order) who can save you from the disaster of deep-seated ignorance. 


Three-stranded rope of Yama 


Yama or the God of Death is described as dragging his victims to his abode by means of the rope 
of paasa (snare). Well. He has no rope factory there, for supplying him with the rope he needs. 
You manufacture the rope yourself and have it ready round your neck; he has only to take hold 
of the rope and pull you along! It is a three-stranded rope, the strands being Ahamkaara, 
Vishayavaasana and Kaama (Egoism, Sense-attachment and Desire). 


Do not respect men who are caught up in the tangle of the senses. Give respect according to the 
knowledge each possesses of himself, i.e., of the Immanent and the Transcendent. How do you 
fix the price of cane? According to the sugar content, is it not? You evaluate oranges in 
proportion to the juice they contain, is it not? So too, a man is worthy of honour in proportion to 
the knowledge of the Self he has acquired. This knowledge alone can confer steadiness and 
strength. Without it, all profession of renunciation, all pretence of devotion, all performance of 
charity are but tongue-deep or skin-deep! 


It is not the resolution that matters; it is resoluteness. Resolution is just a string of words. You 
may know the 700 slokas of the Bhagavadh Geetha by heart; but, believe Me, the time you spent 
in learning it by rote, and in reciting it, is all a waste, if you do not resolutely act upon even a 
single shloka. Why? That learning might even be handicap; for the skill has affected your head, 
and made it swell with pride. 


Dharma will never play false 


Bhagavadh Geetha is a means by which you can get immersed in your own Bhagavadh-bhaava 
(relationship with God). If you are so immersed, you will have undiminished, undiminishable 


Aanandham, Nithyaanandham (Eternal Bliss). Now, in your ignorance, you feel small, you feel 
miserable, you feel that the wicked, the greedy, the cruel, are all happier than you and 
unjustifiably so. You feel it is unjust that you who are so truthful, so loving, so good, should 
suffer. Just ponder over this. Are they as happy as you imagine, and is your condition so bad as 
you picture? Just investigate and you will find out for yourself. They are only painted pots of 
poison; the paint of honey is just a thin coating, a mere show. Their hearts know no peace; they 
are as miserable as you, if not more. 


Believe that Dharma or Moral Rectitude will never play false; it will ensure greater joy than can 
be gained through all other means. Raama destroyed Raavana; it was a victory of one head over 
ten; concentration over distraction. Raavana craved for Prakrithi (Seetha) discarding the Purusha 
(Spirit) which gave it values and meaning, viz., Raama. If you crave for Prakrithi, the objective 
world, you degrade yourself, you deny your reality, and you join Raavana's brood Do not also 
imagine that the Lord is outside Prakrithi, or even of you, who are really a part of the objective 
world. He is in you, behind you, beside you, before you. He is the eye of your eye; the I of your 
I. Yearn for the yoga or union with Him, through the unwavering awareness of His being the real 
You. Yearn for yoga; and whatever bhoga (pleasure) you really need will be offered to you in 
due course. If on the other hand, you yearn for bhoga itself, you are gone! You are blessed only 
with toga (disease), remember! 


Live in the consuming conviction that you are the Aathman. That is the hard core of the Eternal 
Teaching. The Aathma it is that sees through the eyes, hears through the ears, handles through 
the fingers, moves through the feet. That is the basic 'you.' That 'you' is not elated by praise or 
deflated by blame. When some one carps at you, reason out thus within yourself:. 'Is he casting 
aspersions on my body? Well. Why should I be worried? He is doing just what I should myself 
do, casting out the attachment to the flesh, to this paltry prison. Or, is he throwing them at the 
Aathma? Nothing can affect its purist, or tarnish its glory. So remain calm and unperturbed.’ You 
may ask, what happens then to the strings of abuse? Like the letter sent by post and refused by 
the addressee, it returns to the sender! 


I enjoin you to go home and ruminate over these suggestions and ideas. Reflect upon what you 
have heard, especially from these who convey to you the gems contained in the ancient 
scriptures, tested on the touch-stone of experience all along the centuries. Sanaathana Dharma 
recommends the three-fold course of listening, recapitulating, concentrating. Listening makes 
you learned only. Concentrated meditation on the meaning of the thing heard gives you the fruit 
of the teaching as intended by the Teacher. 


Venkatagiri, 19-2-1964 


10. Arupee or hundred paise? 


PICHAYYA Shaasthry of Nellore spoke so feelingly of his ardour and anxiety to meet Me, an 
ardour he has had had for many years, he also spoke of the joy he now has at the realisation of 
his desire. Of course, for every desire to come true, the time, the cause and the circumstances 
have to coincide. It is just today that, in his case, these three combined to give him this 
satisfaction. I have known him all these years and I was aware of his yearning to come to Me, 
especially during the last four years, and I called him today to have his wish fulfilled. 


Remilla Suuryaprkasha Shaasthry spoke on the Apaurusheyathwa (not having a person as their 
author) of the Vedhas and Vaaranaasi Subrahmanya Shaasthry on Dharma as reflected in the 
actions of Raama as depicted in the Vaalmeeki Raamaayana. These are subjects of great interest 
to all of you. But, I must chide you for not paying them the attention they and the subjects 
deserved; you were restless and worried and not concentrating on the teaching. This is a part of 
the atmosphere that you carry about with you, wherever you go, nowadays. There is lack of 
earnestness, of single-pointed attention. 


The trouble is, you are moving in the wrong direction, away from the desirable destination. You 
have come into the world to realise yourselves, fully equipped with all the instruments needed 
for that endeavour---viveka, vairaagya and vichakshana---(discrimination, non-attachment and 
ability), the urge to enlarge your love, to enrich your emotions, to ennoble your actions. 


But, you have lost your way; you are caught in a morass; you are confused by mirages and 
dreams which you take as real; you run after false colours and cheap substitutes. 


Vedha is the source of Dharma 


Subrahmanya Shaasthry, using his erudite scholarship, selected from the Raamaayana fine 
incidents to show that Raama is the perfect embodiment of Dharma and proclaiming Dharma to 
the world. In his arguments with the dying Vali, he declared that all beings, endowed with 
discrimination, are bound by righteousness and shall meet punishment if they should ignore it. 
He was aware of all the various applications of Dharma in the various fields of human activity. 


Now, the Vedha is the source of Dharma, Vedha which Suuryaprakasha Shaasthry declared was 
revealed to the Yogic Consciousness of sages. And Raama is the Personification of that Dharma. 
So Raamaayana partakes of the excellence of the Vedhas. The Mahaabhaaratha is generally 
known as the Fifth Vedha. And the Bhaagavatha describes the Glow and the Grace of the Lord 
and His splendour as the Indweller in All. So, that too is as efficacious as the Vedhas to elevate 
man and to release him from the bondage to the mean and the sordid. 


It is the Vedhaswaruupam (essence of the Vedhas) that is enshrined in these three works, thus 
making them equally effective as drugs to cure you of ignorance. But, why do you promote 
clamour and discord by accusing these Brahmins of exclusiveness and monopolistic greed? Even 
they, in spite of all their faith and sacrifice, are finding it difficult to follow the regimen 
recommended by the Vedhas. They have generations of practice and encouragement behind 
them. 


Develop the Divinity in you 


The study of the Vedhic lore has been with them and their families for centuries; but, yet, they 
are finding it hard to live up to Vedhic standards of Brahminhood. How then can you take it? 


Four persons have a rupee coin each; if each changes the coin into naya paise and keeping 25 for 
himself, gives 25 each to the other three, no one loses. Each of them has a hundred paise, instead 
of a single coin, but, there has been no diminution of the purchasing power each had at the 
beginning. The Raamaayana, the Mahaabhaaratha and the Bhaagavatha are 100 paise; the Vedha 
is the rupee. That is all the difference. Why then lose yourself in this campaign of hatred? Why 
try to can' a burden which is beyond the capacity of your shoulders? Look at all the time-tables, 
the restrictions and regulations, the ceremonies and rites that the Brahmins have burdened 
themselves with. Their purpose is not merely to ensure security and solace to themselves but, 
even more, to ensure the orderly working of the forces of nature for the benefit of all mankind, of 
all beings in all the worlds. That is the high ideal for which they have imposed on themselves all 
the toil and tribulation. 


Your duty is to concentrate on the development of the Divinity latent in you; once you do that, 
all hate and all pride will disappear; you will become humble fellow-pilgrims with the Brahmins, 
to the same goal, though along parallel paths. Remember these things cannot be decided by the 
counting of votes or measuring popular support. You cannot judge fish as more precious than 
diamonds, merely because there are more crowds in the fish-market, and only a handful of 
customers in the shops selling diamonds. 


Aanandha has to be earned the hard way 


The cottage and the castle are both built on the earth: so too, all faiths and religions, all 
disciplines have the Vedha as the basis. The special feature of Indian culture is that here the dress 
and demeanour, the language and literature, the manner and mode of living, the ideals and 
institutions are all attuned to the spiritual progress of man, emphasising as they do the superiority 
of the spirit over the body, the subtle over the gross. Everything is subordinated to that supreme 
task. The body should be fed and kept free from disease. Why? So that it may be fit for spiritual 
discipline. Spiritual discipline for what? For the realisation of the truth about oneself. The subtle 
is the basis for the gross; the Divine is the basis for the Human. Indian Culture turns your eye to 
the basis, not to what is built upon it. 


This outlook was, for long, the natural outlook for every Indian; it was automatic, even. It was 
imbibed at the mother's lap, from the father in the field, the teacher at school, from neighbour 
and friends and relatives, from the old and the young, from whatever was done or written or 
spoken by those around. It is because that attitude is fast disappearing and is in danger of being 
completely thrown overboard that this Prashaanthi Vidwanmahaasabha has been started by Me to 
remind you once again of the duty of cultivating it. 


You will all doubtless agree when I say the Divine Bliss is your greatest need. But, you cannot 
order it from any shop. It has to be earned the hard way: doing good deeds, moving in good 
company, desisting from evil, keeping the mind attached to the Glory of God. Good and bad 
cannot be kept together in the same vessel; then, the good also will turn bad. Night and light 
cannot coexist. The Sun was proud that he had no enemies left. But, some one told him that he 
had one enemy left, viz., Darkness. Then, he sent his rays, the emissaries, to seek out the foe, 
but, wherever they went, they saw only light, the darkness was nowhere to be found. They 
returned and reported - "There was no such thing as Darkness upon the earth; we made the most 
rigorous search!" 


Make intellect Master of your mind 


Suuryaprakaasha Shaasthry said that the worlds this side of Suuryaloka are all inhabited by 
beings that are subject to life and death, to the processes of involution and evolution and that the 
world on the other side are inhabited by beings that are free from these aspects of change. He 
also asked, who can give us the secret of transcending the barrier that divides the region of death 
from the region of immortality? Of course, the Lord has often sent Messengers to tell humanity 
about it and He has Himself come down in human form to communicate it and save mankind 
from perdition. It is because the task of guiding man has gone on so consistently that today in 
India there is at least this quantum of earnestness to achieve it and to escape from the cycle of 
birth and death. 


You can gain that victory only by rigorous Saadhana. Spiritual discipline is more arduous than 
physical discipline; imagine the tremendous amount of effort undergone by the lady who runs 
along a wire stretched across the ring, underneath the circus tent. After all, the gain is just a few 
rupees. The same steadfastness and systematic effort aimed at a higher reward can endow you 
with mental balance and you can maintain your equilibrium under the most adverse or the most 
intoxicating circumstances. The Jnaanendhriyas (organs of perception) are more important for 
this type of saadhana than the Karmendhriyas (sense organs), the intellect more important than 
all the rest of the inner instruments given to man. Make the intellect the Master of your mind and 
you will not fail; you will fail only when the senses establish mastery over the mind. 


Clarify intellect by spiritual discipline 


A lame man and a blind man became friends and they moved from place to place, the lame man 
riding on the shoulders of the blind. One day, while passing through some fields, the lame man 
saw hundreds of what are called Dosakaayis (an edible variety of gourd) in a field and he 
suggested to the blind man that they pluck a few and eat their full. The blind man had greater 
sense and so he did not welcome the idea immediately he heard about it. He asked, "Brother! 
Have they fenced the crop?" The lame man said, "No." Then, the blind man said, "Let us go our 
way. The Dosakaayis must be bitter; that is why they are left unguarded." You know there are 
sweet as well as bitter Dosakaayis and the blind man, by his intellect, was able to discover that 
they were bitter, even without tasting them. His intelligence perceived the truth faster and 
clearer. 


Clarify the intellect by spiritual discipline so that you get a vision of the Lord who dwells within; 
that is the Suudarshana (Discus, a weapon of Vishnu) which saved Gajendra, the wild elephant 
(man) that was caught by the alligator (egoism) while rollicking in the lake of 


Samsaara (the objective world). Look upon joy and grief as teachers of hardihood and balance. 
Grief is a friendly reminder, a good taskmaster, even a better teacher than joy. The Lord grants 
both protection and punishment; for, how can He be the Lord, if He does not insist on strict 
accounting and strict obedience? 


You are as distant from the Lord as you think you are, as near Him as you feel you are. Well, let 
Me tell you this. The distance from Me to you is the same as the distance from you to Me, is it 
not? But, you complain that I am far, far from you, though you are approaching nearer and 
nearer. How can that be? I am as near you as you are near Me. 


You are a prisoner under sentence 


That nearness is won by Devotion, which cannot be steady except after getting rid of "I" and 
"Mine". When a prisoner is taken from place to place, he is accompanied by two constables, is it 
not? When man who is a prisoner in this jail moves from one place to another, he too is 
accompanied by Ahamkaaram and Mamaakaaram: Egoism and Attachment. When he moves 
about without these two, you can be sure he is a free man, liberated from prison. 


Now that I have referred to jail and jail life, let Me tell you something more. You are all under 
sentence of imprisonment and are in this jail. There is no use hoping for reward when you work 
in jail; you have to work because you are ordered to; and you must work well too. You cannot 
argue that rewards are not distributed justly and you are not entitled to desist from your allotted 
task. If you do so, your sentence will be extended or you will be transferred to another jail. On 
the other hand, if you quietly accept the sentence and go about your work without clamouring or 
murmuring, your term is reduced, and you are sent out with a certificate that ensures a happy life, 
unpestered by constables. This is the attitude that the jeevi (individual) must adopt, if he is aware 
of his sentence and if he is earnest about freeing himself. 


Remember, Freedom is your birthright. Concentrate on that and practise the means of attaining 
it. 


Venkatagiri, 20-02-1964 


Remember that with every step, 

you are nearing God. 

And when you take one step towards Him 
God takes ten steps towards you. 

There is no halting place in the pilgrimage! 
It is one continuous journey, 

through day and night, 

through tears and smiles, 

through death and birth, 

through tomb and womb. 

When the road ends and goal is gained, 
the pilgrim .finds that he has travelled 
from himself to himself, 

that was long and lonesome; 

but God that lead him unto, 

was all the while in him, around him, 


with him and besides him. 


He himself was always Divine. 
Shri Sathya Sai 


11. Role of the Pandith 


THE springs of Indian culture have very nearly, gone dry under the scorching influence of 
foreign cultures to which Indians are fast selling themselves. The agencies which are keeping the 
tree green, have become weak; institutions and customary rites and rituals which kept the facets 
of that culture alive in the eyes of the people, have faded into feebleness. People, who were 
charged with the social duty of reminding the masses of their heritage, have been rendered 
dispirited and mendicant. The Dharma laid down in the Vedhas has to be experienced, in order to 
be appreciated; it cannot be merely talked about, in tall language. Tile use of the Vedhas does not 
consist in mere recitation, though the reciters are doing a valuable service, preserving them in 
correct form and style of pronunciation. Vedhas yield Aanandha; Vedha maathaa (Mother of 
Vedhas) is the Aanandha maathaa (Mother of Divine Bliss). 


They provide the answer to the Question of questions: "Who am I?" Every one of you has to 
know that this question has to worry you sooner or later. And, every one has to discover the 
answer. The senses, each specialising in one small field of cognition, are powerless to give the 
answer, they at best very inadequate even in their own specialised provinces; there are sounds the 
ear cannot hear; there are colours the eye cannot take in and interpret to us and tastes beyond the 
ken of the buds of the tongue. They are imperfect instruments for the study of the external world. 
How can they serve to teach :us about the intangible, invisible, inner world of the Self?. The 
Vedhaanthic vision alone can reveal to you "the smaller than the smallest, the bigger than the 
biggest" (Anoraneeyaan mahatho maheeyaan). 


When you have vision, you do not realise its value; you take it as just natural. It is only when you 
lose it or when it gets dim, that you run to the ophthalmic hospital. When the Vedhaanthic vision 
of India had become dim, Shankaraachaarya restored it and so saved the country. If he had not 
done so, believe Me India would have become another China. 


Dharma is eternal, basic, fundamental 


When you are boring and fixing a pipe to draw the water up, you have to take good care, lest 
water or air gets into the pipe and spoils the creation of the vacuum that is needed. So too, if you 
desire success in your effort to unravel the truth of your inner Sell you have to take good care 
that the outer sell does not enter and spoil the concentration. You have to prevent thoughts of the 
outer world from entering the mind. The senses are positive handicaps in that field of research. 


One of the dangerous tricks of the modern times, which is misleading a number of people, is the 
claim made by many, that they have been sent to re-establish Dharma. Each one is doing it in his 
own fashion, and as it suits his skill and idiosyncrasy. When a bridge on the highway gets 
damaged, no single pedestrian, however eminent, can start repairing or re-building it; nor can the 
villagers living in proximity to it, start the operations, according to their own ideas of bridge- 
building. The very authority which laid down the road, and planned the bridge has to come down 
and draw up the plan. Dharma is the road for individual and social progress, in this world and 
through the world, to the next. It is eternal, basic, fundamental. The principles may not be altered 
or adjusted to suit personal whims, or pressing problems, that appear formidable to the eyes of 
some individuals, or group of persons. It is like the mother who has to be accepted, not like the 
wife whom you can choose or discard. 


Man is basically Immortal 


Vaaranaasi Subrahmanya Shaasthry spoke of Dharma as expounded in and through the 
Mahaabhaaratha. That is a prop which can sustain any drooping heart. If you can inquire deeply 
and reason fearlessly, you can appreciate the Indian point of view that, instead of seeking a lower 
standard of aanandha (happiness) by feeding the senses, one can get lasting Aanandha (Divine 
Bliss), by training the mind to be ever in the eyes of the Cosmic, the Universal, the Lord, as It is 
called, when you impose a Name and a Form upon it, to enclose it in you Consciousness. Why 
does man get Aanandha when he contemplates the Cosmic and the Universal? Because he 
himself is the Cosmic, the Universal! It is the thwam (thou) called to the Thath (That); the Thath 
responding to the kindred voice of the thwam. 


Man is basically, essentially, fully, Immortal; he is Amruthaswaruupam (of the nature of Nectar 
of Immortality). But, yet he is afraid he would die! He is Aanandhaswaruupam (of the nature of 
Bliss); but, yet he 


is it that weeps that he is miserable. He is Shaanthiswaruupam (of the nature of peace); yet, 
everywhere he is overlaid with anxiety. This absurd self-deception is the root of the tragedy from 
which the world suffers today. The truth has to be driven into the consciousness of both the 
spiritual teachers and disciples, wherever they may be, in this country or elsewhere. 


Accept what scriptures declare 


Many Gurus do not instruct people in this doctrine of courage, they do not bring up those who go 
to them in the discipline of the knowledge of Self (Aathma-jnaana), for, they themselves are not 
established in the Reality of Self (Aathma-thathwa). They intensify the egoism of their disciples 
and devotees and hasten their doom, rather than avoid it. The disciples too asked for quick results 
and shortened courses and less and less austerity. The Gurus have therefore to water down the 
rigour of spiritual discipline, and behave as minions of the disciples themselves! They wink at 
many a moral transgression, and very often share in the plots and intrigues which are the daily 
routine of the devotees! It is a sad state of affairs, indeed! A people destined for glory, for the 
role of guides of humanity but, grovelling in the dark, seeking to squeeze lasting joy from food, 
clothing, shelter and hours of trivial entertainment. 


A business magnate from the West, Mr. Kilman, came to Puttaparthi and, during the discussion 
on various spiritual problems, he asked Me, "Why build temples, when what we want are wells, 
dams, hospital and factories?" I told him to find out from the well-fed, and well-employed 
whether they are happy, whether they have inner calm! The Aathma alone is the source of inner 
strength, it is the fountain-spring of Joy---joy unaffected by reverses or victories. 


You may ask, "How do you know, or rather, how are we to know that there is an entity called the 
Aathma?" Well, how do you know that today is the 24th day of February? The Sun did not rise 
today, after an announcement from the skies that is the twenty-fourth day of the month called 
February. Some person whom you respect, said that today is the 24th February, that is all. You 
accepted their word and you were glad that your acceptance made things smoother for you. 
Similarly, when the Vedhas and the Scriptures declare that you are Aathman, instead of 
mistaking yourself to be the gross body, accept it and find in it a great source of peace and step 
by step, the truth will be revealed to you in your own unmistakable experience. 


The world is a training ground 


The Lord has declared in the Geetha, ‘Mama Maayaa" My Illusion; that is to say, this relative 
world is His Handiwork, His Leela and His Mahima (Divine Play and Greatness), devised as a 
training ground, an inspiration, for those who desire to see Him, the Source and Substance of all 
this. "This objective world is My Play," He says. From illusion, you must get interested in the 
Author, the Master, the Lord. Once you see the world as the arena of His activity, the stage for 
His play, then, you will never more be misled; you will not be deceived by any tricks of the play 
or of the stage-effect; you will not be distracted; you will not be led to believe it as genuinely 
real. It is valid so long as it lasts, and you are in the theatre. 


Take the base (Aadhaara) as more real than the structure (Aadheya); the Lord as more real than 
the world. This is the basic lesson of Indian thought. Among all the principles of Vedhantha, this 
is a pearl. The world is like a mirage; the mirage does not originate from any rain; nor does it 
reach any lake or sea. It was not there before the Sun shone, nor will it be there when evening 
falls. It is just an intervening phenomenon; it is best left alone. 


This Prashaanthi Vidwanmahaasabha has been established in order to give each thirsty soul a cup 
of solace and strength, from the well of the Vedhas and Shaasthras, to lead the waters of fertility 
to every parched area. Ghandhikota Subrahmanya Shaasthry read out some verses he wrote about 
Me. These Pandiths are not with Me to extol Me; nor is there any need to extol Me or them. I 
have no other purpose than this: to lead you to the path of Aanandha. I have no special 
attachment to the Vidwanmahaasabha because I have established it. All Sabhas and Sanghas 
(Associations) and individuals that do this same task, according to their capacity and means, are 
dear to Me. I do not call upon you to cultivate faith in Me or to worship Me. I want only that you 
should cultivate faith in yourselves, and worship the Lord who is utilising you as His instrument. 


Practise the teachings you heard 


Realise that your essential core is the Aathma. I have no need to seek fame through these 
meetings or associations. Not that the statements made by Ghandikota Subrahmanya Shaasthry 
are wrong. But, I know that some of you sitting here suspected, when he was reading his poem, 
that he and others have collected here, just to eulogise Me! Let Me tell you, I do not like such 
demonstrativeness and show; they are against My very Nature and Purpose. 


After hearing these Pandiths for three days, morning and evening, do not go home without 
becoming richer; let it not be the story of, "I went; I sat; I saw; I heard; I came." That is what the 
dull-witted do. Make the teaching your own by practising it. Let the meaning circulate in your 
veins and enliven your earnestness. There are some weakwilled persons, who are dragged hither 
and thither by others. They see some one going and they too go to Puttaparthi. They see some 
one staying away and they too stay away. Why be moved by the vagaries of others and why lose 
the lucky chance that may not recur at all? 


Of course, I love all; those who come to Me, as well as those who stop coming; those who stay at 
the Nilayam, as well as those who stay away; those who praise, as well as those who blame. For 
no one is beyond the boundary of My love. 


Hold your right palm, spread it vertically before you! You find that the thumb points towards 
you and is keeping apart from the other fingers. That represents the Paramaathma which is aloof 
and unaffected. The forefinger is the jeevi, the sell attached to the three gunas, the three-stranded 
complex of the objective world. It seeks to mix with this, that and the other, to show this and 


mark out that; it is ever busy identifying objects and so it gets the company of only the three 
qualities (gunas). But, once let it turn towards the Paramaathma (Supreme Self), let it achieve 
Saameepya (proximity) with it! Then it will lose the contact with the gunas; it and the thumb will 
form the Chin-mudra---the sign of the Puurna (Full), the completed Consciousness. 


I bless you that your attention and activity be always focussed on the Self within you; that is the 
purpose for which the Prashaanthi Vidwanmahaasabha has been established. 


Rajahmundry, 24-2-1964 


12. Amrithasya Puthraah 


THE Hindu Samaaj, Rajahmundry, was established, as its President told us now, in 1903. So this 
can be considered the Shashtiabda Puurthi Celebration of this institution, which means the 
celebration of its attaining the sixtieth year of its life. It is the custom to have such celebrations a 
little time after the completion of the period, not on the exact date on which the period is 
completed. Therefore, this conforms to that custom also. 


This rite is named a Shaanthi (Pacification), the attainment of an equipoise, of calm. At sixty the 
senses have lost their wildness and waywardness, they have become powerless to drag the 
individual into ruin. That is believed to be just the time to fix one's mind on God and start on the 
course one has missed in the confusion of material pursuits. 


The Samaaj too has wandered far from the path it was set on; it was a premier institution in this 
town of many institutions for the encouragement and promotion of Sanaathana Dharma, the 
Eternal Religion. It held competitions in the recitation and interpretations of the Bhagavadh 
Geetha, the authoritative book on that Dharma, and it distributed copies of the Geetha itself to 
hundreds of high school students, just when they were stepping out of their schools into the 
larger world. I know that it took a leading role in the task of spreading the doctrines of 
Sanaathana Dharma. 


Real form of Devotion is Divine Love 


Now, owing to causes like the apathy of the people, the attractions of more showy forms of 
activity, and the drying up of funds for rewarding students, scholars and Pandiths, this Samaaj 
has been reduced to a recreation centre for office-goers and others: re-creation, not of the ideals 
for which India stood in the past and stands at present, but of the activity and liveliness of the 
body and the nerves and the mind. This Samaaj has now to take up the responsibility again, for it 
is as important now, as it was sixty years ago. For such service the demand is continuous; it can 
never become out-of-date, or superfluous. If one looks around and observes the fall in standards, 
the need is even greater today. This is the reason, perhaps, why the President came to Me with a 
prayer to bless the Samaaj and to speak to you on the work you have to do. 


Devotion to God is not to be calculated on the basis of the institutions one has started or helped, 
the temples one has built or renovated, the donations one has given away, nor does it depend on 
the number of times one has written the Name of the Lord or on the time and energy one has 
spent in the worship of the Lord. These are not vital at all, no, not even secondary. Devotion is 
Divine Love, unsullied by any tinge of desire for the benefit that flows from it or the fruit or 
consequence of that love. It is love that knows no particular reason for its manifestation. It is of 
the nature of the love of the soul for the Oversoul; the river for the sea; the creeper for the tree, 
the star for the sky, the spring for the cliff down which it flows. It is sweet, in bad times as well 
as good. It is not like pepper or salt with which you savour your dishes; it is the very bread and 
butter, the essential substance itself. It is not the pickle, which only lends a twang to the tongue 
and helps you to consume a little more of the food. It is an unchanging attitude, a desirable bent 
of the mind, standing steady through joy and grief. For the Divine Bliss comes through 
knowledge of the Self; the Devotee is the true witness. 


Dharma is a means of living 


Vaaranaasi Subrahmanya Shaasthry said now that Yudhishtira, the eldest of the Paandava 
Brothers, had that devotion and so, he did not falter even an inch from his faith when in exile; 
nor did he lose his head, when he won back his throne. Others like Dhuryodhana used Dharma 
as a handy excuse to escape the evil consequences of their acts. Righteousness is not to be treated 
as a means of escape; it is a means of living. Never once did Dhuryodhana observe the principles 
of righteousness towards the Paandava Brothers; at last, he had to face the inevitable doom, 
when Bheema challenged him for the duel which was to lay him low. At that moment, the author 
of the deceitful gambling game, the house of lac which was set on fire, the insult heaped on the 
honoured Queen, the slaughterer of Abhimanyu by a pack of ferocious foes who fell upon him, 
the dark designer of all these iniquities, took refuge in Dharma and started quoting texts. 


Wavering and indecision affect you in the realm of Dharma when you are not stabilised in the 
knowledge of the Self, which gives you a correct sense of proportion and also a sense of 
direction and achievement. That is why the Geetha lays so much emphasis on the necessity to 
know both the kshethra and the kshethrajna (the field of knowledge and the Knower of that 
Field). Know both, and then, you are entitled to the title, Amrithasya Puthraah: “Children of 
Immortality." Other titles are burdens on the head that wears them. Of what benefit are they, 
those that vanish in a whiff, and do not deceive any one, for more than a few years? 


The grandest things in Creation 


Through devotion to God alone can that knowledge be attained. Bhakthi purifies the heart, 
elevates the feelings and universalises the vision. It also brings down the Grace of God; for, the 
clouds have to come over the fields and pour rain; the plants cannot rise up to drink the life- 
giving fluid. The mother has to bend to the cradle to fondle the child. Bhakthi has that power, to 
bring the Lord down. Once Naaradha was asked to name the most noteworthy among the things 
of the world. He answered that the earth was the biggest. But, he was told water has occupied 
three-fourths of the earth; it threatens to swallow up the balance too, bit by bit. So, water, he had 
to agree, was more powerful. However, water too was drunk up by the sage Agasthya and the 
oceans were rendered dry by him, and he, in turn is now just a star in the sky! Is the sky the 
biggest, then? No. For, it was covered by one single foot of the Vaamana-avathaara of the Lord 
(Vishnu's Incarnation as Vaamana, the Dwarf). And, the Lord? O, He enters the hearts of the 
devotees and resides there. So, Naaradha had to conclude that the hearts of devotees are the 
grandest things in Creation! 


That is why I condemn all signs of weakness and call the sense of weakness itself a sin, an 
unpardonable sin. - it is an insult to the heritage of Immortality, the title Amrithasya Puthraah, 
which mankind deserves and must earn. Weakness, vacillation, despair, all these bring dishonour 
on Him who conferred on you the honour of child of Immortality; you are Bhala-swaruupa (of 
the Nature of Strength). Whenever accosted, you must declare yourself so, and not otherwise. Do 
not bend and cringe and barter your self-respect. Do not believe that you are this little lump of 
body. You are the indestructible, immortal Aathma, of the same nature as the Absolute Reality, 
Brahman itself. 


The four resolutions to be made by everyone 


Have gratitude to the Creator who poured into you the nectar that ensures immortality; He 
requires you to stand firm in the face of joy and grief. Even animals exhibit gratitude; not only 


the pet animals, but wild ones, like the lion. Have you not heard the story of the lion suffering 
from a wound in the foot? A slave who was fleeing through the forest saw it and when he 
approached it with sympathy, the lion put out its foot. He then slowly pulled out the thorn that 
had caused all that pain and left the place, only to be arrested later and taken to Rome. There, 
they decided to throw him into the amphitheatre and let lose upon him a lion that had been 
recently captured. It was, however, the same lion which the slave had saved and so, its gratitude 
did not allow it to harm its saviour. Be grateful to the Lord for endowing you with powers of 
discrimination, of detachment, of evaluation. 


Make four resolutions about your life hereafter : 
(1) Purity: Desist from wicked thoughts, bad habits, low activities that weaken your self-respect 


(2) Service: Serve others for they are the reflections of the same entity of which you are yourself 
another reflection. No one of you has any authenticity, except with reference to the One Original. 


(3) Mutuality: Feel always kinship with all creation. See the same current flowing through all the 
objects in the Universe. 


(4) Truth : Do not deceive yourself or others, by distorting your experience. 
Respect our ancient culture 


The Hindu Samaaj must set about doing the duty for which it was started, the revival in the 
minds of the educated classes and the students, of respect and attachment for our ancient culture. 
Do not be led away by the cynicism of critics; that should serve only to encourage you. There 
was once an incident in train that was going over the Godaavari bridge. A poor ryot searched for 
a naya paisa coin and he threw it into the river for he felt it as a sacred duty to honour the holy 
river. Immediately a fellow-traveller sitting comfortably in the comer got wild. He condemned 
the act as silly superstition and economic waste. "This is why this country is poor and 
powerless," he said, puffing his cigarette, as he poured out his wrath against the custom of 
throwing coins into the rivers. The ryot did not keep quiet. He said, "Look here, my man! I pass 
over this bridge perhaps once a year or so; I lose only one naya paisa at a time; I derive so much 
joy and satisfaction by that little sacrifice; but, pray, tell me, what benefit and economic gain you 
derive from this constant smoking which you are indulging in. The smoke you puff into the air 
poisons the atmosphere for all of us; it harms your health, it spoils the health of others; it wastes 
your money; it is a Raajasik habit (of passion and restless activity), which increases your pride 
and makes you nervous and unstable." 


Examine the faults that may lie dormant in you and try to get rid of them. Do not merely declaim 
from platforms the excellence of such qualities as charity, Service, sympathy, equality, 
secularism, etc. Descend and practise a few sincerely. When your neighbour is in the throes of a 
serious illness, do not rest content with the idea that you are happily free. No one is free if even 
one is bound. Remember that the food you give to each living being reaches God Himself, the 
service you do to any one being fills God with joy. 


Do not vulgarise devotion 


Now, all worship and rituals are for bhakthi only, for the better comfort and more luxurious 
consumption of the worshipper himself. Devotion has been vulgarised into a business deal. I 
shall give you so much, provided you give me so much in return. If that shrine promises more, 
this shrine is given up; if even there, you do not get quick returns, somewhere else, some other 


God might be more profitable. That is the way in which worldly men wander about in their 
panicky rounds. "If I stand in the midst of others, God will not notice me; so, I must stand alone 
and shout, to attract His attention. Otherwise, He might ignore me," they argue and behave 
foolishly. Hold fast to the Ideal; do not try to degrade the Almighty to suit your limited vision. 
Rise up, strengthen your detachment, establish yourselves in discrimination. Then, your goal is 
brought near. 


Rajahmundry, Hindu Samaaj, 25-2-1964 


13. Fragrant with Grace 


NOT all places where images are installed are sacred; or, if they are sacred, not all of them are 
equally potent. Raama incarnated as Man for the re-establishment of Dharma; centuries later, 
Gopana had the chance to worship Him on this hill and to talk and move with Him, as his Master 
and Lord. Badhragiri, by his thapas, forced Raama to install Himself on his head. Truly, this 
place is a monument for the uniqueness of Bhakthi as a means of realising the Lord. All stones 
are not Ahalyas; nor are all feet those of Raama. It is only when the stone that is Ahalya is 
trodden by the feet of Him who is Raama that the resurrection takes place. What is the 
resurrection, really’? It is the revelation of the divinity inherent in man. That is the result of 
contact with God-head; that can come only after years of contrition, which serves to remove the 
evil from the heart of man. 


Raavana had vast knowledge of spiritual texts. His ten heads represent the learning he had earned 
from the six Shaasthras and the four Vedhas. But, he never put that knowledge to any use. He 
craved for the possession of Prakrithi (material objects), only; he wanted to master the world of 
matter, the objective world. He was a master of the material sciences. But, he was not tamed by 
the spirit. He discarded the Spirit, Purusha-Raama; he was content with the possession at Lanka, 
of Prakrithi (Matter), represented by Seetha. That was why he fell. 


Prema alone will remove hatred 


When people do not place faith in the Self but pursue the senses only, the danger signal is up and 
the Lord sends a Messenger or comes Himself if a great big step in reconstruction has to be 
taken. Arjuna forgot the basis of Self. Raavana went counter to it. The world is building itself up 
on the sandy foundation of the sensory world. So, Avathaars have to come. Like the monkey 
which could not pull its hand from out of the narrow-necked pot, because it first held in its grasp 
a handful of doughnuts which the pot contained, man too is suffering today, since he is unwilling 
to release his hold on the handful of pleasurable things he has grasped from the world. Man is led 
into the wrong belief that the accumulation of material possessions will endow him with joy and 
calm. But Divine Love (Prema) alone can give that everlasting joy. Prema alone will remove 
anger and envy and hatred. 


This is a sacred occasion on a sacred hill. You have been privileged to be born in this holy place; 
why the very sight of the pilgrims who come here daily full of yearning and God-hunger, that 
itself is a fortunate chance. They bring so much of Love of Raama (Raamaprema) with them; 
they sing Raamanaama (holy name of Raama) and they recite the Lord's name. They never allow 
you to forget that this is a place fragrant with the Grace of God. Do you realise what a great 
service this is for your advance? When I was in Ayodhya 


Some years back, I could hear the continuous chanting of the holy name of Raama, that the air 
there was wafting in all directions. But, let Me ask you how you behave towards these pilgrims 
who come here, after years of sincere preparation, with hearts laden with faith! Many of you 
crowd round them and seek chances to exploit their devotion and their ignorance of this place. 
You squeeze out of them all the reverence they bring towards you and the place. They respect 
you, they envy you, since you breathe this holy air and drink this holy water and witness this 
holy worship. But, you laugh at their foolishness, while trading on their devotion. This is very 
unjust. You are like men who have plenty of delicious dishes before them, but have no hunger 
for the delicacy. 


Realise the Omnipresence of God 


I must speak also to the pilgrims, for, I see them also here in-large numbers. If you come as on a 
picnic, without the mental preparation necessary to receive the Grace of God, you are a nuisance 
here. You spoil the atmosphere of the place. You have come to see sights, not to strengthen your 
spiritual inclinations. You go from place to place, like postal parcels, collecting impressions on 
the outer wrapper, not on the core of your being. A blind .man going places is not worried 
whether it is night or day. So too, you do not differentiate between one place and another. You 
behave equally unconcerned, equally senses-centred, in all types of places. You do not allow the 
holiness of the place to act on your mind. 


As a result of the pilgrimage, your habits must change for the better; your outlook must widen; 
your inward look must become deeper and become more steady. You must realise the 
Omnipresence of God, and the Oneness of Humanity. You must learn tolerance and patience, 
charity and service. You must determine to seek, after the pilgrimage is over, sitting in your own 
home, ruminating over your experiences, the higher, the richer and the more real experience of 
God-realisation. I bless you that you may form that determination and, striving step by step, 
achieve that Goal. 


Bhadhraachalam, 28-2-1964 


Reawakening of man is at hand. 
Reawakening to the knowledge 
that man himself is God. 

The human body is not you, 
it simply houses the soul or 
the spark of Divinity within, 
for God dwells in the heart of every man 
and that dwelling spark of the divine 
is you - yourself. 

All else is illusion. 

SHRI SATHYA SAI 


14. Be like lamps 


YOU are all pilgrims, moving along this land of action (Karmakshethra) to the goal of land of 
righteousness (Dharmakshethra). The literary men, the poets, the teachers and administrators 
who addressed you so far are all guides who help you along; but, the road has to be trodden by 
you, every inch of it. "Kavim puraanam anusaasithaaram™ the Poet is the person who 
commands, who lays down the law, the ancient, the timeless--that is what the Vedhas declare. So 
these Poets too have to place the rules of right conduct before people and warn them in time 
when they go astray. They should not themselves stray, while professing to show others the path. 
Kavi, the Poet, is called the all-seeing (Kraantha Darshi); he is the seer of Manthra (Manthra 
Drashta); his role is to interpret God to man. He should not indulge in meaningless talk, 
significanceless writing. That will be degrading his role. 


He should not be asking questions without end, for, he should seek in silence to get the answers, 
without infecting others with his doubts and his posers. 


Life is a mirage; it comes from no visible rain; it falls into no recognisable sea. There was a man 
once who was pestered by a host of relatives when he was dying. Parents, wife, children, 
brothers, sisters---all surrounded his bed during his last moments and wailed. They asked him 
"What is to happen to us?" The dying man lifted his head a little from the pillow and asked in 
return, "What is to happen to me? I am now more interested in that problem, than being worried 
about what is to happen to you." Well, it is better every one asks that questions even now and 
equips himself with the answer rather than wait until it is too late. "What am I for?" "What ought 
I to do?" These questions you must pursue, and arrive at the answers. 


You are happiness in essence 


Your nature is Sath, Chith and Aanandha (Existence, Consciousness, Bliss Absolute), believe 
Me. That is why you behave in the way you do. You desire to exist for ever; you enjoy 
continuing to live; you avoid all talk of your own death. That is enough evidence to conclude that 
you are Reality in essence (Sath-swaruupa). Then, again, you are filled with wonder and 
curiosity and a desire to know the world around you. You ask continuously what, why, how and 
when, about all and sundry. This is the prompting that is given by the Consciousness (Chith), 
that is in your make-up. Lastly, you are always seeking joy, through some means or other. You 
try to avoid grief, you try to taste joy instead. It is the nature of man to do so. For, he is 
essentially of the nature of Bliss (Aanandhaswaruupa). When he seeks Aanandha, it is like the 
call of the deep for the deep. When some one asks you, "How do you do," and you answer, 
"Quite well, thank you," he does not stop to enquire why you are well. It is only when you 
answer that you are ill, he stops and expresses concern and probes into the causes, symptoms and 
cure of the illness. "Well-ness" is natural; "illness" unnatural. Anxiety is caused by the unnatural 
only. So, you are happiness in essence (sukhaswaruupa) also. 


Be strong to resist temptations 


Sath, Chith, Aanandha are the attributes of the Aathma (Self) and you are the Self not the body. 
There was a king who had an abiding faith in astrology. So, when his son was born on a day 
when the Moola Nakshathra (Star) was in the ascendant, he feared that the child would bring 
calamity to the line; he therefore asked his soldiers to slay it and throw the carcass in the jungle. 
The servants were so overcome by pity that, instead of killing the child, they just cast it away in 
the jungle and came away. The child was discovered and fostered by a washerman for many 


years. The boy was engaged in watching the clothes spread out to dry, when one day, the king 
lost his way and strayed into the village where the washerman lived with the Prince. While 
resting in the washerman's house, the king discovered that the boy who watched the clothes was 
his own son. He took him back and crowned him Yuvaraaja. Now, even when the boy was with 
the washerman, he did not lose his status as a Prince. Only he did not know his reality. You are 
all in the same plight: Princes, misled into believing that you are washermen, souls ignorant of 
the magnificence of the status, but declaring that you are only the shortlived, easily-destroyed 
bodies. 


The gods once were so elated at some victory they won, so proud and so forgetful of the Divine 
Grace that helped them to foil their enemies, that they held a great banquet to celebrate it. When 
they were engaged in the revelry, the Lord decided to prick the bubble of their conceit. So, He 
created a strange phenomenon which presented itself before them and arrested their attention. 
They went near it out of fear and wonder. It accosted them and when it was told that they were a 
company of gods celebrating a victory, it challenged them to prove their mettle by using their 
powers on a blade of grass that it placed on the ground. Agni, the god of Fire, tried to burn it but 
was foiled; Vaayu, the god of Wind, tried his best to sweep it off but could not. Thus, each god 
tried to prove his worth by using all his skill on that tiny blade and it was demonstrated that 
without the overall Grace of God, each of them and all of them would have failed in the battle, 
instead of winning it. Humility was thus taught to the exultant gods by the all-merciful Lord. 


Read elevating literature 


You must be humble, but yet strong to resist temptation. Do not yield like cowards to the sly 
insinuations of the senses. Your time in school has to be used not only in the task of collecting 
information and earning certain skills that will give you an income on which you can live; it 
must also be used to acquire the art of being content and calm, collected and courageous. You 
must also cultivate at school an ardent thirst for knowing the truth of the world and of your own 
serf. Your words must be like honey; your hearts must be as soft as butter; your outlook must be 
like the lamp, illumining, not confusing. Be like the umpire on the football field, watching the 
game, judging the play according to the rules laid down, unaffected by success or reverse of this 
team or that. 


I want you also to read such books as will prompt you to ask and answer questions about your 
Self. Read good stuff, elevating literature, like the "Educator," which I am inaugurating today. I 
shall also write some articles for it, off and on, for it will be read by teachers who will pass on 
the inspiration to the pupils. I am glad the Teachers Guild of Anantapur District have taken up 
this task of publishing a magazine for their mutual benefit. They are the people who brought Me 
here today, to this School, which bears My Name. I am glad that the School is celebrating its 
Annual School Day. The Headmaster has a special responsibility to cultivate the enthusiasm Of 
the local people and canalise it for the benefit of the school. And, when the plan is for the benefit 
of the school, all should join hands to help him. 


Grace is proportionate to exertion 


I have heard discordant voices emanating from this town, and whispers that if Sathya Sai Baaba 
is really Divine, why is the Bukkapatnam Tank dry during the greater part of the year? Some of 
you here might have heard such statements, made by irresponsible persons who have no 
knowledge of the working of Cosmic Laws. What is the relationship between My Truth and the 
freshes that fill the tank of your village? It is really an absurd idea: that since Sai Baaba is within 


four miles of this place, the Bukkapatnam Tank must be full all the year round and the lands 
below it must yield good profit for the owners! Why should I expend My Grace especially on 
this tank, as proximity gives greater attachment? All places are equally near for Me and, if they 
turn away from good ways, all are equally far! For Me, distance is not to be measured by miles. 
A tank in another continent might be as near to Me as a tank across the Chithravathi. 


Again, unless the people of this village have deposited amounts in the bank, how can the bank 
honour the cheques they draw? Have you deposited devotion to the Lord, service to your kind, 
faith in your spiritual practice? Then alone can you draw upon the Grace that is won by such 
exertion: Grace is proportionate to exertion. 


And, I may also ask, in what way have you suffered? Whereas other villages hereabouts are 
declining and people are migrating from them to the bigger towns, Bukkapatnam is thriving 
continuously. This is due to the stream of pious pilgrims who are flowing into Puttaparthi, 
through this village. The atmosphere is rendered cool by the company of the holy that gathers 
there. The Supreme Divine Power (Mahaashakthi) that manifested in your neighbourhood and 
the Supreme Devotion to God (Mahaabhakthi) radiating from that place have yielded benefits 
which you cannot deny. This school is but one of the many evidences of that Grace. I bless you 
that you may grow more and more in devotion to the Lord, under whatever Name and Form, and 
earn His Grace to a larger extent. 


Bukkapatnam, 13-3-1964 


When the Name is pronounced by the tongue, 
and the image is adored by the mind, 
these should not degenerate 
into mechanical routine; 
the Meaning of the Name and 
the Content of the Form, 
must, at the same time, inspire and illumine 
the Consciousness. 


SHRI SATHYA SAI 


15. Sai Sankalpam 


TODAY is thrice blessed, because first, it is the New Year Day for those who follow the Solar 
Calendar, second, it marks the beginning of the Vasantha Navaraathri; and third, because of the 
entry into Brindaavan, which you all witnessed this morning. For the Kannada country, there is 
an additional reason for rejoicing, for, just now we are inaugurating in their State the activities of 
our Prashaanthi Vidwanmahaasabha. On such an auspicious day, it is the duty of every one of 
you to gather and cherish in your hearts the wise words, the drops of Amritha (Nectar), which 
these Pandiths offer you from their knowledge and experience. Not merely hear, but, endeavour 
to act accordingly, for, the rain has to fall on prepared soil in order to promote the growth of the 
crop. You have to collect the rain, store it in tanks, direct it along well laid out canals to the 
fields which thirst for it; you should not allow it all to flow into waste or into a sea of salt. These 
Pandiths are repositories of ancient learning and I can assure you, whatever subject they speak 
upon, they will not stray a hair's breadth from the path of India's genuine culture. 


We have here today Jatti, the Finance Minister of Mysore, Sawant, the Agriculture Minister for 
Mahaaraashtra, and Members of Parliament like Dr. Raamakrishna Rao, legislators chosen by 
the will of the people. Dasaratha, when he desired to crown Raamachandra, consulted the 
representatives of his people, as well as the Pandiths of the court. He placed before the people, 
not merely :his personal wish, but also the reactions of sages like Vasishta to his proposal. But, at 
present, the link between the Pandiths and the politicians, the religious heads and the rulers has 
snapped and each goes his own way, irrespective of what the other thinks or feels. Long years of 
foreign rule during which the Pandiths were considered to be symbols of an out-dated 
civilization contributed to this, no doubt. But, even after that rule has ended, nothing has been 
done to re-establish the link. 


Scriptures are like traffic signs 


The system of education which promotes an attitude of contempt towards the learning which 
does not yield immediate pecuniary benefits is very largely responsible for the neglect of these 
great men. I must also mention as another cause the fall in the general level of morals. When all 
are sliding down the easy path of flippancy, those who advise against it and warn the victims 
about the inevitable disaster are ignored and laughed at. Sunk in the search of pleasures and 
cheap recreation, people become deaf to the counsels of the past and calls of the sublime. 


Another factor which I must condemn is the hatred between castes and religions. The Pandiths 
are mostly of one caste and the politicians treat them from the angle of communal hatred. This 
hatred is not based on reason; it is rooted in fear and ignorance, and so, is undesirable. The 
Vedhas, Upanishadhs and Shaasthras are like traffic signs on the road; if they are removed, the 
journey is rendered slow and difficult, replete with accidents. We cannot afford to destroy them. 
We have to restore them in the interests of humanity itself. Caste (Jaathi) has to be determined 
on the basis of Gums (qualities) though a man belonging to a caste can be judged fit or unfit, on 
the basis of his Karma. If jaathi has to be decided on the twin bases of Guna and Karma 
(qualities and actions), as evidenced by the character and activities of the individual, a person 
will have to be labelled differently every hour or every minute of his life! It is only in pitch 
darkness that the ground appears level; day reveals the heights and hollows. So too, it is only 
ignorance that makes people talk of equality; knowledge reveals basic differences in health, 
equipment, attitude and tastes! 


Bhakthi-directed education is today's need 


Sai Sankalpam is to bring together once again the Paalakas (Rulers) and the Pandiths, the 
guardians of the welfare of the people in the secular and the spiritual fields. That is why the 
ministers and the legislators are here on this platform, along with Pandiths and Shaasthris. 
Without the cooperative functioning of these two, there can be no progress, no success in the 
attempt to build up a new world. The Kauravas had all the ‘instruments for victory; wealth, might 
of arms, allies, fanatic hatred of the enemy, Kama! But, they all became dust, for they never paid 
heed to the higher values of Dharma; they did not equip themselves with the Grace of God, 
which is reserved for those who walk the path of humility and peace. Krishna was not their 
charioteer: they put their faith in lesser things. 


When plans are laid by the rulers for the uplift of the people and for training the children of the 
land, I want that the ancient wisdom of this land, still preserved and practised by these Pandiths, 
must be consulted. That will keep the keel of the ship straight. I want that the knowledge 
embodied in the Upanishadhs should be handed down to every one. Bhakthi-directed education 
must take precedence over the Bhukthi-directed (enjoyment-directed) schooling that prevails 
today in most countries of the world. Bhakthi is the Aashakthi or yearning which goads you on to 
the spiritual discipline which will endow you with that Jnaana. Have both faith and steadiness--- 
and you will win. 


Calamities must heighten your faith 


You have been putting up since morning with the Sun and the lack of accommodation in this 
crowded pandal; your faith and steadiness have not been shaken by these. Keep them unaffected 
by the still greater difficulties and disasters that might blow over you. The gale helps to toughen 
the trunk of the tree. Calamities must deepen your courage, enlarge your faith; your spiritual 


practise must be intensified just when the weather is inclement. In fair weather, a care-free 
attitude is pardonable, but, in foul weather, every precaution is of value. 


These Pandiths know the precautions and they will tell you about them. Treasure them well and 
act accordingly. That is My message to you today. The Prashaanthi Vidwanmahaasabha is bound 
to extend its activities in Karnataka and enter, as Sawant said, not only Mahaaraashtra State, but 
all States of India and all countries of the world. For the Wisdom of the Sages is the Heritage of 
Humanity. 


Brindavan, Whitefield, 13-4-1964 


16. Take wings and fly 


KAANTHI, the Minister who spoke just now, is in charge of education in this State of 
Karnaataka and he knows well that the education he is arranging for the children of his people is 
not adequate to meet all the challenges of life in this fast-changing, quickly firing world. These 
Pandiths who have dedicated their scholarship and their talents for the spread of the means and 
methods of attaining peace are therefore valuable collaborators with Kaanthi in the field of 
education. I am glad he recognises that truth. 


Dharma is a word related to dhaarana and derived from the same root. Dhaarana means 
‘wearing,’ as a cloth; Dharma is the very habiliment of India, the dress that Bhaarathmaatha 
(Mother India) wears to protect her honour, to proclaim her status, to shelter herself against heat 
and cold, to set a standard to her sisters. When the wicked Kaurava princes seized hold of the sari 
that Dhroupadhi wore and tried to inflict insult on her honour, Krishna rescued her and foiled the 
foul design. Dharmaraaja sat as if he was unaware of his fights and duties; Bheema was involved 
in doubt concerning his obligations to his elder brother and his consort; Arjuna cared more for 
his own interests; Nakula and Sahadeva waited and weighed the pros and cons. But, the Lord did 
not wait! His Grace knew no delay or doubt. 


Now, Bhaarathamaatha is in a similar plight. Dharma, the very clothes that she has worn since 
centuries, which is the expression of her natural style, is now seized on by wicked irreverent 
hands. They wish to dress her in unbecoming styles, as their own imitative or frenzy dictates. So, 
.Krishna has to come again for rescuing the victim of the wicked. 


Everything has its Dharma 


Krishna revealed the hollowness of the people who were confident of their capacity to dishonour 
Dhroupadhi and the weakness of those entrusted with the task of protecting her. Now too, I have 
to foil the attempts to undermine Dharma and to stand in support of those who are the traditional 
protectors and protagonists of Dharma. 


Every single thing has its Dharma; water has its Dharma, the nature and obligation to move; fire, 
the Dharma to burn and consume; the magnet, to attract and draw unto itself. And, every one of 
these is keeping up its Dharma unchanged, including the Solar system and the stars of the 
firmament. Among the things endowed with Consciousness or Chaithanga, the plants and trees, 
the insects and the birds, born out of eggs or the mammals--all have managed to treasure their 
specific Dharmas unaffected by the passage of time. But man, whose intelligence sweeps from 
the inert and the' infinitesimal to the' Super-conscious and the Universal, is the only living thing 
that has slipped, and is sliding down. The experience of many generations of seekers, who sought 
the means of contentment and joy, embodied in the precepts of practical living, collectively 
called Shaasthra is neglected, and new-fangled nostrums are recommended and tried on vast 
scale. No wonder, contentment and joy are far, far away from human grasp. 


Dharma, for example, says 'Sathyam vadha' and ' Dharmam chara': Speak the truth and practise 
righteousness. Sathyaannaasthi paro dharmah: there is no more stabilising factor in society, no 
more support for individual progress than Sathya, Truth. Hiding the truth or perverting it or 
denying it or defacing it are all signs of cowardice; no bold person will stoop to cover the face of 
Truth. Besides, you must know the Vedhic injunction is: 'Dharmam chara’, "Practise Dharma." It 
is not enough if you learn about it; you must act it, fill every moment with word and deed and 
thought that reflect your awareness of Dharma. That type of living is the hallmark of what is 


called seelam (character), in such statements as Seelam param bhuushanam - "Character is the 
most precious jewel." 


Resist temptation to ignore Dharma 


You must examine every moment of your waking time whether you are observing the precepts of 
Dharma or straying away' Dharma is now just a convenient excuse to derive benefits from 
others, not an opportunity to fulfil your duties to others! You remind others of it, when you 
desire to squeeze some advantage from them. You must remember not only the fights that 
Dharma confers but also the duties it imposes. 


The temptation to ignore Dharma grows from egoism and the acceptance of false values. The 
wish to satisfy the lower desire is the root of Adharma (unrighteousness). This wish takes hold of 
you slyly, silently, like a thief in the night; or like a comrade come to save you; or like a servant 
come to attend on you; or, like a counsellor come to warn you. Oh, wickedness has a thousand 
tricks to capture your heart. You must be ever alert against the temptation. The wish makes a 
chink in your consciousness, enters and establish itself and then multiplies its brood and eats into 
the personality you have built up with laborious care. The fort is no longer under your control. 
You have been reduced into a puppet manipulated by these inner enemies. Whenever you try to 
rebuild yourselves, they undermine the structure and you have to do it all over again. That is the 
extent of the harm they do. 


Gopikas state of God-consciousness 


To conquer this egoism, no rigorous system of exercise or breath control is necessary. No, not 
even complicated scholarship. The Gopikas (cow-herds) confirm this truth. They were simple 
rural folk, untouched by the conclusions of deep study. Naaradha was once so shocked at their 
ignorance of the science of spiritual progress that he volunteered to go among them and put them 
through some lessons in Jnaana. 


He found on entry into Brindaavan that the gopees (cowherd girls) selling milk or curds in the 
streets forgot to shout the names of their ware but said, "Govindha, Naaraayana," instead; so 
immersed were they in God-consciousness. They did not know that they had sold off all the 
milk; they still wandered on, calling out the names of the Lord, for the dust of Brindaavan was so 
sacred for them. They had no vishayavaasana, that is, no wish for sensual pleasure; and so, they 
had no Ajnaana (ignorance). Hence, Naaradha concluded that they had no need for the lessons he 
had planned to give. He prayed to them to teach him the means of getting that yearning and that 
vision of the all-pervading Krishna. 


Achieve identification with the Lord 


There was a gopee, for example, called Suguna, who had no other thought than those related to 
Krishna. Now every evening, it was the usual routine in Brindaavan for every housewife to light 
the lamp from the flame of the lamp at the house of Nandha; they believed that getting light from 
the flame of the lamp of the eldest and highest is auspicious. Suguna went with the lamp of 
Nandha's house and when she reached the house, her mind was lost in the thrill and joy of seeing 
the very house where Krishna spent his childhood days, to which his pranks and prattle drew all 
the cowherd boys and girls. She stood there with her unlighted lamp for a long while, near the 
big oil lamp, illumining the central hall. She was holding the lamp near the flame, but not near 
enough. She had her finger right over the flame. She was not aware that her finger was being 


scorched by the flame; she was too full of Krishna-consciousness to be aware of the pain. It was 
Yasodha who saw her plight and woke her from the reverie, or shall we say, vision? For, to her, 
the house was alive with Krishna wherever her eyes turned. That is the thanmayathwam 
(identification) one must achieve. There is no use if the fledgeling stays in the nest; it should 
develop wings and fly into the sky. There is no use if man grovels in the dust; he should take to 
his wings and fly. 


India is the teacher of all humanity in tiffs field. That is her special role. If the body is the temple 
of God, the world is the body of God. So, He seeks to establish Aanandha in all countries and all 
people. That is why I have been giving these discourses and getting the Pandiths from all parts of 
the country to give discourses to you. 


Brindaavan, 15-4-1964 


17. His residential address 


THE Thelugu Vijnaana Samithi, Bangalore, has done well in recognising the greatness and spirit 
of service of these Pandiths who are propagating, under the auspices of the Prashaanthi 
Vidwanmahaasabha, the practical disciplines laid down in the Vedhas and Shaasthras. They are 
invaluable spiritual text-books for all mankind. Shaasthra means that which 'ordains,' or 
‘commands' or ‘instructs with authority.’ They do not force you to do as they ordain, but, they 
"remind you of your worth and work"---"jnaapakam, na thu kaarakam," as the saying goes. 


For, there is great need of that reminder, the Divine that the Human really is, has been forgotten. 
It was once glowing and shining in the experience, but, it no longer inspires the individual with 
sublime confidence. The Vedhamaatha has been deserted; spurious guardians and sham 
caretakers have won the hearts of the people 


Remilla Suuryaprakaasha Shaasthry just now in his speech on the role of Suurya (Sun) according 
to the Vedhic Riks (hymns) mentioned that the Sun is the source, sustenance, and silent 
slaughterer of life. But, he did not mention about the much greater role played by the inner Sun, 
buddhi (intellect), in individual and social life. Chakshos suuryo ajaayatha--"the Sun was born 
out of the Eye of the Purusha," says the Purusha Sooktha. Intellect illumines the Vision 
(Dhrishti). What is the Nethra (Eye) that is talked about? It is the Jnaana nethra or the Shaasthra 
nethra (Eye of knowledge or Eye of Scriptures), which is endowed with correct Vision. 


The Shaasthras direct you to the Reality easily and without hesitation. You have heard people 
pointing to the faint crescent moon in the sky and saying, "There! Right on top of that mango 
tree, a yard from the lightning-conductor on that spire, to the left of it." That is just the kind of 
help that the Shaasthras give about the Universal and the Absolute. You have to run your eye 
along the tree, the spire and the lightning conductor, and see the moon yourself. Shaasthras 
guide you to the truth and lead you to it, in easy stages. 


Mere scholarship will not help 


It is a hard job to know about your own Self. Take the case of the food that you eat with your 
own mouth. You feel it in your stomach and after that, you do not experience what happens to it 
at each stage. How then can you know, without acquiring the special means for it, the Truth that 
lies behind the sheaths that encase and enclose you---the Annamaya, Praanamaya, Manomaya, 
Vijnaanamaya and Aanandhamaya--(sheaths of material, vital energy, mind, intelligence and 
bliss)? Clear your intellect or intellectual power (dheeshakthi) of the cobwebs of the ego, the dust 
of desire, the soot of greed and envy, and it becomes a fit instrument for revealing the Swaruupa- 
--the Inner Truth. "Know yourself, know the Inner Motivator, the Antharyaamin"---that is the 
exhortation of the scriptures of all faiths. For, unless you are armed with that knowledge, you are 
like a ship without a compass, sailing on a stormy sea. 


I must tell you that scholarship in the Shaasthras will not help you; scholarship is a very 
dangerous thing for it makes you aware of your ego all the time, instead of helping you to 
overcome it. If you notice serried ranks of bottles on the shelves of a man, you can conclude that 
he is a chronic invalid, addicted to drugs. So too, if you see on a man's shelves serried ranks of 
books, you can conclude that he is a chronic invalid, suffering from doubt and despair and 
confusion, and addicted to the drugs that he believes will cure them. Like all long-standing 
invalids, both these will start giving, at the slightest provocation, tedious accounts of their 
illnesses and the methods by which they tried to cure themselves. 


Royal road to achieve the Truth 


Want of steady faith is what drives people to drugs and books. There is a story about Raadha and 
her faith in Krishna. The elders in Brindaavan who revelled in scandalising Krishna--successors 
have been born for them even now---set an ordeal for Raadha to test her virtue. She was given a 
mud pot with a hundred holes and asked to bring water in that pot, from the Yamuna to her 
house! She was so full of the Krishna-consciousness that she never knew the condition of the 
pot. She immersed it in the river, repeating the name of Krishna as usual with every intake of the 
breath and every exhalation. Every time the name Krishna was uttered, a hole was covered, so 
that by the time the pot was full, it was whole! That was the measure of her faith. Faith can affect 
even inanimate objects. 


The ancients have laid a royal road for cultivating the spirit and achieving the Truth with that as 
the instrument. Why wander about in the thorny wastes, or slushy bylanes? Practise the 
Saadhana of Japam and Dhyaanam as prescribed; know all about it, from these Pandiths and 
others who have the experience. Do Puuja (ritual worship), with flowers, Japam with rosaries, 
etc., but, only until you get set for higher endeavours. You must offer the Lord, not the flowers 
that plants grow; that will reward the plant, not you! The Lord wants you to offer the lotus that 
blooms in the Lake of your Heart, the fruit that ripens on the tree of your earthly career, not the 
lotus and the fruit available in the market place! You may ask- "Where can we find the Lord?" 
Well, He has given His address, in Chapter 18, Slokha 61 of the Bhagavadh Geetha. Turn to it 
and note it down. Ishwarassarvabhoothaanaam hriddese, Arjuna, thisthathi'---" O Arjuna, the 
Lord resides in the heart of all beings." Now, after knowing that, how can you look down on any 
living being in contempt or how can you revel in hating him or indulge in the pastime of 
ridiculing? Every individual is charged with the Divine Presence, moved by Divine attributes. 
Love, honour, friendliness -that is what each one deserves from you. Give these in full measure. 


The hard path to win Lord's Grace 


The Grace of the Lord cannot be won by a little pretence of vairaagyam (non-attachment) or just 
a grain of vivekam (discrimination). Know and act; realise and experience; that is the hard path. 
Surrender yourself to His Will. 


Life is a great Yajna (Vedhic ritual of sacrifice). Allow the Lord to preside over it. Do not ignore 
Him. This is not a Bhoga-bhuumi (land of enjoyment), it is Thyaagabhuumi, Yogabhuumi, 
Karmabhuumi (land of sacrifice, union with God, and of devoted action). See how even the rain 
which threatened to pour on you and disturb the gathering stood away. When | started from 
Whitefield some people said, "There cannot be any meeting this evening; there will be heavy 
rain at Bangalore also." I told them, "Never has rain interfered with the meetings where I spoke." 
The clouds melted away in a refreshing gale, which scattered on your sweet-smelling flowers 
from that row of trees, that is all. 


Have that love, that spirit of united work and prayer---and I assure you, Raamaraajya (kingdom 
of Lord Raama) will establish itself again in this land. 


Malleswaram, 16-4-1964 


Listen to the primeval 


Pranava AUM 


resounding in your heart 
as well as in the heart 
of the Universe 


SHRI SATHYA SAI 


18. Upanayanam 


TODAY is Shankara Jayanthi---the day commemorating the advent of Shankaraacharya who 
came to restore Dharma, it is also the day on which Brahmopadesam (instruction about 
Brahman) was given here for the boys sitting on this dais, who have come from Bengal, Bombay 
Hyderabad and Bangalore. The Shankara Jayanthi Day was chosen by Me for their initiation into 
the higher Aadhyaathmic (Spiritual) Life, for Shankara is an inspiration even today for millions 
of spiritual aspirants all over the world, who seek to know the Reality of the Universe and its 
fundamental Unity. They had this lucky chance of getting initiated here in My Presence by Me, 
as a result of their own good fortune. 


The ceremony of Brahmopadesam is Upanayanam, which means, "taking near," taking the 
young aspirant near Brahman, that is to say, introducing him to Brahmajijnaasa (desire to know 
Brahman), the path of Brahman. It is one of the Samskaaras (purificatory acts), rites which 
reconstruct the personality, reform the mind, purify it and re-build it. It makes the person 
receiving it a Dwija (a twice born)! The boy is born first into the world; now, he is born into the 
Saadhaka world. He becomes a Brahma-chaari--a person who walks towards Brahman. So, it is 
a very significant day in the lives of these people, a day they must long remember with joy and 
thankfulness. It is the day when their hearts were turned towards God; and they should try not to 
run away from God hereafter; that is a great responsibility. 


Gaayathri manthra is Universal prayer 


The initiation was done by the Upadesham (instruction) of the Gaayathri manthram. The 
manthram (sacred formula) is a universal prayer that can be used by men of all climes and 
creeds, for, it calls upon the Glorious Power that pervades the Sun and the three worlds to arouse, 
awaken and strengthen the Intelligence, so that it may lead to intense Saadhana and Saadhana 
may lead to success. 


Every little moment or incident results in sound; only, you may not be able to hear, because the 
range of your ear is limited. The falling of an eyelid over the eye makes a sound, the dropping of 
dew on a petal makes a sound. Any little agitation disturbing the calm is bound to produce 
sound. The sound caused by the primal movement that resulted in the enveloping of Brahman by 
self-evolved illusion is the Pranavasabdha or OM. The Gaayathri is the elaboration of that 
Pranava and so, it is now held so venerable that initiation into spiritual life is achieved by its 
contemplation. 


The sound of a Manthra is as valuable as its meaning. Even a poisonous cobra is quietened by 
music; Naadham (sound), has that allaying property. The child in the cradle stops wailing as 
soon as the lullaby is sung; it may not carry any meaning; it may be a nonsensical rhyme or just a 
jingle, but, it quietens, soothes the nerves and induces sleep. In the case of the Gaayathri, the 
meaning too is easy and profound. It does not ask for mercy or pardon; it asks for a dear intellect, 
so that the Truth may be reflected therein correctly, without any disfigurement. 


Requisites of spiritual discipline 


The Brahmachaari has vowed himself into a life of spiritual discipline. Now what are the 
requisites for the discipline? 


First: Faith, that can stand the ridicule of the ignorant, the cavilling by the worldly, the laughter 
of the low-minded. When someone ridicules, you should argue like this within yourself: Is he 
ridiculing my body? Well, he is doing what I myself would wish to do; for, I too want to escape 
out of this attachment of this body. Is he ridiculing the Aathma? Well, he is doing the impossible, 
for, the Aathma is beyond the reach of words or thought; it is unaffected by praise or blame. Say 
to yourself, "My Aathma thathwa (Principle of the Self) is Nischala (immovable), it is Nirmala 
(pure)," and carry on. 


Second: Do not worry about ups and downs, loss or gain, joy or grief. You are yourself the 
maker of the ups and downs. If you but care, it can all be one smooth level. You label something 
as loss and something else as gain. You crave for a thing and when you get it, you call it joy; 
when you don't, you call it grief. Cut the craving off, and there will be no more swinging from 
joy to grief. 


Third: Reason out and get convinced of the truth, Sarvam Brahmamayam (All is Brahman). You 
know there are five elements or bhuuthas, which constitute, by their permutations and 
combinations, the world called Prapancham, the "Five-constituted." Prithivi or the Earth- 
element has five qualities, the maximum, and so, it is the grossest. It has its own special 
characteristic of gandha (smell), as well as the characteristic of the other four, namely, sparsha, 
rasa, ruupa and sabdha (touch, taste, form and sound). The next one Jala, the water-element has 
only four, its own special one---taste and touch, form So it is subtler than the Earth-element. 
Agni is subtler still, because apart from its special characteristics of form, it has only two others, 
sound and touch. Vaagu, the Air-element has touch as its special and one more quality, sound. 
Finally the lightest and subtlest of all the five, Aakaasha, the Sky-element, has only one 
characteristic, its own, namely, sabdha. Now, God is subtler than even Aakaasha and so He is 
all-pervading, even more than ether or anything more pervasive than that. His nature is beyond 
all human vocabulary, beyond all human mathematics. Have this conviction well stabilised in 
your intellect. 


Establishment of Dharma by Adhi Shankara 


Fourth: Be steady in spiritual practice, and never hesitate once you have decided on it. When the 
bus is moving on, the dust will be floating behind as a cloud: it is only when it stops with a jerk 
that the dust will envelop the faces of the passengers. So, keep steadily engaged in the practice. 
Then, the cloudy dust of the objective world will not cover your face. 


Shankaraacharya came to this world for the work of Dharmasthaapana (establishment of 
righteousness), but he did not wage a war against the narrow sectarians or the wild theologians 
who opposed him or the critics who condemned him as a pseudo-Buddhist. He won them over by 
argument, persuasion and preaching. He spoke softly, but, with conviction. He gave his 
opponents fair chances to present their cases to the best of their ability and sometimes he even 
helped them to clarify their own points of view. Through Bodha (knowledge) alone can Dharma 
be saved in the modern Kali-age. That is why I am engaged in bodha (imparting knowledge), in 
this task of re-constructing through upadesha (instruction). 


When you scatter seeds on the surface of the soil, they do not germinate. You have to keep them 
inside the soil. So too, bodha, if it is scattered on the surface, it will not germinate, grow into the 
tree of knowledge and yield the fruit of wisdom. Plant it in the heart, water the plant with divine 
love, manure it with Faith and Courage, keep off pests with insecticides of bhajana (group 
singing of holy names) and sathsangha (company of the holy), so that you can benefit in the end. 


You have not yet got started in saadhana; still you demand shaanthi; you demand Grace. How is 
it ever possible? Start! Then, everything will be added unto you. 


Ask for the right things 


God gives you whatever you pray for; so, take care. Ask for the right things. There was a man 
who had four wives; he happened to go to Bombay on some work connected with his business. 
From there, he wrote to all of them that he was prepared to bring home whatever each of them 
wanted. So, they all wrote to him giving a list of things they wanted. The first wife asked for 
some nice tonics for her health, and rugs and woollen clothing, to be of service whenever she fell 
ill. The second wife wanted some sails of the latest style, choli pieces, jewellery of the Bombay 
type and such other sundry decorative stuff. The third asked him to select for her some religious 
books, the Jnaaneshwari, abhangs, Bhakthi-vijaya, etc., available in Bombay book-shops, as 
well as pictures of Pandarinath, Bhavaani, Sai Baaba, etc. The fourth wife had no list at all; she 
simply wrote, "If you return soon and safe, that is enough for me." She got nothing but his love. 
The others got big packets containing whatever they had written for. So think well, discriminate 
clearly before you ask, before you pray. 


I know how systematic you are all in eating and drinking. You take pretty good care of the body. 
I do not condemn it; I only want that you should take equally good care of the needs of the spirit 
also. Take a dose of Dhyaanam (meditation) and Japam (silent repetition of holy Names) as the 
morning breakfast; Puuja and Archana (ritual worship) as Lunch at noon; some Sath-sangha 
(holy company) or Sath-chinthana (thinking ‘holy thoughts) or Sath-grantha paaraayana 
(reading of holy books) or Naama /ikhitha (writing of holy Names) as afternoon tea and snacks; 
an hour of bhajana (devotional singing) as Dinner; and a small ten-minute manana (reflection) as 
the cup of milk before going to bed. That dietary is enough to keep your inner being happy and 
healthy. That is My advice to you today. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 16-5-1964 


There is in this world no austerity higher than fortitude, no 
happiness greater than contentment, no punya (good deed) holier 
than mercy, no weapon more effective than patience. 


SHRI SATHYA SAI 


19. Jeeva and Dheva 


WHEN you pour oil from one tin to another; the hand that pours must be steady and the tin from 
which it is poured must not shake; nor, should the tin that receives shake, for, that will also make 
the oil spill on the ground. You should be nischalam (not moving); then only can you accept the 
Bodha (imparting of knowledge) straight into your hearts. 


Now, there are some who say that Jeevi will be jeevi (individual soul) and Deva will be Deva 
(God) and the two can never be the same or merge. If that was true, then, what is the use of 
Japam, Dhyaanam, Sath-karma (good deeds) and all the other varieties of Saadhana (spiritual 
discipline) recommended by the Shaasthras and the sages? There is no doubt that Nara (man) 
can become Naaraayana (God); 'thwam' (thou) can become 'Thath' (That). That is the doctrine 
of the Upanishadhs and the experience of the saints. 


Once a quarrel ensued between the Adhwaithin (non-dualist) who said that the jeevi (individual 
soul) is really God who falsely identifies himself with the limited Name and Form which he 
appears to have assumed, and the Dhwaithin (dualist) who said that the jeevi is distinct from the 
Dheva. When the quarrel boiled over, the Dhwaithin said, "See, even this dhobi knows that 
Adhwaithism is wrong." The Adwaithin said that the dhobi too is subject to the Ajnaana, the 
delusion that he is the limited Upaadhi (adjunct) of name and form, which are but temporary 
adjuncts of the personality. The knowledge of the kshethra and the Kshethrajna will alone help 
to overcome that delusion. Kshethra is the field, the field of the senses, the field of the dualities, 
and the Kshethrajna is he who knows the field and is its Master. 


Human body is "God's temple" 


Every word used in philosophy and even in common parlance has a deep meaning, full of 
significance. Dhehi which means, liable to be burnt, is the word for body; not merely because it 
is consumed by fire after the, praana (life) has left, but because even when alive, man is 
consumed by the fire of Thaapathraya (threefold suffering caused by oneself nature and fate). 
Sareeram, which is another word for the body, also comes from the root, meaning that which is 
consumed. 


The dheha (body) is called a Dhevaalayam (God's temple) for the jeevi (individual soul) which is 
the Deva (God). The architectural temple has three parts; the Praakaaram (the outer temple), the 
inner temple and the shrine or Garbhagriha (sanctum sanctorum). These three represent the 
sthuula, the suukshma and the kaarana sareera (the gross, the Subtle and the causal body) of 
man; when you go to a temple, you should remember this symbolism. Prakrithi is a word that is 
used to indicate condition of the body, the svabhaava (one's nature) of the body. Well, this 
Prakrithi or Nature is also just svabhaava of the Lord,’ his Sankalpa (Will), a manner of His 
manifestation. All this is, as Kasthuri said in his speech, while quoting some experiences of 
Bhakthas, "His Hands and Feet, His manifestation." That is why it is said that Sarvam is 
Brahmamayam. 


A yogi had an attack of gastritis and his comrades and co-saadhakas gathered round him to 
advise him on the treatment. One man suggested that he should always keep some salt in his 
mouth and swallow the saliva. He did so and was having always salt in the mouth. A few days 
later, he wanted to distribute some sweets to the children around his aashram, but, whichever 
item he tasted, he found it not sweet enough. At last, one sweets-vendor asked him to spit out 
what he had in his mouth and gargle his throat and wash his mouth and then taste the sweets. 


That made them taste quite nice. With all this salt taste accumulated through many births on your 
tongue, how can you discover the true sweetness of the Lord? 


Keep intellect free from prejudices 


At one of the railway stations of North India, when a thirsty passenger asked the waterman 
whether the skin-bag from which he was pouring water into his cup was clean enough, the 
waterman replied, "The bag I have is cleaner than the bag, into which the water is being poured 
by you." Keep your mind clean of Vaasanas (tendencies caused by past deeds), your intellect 
free from prejudices, your character free from blemishes, your behaviour free from rudeness-- 
then, you can attach yourself to God and God too will favour you with His affection. 


With just a little paint and a piece of white paper, the painter can draw a frightening picture of a 
demon, or a charming picture of a smiling baby or an inspiring picture of a yogi meditating on 
the Absolute. All those different reactions are the result of the combinations of colours; the basic 
reality is just colour. So too in the picture house, the screen is the stable substance, the shadows 
come and go. When the picture is being flashed on the screen, the screen is not noticed; it is the 
base, the foundation, the whole of it has become the picture. Sarvam Vishnu mayam jagath (All 
this Universe is pervaded by Lord Vishnu). 


Every one calls himself "I," is it not? Now, who gave that possession? Was it any company? Or, 
did you get it as part of the dowry? Or, from the rulers? Or from some organisation? You say it is 
your birthright; well, let it be so. That 'T' is the entity which is posited as Brahman in the 
Mahaavaakya (great Vedhic dictum), 'Aham Brahmaasmi,'I am Brahman. 


See the divine in the sense-impressions 


When the One became many, when the One manifests as Prakrithi composed of the Five 
Elements, do not imagine that its value is affected thereby. When a rupee is changed into ten- 
naya paise coins, its value is not decreased at all. So, see Nature as Supreme Soul, not as 
multiplicity of sense-impressions and sense-attractions. Wherever your eye turns, whatever your 
ears hear, your fingers touch, your tongue tastes, and your nose smells, whatever has form, 
sound, touch, taste and smell, take that also to be God-filled. Do not allow the mere sound, the 
mere taste, etc. to captivate your senses. See the divine in each, welcome and accept only that. 


When Thukaaraam was asked how man can keep this monkey-mind from running after sensuous 
pleasures, he replied to the enquirer, "Let the monkey run; you keep quiet where you are; do not 
let the body go along with the monkey-mind." Tell the mind, "I shall not give you the body as 
your servant." Then, the mind will desist and it can be defeated. Just as there is a method to be 
followed even in pulling down a house, there is a method to be followed even in pulling down 
the complex structure of the mind. 


You can become Master of yourself 


The mind can be pulled down by systematic efforts and you can become master of yourself. You 
might ask, can such a mighty force come down? Well. When We were nearing Rishikesh on our 
way back from Badhri, Governor Raamakrishna Rao also asked Me the same question. I asked 
every one to come beyond a certain point on the road in a matter of minutes. Everyone was 
surprised that I was ordering them to get down from the cars and buses and scurry forward in hot 
haste. I told the Governor that the projecting rock on the mountain by the side of the road will 
slide very soon on the road and block it. He asked Me "Is it possible?" Within a few minutes, 


after every one had come forward to a safe distance, the rocks fell and the road was blocked for a 
long time, until debris was cleared. 


The ladder must be as tall as the height to which you want to climb, is it not? Your spiritual 
practice to curb the mind must be carried on step by step until Saakshaathkaaram (Realisation) is 
gained. The rice in the pot must be well boiled and become soft and sweet. Until that happens, 
the fire must burn. In the vessel of "body,' with the water, that is to say the 'senses,' boil the mind 
and make it soft. The fire is the Saadhana. Keep it burning bright; the jeeva will at last become 
Deva. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 17-5-1964 


20. The Guru is the guide 


THIS day is called Vyaasa Poornima, holy day, which must be celebrated with the prayer and 
contrition which alone can cleanse the heart, and not by feasting or fasting, which affect only the 
body. The fact that Sage Vyaasa is associated with this day or that Lord Raama or Krishna is 
connected with some other day is merely an opportunity to mark the day as outstandingly 
important, when something holy has to be done. It is full moon today, when the moon shines, 
without any let or hindrance, when moonlight is bright and cool and full. The mind of man is 
compared to the moon, for it is as wayward as the moon with its swing from brightness to 
darkness; this day, the mind too has to be bright, effulgent and cool. 


Vyaasa was born with a great urge for spiritual uplift and he entered into deep study and 
saadhana, even as a child. He acquired such divine wisdom and glory that he is identified with 
Naaraayana Himself. He stands out as the Lokaguru (World Teacher) for he codified the Vedhic 
hymns, and prepared the great Vedhaanthic text of Brahmasuuthra, besides the epic 
commentaries of the Vedha-vedhaantha (teachings based on Upanishadhic philosophies) for the 
people whom he loved to educate, commentaries named the Mahaabhaaratha and the Shrimadh 
Bhaagavatha. 


You have to traverse the path 


He is called Vedha-Vyaasa because of his service to the students of the Vedhas, which defied 
understanding, since they were countless and fathomless: Anantho vai Vedhaah. He composed 
also the eighteen Puraanas, on the various Naamaruupas (Names and Forms) of the same 
Godhead, Puraanas which are text-books and illustrative descriptions of moral codes, historical 
episodes, philosophical principles and social ideals. Vyaasa sought to bring home, through the 
Puraanas, the need for mastering egoistic impulses, as the slokha says, 


Ashtaa dasha puraaneshu 
Vyaasaaya vachana dwayam; 
Paropakaara punyaaya 
Paapaaya para peedanam. 


"Two statements can summarise all the eighteen Puraanas composed by Vyaasa. Do good to 
others; avoid doing harm," says the hymn. Doing good is the drug; avoiding harm is the regimen, 
that must accompany the treatment. That is the cure for the disease of suffering from joy and 
grief, honour and dishonour, prosperity and adversity, and the dual throng, that bothers man and 
deprives him of equanimity. 


Vyaasa is the Lokaguru: he is Divine Effulgence. Even Vyaasa can only show you the road. 
YOU have to traverse it alone. He gives you a manthra (a sacred word or formula), which you 
repeat; though you may not know its meaning, it will act as the purifier of your mind. 


When a ryot has to get something done for him by the Collector, he goes to a lawyer, who knows 
how it has to be asked for’, he writes it out in English, and gives it to him as a typed sheet, which 
the ryot presents to the Collector. He does not know what is written or its meaning but it does the 
work because it has come from the brain and the experience of a man who is his Guru for the 
purpose. The Lord is kinder than any human officer and far more eager. He takes on the roles 
which will save the devotee from harm, as he did to help Sakkubhai. 


Make the offerings without egoism 


There was a devotee who felt that Seetha was his sister and Raama his brother-in-law; he loved 
Raama as Krishna loved Arjun! He came to know that Seetha had gone into the forest following 
Raama in exile; he imagined the distress she must be suffering, for want of sandals in the thorn- 
infested jungle paths and of a cot in the snake-infested depths of the forests. So, he went about in 
the jungle, with a pair of sandals and a cot, calling out, "Sister! Seetha!" long after his throat had 
turned hoarse. This happened a few decades ago. He took the Raamaayana as a contemporary 
event. 


Raama appeared before him and consoled him. He fell before Him and prayed that He should 
accept the sandals and cot from him and use them, pleading that Seetha cannot walk on the hard 
thorny ground, or rather, that he would not be happy until she used them. "My dear brother-in- 
law," he addressed Raama fondly. Raama accepted them and asked him to leave happily. 
Offerings that are made with no defilement of egoism are gladly accepted by the Lord. If you 
feel proud or conceited, even the most fragrant flowers placed at the Feet of the Lord will be 
rejected by Him as unbearably stinking. 


Man is a mixture of dhaiva, dhaanava and maanava, (god, demon and man). The wickedness of 
the ogre can be overcome by dhaya (the quality of mercy and charity), of sympathy and fellow- 
feeling; the pride of the god can be overcome by dhama (self-control), detachment, renunciation; 
the egoism of man can be overcome by following dharma prescribed by the impartial sages who 
have been purified by thapas (penance), and by canalising the instincts and impulses into fruitful 
fields. When these three are thus sublimated, maanava (man) is transformed into Maadhava 
(God). Each one must take up this process of purification, by discovering his faults and failings 
and realise the road to success. 


Krishna moved by devotion of Bheeshma 


One morning, Dharmaraaja went to Krishna, in order to pay homage. He found Krishna seated in 
the padmaasana (lotus seat) pose, meditating deeply, with teardrops rolling over His cheeks. 
Dharmaraaja wondered whom He was meditating upon. At last, when Krishna opened His eyes 
he dared ask Him the question and Krishna replied that He was exulting over the devotion of a 
great soul towards Him. He said that it was no other than Bheeshma, whose mind was intently 
fixed on Him even while he was on the bed of arrows. It is not enough if you claim to be a 
bhaktha; the Lord must acknowledge it and exult over it, as Krishna did, when He was lost in 
admiration over the steadfastness of Bheeshma. 


Vyaasa composed the Mahaabhaaratha, also called jaya (victory) with its galaxy of great 
persons, like Bheeshma, Bheema, Arjuna, Vidhura, Dharmaraaja, Dhroupadhi, Kunthi, all 
revolving around the divine Krishna. This epic will remove the darkness of ignorance, the 
pettiness of selfishness, the cowardice of separation from the hearts of men. So, the title of 
Lokaguru for Vyaasa is very apt. He is extolled as Vishnu, sans Shankha (conch) and Chakra 
(discus); Shankara (Shiva), sans the three eyes; and Brahma (the Creator) sans the four heads. 
You must make the best use of this Guru, as you must, of this Puttaparthi itself. You must 
acquire here the skills for winning shaanthi and santhosha (peace of mind and bliss), the grace of 
God, the lessons of saadhana, the fruits of sathsang (company of holy men); do not fritter away 
your energy and time, seeking sensory satisfaction in ungodly company. 


You pray, not for grace, but for petty impermanent pleasures; you do not try to know the 
ordinances of God and decide to follow them. Look at Dhruva. He started his penance, with the 
low aim of getting mastery over his step-mother's son; but as he progressed, he saw that he could 
get something far higher than even imperial honours, namely, the grace of God. Learn to 
appreciate the Aathma (Divine Self) and to detach your mind from that which is not Aathma. 
Become wise and discriminating. 


Leave everything to the Guru 


When I was in the previous body at Shirdhi, there was a woman named Raadhabhai who yearned 
to get a Manthropadhesha (inflated into a sacred word or formula) from me. That day was also 
Vyaasa Poornima. She was so anxious to get a Naamam (Name) that she refused to take even 
food until she got it. Three days passed like this, but Baaba did not yield. At last, Syaama who 
was with the previous body spoke about her and pleaded for her and feared that she might even 
die of hunger. He said that if she died, it would be poor reflection on the broad-mindedness for 
which Baaba was known. Raadhabhai was brought to the place in a weak condition. Baaba asked 
her to go to some Guru and get initiated into the name; she said, "I know of no other." Baaba 
asked her the meaning of the slokha "Guru Brahma Guru Vishnu Guru Dhevo Maheshwarah, 
Gurusaakshath param Brahma Tasmai Shri Guruve namah." He asked her, "Why not take the 
Guru's name, then? Why demand another name from the Guru? If the Guru is God, obeying His 
orders, walking in the path He has shown, these are as effective as the japam (repetition) of the 
name." 


You are judged by your words 


Once you have secured a Guru, leave everything to him, even the desire to achieve liberation. He 
knows you more than you yourself ever can. He will direct you as much as is good for you. Your 
duty is only to obey and to smother the tendency to drift away from Him. You may ask, how are 
we to earn our food, if we attach ourselves to a Guru like this? Be convinced that the Lord will 
not let you starve; He will give you not merely money but even Amirtha, not only food but the 
nectar of immortality. 


Become immersed in the sweetness of the Name on your tongue. That will render your words 
also sweet and soft. By your words, will you be judged. A Mahaaraaja out hunting happened to 
ride far forward, so that his retinue could not catch up with him. He saw a blind man by the 
jungle road and so he accosted him, "Hallo, dear man. Did you notice any one passing along?" 
The blind man said "No." Then, after a few minutes, the minister came along and asked the same 
man, "Hey brother! Did you notice any one passing along?" and got the same answer. The 
commander when he saw him asked "Here, you fool! Did you notice some one passing along?" 
and a soldier who came last shouted, "You blind rotter, open your dirty mouth and tell me 
whether any one passed this way." At last when the priest of the court came along and said, 
"Dear brother, please tell me whether any one passed this way," he could reply that a king, a 
minister, a commander and a soldier had passed and had asked him the same question. For their 
style of speech, revealed their status and character. 


If you have dhaya, dhama and dharma (sympathy, self-control and righteousness), that will take 
you beyond the realm of the three gunas (qualities of the mind); there is no need then for getting 
a Naama (Name) from the Guru and repeating it. The aajna (command) of the Guru or the Lord 
is even more important than the Name of the Guru or the Name of the Lord. Of what use is the 


repetition of the Name, without at the same time purifying the impulses by the observance of His 
commands. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 24-7-1964 


Maayaa itself has caused multifarious forms. 
This is a clever stage-play, a kind of fancy-dress. 


The objective world or Nature assumes many forms through the 
manipulation of Maayaa, the Deluding urge. 


Shri Sathya Sai 


21. Sravana and Smarana 


THE first among the nine forms of devotion is sravana (hearing) and today, we have installed 
here at the Prashaanthi Nilayam this instrument for sravana, namely, the telephone. I am used to 
hearing not the talk that comes through this instrument, but the cries of agony; the call of pining 
hearts hungering for grace. Still since it gladdens the hearts of devotees and I am never against 
anything that makes them glad and full-hearted, I have agreed for this installation. Just now, 
sitting in this hall, on this chair, you heard Me speak to Kanjilal at New Delhi and only he and I 
know how happy he is at the present moment, for he was able to speak to Baaba direct and to 
hear My voice, while in his own house. 


Just see how this telephone itself came to be installed. The engineering staff were working day 
and night to fix it, but heavy rains interfered and even this noon, they were afraid that a 
connection with Delhi had become next to impossible. I had fixed the time as 5-30; but they 
pleaded with Me to postpone My coming into the hall for a few minutes at least, so that they 
could make sure that Delhi was coming through fine and clear. I said that we could speak to 
Delhi later, if they felt that would be better. 


Sravana can transform the individual 


But, you saw how, as soon as I sat on this chair, Kanjilal could be heard clearly and I could 
inaugurate the service. It is given to these men who are here today to share in this achievement 
and this joy; they have the luck, the chance. Many times, people search far and wide for a groom 
for their daughter; but all the while, the young man might be in the neighbouring house itself. 
The engineers may say that they only did their duty and they might not look for any gratitude; 
but I am sure, you will thank them for the service they rendered, in these rains and under high 
pressure of work. 


Sravana, heating the voice of God, hearing about God, these are important events in life, events 
that transform the individual. Arjuna "heard" the Bhagavadh Geetha; Pareekshit "heard" the 
Bhaagavatha; both were liberated from bondage thereby. In the Mahaabhaaratha, Karna, 
meaning the Ear (!) is the most outstanding character; it is called Karnarasaayana, (sweet 
medicine to be "heard") and assimilated into daily life. The Sabdha (Sound), the Pranava (Om) 
are all very important keys to bliss; the Vedhas are to be "heard" and "recited." They are Shruthi, 
that which was heard, in moments of supraconscious ecstasy, by purified scholars doing 
saadhana. I am reminded of all this in the presence of this contrivance for Doora-sravana, 
hearing people who are far away. 


Bhaagavatha-sravana (listening to Bhaagavatha) leads to Bhaagavatha-smarana (the constant 
remembrance of the Lord), and detachment from the ties of the objective world. There was 
famous dacoit once who advised his son while initiating him into the ancestral profession, never 
for a moment listen to stories of the Lord. "Do not stay to listen to any Puraana (mythological 
stories) or any reading of the Bhaagavatha," (tales of incarnations of Vishnu), he exhorted the 
young aspirant. The son scrupulously observed this injunction for years and amassed a good 
fortune. 


Effect of hearing the Bhaagavatha 


One night, however, while running with his loot on his shoulder through a side lane of the city to 
avoid the police, a piece of glass cut into his sole; he sat for a while to pull it off and stop the 


flow of blood. He was then behind a house, where some one was reading and explaining the 
Bhaagavatha to a small group of listeners; he listened perforce for a short two minutes. The 
spark fell on the heap of cotton. During that short period, he heard the Pandith explaining the 
nature of God. He has no ears, no eyes, no limbs; He has a thousand forms; He is without form. 
"Sarvathah paani-paadham," (with hands and feet every here) as the Geetha says. That 
description got fixed in his heart. He could not shake it. 


A few days later the police came to know of the depredations made by him as well as his 
associates and kinsmen. In order to know more about their activities they entered the area 
incognito, one constable as Goddess Kaali and some others as the worshippers and priests. They 
shouted and yelled, cursed and terrified the dacoits and called upon them to come out of their 
homes and fall at the feet of Kaali. 


Many did so, but the son who heard the Bhaagavatha albeit for two minutes knew just enough to 
save his skin. He was not terrified at all. He challenged the constable who was acting the role of 
Kaali and tore off his makeup and exposed the plot and instilled courage into the hearts of the 
gang. Then, when the police left discomfited he argued within himself thus: "If two minutes of 
the forbidden fruit could help me so much, what can I not gain if I devote myself entirely to the 
stories of the glories of God?" He left off the evil path and became a saadhaka (spiritual 
practitioner). 


Tongue is man's biggest weapon of offence 


The grace of God descends upon the eager saadhaka, who listens attentively to the story of that 
grace. The name of God, if recited with love and faith, has that power. Once the mother of 
Agasthya boasted that her son drank all the waters of the ocean; but the mother of Hanumaan, 
who was there, said: "Why go to that extent? My son leaped over it in a trice." But there was the 
mother of Raama with them. She said, "Your son leaped over the ocean, uttering my son's name. 
Without it, he was helpless." The name has that overmastering power. It can award unheard of, 
unimagined strength and courage. The other two women disputed the fact that it was 
Raamanaama that strengthened Hanumaan for the enterprise. So, Kaushalya asked Raama 
Himself. He said, "Why, it was because this body was called Raama, the name that combines the 
beejaaksharas (mystic letters) of both Shiva and Vishnu, that I Myself was able to conquer 
Raavana and his hordes!" 


The name has much efficacy. By repeating the name, the Lord and His attributes can be easily 
identified. The tongue must be sanctified by the repetition of the name. It has also to use sweet 
expressions which will spread contentment and joy. Be very careful about your speech. Animals 
have horns, insects have stings, beasts have claws and fangs. But, man's biggest weapon of 
offence is his tongue. The wounds that his tongue inflicts can scarce be healed; they fester in the 
heart for long. They are capable of more damage than even an atom bomb. 


When Bheema went to bring the Saugandhika flower for his beloved, he saw Hanumaan with his 
tail lying across the road. Bheema talked rudely to Hanumaan, ordering him to remove the tail, 
for he thought it mean to walk over some one else's appendage. The rudeness made Hanumaan 
refuse the demand and so, Bheema was humiliated for he could not lift the tail and set it aside. 
He learned the need for politeness in conversation. 


Speak so that your language is as sweet as your feelings are. Make the words true and pleasing. 
(Sathyam broth; privam brooyath). But, for the sake of pleasing another, do not speak falsehood 


or exaggerate. Cynicism which leads you to speak about a thing in a carping manner and in order 
to bring it into disrepute is as bad as flattery which makes you exaggerate and cross the 
boundaries of truth. 


Bliss is man's native character 


You can give Aanandha by your speech, only if you have attained the state of Aanandha 
yourself. A lamp burning under a pot with five holes: that is the symbol of man, who has the 
Flame of Wisdom shining through five senses. Cover the pot with a thick cloth and no light 
emerges. The cloth is the cover of ajnaana (ignorance), of thamas (inaction). Remove it; it shines 
feebly through the senses, that is the symbol of rajas (passion and activity). Remove the pot 
itself, that is to say, remove the identification with the body, (the dhehaathma-buddhi); then the 
Aathmajyothi (light of the Sell) shines full and bright. The jyothi or Aanandha (Divine light or 
Divine Bliss) is ever there but, it was obstructed by the pot and the cloth. Aanandha is your 
native character, your real stamp, your very reality. 


The patient must himself drink the drug. There is no vicarious cure. The balm must be applied 
where the pain is. The cause of the illness and of the misery is in your mental vision, for, you see 
many, when there is only One. You say "My God," "Their God," "Your Baaba," as if there are so 
many Gods existing to help you quarrel and right among yourselves' Ask the Lord for the 
removal of your earthly troubles; there is no mistake in that. It is much better than asking other 
men, and losing self-respect and honour. For the sake of votes, people catch hold of the feet of 
all and sundry; if they fall at the feet of the Lord, that will bring them more votes, for the people 
will plead with Him to lead them as a great servant of God. 


Communicate from heart to heart 


You can call Me on the phone, but I will not be available for all those who do not have the 
sincere and steady yearning for the Lord. For those who say "No! You are not my Lord," I say 
"No." For those who say, "Yes," I too echo "Yes." If I am available in your heart, I will be 
available over the phone. But, remember, I have My own special postal and telephone systems. 
They operate from the heart straight to the heart. There are rules and regulations for the operation 
of that system, which the Shaasthras (scriptures) declare. You can find them there. I am glad that 
devotees have today acquired this new convenience at Prashaanthi Nilayam. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 29-7-1964 


Difficulties are created to increase the yearning and to sift the 
sincere devotee from the rest. 


SHRI SATHYA SAI 


22. Eliminate the Ego 


IT is indeed a piece of good fortune that you have been able to hear, in the midst of the many 
worldly worries that engross you, the valuable teachings of the ancient scriptures of this land, 
from these great Pandiths. This is what really confers lasting happiness. In the land which once 
cultivated these great ideals, weeds and thorny bushes have over-run the fields and with the 
decline of spiritual enthusiasm, enmity, factions, injustice and falsehood have grown wild. Indian 
religion and culture have treasured many folkways and customs that enshrine the lessons laid 
down by yogis and rishis for the good of the community. They are called samskaaras, 
(purificatory acts), acts which sublimate the baser emotions and impulses; there are 48 of these 
mentioned in the Shaasthras, but, of these, 16 are essential for the individual who strives for the 
higher destiny. 


These have been neglected by society, since many decades, on account of a mad infatuation for 
the ways of the ruling race, which had come from the west. Their language slowly modified 
habits of living and even thinking; their dress which was adopted, changed outlooks and modes 
of living; their games and recreations transformed the ways in which Indians spend their leisure; 
their culture percolated into every field of activity and Indian culture is faced, even after the 
recovery of national independence, with a great danger to its continuity. 


Discard all low desires 


Of course, there is no need to feel unduly depressed. One has only to recognise ignorance, in 
order to make it vanish. One has only to know one-self in order to contact the springs of Bliss 
and Immortality and of kinship with all beings. In Sanskrit, the individual is known as vyakthi, 
because he has to make his innate divinity vyaktha (explicit). That is your reality; discover it, 
dwell in it, desire to divulge it. Discard all low desires for a few acres of land, or a fat account in 
the bank, or a few more bungalows or cars or radios; desire rather the joy that will never fade, 
that will never cloy, deep, steady and strength-giving, the joy of Divine Realisation. 


Discover your holiness, your divinity, your truth. You may have doubts which is dharma (right 
conduct), which is sathya (truth), which is prema (Divine love), etc.; I admit; but, you can have 
no doubt about yourself, is it not? So, find out who you are and be fixed in that truth. That is 
enough to save you, to give you everlasting joy. That is why the Vedhas and the Upanishadhs 
teach, what the sages and the saints experienced, what these Pandiths (scholars) remind you in 
their discourses. 


Remember the God in whom you move, the God who makes you move, the God who is all this 
vast universe, every atom, every huge star. Select some Name and Form for this all-pervasive 
immanent God and keep those on your tongue and before your mental eye. That is what is called 
jJapasahitha dhyaanam (meditation-cum-recitation of the Name). 


Discover the truth in silence 


You are now more interested in listening to film-songs on the transistor radios which you carry 
round your necks. A villager came to Madras recently and his educated son-in-law went to the 
railway station to meet him and take him home. While they were proceeding homewards in a 
taxi, the father-in-law asked the son-in-law a rather strange question: "How much do the barbers 
here charge per shave?" The son-in-law was amazed at his curiosity; he asked why he was so 
eager to know this particular fact, more than anything else. The villager replied, "I saw a few 


barbers going along the road now; they are all wearing rich clothes, and they are carrying their 
equipment not in tin boxes as our village barbers do, but, in fine shiny leather boxes." The old 
man had seen people carrying these transistor radios. People miss a very valuable thing if they do 
not listen in, even while they are moving about or resting in the park or beach! They are afraid of 
being alone; they avoid silence as something detestable! But, you can discover your own truth 
only when you are alone with yourself and there is silence all around you. 


Justice Sadhaashivam said now that he had seen huge gatherings of eager listeners at religious 
meetings like this and so, he was led to the conclusion that atheism is not gaining ground in this 
country. The gatherings are certainly large but they are not very encouraging if you consider 
what a small percentage actually pay attention and of those who attend, what a small percentage 
cherish the teaching in the heart and strive to regulate their lives accordingly. 


As a matter of fact, there are no atheists at all but, only ignorant people. They do not know that 
God is their innermost core. They deny God because they do not know that their very breath is 
God. It is like fish denying the existence of water. You have to pity them for their colossal 
ignorance, not get angry with them for saying things you do not like. God dwells in you as 
aanandha (divine bliss); that is why you seek aanandha automatically, always, in every object 
around you. To become as full of aanandha as Raadha (the consort of Lord Krishna) or as 
Raamakrishna Paramahamsa or as Vivekaanandha, you have to sacrifice your ego and saturate 
yourself with the consciousness that the Lord is your very being. 


Krishna and Aanjaneya 


You must have heard many stories of garvabhangam--the suppression of conceit or egoism by 
the Lord. One day, Aanjaneya appeared in a garden on the outskirts of Dhwaaraka (abode of 
Lord Krishna). Krishna who heard about the pranks of the strange monkey, directed Garuda to 
proceed and scare the animal out of the city limits. Garuda failed, even though the later took the 
entire army with him for the fray. His pride was humbled. Krishna sent a message through him to 
the monkey, who had declared himself as Aanjaneya, that he should deign to come to Krishna's 
court. But, Aanjaneya recognised only Raama and would obey only the orders of Raama. So, 
Krishna had to send another message that Raama was calling him to His audience hall! Devotion 
compels the Lord to yield to the whims of His servants. Aanjaneya hurried to see Raama and 
Krishna gave him the darshan of Raama Himself. Sathyabhaama had offered to change herself 
into Seetha and when she stood by the side of Raama, Aanjaneya could not recognise in that 
form his Seetha. He was bewildered at this apparition. He asked Krishna, "O Lord Raama! 
Where is my Seetha? Who is this substitute?" Thus, the conceit of Sathyabhaama was broken by 
the Lord. He then asked Rukmini (Krishna's consort) to come forward and Aanjaneya 
immediately saw in her the Seetha he adored. 


So long as you have a trace of ego in you, you cannot see the Lord clearly. That is the thera 
(curtain), which Saint Thyaagaraaja prayed Lord Venkateshwara to remove from his mind. 
Egoism will be destroyed if you constantly tell yourself, 'It is He, not I.' 'He is the force, I am but 
the instrument.' Keep His Name always on the tongue; contemplate His glory whenever you see 
or hear anything beautiful or grand; see in every one the Lord Himself moving in that form. Do 
not talk evil of others, see only good in them. Welcome every chance to help others, to console 
others, to encourage others along the spiritual path. Be humble, do not become proud of your 
wealth, status, authority, learning or caste. Dedicate all your physical possessions and mental 


skills and intellectual attainments to the service of the Lord and to the Lord's manifold 
manifestations. 


Prashaanthi Vidwanmahaasabha (Madras), Inauguration by Shri M. Bhakthavatsalam, 
President: Mr. Justice Sadhaashivam, 13-8-1964 


Mother is Love. Worship the mother as God. Father is Truth. 
Worship the father as God. 


SHRI SATHYA SAI 


23. The Rain Clouds 


FOR the last two hours, you were fully immersed in the aanandha of Krishnathathwa (Reality of 
Krishna) and of Vedhasaara (essence of Vedha), which are both the same. How grand it would 
be if all the moments of life you were imbibing this aanandha undisturbed! Iyengar spoke on 
Krishna-thrishna, the thirst for Krishna! What an appropriate word, that! The thirst for worldly 
goods can never be allayed; trying to satisfy it makes it only more acute. Thirst can never be 
quenched by drinking salt water, which is the objective world. Human desire is illimitable, 
without end. It makes you pursue the mirage in the desert; it makes you build castles in the air; it 
breeds discontent and despair once you succumb to it. But, develop the thirst for Krishna, you 
discover the cool spring of aanandha within you. Krishna Naama (name) makes you strong and 
steady; it is sweet and sustaining. 


Gouranga, the great example of this thirst, is so called because his heart was so pure that it had 
no touch of blemish at all. He is called Krishna Chaithanya, because he lost his chaithanya, that 
is, became unconscious of the world outside him, when he heard the name Krishna and became 
Krishna conscious! 


Yearning of Gopees for Krishna 


Look at the gopees (milk maids of Gokulam) and their yearning for the Lord! They never 
swerved from the path of bhakthi, of continuous smarana (remembrance) of the Lord. When in 
pain you shout "Ayyo, appa or amma"; but the gopees always called on Krishna only, whether in 
joy or in grief. A gopee was moving along the streets of. Brindhaavan selling butter and ghee and 
milk; but, she was not crying aloud the names of her ware; she was calling aloud the names of 
Krishna: "Govindha! Dhamodhara! Maadhava!" The gopees forgot the very purpose of their visit 
to Brindhaavan, their very livelihood, their task of selling and earning. They stood watching 
Krishna, running along with a hoop and ignoring all else, they ran behind him with a ball of 
butter in the hand, offering it to the Divine child who had captured their hearts, calling on Him to 
receive the gift; "Govindha!" Dhamodhara! Maadhava!" 


When one of them was rolling on the ground in terrible anguish at the separation from Krishna, 
they sat around her and instead of assuaging her grief by turning her thoughts away from 
Krishna, they augmented it because they themselves could not think of any other subject to talk 
to her than Krishna's glory and Krishna's prema! They sat around and sang, "Govindha! 
Dhamodhara! Maadhava!" Whoever has the thirst, Krishna will quench it; whoever calls on Him 
in the agony of that thirst, Krishna, the rain-cloud, will answer that call and appear. 


You can understand Raadha (Krishna's consort) only if you can fathom the depth of that thirst. 
Raadha believed that Krishna is the Aadhar (basis); she did aaradh (worship) to Krishna in a 
continuous dhaara (stream); in fact, she is Dhaara or Prakrithi, which is another form of the 
Lord or Pursuha Himself. How can those who are full of evil tendencies and impulses grasp that 
relationship? 


In this Kaliyuga, the principle of Prema (Divine Love) is not in evidence. It is smothered in 
jealousy, conceit, hatred, fear, falsehood and greed. That is why it is best referred to as the 
kalaha-yuga (the age of faction), marked by fights between mother and daughter, father and son, 
teacher and pupil, guru and guru, brother and brother. The recitation of the name of Krishna is 
the best method for cleansing the mind of all these evil impulses. 


You may ask, "If we engage ourselves in this pastime, how can we earn our livelihood?" Well, 
let me assure you, if you have pure and steady faith in the Lord, He will provide for you, not 
merely food, but the nectar of immortality. You have that mighty potentiality in you, to discover 
the Lord within and compel Him to grant you that nectar. 


Make the thirst for Krishna grow in you 


When you say that Krishna was born in Gokula, then. He grew up in Brindhaavan, that He ruled 
over Mathura and that He later reigned at Dhwaaraka, what do those statements signify? The 
manas (mind) is the Gokula! where He was born (where He is born even now to whoever takes 
the spiritual path); the heart is the Brindhaavan where He grows, where prema (divine love) for 
Him develops; the Chith is the Mathura which He rules over and the Nirvikalpa stage is 
Dhwaaraka where He installs Himself, as the reigning monarch. Make the Krishna-thrishna 
(thirst for Krishna) grow through these stages and you will be saving yourself! You will be 
joining the ranks of Raadha, Meera and Sakkubhai (devotees of Lord Krishna). 


Once upon a time, we used to hear of three famous names Lal, Bal and Pal; they were famous in 
the days of the national struggle. But many do not know now who they were. At least, Lal and 
Pal have disappeared from the memory of the people; a large percentage of even educated 
persons will flounder if you ask them who Lal and Pal were. Bal, meaning Bala Gangaadhara 
Thilak, is still known to many, because he has made a contribution to spiritual knowledge, being 
a saadhaka himself and a good student of Geetha for which he wrote a commentary. So, 
saadhana alone makes life worth while; the rest is mostly froth or fake or failure, flashes of the 
moment. 


Three principles to guide you 


The mind must become bhakthimaya (saturated with devotion to God); the intelligence must be 
transformed into jnaana-dheepthi (the splendour of universal wisdom), or jnaana (Divine 
Knowledge); the body must be a willing and efficient instrument for saddharmacharana, (the 
practice of righteousness). Such a life is indeed the crown and glory of humanity. The rest are 
contaminated, contained, caged lives! 


There is no use asking a doctor to advise you about the plans for the building you propose to 
raise; nor is it wise to ask the engineer for a balm to assuage pain. Go to the proper Guru and 
learn from him about at least three principles to guide your lives. 


(1) Dharma : What is dharma, why should it be followed, what does it allow, what does it 
condemn, etc.?---these have to be clearly known. The Geetha is the best text on Dharma: the 
first word in it is dharma and the last word is mama (mine). So, it teaches each student what 
exactly he should consider as "the dharma which is mine!" Each one must evolve his own 
dharma based on Aathmadharma, the faith that the Aathma (soul) is his true reality. 


(2) Bhakthi - Bhakthi (devotion) is like a king, who has two aides-de-camp called jnaana (divine 
knowledge) and vairaagya (non-attachment). Without these two bodyguards, bhakthi is never 
secure or safe. Bhakthi must be built upon the foundation of jnaana; it must flower as 
"detachment from the world." The jnaani is the sthitha-prajna (unmoved by agitating feelings 
and emotions), unshaken by the storms of fortune, good or bad; the vairaagi (the detached), is 
the person who has rid himself of the three gunas (qualities of the mind); and the bhaktha 
(devotee) is he who is all prema (Love). Bhakthi, jnaana and vairaagya are three peaks of the 


same Himaalyan range. Prema creates dhaya (compassion); vairaagya induces dhama 
(tolerance); and, jnaana leads you along the path of dharma. 


Put out the fire raging within you 


(3) Saadhana- When the house catches fire, you run about in desperate haste to get succour and 
to put out the flames; but, you do not realise that the fire raging inside you is even more 
devastating and devouring. You must take up the duty of fire fighting in right earnest and never 
rest until the flames are put out. Start the fight right now. Start serving your parents, your 
teachers, the elders, the poor, the diseased, the distressed. Do not foster factions and divisions. 
Promote love, concord, co-operation, brotherliness. Do not look upon people as belonging to this 
state or that; all are in the state of bondage to the senses, to the objective world. Join the 
company of the good, the striving, the yearning saadhakas and you will soon reach the stage of 
peace within and harmony without. 


Madras, 14-8-1964 


24. The sandalwood tree 


THE importance which Sanaathana culture (unchanging truth) gives to dharma was explained to 
you by the Pandith; he outlined some of the main principles of that subtle ideal. Dharma 
(righteousness) is the feet and Moksha (Realisation) the head of the human community, while the 
other two purushaarthas---artha (wealth)and kaama (desire)---form the trunk and limbs. Now, 
feet and head are ignored and the other two reckoned as vital. That is the tragedy of modem 
times. Enough warning against this tragedy has been given in the ancient texts of this country. 
The Kauravas are useful examples of the calamity that awaits those who pursue the ideals of 
artha and kaama, without the regulating influence of dharma and moksha. They were drunk with 
power; they were overcome by greed and pride; they had insatiable desire; they suffered untold 
misery and were destroyed. 


Raavana fell because he strove to accumulate artha and was carried away by covetousness, 
kaama. His "ten heads" indicate his mastery over the four Vedhas and the six Shaasthras; but, of 
what avail was all that learning? Aanjaneya reported that Lanka was echoing with the recitation 
of the Vedhas and the air was thick with sacrificial smoke. But, the raakshasas (demons) were 
wicked, in spite of all that ritual exactitude. Ritual must result in righteousness; otherwise, it is 
only rigmarole. Raavana sought to gain Prakrithi, not Purusha (the manifestation not the 
manifestor); Seetha not Raama! And, so his life became futile. 


Kaama is the three-headed demon; when you win your desire, you develop lobha (miserly 
greed), to retain the gain and see that it multiplies; when you are defeated in desire, you develop 
krodha (resentment, anger); even thapas (penance) might not transmute such a character, as seen 
in the case of Bhasmaasura, who sought to destroy the very Lord who granted him the boon he 
was after! Kaama, lobha and krodha are all forms of rajoguna (quality of passion and activity), 
the feverish activity that ignores the "means" while concentrating on the "end." Rajoguna 
pursues the goal, but is not particular about the correctness of the path. 


Qualify yourself and desire 


There is a story of some monkeys who planted a mango garden. They planted the saplings, 
watered them a few days, and plucked them from off the ground to see how deep the roots had 
gone! They wanted them to grow fast and yield fruits, but they were unaware of the process by 
which alone they could get the fruits they craved for! Act right; then, claim the fruit. Cultivate 
with care, and collect the harvest. 


What is good of burdening yourself with desire when you do not have the qualification to fulfil 
it? Madhuranaath once asked Raamakrishna Paramahamsa for a chance to enjoy what was 
known as Nirvikalpa samaadhi (superconscious state of Bliss), about which he had heard. 
Though Raamakrishna demurred because he had no qualification and preparatory training for it, 
he insisted; so when at last, the Master acceded, and made him lose consciousness for three days, 
the poor man protested and appealed for an end to that experience. It was a burden too heavy for 
his weak shoulders. 


The three gunas (qualities of the mind) have to be transcended one after the other; thamas 
(lethargy) being transmuted into rajas (passionate activity) and rajas into sathwa (serenity and 
poise) and sathwa too, at last into characteristiclessness. 'The gunas bind man and leave 
impressions. Thamas is like the worms that creep and crawl in offal; rajas is like the fly that sits 
on foul things as well as fair; sathwa is like the bee that visits only fragrant flowers. But, all three 


are drawn towards objects, whereas one should be free from all traces of attachment. When 
hearts are infested with flies and worms, the flit of Naamasmarana (constant remembrance of 
God's name) has to be used for disinfecting the place. You must recognise the high purpose of 
this human body and the unique chance man has. Then only will you strive to benefit by this 
hard-won piece of luck. 


The magnanimous king 


A Raaja (king) was out hunting in the forest and while pursuing the deer, he went too far and 
discovered that his retinue was left behind. He lost his way and was overcome by hunger and 
thirst. At last, he saw a tiny hut where lived a poor wood-cutter and his wife selling fuel in the 
distant villages. Their larder was almost empty, but the wife managed to bring out a roti (bread), 
which the king ate with avidity. He had never known such taste, for he was never so hungry as 
then. and, he slept soundly that noon, for he was never so tired as then. By that time, the courtiers 
and soldiers came upto where he was and the astounded wood-cutter learnt that his guest was no 
less a person than the monarch of the realm. He apologised for the poor fare he offered, though 
the king never uttered a harsh word. 


Tragedy of man everywhere 


Next day, a man came from the capital to take him to the court and the poor fellow was certain 
that he was going to be punished for insulting the ruler. His wife accompanied him, for she 
offered to share the misery with her lord. The Raaja gave him a seat and insisted upon his sitting, 
an honour which the wood-cutter knew was usually given to animals that were about to be 
sacrificed. He was fed nicely, along with his wife, another honour which such animals usually 
get. 


Then the king asked him what boon he would ask from him, and the terrified man could ask for 
only this: "Please allow me to go home alive, with my wife! Please do not cut off my head," he 
cried. The Raaja said, "I am not an ungrateful wretch to treat you so cruelly. If I give you an 
estate you will ruin it, for you are unaware of agriculture. If I give riches, thieves will carry it 
away, for you live alone in the jungle. Well, I shall give you a sandalwood plantation in that 
forest, thirty acres in extent. Make good use of it and prosper." The wood-cutter felt relieved and 
he went away into the woods. 


After about six months, the King went to the forest again for a hunt and remembering the bread, 
he went in search of the wood-cutter. He found him quite happy for he said, that he had started 
selling charcoal instead of fuel. The sandalwood trees were being reduced to charcoal by that 
man; he did not know the value of the gift he had received. Man too does not realise the value of 
the precious gift of "the number of days" of life he has received from the Lord. He fritters them 
away for temporary earnings. That is the tragedy of man everywhere. 


Sanaathana Dharma has laid down the rules and regulations for the best possible utilisation of 
life, but for want of teaching, exposition and example, they have been sadly neglected. This is 
like inflicting injuries on oneself, this neglect of the rules, which give real happiness and peace. 
This is like the foolishness of living upon your neighbour's leavings, while your own home has a 
relishing, nourishing banquet ready! 


Regulate the way of living 


Reform the body, reconstruct the mind; regulate the way of living; then, the country will become 
automatically strong and prosperous. Do not wail that is a mud pot if it contains nectar; it is far 
better than having a gold pot with poison in it. The land may be rich, but, if life is mean, it is 
deplorable. It does not matter if the standard of life is poor, provided the way of life is pure, full 
of prema, humility, fear-of-sin, and reverence towards elders. 


It is easy to restore this way of life, provided the Vedhas are once again studied and followed. 
The Vedhamaatha (mother of Vedhas) will foster in you love and kindness. Have faith; do not 
discard a diamond, dismissing it as a piece of glass. The Dharma laid down in the Vedhas is the 
best armour to guard you against sorrow. 


Women should observe sthree dharma and men purusha 'dharma, the householder, grihastha 
dharma, the monk sanyaasa dharma (the path of righteousness prescribed for each category of 
persons. The outward symbols like shave head, the ochre cloth, kamandalu---these are like the 
barbed wire erected to protect the crop from depredation. But, what we now find is, there is 
plenty of fence without, but no crop within! 


You may have a grand feast on the plate, but, unless you have hunger, you will not be tempted to 
eat. There are qualifications for every task, be it eating or fasting, be it leading a householder's 
life or monk's life. Only a stone that was once Ahalya and was saturated by dhyaana (meditation) 
and remorse can be transmuted into human form and only the feet of a Divine incarnation can so 
transmute it. All stones trodden by Raama did not get transformed into women; nor did any of 
the feet that trod upon that stone had the power of giving life. The Guru must have the 
awakening touch and the sishya (disciple) must have the eagerness to awake. The relationship 
should not be like the snake with a frog in the mouth, the frog too weak to escape, the snake too 
full to swallow. The Guru must be able to save; the sishya must be ready to be saved. 


Hanumaan's dedicated service 


Dedicate all tasks of offerings to the Lord. Never deviate from that attitude. Hanumaan was such 
a bhaktha; Raama was the very life-breath for him. After the coronation, one day, Seetha and the 
three brothers of Raama met and planned to exclude Hanumaan from the seva (service) of 
Raama and wanted that all the various services for Raama should be divided only among 
themselves. They felt that Hanumaan had enough chances already. So, they drew up a list, as 
exhaustive as they could remember, of the service from dawn till dusk, down to the smallest 
minutiae and assigned each item to one among themselves. They presented the list of items and 
assignees to the Lord, while Hanumaan was present. Raama heard about the new procedure, read 
the list and gave His approval, with a smile. He told Hanumaan that all the tasks had been 
assigned to others and that he could now take rest. Hanumaan prayed that the list might be read 
and when it was done, he noticed an omission---the task of 'snapping fingers when one yawns:.' 
Of course, being an emperor, Raama should not be allowed to do it himself. It has to be done by 
a servant, he pleaded. Raama agreed to allot that task to Hanumaan! 


It was a great epic piece of good luck for Hanumaan, for it entitled Hanumaan's constant 
attendance on his Master, for how could anyone predict when the yawn would come? And, he 
had to be looking on that heart-charming face all the time, to be ready with snap, as soon as the 
yawn was on! He could not be away for a minute nor could he relax for a moment. You must be 


happy that the seva of the Lord keeps you always in His presence and ever vigilant to carry out 
His behests. 


Select a Name and a Form 


The Lord cares for ekaagratha and chittha-suddhi (concentration and purity of mind). You need 
not feel that you are physically away from Him. He has no 'near' and 'far' Provided the address is 
clear and correct, your letter will be delivered, either at the next street or at Calcutta or Bombay 
for the same stamp. Smarana (remembering) is the stamp; manana (recapitulaiton) is the address. 
Have the Name for smarana; the Form for manana, that is enough. 


Select one Name and one Form for smarana and manana; but, do not talk ill of other names and 
forms. Behave like the woman in a joint family; she respects and serves the elders of the family 
such as the father-in-law, and his brothers and her own brother-in-law, but her heart is dedicated 
to her husband, whom she loves and reveres in a special manner. If you carp at the faith of 
others, your devotion is fake. If you are sincere, you will appreciate the sincerity of others. You 
see faults in others because you yourself have those faults, not otherwise. 


While in Dandakaaranya forest, Raama was once reclining with His head on the lap of Sugreeva 
and the vaanara (monkey) leaders were around Him. The moon was shining overhead in full 
glow, but, there was the tell-tale spot which marred the fullness of the effulgence. Raama asked 
each one of them what the spot indicated. Each one gave a different explanation; the reflection of 
the sea, one said; a deep pit, said another; a mountain range, said a third; but, Aanjaneya said, "It 
is your reflection I see on the moon, your colour, nothing else." That was the measure of his 
devotion. He saw everywhere, everytime only Raama. 


Have faith in your culture, which emphasises the path of self-control and discipline. Do not be 
led away by the tinsel attractions of foreign cultures. Indian customs, like the wearing of the sari 
are now adopted by western women, while Indian women are wearing gowns! Indian women 
bob their hair and discard the kumkum (vermilion dot on the forehead), in order to look 
fashionable; but, every Indian custom has deep significance, ignored in this imitative rush. A 
vessel of sweetness can be spoiled by a drop of kerosene. Accept good things from other 
cultures, the things that help you to control the vagaries of the senses and the mind, to investigate 
and discriminate more dearly. 


Of the many lakhs of people who dwell in this city, you alone had the great chance to come and 
hear the advice given today. So make the best use of this treasure and decide on leading more 
useful lives from this very moment. Listen to all who speak of the glory of the Lord, who is in 
you, as in everybody else. Learn from all the methods by which you can discover Him and reach 
Him. That is my advice to you. 


Madras, 15-8-1964 


25. The bubble of pride 


MAN is a pilgrim towards Dharmakshethra, the pride of dharma, which is the abode also of 
Shaanthi; but, on the way, he is led into the bylanes and alleys of objective pleasure by the 
senses to which he has become .a slave. Man is eager to know about all kinds of trivialities, like 
the details of other lives and other places, but, he has no keenness to know about himself or the 
place from where he himself has come. Man is sunk in ignorance about himself, his source and 
substance, his goal and fate. He reduces himself to just one individual; he, the inheritor of 
unlimited wealth and fortune, feels himself a pauper. Remove this ego boundary; then only can 
you recognise the vastness of yourself. 


This microphone before Me must have been made by someone, is it not? He is not seen or 
known by you, but of his existence, there can be no doubt. Besides, it is certain he must be 
knowing all about this. microphone which he has made. So too, there must be a creator for this 
universe and He must be knowing all about it. This universe is composed of the five elements 
and He is the master of all the five, their manipulator, aware of their subtle characteristics and 
properties. He is the Ashethrajna (Indweller), he who knows this kshethra (field). When I speak 
into the mike, all of you can hear Me clearly; but the tape recorder here, the fan, the bulbs, the 
tube-lights, all operate on account of the self-same unseen electric current that animates each of 
them. 


Diwan Bahadur Raamaswamy Shaasthry, Yogi Suddhanandha Bhaarathi, and others addressed 
you now, each one on a separate note, but, all described only the self-same Kshethrajna, the 
Universal knower, who is known by all names and who is in all forms. He is the impersonal 
person described in a hundred different ways in the Vedhas, the Shaasthras, the 
Mahaabhaaratha, the Raamaayana and the Bhaagavatha. Hold on to Him and live your lives; 
you will not slip. Build your activities on that basis; your career will not cave in. You will also 
develop courage, consolation and faith in yourself and in your destiny. 


Krishna's lessons to control the ego 


Krishna addresses Arjuna in the Geetha sometimes as Kaunteya. Now, what does that appellation 
mean? It means, "One who assimilates quietly" as you are doing now. You are seated 
comfortably under this pandal, in fine weather and you can afford to listen in silence. But 
remember, Arjuna was between two opposing armies, eager for the fray for which they had 
prepared for years with unquenchable vengeance. It requires extraordinary self-control and 
yearning to command concentration at that time. Krishna addresses him as Kurunandhana, 
which means that he takes delight in karma dedicated to the high ideals he had in view. Every 
mode of address of Krishna has an inner meaning and appropriateness, as well as a lesson for 
others. 


Arjuna was trained by Krishna, without break, to control his egoism. Before the 
Mahaabhaaratha war, Arjuna once happened to be at Raamasethu, near Raameshwaram. Arjuna 
spoke of the bridge with some scorn in the hearing of Aanjaneya who was there and said that he 
would have built a bridge of arrows, single-handed and not bothered about subduing the sea and 
getting monkeys to pile up rocks one over the other. Aanjaneya asked him to build one. When 
Aanjaneya walked gently over the bridge, the arrows broke under his weight! 


Krishna suddenly presented Himself and suggested that it should be done in his presence, for 
there was no witness when the challenge was made and accepted. In order to save Arjuna from 


humiliation, Krishna bore the second bridge on His back, when Aanjaneya walked on it, so that 
Arjuna saw the tell-tale streaks of red, where the arrow points had pierced the Lord's back. Thus, 
Arjuna's pride was humbled. He prayed to Aanjaneya to fight on his side at Kurukshethra; but 
Aanjaneya said that the Kaurava army would be too infinitesimal a foe for his prowess; it would 
not be fair to pit him against such a weak enemy; he would only watch the fight, from the flag of 
Arjuna's chariot, he said; and the offer was gladly accepted. 


Egoism is a tough enemy 


Arjuna's pride was humbled during the war in another interesting manner by Krishna. About the 
end of the war, one evening, Arjuna felt proud that Krishna was his charioteer, and his 'servant.' 
He felt that as master, he should get down from the chariot after Krishna and not before Him. So, 
that day he insisted that Krishna should get down first, that he should come down only afterward. 
But, Krishna was adamant; Arjuna must come down first, he said. After wasting a long time, 
pleading and protesting and praying, Arjuna got down, very unwillingly, swallowing his pride. 
Krishna then came down, and, immediately the chariot went up in flames! Krishna explained the 
reason. The incendiary arrows and missiles that had stuck on the chariot were powerless so long 
as He was on it; but, when his presence was no longer there, they set the chariot on fire. Thus, 
Krishna showed that every act and word of the Lord had significance and a purpose, which 
mortals cannot gauge. Egoism is a tough enemy and it requires constant vigilance to conquer it. 


Conquer the foes of the inner realm 


Pride raises its head in every stage and state. Like grass which covers the earth with a green 
carpet, as soon as the rains fall even in places which appeared dry waste, pride thrives upon 
opportunity. Sikhadhwaja, the King, got a feeling of extreme renunciation and left for the forest 
for ascetic practices. His queen Choodala had the spirit of detachment in greater measure, but, 
she did not make a show of it as her husband did. 


The queen put on a male attire, wore ochre, spelt a rosary and sought him in the jungle. 
Discovering him at last, she asked him who he was. The king replied that he was the ruler of the 
realm, that he had given up his riches, his treasure, his army, his court, etc. "For the sake of what 
did you give up these?" asked Choodala. "For the sake of peace," replied the king. But, he had to 
confess that he had not attained it. Then, Choodala taught him that the giving up of "things" will 
bear no fruit, that the desire for things, the pride of possessing things, of having once possessed 
them, has to be given up, that one must be detached from the objective world so that he might 
turn his eyes inward and conquer the foes of the inner realm and become a master of himself. 
When the king attempted to fall at the feet of the new Guru that had come to him, Choodala 
revealed her identity. She was a sathi (virtuous wife) who was the Guru of her pathi (husband); 
there were many such women in ancient times, when they were honoured and educated much 
better than today. 


Tremendous power of mind over body 


You must develop the devotion of the gopees, of Raadha, of Uddhava, of Hanumaan. 
Raamakrishna Paramahamsa did intense saadhana, transmitting himself into the attitude of 
Hanumaan and even his physical attributes changed to suit the role. He developed a small tail 
during the period; such is the tremendous power of mind over body. Many husbands and 
mothers-in-law tried to scare away the gopees from Krishna by spreading scandals about Him 
but how can any one keep the Jeeva (individual soul) and the jagadeeshwara (Lord of the 


Universe) apart? Vyaasa, the great saint, says that words are inadequate to describe the intensity 
of that devotion, the devotion of the gopees to the Lord. They had no egoism left in them and 
that is why they became the supreme devotees of the Lord. 


Learn the art of overcoming the ego from the Shaasthras, whose repositories are here before you, 
in the Prashaanthi Vidwanmahaasabha. There are still many such in our land, in spite of decades 
of neglect and the glitter of other studies. You must have heard of Bhojaraaja, the great patron of 
Pandiths, such as these. He was at first not so considerate; but an incident happened which turned 
his attention to this essential task. The Pandiths of his realm had the grace of God in good 
measure, no doubt; but, they were extremely poor and had to struggle to keep their families 
above starvation. One Pandith was so down and out that he decided to turn thief and steal, not 
from any poor man's house, but from the king's palace itself, for the king cannot be made poorer 
by the loss. He crept into the private apartments at dusk and though he had access to a large 
quantity of silverware and gold cups and plates, he felt that he should carry away with him only 
what he needed most and so, he stole only a few seers of wheat flour. While moving about with 
the bag of flour in a dark corridor he heard noises and so he entered a room whose door was ajar, 
and hide himself under a cot. It was the bedroom of the king! 


Scholars must have faith in their learning 


The Pandith spent the night under a cot, unable to move or cough or sneeze or even breathe 
aloud. An hour before dawn, the king rose and sat upon the bed, reciting aloud a stanza he had 
composed at night, while trying to sleep. There was a gap in the last line which the king could 
not fill; the appropriate word was evading him. The Pandith heard the stanza; he had the word on 
his lips and he could not but shout it out from underneath the cot. He forgot for the moment that 
he was a thief with the tell-tale bag in his hands. The king peeped under the cot, and welcomed 
the Pandith and honoured him for his scholarship and poured largesses on him in sympathy for 
his plight. It was thus that Bhojaraaja learnt of the misery in which the scholars of his kingdom 
lived. 


The Pandiths also must have this faith: that their learning will never injure them, never destroy 
them, that it will sustain them, provided they follow them strictly, gladly, sincerely and in the 
fear of God. The faith in God will be instilled by naamasmarana (the repetition of the Name of 
God)---the remembering of the glory of the Lord and of his infinite mercy and power. 


When a mother is feeding her child, you can see her with the child on her hip and the plate in her 
hand, inducing the child to eat, by means of harsh words or a smile, a joke, a threat or a story, 
diverting its attention, showing the child a dog or a flower or the moon. I have also to adopt the 
same tactics to make you listen and assimilate the valuable food that is so necessary for your 
growth. That is the reason why I relate stories, sing, recite poems, etc., in My discourses! 


Madras, 16-8-1964 


Birth and death are 
two high cliffs between which 
the river of life flows. 


The force of Aathma-shakthi is the bridge 
that scans the chasm, and 

for those who have developed 

that force and faith, 


the floods are of no concern. 


With Aathma-shakthi as their safe support, 
they can reach the other bank, 

braving all dangers. 

Shri Sathya Sai 


26. True remorse and false 


Pandith who spoke about the Geetha explained how it summarised the Upanishadhs. In fact, the 
people of Bhaarath can be said to be residing in Geetha Mahaal itself, whether they know it or 
not. The entrance to that Mahaal is through vishaadha (remorse), discovery of the tawdriness of 
sense pleasures and searching out for something more substantial and satisfying. The most 
satisfying prize is Purushoththamapraapthi--the attainment of the Lord, the Supremest Purusha. 
The purusha is "he who lives in the pura," namely, the body, the physical body. He who lives in 
the universe which is His body He is the Supremest, the Purushoththama. A tiny ant creeping 
over the foot is cognised by your consciousness; that is to say, the purusha had consciousness 
filling the entire body: The Purushoththama has consciousness filling and activating the entire 
universe, which is His body: The individual tree is the purusha, the forest is the Purushoththama. 
The jeeva is the vyasthi, the samashti is God. For the purusha to become Purushoththama, the 
path is yoga, or jnaana won by action and devotion to God. 


He said that there can be no vision of unity when the jeeva is scattered in five directions by the 
five senses which drag him. Really, it does not matter if a person has five rupee coins or the 
same amount in small change. All the five senses subserve the same Purusha. It is one family, 
under one master. The senses need not necessarily be inimical; they can be trained to co-operate 
in the saadhana. Why? Even intellect can become an enemy, if it promotes conceit and 
competitive exhibitionism. 


The gods once imagined that they were able to get victory over the demons because of their own 
prowess. When they were celebrating the victory, a deity appeared before them and cast a blade 
of grass on the ground. It asked Agni to bum it; but it could not. It challenged Vaayu to lift it, but 
he could not. It provoked Varuna to wet it, but, in spite of his best efforts, he could not. Then 
when their pride had been pricked, the deity taught them the Brahma Vidhya (science of 
Brahman), which reveals the inner source of all strength. This is no ordinary story; Agni is the 
presiding deity of vaak (speech) and so it tells us that speech has to be humble, that it derives its 
power only from the basic Universal Principle. Vaayu is praana (the vital air); Indhra is buddhi 
(the intellect). 


A person is judged by his conduct 


After all, it is behaviour and practice that count. In the case of dharma and of saadhana, this is 
specially true. You judge a person by his conduct and character as revealed in his actions. No 
other witness or proof is needed. There were two women, living opposite each other in a bazaar; 
one had five cows and the other had just one. The richer woman was wasteful in habits, very 
extravagant and careless. So, she used to borrow milk from the woman with one cow, and the 
latter was helping her, in spite of the fact that she had a larger family. When she had thus 
borrowed about 50 seers of milk, the cow of the poorer woman died, and she went to the other 
woman and wanted her to return the milk loaned, at the rate of a seer per day. At this, she got 
wild and deposed in court that she had never borrowed any 


"Why should I, owning five cows, go to this woman with one cow for the loan of milk?" she 
asked. The magistrate was a shrewd man who sympathised with the woman whose cow had died. 
He knew how to get at the truth. He gave each of them five vessels full of water and asked them 
to wash their feet and come back to court. The five-cow woman poured all the five vessel-fuls in 
one stream on her feet and came in with all the dirt intact. The one-cow woman cleaned her feet 


by skillful use of one vessel-ful only and she left the other four vessels untouched. The act of 
washing the feet revealed their character and the magistrate had no hesitation in convicting the 
culprit. The one-cow woman must have saved and the five-cow woman must have wasted and 
been in perpetual want. 


The two poison fangs of man 


Arjuna's vishaadha (dejection) is also a case of finely disguised egoism, which revealed a fault in 
his make-up. He was a dheera (hero) until he came on the battlefield and was transformed into a 
bheeru (a coward). It was all a case of I and Mine. "I will go to hell, I would rather beg. I will not 
fight my Guru, my uncle, my cousin, etc." I and Mine are two poison fangs; they have to be 
removed to make man harmless. Once Naaradha told Brahma of a ridiculous situation in the 
world; those who are dying are weeping for those who have died! That was what Arjuna too was 
doing, but, this foolishness is clothed in the language of renunciation and charity. The question 
on the battlefield was not who was the kin of whom, but who was right and who was wrong. 
Fight for justice, fight for truth, fight for these, as a kshathriya (warrior) is in duty bound, and 
leave the result to the Dispenser of all. 


Krishna told Arjuna, "I am surprised that you should weep so, for you are Gudakesha, the 
conqueror of sleep, of ignorance. You do not kill, don't be so conceited as all that; nor do they 
die, 'they' have many more things to do, and the real 'they' are deathless. The sentence of death 
has been already pronounced on their bodies by Me and you have but to carry out My orders." 


You are only an instrument 


Krishna made Arjuna aware of himself; so, the delusion that made him believe that he was a 
great bowman, a foe of Dhuryodhana, etc., disappeared from his consciousness; he came to know 
that he was but an instrument in the hands of the Lord. 


You too must learn that lesson; for, otherwise there is no end to misery. 7hamaso maa 
jvothirgamaya---"Lead me from darkness to light"---is the prayer. Egoism is thamas (darkness); 
sharanaagathi (surrender) is jyothi (light). There is an easy way to illumine the inner 
consciousness and the outer behaviour, with the light of God. Put the lamp of the name of the 
Lord, the illumining flame, on the tongue! That is the door-step; that light will drive out the 
darkness from both inside and outside. Have it ever burning, clear and bright. You will soon 
reach remarkable heights and enjoy happiness, the like of which you cannot get by sticking to the 
senses. 


Madras, 17-8-1964 


27. The I behind the Eye 


This gathering is like the confluence of two rivers, the Yamuna and the Ganga, of people 
speaking Thamil, and Thelugu. I always speak in one language, and I am not inclined to change 
the language to suit the audience. I am sure even those who do not know Thelugu will 
understand the gist of what I say. 


Whenever ashaanthi (absence of peace) overwhelms the world, the Lord will incarnate in human 
form to establish the modes of earning prashaanthi (tranquillity) and to reeducate the human 
community in the paths of peace. At the present time, strife and discord have robbed the family, 
the school, the community, the society, the villages, the cities and the State, of peace and amity. 
Anxiety and fear have contaminated the very 'food one eats. Therefore, the Prashaanthi 
Vidhwanmahaasabha has been established, and Pandiths have been entrusted with the task of 
revitalising the dry sources of Shaanthi, by the teachings contained in the Shaasthras. 


Why is ashaanthi harassing the world? Because of raaga, dwesha and moha (attachment, hate 
and infatuation). These are born out of ignorance, which cause delusion. Things seen in darkness 
cannot be clear; they are mistaken for something else. A rope is mistaken to be a snake; a stump 
is mistaken to be a thief. A piece of glass may be coveted as a diamond. So, this mistaken notion, 
this indistinct light, must go. It can go only if methods of discovering the truth are learnt. That is 
what the Shaasthras teach and what these Pandiths are commissioned to instruct you. They will 
tell you that the outward-seeking senses must be directed inwards; the inner realm of impulses, 
instincts, habits, prejudices, attitudes must be cleansed before God is reflected clear and bright 
therein. How is this to be achieved? The Vedhas explain how. 


Falsity of dualistic experience 


The Vedhas tell you those things that cannot be known by anything else. The word Vedha means 
‘knowledge’, knowledge that cannot be acquired by the senses or the intellect or even by 
unguided intuition. Adhwaitha is something that no one in the dual world can understand. It is 
‘spraapya manasa saha:' "beyond the reach of even the mind." In fact, intellect and mind must 
each be transcended, before one can grasp the magnificence of that Unity. If dhwaitha has to be 
taught, why should the Vedhas take up that task? Dhwaitha ( duality)--the seer and the seen, the 
creator and the created, the good and the bad, the right and the wrong---this is the daily concrete 
experience of every one. Prakrithi (Nature, Creation) is patently dualistic. The Vedhas endeavour 
to open the eyes of man to the falsity of dualistic experience, the reality of the only One, 
Adhwaiha (the non-dual One). They proclaim it, loudly and with enthusiasm. 


Appanna Shaasthry said that the deer, the elephant, the moth, the fish and the bee are drawn to 
death by the senses of hearing, touch, sight, taste and smell respectively. If each of these falls a 
victim to one sense, how much is man to be pitied for he has all the five to drag him to perdition! 
Arjuna too had the same combination of foes. He had the urge to give up his mission and take up 
another's mission, namely, an urge to give up fighting, which is the mission of the kshathriya and 
a temptation to take to sanyaasa (asceticism), which has to 'be earned by further evolution. To 
overcome these obstacles,' one must have both saadhana and a sankalpa, self-effort and grace. 


Lord's hands and feet are everywhere 


Arjuna aspired to give up karma, momentarily fascinated by the ideal of sanyaasa. It is only 
through action that devotion can be deepened. Action cleanses the mind and makes it fit for 


spiritual knowledge. Sravana (hearing) is a thaamasik act, manana (recapitulation) is raajasik, 
while nididhyaasana (concentration) is Saathwik. When you are simply listening, quietly 
receiving without responding, you are just dull (thaamasik); when you turn it over in your mind, 
attempting to assimilate it, then you are active (raajasik); when you are sunk in the sweetness of 
experience in dhyaana you are having pure exultation (saathwik). That is the fruit of bhakthi, this 
nididhyaasana. 


There is no need to fight against the fundamental delusion of dheha bhraanthi (attachment to 
body) with overwhelming force and argument! As Agnihothram Raamaanuja Thaathaachaariar 
said now, the delusion will disappear only if one sits quietly for a minute and analyse for himself 
the world and his experience of the world. Jnaana is not Apraaptha-praapthi, something new 
that' is acquired, like gifts by some one, of money that the donor had, but which the recipient did 
not have. It is praptha-prapathi, like some one giving you a ten-rupee note which you had kept 
between the pages of a book you were reading. You had lent him the book; when you needed a 
loan, you asked him for a tenner; and he gave you back your own note. That is how jnaana 
reveals to you your own glory. The Guru gives you from out of your own hridhaya-pustaka 
(heart-book) the treasure which was there unrecognised by you. You are afraid because you have 
forgotten your own strength. Agnihothram Thaathaachaariar said that the Lord had sarvathaah 
paani paadham: "His hands and feet are everywhere." It is through him that you are able to see; 
your eye required His eye in order to function. It is the reflection the Aathma in the 
anthahkarana (inner consciousness) that activates it and makes it flow through the senses 
towards the objective world. 


Liberation is attained when the Aathma shines in its own glory; it is not a colony or a suburb 
where aristocratic residents have secured good sites in paradise. it is the condition of the jeeva 
which has shed delusion. 


It is not easy to become a bhaktha 


When delusion is shed, grief gets destroyed; joy is established: dukha nivritthi (removal of grief) 
and aanandha praapthi (attainment of bliss) both happen at the same time. The mind is the 
villain; it is' another name for desire; the texture of the mind is just desire; both warp and woof 
are desire and nothing else. If desire goes, the mind disappears. When you pull out all the yarn 
from a piece of cloth, you have no more cloth. So too, pull out desires from the mind, it 
disappears, and you are free. Grief and joy are the obverse and reverse of the same experience. 
Joy is when grief ends; grief is when joy ends. When you invite a blind man for dinner, you must 
set on the table two plates, for he comes along with another man who will lead him in. Grief and 
joy are inseparable companions. 


Bhakthi is very difficult to acquire; do not think it is easy to become a bhaktha. As a matter of 
fact, it is even more difficult than jnaana, for it means complete surrender, full contentment 
whatever may happen. The river must flow back to its source; it must turn back and up. If you 
flow down, you will have to go down, down, down, and water becomes undrinkable. But, do not 
despair; you have to win some day. The sooner, the better. A mango seller may seek to sell four 
for a rupee; if three of them get spoiled, he should not give up hope, for, a person may come and 
offer a rupee for the fourth one. 


Having come here and lists, and secured dharshan and read about Me, put into actual prance at 
least one of the good counsel you got; one stick is enough to light a fire; the entire box of 
matches need not be used. Have faith that you will win; have steadiness in the pursuit of the goat 


Bhakthi has stages in its growth 


For, like the body which passes through childhood, boyhood, adolescence, middle age and old 
age, bhakhi too has stages in its growth. The tender fruit is love, the grown one is devotion and 
the ripe fruit is surrender. There is a type of karma which will melt the heart of the Lord. It is the 
type which does not inflict pain on any one. When Raama met the armies of Khara-Dhuushana 
single-handed, He did so in order to demonstrate his valour and His divinity to the demons and 
the sages of the forest. 


My coming here and speaking daily at these meetings is the consequence of your merit and my 
grace. You had fine dharshana and sravana (audience and listening) in this silent gathering, 
silence which beats even the silence of Prashaanthi Nilayam. I am glad so many of you have 
been prompted by the desire to know about spiritual discipline. The committee too has the 
energy and enthusiasm needed to continue these Sapthaahams; such chances may be given to 
you in a larger number in the coming months. This extensive area round the Venkatagiri Raaja's 
bungalow is always available for your meetings; imagine what a great piece of good fortune it is 
for him. That so many thousands of you could gather here and hear the elevating discourses of 
Scholars and get started on the path of spiritual progress must indeed be very satisfying to him. 
Tile aanandha that you experienced here now is not something that carne from outside; it was 
your own aanandha that you experienced; you are Aanandhaswaruupa (bliss personified); and so 
it welled up from inside your own heart. 


Madras, 18-8-1964 


Have faith in His Grace, and lead a virtuous life, a life devoted to 
the service of the weak, life spent in the thought, about the might 
and glory of God. 

Pray that you may carry out your duty well. God will certainly 
answer your prayers. 


Shri Sathya Sai 


28. Be a care taker 


TODAY this Saptaaha (seven-day discourse)celebrates its Samaapthi (conclusion). That word 
means, according to most people, the final function; but it has a profounder meaning too. 
Samaapthi means, the attainment (Aapthi) of Samam (Brahman). That is the final fruit of 
sravana, manana and nididhyaasana (hearing, recapitulation and contention) of spiritual lessons 
and discourses. In the worldly sense, it means the conclusion of a period of time; in the spiritual 
sense, it means transcending time! 


What is the sum and substance of all these discourses? It is that man has to give up his pursuit of 
sensory objects if he seeks lasting peace and joy. Material wealth brings along with it, not only 
joy but grief as well. Accumulation of riches, multiplication of wants--these lead only to 
alternation between joy and grief. Attachment is the root of both joy and grief; detachment is the 
Saviour. Aashakthi (attachment) is maaraka (death); anaashakthi (non-attachment) is thaaraka 
(saviour). 


A millionaire pays income-tax with tears in his eyes; a headmaster joyfully gives up the furniture 
and laboratory appliances of his school when he is transferred to some other place. Why? 
Because the headmaster knows that he is only the caretaker, not the owner. He is not attached to 
these articles; he knows that they belong to the government. So, too, feel that your family, your 
house, your fields your car, are all the Lord's property and that you are only the trustee; be rely to 
give them up without a murmur at a moment's notice. 


The sacred literature of our country, the Vedas, the Shaasthras, the Ithihaasas, the Manusmrithi 
and the Puraanas contain the drugs to cure attachment and endow you with the strength of 
detachment. Drugs available at other places though they may be more pleasant, cost time and 
money and do not assuage pain. Thyaaga (sacrifice) does not mean that you should not value 
things; you may, even care for them. But, remember always that they are transient, that the joy 
they give is trivial and temporary. That is to say, do not develop moha towards them. Know 
their real worth; do not over-estimate them. 


Subject yourself to vigilant scrutiny 


A thirsty passenger asked the water-career at an up-country railway station whether his leather 
bag was clean. The reply he got was, "As regards cleanliness, all I can say is that the bag which 
pours is cleaner than the bag which takes in." You must care more for the cleanliness of your 
mind and intellect than for the external body. Instead of criticising others and finding faults with 
the actions of others, subject yourself to vigilant scrutiny, understand yourself well, and correct 
your own faults; do not be like the dancer who blamed the drummer for her wrong steps. 


This objective world is as ageless as God. Who knows when God resolved upon the Universe? It 
is as anaadhi (beginningless) as God; we cannot determine when it came into being but we can 
determine when it will end, at least for each of us. When you look into the well, your reflection is 
always there; so far as you are concerned, your reflection can be removed from the well moment 
you decide you will no more seek the well, or pay attention to it. 


The Shaasthri who discoursed today gave a very learned and convincing disquisition on the 
concepts of Aarya and Anaarya as depicted in the Raamaayana; but, you must now concentrate 
on the illness from which you are suffering and on its cure. Foolishness, egoism and sheer 
ignorance are the causes of the misery of man today. The eye, the ear and the tongue lead man to 


anxiety and malice, instead of making him the messenger of peace and harmony. Intellect is the 
root of pride and envy. Vishnu is Jagannaatha at Puri; at Kaashi, Shiva is Vishweshwara (both 
Lords of the Universe); where, then, is there any room for rivalry between those who worship at 
Puri and those who worship at Kaashi? Vishnu is Gopaal (protector of cows) and Shiva is 
Pashupathi (master of cows). Still, the innate urge to fight comes up in the heart of man and he 
uses the names of the Lord as excuses for provoking the fighting he relishes. 


Limit the desires to your capacity 


It is difficult to put into practice even the truths of which you are intellectually convinced. Look 
at Dhrona on the battle-field. When he heard that Ashwattama had been killed, he was so 
overcome with sorrow that he did not pause to consider where he was and for what end; even if 
the news were true he should not have laid down arms, forgetting the task upon which he had 
come to the field. Delusion (moha) induced him to do so; that was the reason for his discomfiture 
and death. 


There are many thousands of people here today, the final day, as there were all these days and so, 
I would like to tell you that it is not what you hear that is beneficial, but what you put into daily 
practice. Develop renunciation about your own needs and wishes. Examine each on the 
touchstone of essentiality. When you pile up things in your apartments, you only promote 
darkness and dust; so also, do not collect and store too many materials in your mind. Travel light. 
Have just enough to sustain life and maintain health. The pappu (dhal) must have only enough 
uppu (salt) to make it relishing; that is to say, do not spoil the 'dhal' by adding too much salt. Life 
becomes too difficult to bear if you put into it too much of "desire." Limit your desires to your 
capacity and even among them, have only those that will grant lasting joy. Do not run after 
fashion and public approval and strain your resources, beyond repair. Also, keep to your own 
dharma and the code of rules that regulate life or the stage you have reached. 


Cow: symbol of selfless service 


Do not place your needs first, your joy first. Consider the needs of others, the aanandha of 
others, as even more important. Respect elders and cultivate cordiality between brothers and 
sisters, teachers and students, employers and employees, etc. 


Tend the cow, for, the cow is the symbol of selfless service of Dharma. That is why when a 
newly built house is ceremonially entered, the owner first takes into the house a cow. Once a 
rishi was taking a ritual bath at the Thriveni Sangham at the confluence of the Yamuna, Ganga 
and Saraswathi. While he was submerged in the holy water some fishermen threw the net and he 
was dragged ashore by them as a rare catch. He was claimed by the fishermen and the rishi told 
the king, who was in a fix, that they should be paid the price of the catch before he could order 
them to release him. Now, what was the price of the "rishi-fish?" A thousand varaahas? The 
rishi protested that he was not so cheap. Five thousand? it was too small, the rishi remarked. 
Then a yogi who was at the palace suggested a fair solution. He said "Give a cow, that is 
enough" and the cow was considered fair compensation for the rishi. That is the measure of the 
value of a cow. 


Observe the rules laid down in the Shaasthras, respect the culture of your land and bring honour 
to the land of your birth. Belief in providence is native to an Indian and fear of sin is inherent in 
him. Nourish your aged parents; revere them. If you honour your mother, the mother of the 
Universe will guard you against harm. If you honour your father, the Father of all beings will 


guard you. This is as true as the fact that if you honour your parents, your children will honour 
you. 


Distinctions of different Incarnations 


While speaking of God as guarding you, I am reminded of a note that some one has sent Me 
from this gathering. The note wants Me to explain why I have not mentioned Sai Baaba in any of 
my discourses so far, though I bear the name as the avathaara of Sai Baaba. Evidently, the writer 
of the note had in mind the people who engage themselves in publicity work of Raama or 
Krishna or Sai Baaba. 


For those who know, Sai Raama, Krishna Vishnu, all are One; the distinction is only in the 
Upaadhi (the form and the name). The power, the glory, the mission, the message are all the 
same, though the particular achievements may be different, according to the needs and purposes 
of the age. That is why, though you believe that Raama and Krishna are the same, you do not 
approve when some one says that Raama lifted the Govardhanagiri or that Krishna broke the 
Shivadhanus (Shiva's bow). I do not appreciate in the least, the distinction between the various 
appearances of Godhead, Sai, Raama, Krishna, etc. I do not proclaim that this is more important 
or that the other is less important. 


There are many attempts to construct mandhirs (temples) for Me, and people go about collecting 
donations for the same. I do not like this enthusiasm. Worship in any temple, any form, under 
any name. You neglect the ancient temples of your town, and start building new ones. And, very 
soon, the new ones too will be neglected, when you discover reasons for building newer ones. 
People who plan the new mandhirs, and form committees, and go about collecting contributions, 
help only to spread atheism, for they are urged by egoism, greed and malice, rather than genuine 
devotion and spirit of service. 


Be an example to others 


Dhana (money) is the currency of the world; Saadhana is the currency of the spirit. When these 
self-styled bhakthas come to you with their lists and books, do not give even a paisa. Why do 
you need a hall to do naamasmarana or japa or dhyaana? The presence of others will more often 
be a hindrance rather than help; make your house itself a mandhir, meditate in your own shrine- 
room. Sing bhajans in your own home; above all, be an example to others by means of sweet 
speech, humility, reverence to elders, truthfulness, faith and steadfastness. That way you will 
bring more into the fold of theism than by establishing societies, collecting donations and 
running mandhirs. 


The Lord looks for sincerity, simplicity and steady joy in the contemplation of His name and 
form. If you keep awake throughout the twelve hours on Shivaraathri (festival of Lord Shiva), 
because of illness, the vigil will not win His favour. If you quarrel with the wife and desist from 
food for one full day, it will not be recorded in the book of God as a fast. If you lose yourself in 
the depths of unconsciousness after a bout of drink, you will not be counted as a person who has 
achieved Samaadhi. No bhuktha (enjoyed) can be a bhaktha (devotee); that is to say, he who has 
an eye on the profit he can derive from service to God, cannot be a true devotee. They praise 
Raama to the skies one day and decry Him the next, if their fortune gets dry. Those who declare 
that Sai Baaba is great and others are small, do not know the elements of spiritual discipline. 
They are unfit for entering the field of spiritual service. I want to warn you against a set of 


people who have emerged nowadays using My name for such personal purposes. Be careful 
about these and treat them as they deserve. 


Treasure in your hearts the Amrithavaakyas (death-destroying message) that you have heard 
during these seven days; ponder over them in the silence of your dhyaana; and, endeavour to 
realise the precious Goal of this invaluable 'Human birth." I bless you all. 


Madras, 19-8-1964 


Past Is past, It won't come. 

Future, you are not sure of. 

The given moment is now (Present). 
This Present is Omnipresent. 

Shri Sathya Sai 


29. Japa and bhaja 


THE Ministers, P. K. Savant and Lakshminarasiah, one from Andhra and the other from 
Maharaashtra, spoke informatively and enthusiastically to you, on health administration and on 
the part that spiritual discipline plays in the upkeep of mental and physical health. 


Savant spoke about the work being done in the Maharaashtra State to eradicate disease in the 
villages and to persuade doctors to settle in the villages. He said that the ancient Ayurvedhic 
system of medicine was more suited to the food habits and the climatic peculiarities of this 
country and since it used the drugs available in the neighbourhood of the village, it was cheaper 
and more easily available. He also said that he has never been a patient so far, because he has 
been able to resist disease by means of strict observance of the rules regarding food, sleep and 
recreation. His faith in Baaba, he said, has proved a great reserve of strength to overcome illness. 


Lakshminarasiah is himself a doctor; he spoke in praise of the quiet atmosphere of the 
hermitages of India and he wanted that the simple living of the ancient seers be revived. He said 
that deep down in the heart of every Indian there is a stratum of faith in Sanaathana Dharma 
which has to be tapped for all kinds of reconstruction. 


Being the anniversary function of the hospital, I have to say something about physical ailments, 
their treatment and cure. Health is sought by man, not for its own sake; he tries to cure his 
illness, for illness means grief; he tries to secure health, for health means joy. He is after 
Aanandha (joy). At all times, through all acts, he seeks only Aanandha. A fish thrown on the 
bank of the lake wriggles and struggles to enter the water again. Man's struggle to get back into 
Aanandha is also of the same nature; he was in Aanandha and he has been thrown into misery. 
His native element is Aanandha. He was calm, and experienced concord, Shaanthi and Prema, 
when he was in the realm of Aanandha. Now, this Aanandha has to be won back, each for 
himself. No other can get it for him. The minister described how the Plan is providing food, 
clothing and shelter for all. But, even those who have these three in ample measure are not free 
from misery; they have not been restored to Aanandha. Aanandha is an inner treasure, won by 
detachment and discipline. We must have a Plan for Aanandha, a Plan for Shaanthi and 
Santhosha (Peace and Contentment). 


Consider first things first 


A person may be sitting on a soft-cushioned sofa in an air-conditioned room, but his heart may 
be burning with unspeakable anxiety and fear. The body is as the cart and the mind as the horse. 
Now, planning places the cart before the horse. It gives first place to body and its needs. 
Consider first things first. Then only can the true culture of India be restored in all its ancient 
vitality. The sages of this land had known of the mine of Aanandha that lies in every human 
heart and they had discovered methods of developing that mine and working that gold. They said 
that if Bhoomaatha (Mother Earth), Gomaatha (Mother Cow). Nijamaatha (one's own mother) 
and Vedhamaatha (Mother Scripture) were revered and fostered, and used as best as they could 
be, happiness is certain and liberation is assured. It is because the people of India followed this 
path that India has remained India and not become either Europe or China. 


Inner harmony is what really matters 


Even the scarcity of food about which the minister spoke is due to the decline in shraddha (faith) 
which was the hallmark of the ryots. When the strength that comes from the enthusiastic pursuit 


of one's profession wanes, when the courage of self-sacrifice is absent, all activity suffers. Have 
faith in the Lord or the Aathmathathwa; it will vitalise you. A fakir went to Akbar and he was 
told that Akbar was at his prayers and so could not give audience for some time. He was asked to 
wait in the ante-room. But, he refused to wait. He said, "What can this beggar get from that 
beggar?" All are beggars at the gate of God. The hero is he who does not beg or cringe or flatter 
or fawn. He knows that the Lord knows best. If it is His will, He will grant food and raiment; if 
not, well, let His will prevail. That is the path of Sharanaagathi or Prapatthi (absolute 
surrender). 


There should be no begging or bargaining; surrender, submit to His will. Some people bargain 
with God and promise to give Him this or that costly article or their own hair, if a certain illness 
is cured or a certain calamity is averted. Lord Venkateshwara or any other form of the Lord does 
not need the hair of your head, but He wants you to respect the plighted word, to whomsoever 
given. 


So in order to be true to your word and not incur the sin of falsehood and deceit, you have to 
offer it to Him, whatever the lapse of time. Shaving off the hair of the head is a sign that you 
have lost the delusion that it is physical beauty that counts; you make yourselves willfully ugly, 
so that you can demonstrate that it is inner harmony, inner charm, that really matters. Sanyaasins 
(ascetics) too have to shave likewise, in order to escape from a similar delusion, and equip 
themselves with the proper attitude. 


Even the best of doctors will not be able to save a man when death calls. Men have to respond to 
that call, whether they are on a pilgrimage to Kedhara or Badhri or Rameshwaram, whether they 
are bridegrooms in the ceremonial seat before the ritual fire. Death brooks no delay; death 
accepts no excuse. Tears do not move His heart, nor can threats keep Him away. 


The waking and dreaming stages 


Emperor Janaka was listening to the soothing strains of music in the Durbar Hall, and he fell 
asleep on his throne. Slowly and silently, the courtiers and musicians slid out of the hall leaving 
him to himself. He had a dream. His kingdom was invaded, over-run, pillaged. He was captured 
and imprisoned. But he escaped, he was wandering alone, in enemy territory, overcome with 
hunger and thirst. The jungle was dark. He groaned aloud. The queen heard the groan and woke 
him! He saw himself as Emperor on the throne, surrounded by servants. Then, a doubt started 
haunting Janaka: "Which is true, that or this?" While dreaming, the dream was as true as the 
experience of the palace when awake. This is true, while awake; that was true, while dreaming. 
Each has only relative value, while at that stage. Nothing is absolutely true, really real. The 
waking experience is as unreal as the dream experience. When you are in deep sleep, there is no 
world at all. When you attain the super-conscious fourth stage, the 'I' alone remains, the 
Universal 'l', which was mistaken even in the sleeping stage as limited and particular. 


Fix responsibility for your health on Him 


A few minutes of quiet thought will convince you of this. But you are too busy with trivialities to 
pay attention to the vital needs. Plant the seed of the name of the Lord, any one of His thousand 
names that appeals to you, in the well-prepared soil of your heart and let it sprout in the silence 
there; water it with love and service to fellowmen; guard it against pests and cattle, the outward 
dragging emotions and passions, by putting up the fence of japa and dhyaana, then you will get 
the harvest of Aanandha. 


Minister Savant said that faith in Sai Baaba is keeping him fit, the mind and body, all these 
years. He was the chairman of Shirdhi Samasthan for many years. His devotion and attachment 
to that body are known only to him and Me. So, when he says that Baaba has been keeping him 
healthy and strong, I know that it is true and that his faith is deep and sincere. If you have sincere 
devotion you will fix the responsibility for your health on Him and He will also accept that 
responsibility. Your mind will be so full of happiness that your body will be fit instrument for 
Saadhana. 


Shri Sathya Sai Hospital Day, Prashaanthi Nilayam, 8-10-1964 


30. Genuine kinsmen 


Pandiths, scholars in Bhaagavatha lore, have spoken to you so far on many sweet and wholesome 
topics taken from that great and inspiring work. The teachings of the Bhaagavatha are the 
mainstay of all bhakthas, the strength with which they walk the path of God. If only the culture 
of India, which is based on the Vedhas and expounded in the Raamaayana and the Bhaagavatha, 
is practised with a true understanding of its value, people can ensure for themselves perpetual joy 
or bliss. Grief is the illness; it has to be cured. The medicine is prescribed in the Vedhas; it is 
taught in the Shaasthras and Puraanas; it has to be discovered and taken in; then the experience 
of Aanandha will certainly follow. Of this, there is no doubt. 


Samskrithi, the word for culture and cultivation, is derived from the word, samskaara, which 
means the dual process of removing the dust and dirt of vice and planting the virtues of Sathya, 
Dharma, Shaanthi and Prema. Samskaara is also the name for certain obligatory rites of 
initiation and purification prescribed by the Vedhas for the spiritual upliftment of man. Their 
number is forty-eight in all; but, they could be reduced to ten and, if needed, even to one; the 
final and fulfilling One, of recognising one's identity with Maadhava or Shiva or Brahman. Nara 
(man) is but Naaraayana (God); Jeeva is Brahman, seen through the limitations of primal 
ignorance. 


Forms of devotion revealed by Bhaagavatha 


Though the tongue of the penitent might repeat the sloka, "Paapoham paapakarmaanaam," (I 
am a sinner, committing sins) the inner Dweller, as the real You, will not agree to the description 
and that self-condemnation! Hence, you turn round in anger when you are accosted as a sinner 
(paapi). In your heart of hems, you know that you are the Pure, the Full, the Eternal. You are the 
limitless, timeless, spaceless Aathma, the changeless, characteristicless Self. That Aathma 
persists in your dreams, in deep sleep, in the varied activities of the waking stage. It persists 
during childhood, youth, middle age, old age and senility. It is the entity which declares itself as 
I: I slept, I dreamt, I awoke, I was a child, I am too old to walk erect, etc. My eye, my word, my 
idea, my plan, my resolution, my experience, you say; thereby, you announce that you are not 
any of these. You are separate from these, but yet, you are involved with them. How to 
experience the Aathma? The Vedhas say, "Sathyam vadha; Dharmam chara." (Speak the truth; 
practise righteousness). 


What is Sathya and what is Dharma? The Raamaayana and the Bhaagavatha reveal this 
knowledge, .through story and example, so that any one, however poor or illiterate he may be, 
can understand it and practise it and benefit by it. So it is enough if these are taken to the door of 
every home in this land. The Bhaagavatha will reveal the fortune of Nandha and Yashodha who 
reared the Lord as their own child; the supramental Love that bound the simple cowherds of 
Brindhaavan with the Lord; the deep self-abnegating devotion of Raadha; the reverent affection 
that Uddhava had towards the Lord; and a variety of other forms of devoted service which brings 
God nearer to man. If you revolve these relationships in your mind and ruminate over the 
sweetness, it is freed from inferior impulses and your faith in the Supreme deepens. 


Remove the dirt of envy from the mind 


You will have to re-live the Bhaagavatha in your own experience; become a Nandha or 
Yashodha fondling the child Krishna; become a Gopee yearning for the company of the Lord, as 


the soul craves for the Supersoul, as the river craves for the sea; become one with the cows 
whom He tended, or the boys with whom He played, or the Murali (flute) which He breathed 
through to give the world the music that captivates. Mere reading the Bhaagavatha is not enough; 
seeing the picture of grand banquet in the cinema will not appease hunger. Eat a meal and it is 
appeased. 


Samskaara means first removing the dirt from the mind. Know that envy is the stickiest dirt! 
You must be happy when others were happy. Raama is said to have been happy when others 
were happy; the Raamaayana says that He was then as happy as if, the event that made the other 
man happy, had happened to Him. That is the true test. Krishna speaks of Arjuna as An-asuya 
(envy-less). What a great compliment! Therefore, He proposed to teach him the mysteries of 
spiritual discipline. Dhroupadhi is extolled as an ideal wife, for she served her five masters, who 
were the five vital airs or Praanas, without the least trace of envy or pride. Sathyabhaama has 
become famous for jealousy and there are many stories current about Krishna's attempts to put 
down this vice and teach her humility. 


Have Love towards the Lord, but do not become depressed with envy when others also love him 
or get attached to Him. The Kuchipudi Party acted the musical dance-drama 'Bhaamakalaapam' 
here very nicely and artistically. They demonstrated both the love and the jealousy of 
Sathyabhaama. Try to have Love without the canker of jealousy. 


You come often to Puttaparthi; you hear the pandiths expounding the scriptures; you observe Me 
and My activity; what is the benefit you derive? How have you improved by all this? Have you 
succeeded at least in recognising your thaamasik and raajasik habits and tendencies? 
Recognising them as deleterious is the first step in removing them. Have you become more and 
more saathwik (serene and poised) as the years go by, or are you the same dull or perhaps, fiery 
individual? If you must know the Lord, you must love the Lord and live the good way. Hatred or 
even indifference will result only in misunderstanding. Develop close association with Him and 
He will reveal Himself to you. 


Grace is won by suffering only 


Walk in the path laid down in the Raamaayana, and Mahaabhaaratha and the Bhaagavatha. 
Proceed along that path, inspite of halts and handicaps, inspite of the approval or disapproval of 
kith and kin, of praise or blame from society. What exactly is praise or blame? Words, sound 
waves coming from across the air; waves that strike your ear. Let them strike only the outer ear. 
Do not welcome them in. 


The other speaker said that the lament of Dhroupadhi in her helplessness brought her the grace of 
the Lord. Yes, grace is won by suffering only. The Incarnation of the Lord comes upon the world 
when Adharma (unrighteousness) becomes rampant. Therefore, adharma has to be suffered so 
that one may have the joy of welcoming the Lord in human form. You can experience the 
swabhaava (nature) and the swaruupa (form) of the Lord through the experience the avathaara 
confers. That is the greatest gain. If the place you must reach is very near, you can just step 
across; if the distance is more, you may need a vehicle, bullock-drawn or horse-drawn; for longer 
distances, you may require a car or a plane. But, the Lord is nearest to you. Slide ajar the door of 
delusion; part the curtain of ignorance; open the closed eye; He is right there, before you! The 
fog of sensual pleasure is hiding Him from you. Switch on the light; the darkness disappears and 
He becomes visible. 


Know your genuine kith and kin 


Revere Knowledge as you revere your father, adore Love as you adore your mother, move 
fondly with Dharma, as if it is your own brother; confide in Dhaya (compassion) as if it is your 
dearest friend; have Shaantham (calmness) as your better half; treat Sahana (fortitude), as if it is 
your own beloved son. These are your genuine kith and kin. Move with them, live with them, do 
not forsake or neglect them. 


Arjuna asked Krishna how the ever-restless mind could be controlled. Living with these kinsmen 
is the best recipe. That is the best atmosphere to ensure the discipline and detachment needed for 
mind control. Mere prayer will not do. You will have to swallow and digest the morsel that is put 
into the mouth; repetition of the name of the dish is of no use. Hearing discourses and nodding 
approval or clapping in appreciation are not enough. The mother feeds lovingly, but the child 
must take it in with avidity and relish. When this earthly mother has so much love, who can 
estimate the love of the Mother of all beings, the Jagathjanani. 


You heard the Bhaagavatha, portions of it, today. All the teaching you need for liberation from 
grief and worry, you can get in that one book. Read it every day, bit by bit, page by page and 
ruminate over the lessons you find there. Gradually, you will earn detachment from worldly 
sense objects; the book will take you in hand and lead you Godword. It is a better guide than 
many of the so-called gurus who ply their trade today. They welcome you with great gusto and 
proclaim the excellence of their wares, condemning those of the others and set about the 
profitable task of hooking you as a disciple, so that they may extract funds from you or fame 
through you. Like shopkeepers clamouring for customers, manufacturers of patent medicines 
competing for customers, they try to sell their prescriptions to you, before you discriminate and 
escape. 


The four-storeyed mansion 


Whichever the book, whoever the guru, whatever the peetam (institution), the goal is the same. 
The path is the ancient one, laid down by the saintly pioneers. Or, you can picture it as a four- 
storeyed mansion, the ground floor being karmayoga (union with God through action) and the 
succeeding ones being bhakthi, jnaana and vairaagya (devotion, spiritual knowledge and non- 
attachment). When it is just a nascent fruit, it is karma. That is, the activity that all are capable of, 
and so it is the first step in saadhana as well. When it matures and is rendered free from egoism 
and greed, it becomes worship, and so, it leads one on to the second floor, bhakthi. When it is 
ripe and sweet, that is to say, when the bhaktha (devotee) achieves complete self-surrender, then, 
it is the acquisition of jnaana; when the fruit drops from the tree, it marks full detachment 
(vairaagya); the fourth floor of God's mansion is then reached. 


Prema (divine love) is the motive power in Karma Yoga; it is the very breath of Bhakthi Yoga. It 
is universal and infinite, in Jnaana; it sees the Lord everywhere and in everything, when 
vairaagya has been achieved. The Bhaagavatha is saturated with the sweetness of prema. 


The sweetness of Krishna is filling this Nature or objective world and Raadha is tasting it and 
being thrilled by it. Who is Raadha? She is Nature, the Prakrithi, the Maayaa Shakthi (power of 
delusion), the Hlaadini Shakthi (power of joy) of Krishna Himself His Mahaabhaava (Great 
State). She has stolen and treasured in her heart the aanandha of Krishna which manifested as 
prakrithi and so, like the owner who roams round and round the house of the thief until he gets 
back his property, Krishna too is ever around Raadha's residence, seeking His aanandha. 


Be like the flute on Krishna's lips 


If you have the capacity to draw the Lord to yourself, He will Himself come to you and be with 
you. Be like the flute, a hollow reed, straight, light, with no substance to hinder His breath. Then, 
He will come and pick you up from the ground; He will breathe divine music through you, 
playing upon you with a delicate touch; He will stick the flute into His sash; He will press his 
lips on it. In His hand, the infinitesimal will be transmuted into the Infinite, the anu (light atom) 
will be transformed into the ghana (heavy solid). 


One day, Krishna pretended to be fast asleep, with the flute carelessly thrown aside by His side 
when Raadha approached the fortunate flute and asked it in plaintive terms, "O lucky Murali! 
Tell me how did you earn this great good fortune. What was the vow you observed, the vigil you 
kept, the pilgrimage you accomplished? What was the manthra you recited, the idol you 
worshipped?" The Flute got a voice through His grace and said: "I rid myself of all sensual 
desire, of envy, greed, of ego, that is all. I had no feeling of ego left to obstruct the flow of His 
prema through Me to all creation." 


Intensify the prema that is within you, as a sacred gift. Expand it so that all beings can share in it. 
Raamakrishna Paramahamsa had that prema; when someone around him was sad, he felt sad; 
when some one was glad, he felt glad.: He made himself one with all, in his great prema bhaava 
(state of Love). Have your prema fixed on the Lord, whether your petty wishes are fulfilled or 
not. Do not let slip the treasure, on some silly excuse or other. When Sai Baaba confers success 
after success on you, you are foremost in singing "Sai Shankara, Sai Shankara;" but let the 
shadow or disappointment fall on you, immediately you turn round and declare, "This Sai is not 
God." 


Kali Yuga is conducive to win liberation 


Your worldly ‘intelligence cannot fathom the ways of Go. He cannot be recognised by mere 
cleverness, which is what your intelligence mostly is. You may benefit from God, but you cannot 
explain Him. You may benefit from electricity, and use it in a thousand ways, but you cannot 
explore and explain its mystery. How it works so and why it works so and not in any other way, 
is beyond your ken. Your explanations are merely guesses, attempts to clothe your ignorance in 
pompous expressions. The mistake is, you give the brain more value than it deserves. The 
Parathathwa (Supreme Truth) is beyond the reach of the brain; standing on the rock, you cannot 
lift it! Standing in Maayaa, you cannot discard it. 


The present age is described in the Shaasthras as very conducive to liberation; for, while in past 
ages, rigorous penance was prescribed as the means, the Kali age in which you are, requires only 
Naamasmarana to win liberation! When the name of the Lord is remembered with all the glory 
that is associated with it, a great flood of aanandha wells up within the mind. Vyaasa himself 
knew this; for, when some sages once went to him to find out which yuga is most conducive to 
success in man's efforts for liberation, Vyaasa anticipated their question and repeated to himself 
aloud, "O, how fortunate are those destined to be born in the Kali Yuga!" It is so easy in this Kali 
age to win the grace of the Lord. 


But, how do you profit by this luck that you have come across? How far have you progressed 
using the chance of these discourses and the dharshan and sparshan (seeing and touching)? 
Bring something into your daily practice, as evidence of your having known the secret of the 


higher life' from Me. Show that you have greater brotherliness, speak .less with more sweetness 
and self-control, that you can bear defeat as well as victory with calm resignation. 


You read these great books, the Raamaayana and the Bhaagavatha many times, for they are now 
easily available at a cheap cost. But, what proof can you give for having profited by the hours 
that you have spent with them? To digest the food you have taken, you have to engage in some 
physical activity. To digest the lessons that you imbue through holy company or through the 
study of great books, practise them in daily life. Manana (recapitulation) is a very important 
saadhana; dwell in silence on the implications of the lessons you have come across. 


Keep up the enthusiasm that has given you the patience to sit through these discourses here for 
the last five hours. Develop it, and seeking the company of pious men, strengthen your saathwik 
(serene and poised) tendencies and progress in the spiritual path. You have my blessings. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 9-10-1964 


31. How old are you really? 


The world is full of sorrow and strife; man tries to avoid these and somehow derive a little joy 
and peace, in the midst of grief and disappointment. It is like digging a well in a sand heap; the 
deeper you dig, the faster it caves in. And, the whole process has to be repeated again. The piles 
of sensual desires overwhelm the aspirant and drag him down into grief. The only means of 
getting lasting joy is bhakthi; that is the best among the yukthis (the paths dictated by 
intelligence). That alone gives the shakthi (the strength needed for acquiring unshakable joy). 
Bhakthi can grow only on prepared ground. The method of preparation is given in the Vedhas, 
which speak also of things that have to be avoided. The Vedhas lay down the lines of conduct, 
the method of living, the ideals to be followed. You may not all be able to study the Vedhas and 
grasp the meaning. But those who have studied and who are following the teachings and who are 
overcome by the joy of that experience are here to tell you, in terms that you can understand. 


Today, for example, we had the Shaasthri, who spoke of the four Purushaarthas (goals of human 
life), as mentioned in the Bhagavadh Geetha, which itself is the essence of the Upanishadhs, the 
latter part of the Vedhas called Vedhaantha. Of these goals, the final consummation is moksha; 
that is the very crux of the problem of life. Moksha means liberation from bondage to both joy 
and grief, which are the obverse and reverse of the same coin. Moksha is the recognition of the 
truth; but, though it is so simple, it required the cultivation of viveka, vairaagya and vichakshana 
(discrimination, detachment and ability), to know the Truth and escape from the temptation to 
hug falsehood. Viveka is necessary to decide what is dharma---the very first of the 
Purushaarthas. Each one must decide for himself the dharma he must choose for his uplift; this 
required viveka, the recognition of the permanently beneficial source of pure and lasting joy. 


Walk with the help of Bhakthi and Karma 


Kurukshethra must be made a Dharmakshethra. Kurukshethra is the field where brothers fought 
over a handful of earth; but, it must be made a field for the uplift of man through the practice of 
dharma. It is for the sake of jnaana that dharma has been laid down. Bhakthi and karma are the 
two feet and the head is jnaana; walk on with the help of these two. 


Now, about vairaagya. When you go to a temple you break a coconut before the idol. Now, if 
you try to break the nut as it has fallen from the tree, will it break? No; the fibrous cover has to 
be removed, and the shell exposed. The fibre protects the shell and prevents the blow from 
affecting the shell. Moksha (liberation) results from the breaking of the mind with all its vagaries 
and wishes. You have to break your mind but, how can you do it, when the fibrous armour of 
sensual desires encompasses it? Remove them and dedicate the mind to God and smash it in His 
presence. That moment, you are free. 


The toughest fibre is anger, it is the stickiest dirt. When you get angry, you forget mother, father 
and teacher; you descend to the lowest depths. You lose all discrimination in the excitement; 
even Hanumantha set fire to the whole of Lanka when he was incensed by the demons who set 
fire to the tip of his tail; he lost sight of the fact that Seetha was in the Ashokavana. It was only 
when he had exulted in achievement for a little while that he remembered it and then he started 
condemning himself for his anger. 


Feel an inseparable unity with the Lord 


Another fatal weakness is dambha (conceit, egoism, pride), the desire to be talked about, to be 
praised; people take delight in tom-tomming their achievements and capacities. This makes them 
ludicrous and pitiable. They want that their names and deeds should appear in the daily papers in 
big bold letters, as big as My head of hair! But it is not in the newspapers that you should 
strive to get attention. Earn status in the realm of God; earn fame in the company of the good and 
the godly, progress in humility, in reverence of elders and parents If you are for ever in the 
primary class poring over A B C and D, how can you make out the meaning of what these 
Pandiths say? These are all subjects beyond the reach of the senses and you must gamer them 
and cherish them in your minds. Practise them and live in joy. 


When the discourses are on here, I find many running about with their beds and reserving space 
for spreading them. When you go to a temple, you see the idol within but your thoughts are with 
your footwear that you had to keep outside the outer gate. These are matters that reveal the 
concentration that you are capable of. Every little point has to be taken care of, lest the benefit of 
saadhana be lost. You cannot get liberation by merely coming here; you cannot get it even by 
dharshana, sprashana and sambhashana (seeing, touching and conversing). You will have to 
follow the instructions, the Aajna (the order) and the directions: 


You will have to follow the path of Raadha, Meera, Gouranga and Thukaaraam. You must feel 
an inseparable affinity with the Lord, as inseparable as the wave and the sea. You are really of 
the same essence, the same taste, the same quality as the sea, though you have the name and 
form of the wave. The Lord is the Saguna aspect (Form with attributes) of the Paramaathma, 
that is the Universe. Butter, when in the milk, is immanent in it, has no separate name~ and form; 
but, take it out and it has a name and form which makes it distinct from mille Ghee too when 
liquid has no particular form, but when it hardens, it has a form. So too Maadhava-thathwam 
(Divine state) when it assumes a form, is Maanava (Man). 


Virtue is the life-breath 


When you are immersed in yourself, you are happiest. The child in the womb is in Soham (I am 
He); but when it is born in the world, it starts the question, Koham (Who am 1?). For it forgot its 
truth; it identifies itself with the body and the senses. Until it becomes a jnaani (person of 
realisation), it will never regain in Soham knowledge. 


Maanava can become Maadhava by engaging himself in Maadhava karma (action dedicated to 
God); he can then discover his Naaraayana thathwam (Divine state). What is the use of doing 
only maanava karma (human action) or even dhaanava karma (demonaic action) and claiming 
that man is divine? Virtue is the life-breath; character is the backbone. Without that, no 
meritorious act will fructify. A characterless man is like a pot with many holes, useless for 
carrying water, or storing it. Renounce and win peace; have and win troubles. 


There was a man living in a ramshackle hut when a huge big storm came along threatening to 
scatter it to the far comers, he sat inside and prayed to Vaayudheva (wind god). "O Vaayu! Abate 
thy fury," but the storm raged wild and furious. He prayed to Hanumaan, the son of the wind god 
Vaayu. "O Hanumaan, soften the fury of your father and save this poor fellow's shelter," and the 
storm blew with even more ferocity. Then he prayed to Raama to command His servant, 
Hanumaan, to persuade the wind god to reduce His overpowering sweep. He found that too had 
no effect. So, he came out of the hut and coolly said, 


"Let it be pulled asunder and lifted by the’ storm out of sight. I do not care." Thus, he got his 
peace of mind back. 


The eagle is pestered by crows so long as it has a fish in its beak. They swish past that so they 
could steal the fish out of its mouth. They pursue the bird wherever it sits for a little rest. At last, 
it gives up the attachment to the fish and drops it from its beak; the crows fly behind it and leave 
the eagle free. So leave off sense pleasures and the crows of pride, envy, malice, and hatred will 
fly away, for they want only carrion. 


Practise renunciation from now on 


The snake moves in curves, not in a straight line; man too when he is following the senses has to. 
move in a crooked path. He has greater poison in him than the snake; his venom is to be found in 
his eyes, his tongue, his hands, his mind, his heart, his thoughts---whereas the cobra has it only in 
its fangs. The cobra raises its hood and sways in joy when it hears music; so too man when he 
realises the stage of niruvikalpa--steady unchanging establishment in the Ultimate Reality--- 
dances in heavenly bliss. 


Practise renunciation from now on, that you may set out on the journey when the call comes, you 
don't know when. Or at that moment, you will be in tears, when you think of the house you have 
built, the property you have accumulated, the fame you have amassed, the rifles you have won. 
Know that all this is for the fleeting moment: develop attachment for the Lord, who will be with 
you wherever you go. Only the years that you have lived with the Lord have to be counted as 
life; the rest are all out of count. An old grandfather of seventy was asked by his seven-year old 
grandchild, "Grandpa! How old are you?" and the old man replied, "Two!" The child was struk 
with wonder and looked a picture of doubt. The old man replied, "I have spent only the last two 
years in the company of the Lord;, until then I was plunged in the marshland of pleasure 
seeking." 


Realise the Indweller in the body 


Bhrigu asked Varuna what the Lord does and Varuna (rain god) replied, Thapas (penance). For, 
he explained, "He is in all the five kashas (sheaths)--the Annamaya, the Praanamaya, the 
Manomaya, the Vijnaanamaya and the Aanandhamaya koshas (sheaths of material, vital energy, 
mind, knowledge and bliss). He digests the food in the body and the food in the mind. He is ever 
active, creating, fostering and transforming. You must realise the dhehi (the Indweller), in the 
dheha (body) and the Naami (person designated) by the Naama (name). There was a wife who 
got bangles of gold made when she became a widow-, for, she argued, her husband had now 
become indestructible like gold, whereas he was, while alive, breakable, like the glass bangles 
she wore then. He had merged in the Akshara Brahman (Indestructible Supreme Reality). 


Develop prema (divine love) towards the Lord, the Parama-prema (Supreme divine love) of 
which He is the embodiment. Never give room for doubts and hesitations, for questions to test 
the Lord's Prema. "My troubles have not ended; why? Why is it that He did not speak to me? 
How is it I did not get a room for staying here? Why did he not call me?" you whine! Do not 
think that I do not care for you or that I do not know you. I may not talk to you, but do not be 
under the impression that. I have no prema. As a matter of fact, it is to give you the chance of 
dharshan that I move along the verandah from this room to that. Whatever I do, it is for you, not 
for Me. For, what is it that can be called Mine? Only you. 


Hold fast to your chosen deity 


So, do not get shaken in mind; do not allow faith to decline. That will only add to the grief you 
already suffer from. Hold fast--that must be your vow. Whoever is your Ishta dhevatha (the 
chosen deity)--Vishnu or Raama or Shiva or Venkateshwara--hold fast to Him. Do not lose the 
contact and the company; for, it is only when the coal is in contact with the live embers that it 
can also become live ember. Cultivate nearness to Me in the heart and you will be rewarded. 
Then you too will acquire a fraction of the Supreme Prema. This is the great chance. This chance 
will not come your way again, beware of that. If you cannot, if you do not, cross the sea of grief 
now, taking hold of this chance, when again can you get such a chance? Really you are the 
fortunate few-, out of millions and millions of people you have come, though no one specially 
invited you to be present here. That is what I call the mark of destiny. 


Now, engage yourself in spiritual discipline, spiritual thoughts, spiritual company. Let the past 
go its way. At least from now on, seek to save yourself Never yield to doubt or unsteadiness. 
That is a sign of ignorance. Have faith in any one Name and the Form indicated by that name. If 
you revere Shiva and hate Vishnu, the plus and the minus cancel out and the net result is zero. I 
will not tolerate the slightest hatred of any Name or Form. The wife has to revere the husband, 
but that does not mean that she has to hate his parents or brothers or sisters. 


You can never attain the Lord through hatred of one or more of His many Forms and Names. If 
you throw contempt at the God that another reveres, the contempt falls on your own God. Avoid 
factions, quarrelling, hating, scorning, fault-finding; they recoil on you. You find fault in others 
because you have faults in you. Remember every one is a pilgrim towards the same goal; some 
travel by one road, some by another. Raavana, Sisupaala, Danthavakra---they too reached the 
feet of the Lord, by inviting Him to end their earthly careers. 


Seek the good in others 


Learn to speak little and to speak soft. That will reduce the chances of getting angry. Seek the 
good in others and the evil in yourself. When I am defamed, I never get incensed, for it is only 
the tree full of edible fruits that is attacked with sticks and stones. Moreover, without scorn and 
contempt, greatness will not shine and Spread. It has always been so, whenever Avathaars have 
come. When you hear the word, Rasala mango, you conceive of a sweet juicy fruit; but, when 
you have the fruit actually in hand, you are pestered by doubts whether it is really Rasala, 
whether it will taste sweet or sour. But, I never care for praise or blame; I just discard both. I am 
ever intent on the task for which I have come, the laying down of Sathya maarga (path of truth), 
of Dharma and the spread of the knowledge and practice of Dharma. 


The Prashaanthi Vidhwanmahaasabha is just one of the instruments for this task: the task of 
making the Kali yuga (present Iron age), a Kritha yuga (past Golden age). Stage by stage as the 
task unfolds, the sound of detractors will also cease; when fully fried, the pappad will make no 
further noise. Only the frying pappad makes noise. You too should avoid contact with the 
unfried minds; do not develop either hatred or envy. Have love and charity towards all. 


Know what exactly is your duty 


This aged Shaasthry is a sweet fruit, ripe with age and experience; he knows and has actual 
experience of the life laid down in the Geetha. When I asked him to share his wisdom with the 
world, he was indeed happy beyond words. He is exulting over the opportunity he has got to 


partake in the revival of Vedhic scholarship and in the re-establishment of Dharma. He knows 
and I know, and no one else knows, the intensity of his joy at the chance he now has secured. He 
has but one desire in him now, a very sacred desire: to see the era of Dharma established on 
earth through My Sankalpa (Will). What a rare relationship is this, between him and Me! It is 
Sanaathana Sambandha (eternal relationship); hence he got Me. 


Some things happened today to make Me speak in this strain and I wanted all of you to know 
what exactly is your duty to yourself and to others. There are some men who are like moths, who 
must bore through whatever they come across, silk or cotton or wool; there are others who are 
like bees, who seek only honey. The lotus attracts bees from afar, but the frogs that skip around it 
on the lake know nought of its beauty or fragrance. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 10-10-1964 


32. The path to the presence 


This day, three learned Pandiths (scholars) spoke on Adhwaitha (philosophy of Non-dualism) 
and Avathaara Thathwa (essential nature of Incarnation) and on the Lord of Mathura. They have 
appeased your hunger in full. When the stomach is full anything extra is bitter. But, a bit of 
pickle may be welcome. That I shall give you now! 


Birth as a human being is a unique chance for living beings. For, man is endowed with 
discriminating intelligence, the power to reason out the best among alternative courses. Man is 
far from the Pashu (animal), doser to Pashupathi (Lord of beings). He should not relapse into 
Pashuthwa (animality). Listening to Krishnamurthy Shaasthry expounding the Bhaagavatha--the 
sweet story of Krishna---told in sweet Sanskrit and explained so sweetly, you should imbue the 
prema with which the story is filled. 


The Bhaagavatha has the majesty of seelam (virtue); it has the majesty of kriya (action); it has 
also the majesty of bhaava (feeling). By majesty, I mean Udhaaththatha (elevation). What a 
grandeur you witness in the Raamaayana, for example! When Raavana fell, Raama sent 
Lakshmana to the place with a message to see that he is treated like the Emperor of Lanka and 
not a despised enemy. Lakshmana when he was called in to identify the ornaments of Seetha 
contained in the bundle she had thrown on the ground during the flight to captivity, declared that 
he could identify only the toe-rings of his sister-in-law; he saw only those ornaments, for he 
prostrated every day at her feet, as the consort of the elder brother is, according to the 
Shaasthras, equal to one's own mother. Now, it is impossible to find such virtue holding sway 
over men's minds. Now it is egoism, pride and greed that sway them. 


Importance of moral standards 


Man has lost the fear of a fall; he has become worse than animals. It was not like this in the past. 
During previous centuries, Rajput women immolated themselves rather than fall into the hands 
of wicked foes. When Hanumaan offered to take Seetha on his shoulder back to Raama, the 
virtue of Seetha would not allow her to accept the offer. She had her husband's reputation in 
view. She said that it would best suit her husband's fame if he himself avenges the wrong and 
rescues her. Hanumaan's taking her, would be a repetition of what Raavana did, for he too stole 
her secretly while Raama was away. She did not consider her immediate relief as more important 
than the implications of that step to her virtue and her husband's fair name. That is what I call 
Seelodaaththatha (virtue in exaltation). 


Or, take the Mahaabhaaratha. The Yaksha who guarded the lake had killed all the four brothers 
and they were lying on the ground. Dharmaraaja, the eldest brother, went there to slake his thirst 
and the Yaksha warned him, too. He challenged him to answer his questions, just as he had asked 
the others; but since he replied correctly, the Yaksha was pleased to grant him a boon; he could 
bring back to life one among the four who lay dead! And, whom did Dharmaraaja select? Not 
Bheema who would be his right hand in the coming battle against the Kauravas; not Arjuna, who 
was indispensable as a bowman of the highest attainments; but, Nakula, the son of his 
stepmother, Madri. Even the Yaksha was surprised. He asked him the reason why. Dharmaraaja 
said that his mother had him as the one surviving son but his stepmother too should have a son 
alive. That was the measure of his attachment to Dharma, to virtue, to normal standards. Then, 
people lived for the sake of Dharma; now, the ideal is dhana (riches). When Duryodhana had at 
last to be encountered a single combat, he himself selected a foeman worthy of his reputation, 


Bheema, when he could as well have chosen a weaker rival. It was considered improper to fight 
with a weaker foe. 


Gopees' prema to Krishna was super-physical 


It all lies in the vision that you command, that you have equipped yourselves with. One of the 
Shaasthrys spoke of certain doubts which he himself had felt about Me, doubts which kept him 
away for some years. The love of the Gopees towards Krishna has led many ignorant people 
enmeshed in worldly attachments and physical attractions, to turn their faces away from God. 
Before passing judgement on any subject, you must investigate closely. 


The prema of the gopees towards Krishna was super-physical, the love of the soul for the Over- 
soul, of the river for the sea. Persons deep in this type of love see nothing else, hear nothing else; 
they behave like mad persons, as the world goes. Their joy when they feel his presence is as 
supreme as their grief when they feel they are deprived of it. That is why among the songs of the 
saints, you have Nindhaasthuthi also; that is to say, songs, which blame Him for being cruel, 
partial, negligent, etc.! 


You may know that the Lord of the Holy Shrine Shrisailam is called Mallikaarjuna, the white 
jasmine; and the Goddess, the Consort, is called most appropriately, Bhramaramba, the Bee! For 
the bee is drawn inescapably to the flower and it forgets itself while tasting the Glory of the 
Flower. The union of Jeeva and Brahman is of the same significance as the union of Krishna and 
Thrishna---Krishna and the Thirst, the Lord and the Love. 


Doubt leads to perdition, spiritual ruin 


The children of the Sanskrit School enacted the play Maarkandeya yesterday and you saw the 
boys who took the role of Marudvathi and Maarkandeya completely immersed in the role and so, 
they were able to make you also feel every emotion they expressed. You must fill yourself with 
the Form and the Glory of the Lord; you must not be aware of anything else. Then, you too can 
become Maadhava. 


There are two eight-syllabled axioms in the Geetha, which you must take to heart: Shraddhaavan 
labhate Jnaanam and Samshayaathma vinashyathi. The first tells you that the person who is 
steady in his faith gains the knowledge of the path of liberation and the second warns against the 
sinister consequence of "doubt"; doubt leads to perdition, spiritual ruin. Dwell on these axioms 
and practise the spiritual discipline of Naamasmarana, Japam or Dhyaanam. This is the pursuit 
that is worthy, not the pursuit of fame, nor the friendship of the famous. 


You ask for grace, which is available only at a very high cost; but, you pay only trash. It is sheer 
avarice, like asking a gourd as extra, when what you have paid is for a bean! You may claim that 
you have been coming to Puttaparthi for ten or twelve or sixteen years or that you have even 
stayed here long; but, it is not the years that matter; it is the depth to which the roots of karma 
have grown in previous births. They decide the ears of corn that you have to live upon. It takes a 
long time and systematic saadhana to clear the field of all those growths---the saadhana, as the 
Shaasthry said, of Karma and Upaasana which leads to Jnaana. 


Three stages in spiritual awareness 


This is the meaning of the injunction that you should dip thrice in succession, when you take a 
bath in any holy river. The first dip is to cleanse the sthuula sareera (the gross physical body); 


the second is to cleanse the suuwkshma sareera (the subtle body), of the praanamaya, the 
manomaya and the vijnaanamaya koshas (sheaths of vital energy, mind, knowledge) and third is 
to cleanse the kaarana sareera (the causal body) or the vijnaanamaya kosha, with just a tinge of 
maayaa still left. They are also meant to consecrate the karma and the upaasana saadhanas and 
confer jnaana. Dhwaitha, Visishtaadhwaitha and Adhwaitha are also only three stages in 
spiritual awareness. 


Somasekhara Shaasthry spoke of the Dhwaitha and Adhwaitha (dual and non-dual) attitudes 
which colour people's outlook in every field. But, they are not distinct;, they are stages of mental 
transformation. The fruit is the same; the soil and the sun make it reach the ripe stage, through 
the intermediate stages of tender fruit and mature fruit. When you realise that the Lord is at the 
address that He has given towards the end of the Geetha in the 61st s/oka of the 18th chapter, 
namely, "Jshwarassarvabhuthaanaam hriddese, Arjuna, thishtathi," that "He is in the heart of 
every being," then you know the one, with no other. 


To realise the Lord in every being, you must cultivate Prema and drive out the bats that infest the 
dark caverns of your heart, the bats of hate, envy and malice. Let the light of Prema illumine 
your thoughts, your words, your movements, your activities, your judgements. When you 
become transmuted into Prema, the Lord who is Premaswaruupa, will reveal Himself to you, 
and play on the Flute, awakening your higher consciousness in the flood of Universal love. 


Saadhana is essential because the effects of karma have to be removed by karma alone, as a 
thorn is removable only by another thorn. You cannot remove it by a knife or a hammer, or even 
a sword. The knowledge that the world is unreal was itself spread by Shankaraachaarya by 
means of activity in the unreal world, the establishment of mutts the writing of books and 
partaking in disputations. You cannot desist from arm; only, you have got to take care that it is 
saturated with prema and promotes the welfare of the world. 


The grand combination 


Tomorrow again, the path of the Presence of the Lord will be explained by these Pandiths as 
well as by Me. Whoever may speak, whatever the text, the substance is the same in no other 
place can you have this grand combination: Pandiths who expound, as if to their own kith and 
kin, the great truths contained in the scriptures with such faith and devotion and a congregation 
of listeners which listens with devoted avidity, eager to learn and practise what they learn. 


You must be devoted, as devoted as a boy who studied in the Aashram of Dhoumyarishi. When 
the guru was conducting his lesson assiduously, the rain came in torrents and the boys ran helter- 
skelter to roll up their beds or collect their clothes or save their kusa grass bundles. But, one boy 
reasoned out within himself:, we had heavy rain last evening too, so this downpour will certainly 
damage the dike. So, to save the two acres of land that the guru owned, he went and laid himself 
across the breach. You must so act that the heart of the Guru melts at your devotion. Only that 
will cleanse the mind of evil and vice. If you develop devotion and steady faith you will achieve 
the Glory of Self-realisation. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 11-10-1964 


After long searches, here and there, 


in temples and in churches, 


in earths and in heavens, at last you come back. 
Completing the circle from Where you started, 
to your own soul, and find that 

He, for whom you have been seeking 

all over the world, 

for whom you have been weeping and praying, 
in churches and temples, 

on whom you were looking as the mystery of all mysteries, 
shrouded in the clouds, 

in the nearest of the near, is your own self, 

the reality of your life, 

body and soul. 

Shri Sathya Sai 


33. Faith is the foundation 


This day you heard the Pandiths tell you about the supremacy of the Vedhas and the need for 
establishing Dharma. No one can break the limits of Vedhas and Shaasthras and speak here; in 
fact, all spiritual subjects are subsumed in the scriptures. All knowledge is derived from the 
Vedhas. You cultivate your divinity in proportion to the Saadhana you do and the handicaps you 
have brought down from previous births. It is above and beyond the intellect and incapable of 
being reached through the senses. Divinity is its own law; it is independent of all restrictions and 
modes. The senses can each perform only one operation for the gathering of knowledge: the ear 
can inform you of sound, the eyes can speak of colour, the tongue of taste, etc. But, the Divine is 
beyond all sensations and systems. 


Srishti, Sthithi and Laya (creation, sustentation and dissolution) are the three forms of the Divine 
will; you have to penetrate the inner meaning of Srishti, by means of Karma Yoga; you have to 
grasp the significance of sthithi, by means of Bhakthi Yoga and when you master the Jnaana 
Yoga, you arrive at the experience of Laya, of manifoldness in the One. Bhakthi makes you 
aware of the Lord who sustains and supports every being; it is Prema, which is Nithya, Sathya 
and Nirmala; that is to say, Love which is unchanging, sincere and pure. There is no one who is 
devoid of bhakthi; deep down in his core, every one has the feeling of kinship with all creatures. 
It is this that makes a lonely man miserable, that makes every one likeable to some one or other. 
If you have no love; you are like a lamp without the flame, blind and blinding. Love of the pure 
type is unmixed with hate, untampered with greed. 


Karma is necessary for liberation 


Faith is the foundation for this type of devotion, faith in doing good, faith in punya and paapa 
(merit and sin), so that you examine each act in the light of its long-distance consequences, and 
lastly faith, in the series of births through which the present life is built up. Pilgrimage was, in 
the years gone by, a long and arduous process, and so, the pilgrim was educated by it in humility 
and fortitude. Those who came with Me to Badhri were free from fear for the road, and so, they 
had more time to dwell on Naaraayana and His glory. 


Thirupathi has been made so easily accessible now that it is fast being turned into a paradise for 
picnickers! The sacred hills have been scarred and the full throated exclamation, "Govindha" 
"Govindha" as the pilgrims climb the steps have disappeared. People go in aeroplanes to Kaashi 
and return after a quick round of the ghats and shrine, in a few hours. The silent communion with 
the Divine and the slow infiltration of elation into the inner consciousness have been lost. 


Only through karma can liberation be effected. When karma is prompted by bhakthi, it is 
samasaara bhakthi (devotion of the worldly); when jnaana also blossoms a little, it is 
vaanaprastha bhakthi (devotion of the recluse); when bhakthi fructifies into jnaana, then it is 
Sanyaasa bhakthi (devotion of the ascetic) or Moksha (liberation) itself. Without karma, progress 
is very difficult. 


Faith is essential for consummation of saadhana 


The jnaani too has to do karma, but, like swans coming out of the water, they can swish their 
feathers and wings and be as dry as when they entered it: karma will not affect them at all. They 
do it with no ego, with no desire. It is their nature to wish well of the world and to engage in 
work that promotes the welfare of the world. When a woman who is pregnant is widowed, she 


does not immediately rid herself of the marks of a married woman, for she can discard the nose- 
screw, the ear-rings, the mangala suuthra (marriage string worn by married women), etc., only 
after the child is born! Until then, though she has the outward marks of a woman happy with her 
husband, she knows she is a widow. 


The jnaani is also of the same type; he knows that he is free, but, to the world he appears bound. 
Frothy youth, suffering from the fever of cynicism, laugh at jnaanis and treat them with 
dishonour. There is no use blaming them, either. The elders set the example and what else can 
they do? 


Prema is the seed; thanmayathwam, ovet-powering experience of merging, is the tree; 
inexhaustible Aanandham is the fruit. For this consummation, faith is essential. Look at Arjuna! 
When the choice was placed before him to decide which he should receive---the army of 
redoubtable heroes belonging to the Yadhava clan or Krishna alone, unarmed and refusing to 
fight--he asked only for Krishna! He knew; he believed; he was saved. The same choice India 
has to make even now, when the Lord has appeared in His swaruupa here. What does it profit the 
country if it accumulates money, gold and grain? The aanandha, derived from the worship of the 
name and form which arouses spiritual joy, is far more desirable than these. Want of faith is the 
source of weakness in all fields. 


Establishing the reign of Dharma 


In the days of Ashoka, there was a poor man living in Buddhagaya. His name was Sishupaala. 
Though very poor, he stuck to dharma and was never known to forsake that path, in spite of 
strong temptations. Ashoka slipped into his house one night and craved for food and shelter. 
Sishupaala was surprised that there was someone poorer than himself, He welcomed him and fed 
him with his own share of the meal; he asked his son to press his feet, to give relief to the fired 
limb. When Ashoka spoke praising him for his hospitality, he protested and said, that it was 
wrong to take such extra notice of what was his duty. "It is our dharma," he said. Ashoka asked 
him what he meant by dharma and when Sishupaala said that the land was immersed in adharma 
and that the Emperor was not fostering dharma, Ashoka who was incognito, challenged him. 
"What Ashoka could not do, can you achieve?" he asked. Sishupaala replied, "Of course I shall; I 
bend only to God. I am not afraid of man. I care only for dharma." The guest laughed and 
changed the topic; but Ashoka had no sleep that night. He rose in the early morning and went out 
of the hut, while it was still dark. 


Next morning, a gorgeously dressed courtier appeared before the hut and inquired whether he 
had, by any chance, blamed the Emperor to someone during the night. Sishupaala said that he 
had done so, but that what he said was correct. The courtier was entrusted with the mission of 
bringing him to the palace, where Ashoka appointed him as Dharmadhevatha (deity of 
Righteousness), to establish the reign of dharma in the land. He told him, "If the slightest 
deviation from dharma happens anywhere you will be executed, beware. I shall give you all the 
military help you need to transform the conduct of the people." Sishupaala agreed. He said: "I 
shall do so; I do not need your army. I have full trust in God." Ashoka was rather disappointed 
that the man placed no trust in him! But he decided to watch the progress of this new experiment 
in administration, which was to last for ten days. 


And the unexpected happened. There was no theft, no breach of the moral code, no violation of 
the Shaasthras anywhere in the land. Young women decked with jewels could go from one end 
of the empire to another, even during nights, without any fear of molestation or theft. 


Emperor Ashoka submits to Dharma 


Ashoka really got envious of the capacity of the new administrator. He went incognito one night 
to the house of a prostitute and banged at the outer door, demanding entry. The lady protested 
and refused to admit him, since Dharmadhevatha ruled the land. There was an altercation 
between Ashoka and the hefty watchman at the door, which became hot. A fight ensued, and the 
watchman was slain. 


That was on the seventh day of the new regime. Ashoka had it announced that since a murder 
had been committed in the town, the man from Buddhagaya had to be executed. 


The news spread like wildfire and every one wept at the plight of the good man. Sishupaala, 
however, had discovered that it was no less a person than the Emperor who had done the deed; 
he had actually visited the house where the incident happened and recorded details of the persons 
involved. So, when he was about to ascend the steps and place his head on the block, he shouted 
"Stop," and asked that Ashoka himself be brought to the place of execution, for, it was he who 
had killed the watchman. Ashoka too was prepared; he had made an image of himself in gold and 
that was beheaded in his place, as the Shaasthras allow. The gold was distributed as gifts, and 
dharma was observed. 


Contribute your individual effort 


You must use all the talents awarded to you in a prayerful and humble mood. Until then, you 
have no right to seek the help of the Lord, His intervention. A devotee of Hanumaan was once 
driving a cartload of grain to the market. On the way, the wheel got stuck and the cart could not 
be drawn forward by the bullocks. The cart slanted too far to one side and the bags fell on the 
ground. The devotee sat on the ground and started praying to Hanumaan. He finished reciting the 
Sthothras, the !08 names, and even the 1008 names. The cart did not regain balance. He began to 
blame Hanumaan and started reviling Him for not coming to his rescue. Hanumaan appeared and 
took him to task. "Foolish fellow; instead of applying all your strength on the job, you have 
reviled Me, for not doing what is really your task Come on, put your shoulder to the wheel; 
engage in karma; contribute purusha prayaithana (individual effort)." 


Karma cleanses the mind, if it is done as a dedicatory act, the consequence being left to the Will 
of the Lord. Repentance saves even sinners from perdition. No ceremony of expiation is as 
effective as sincere repentance. The shop-keeper may give short measure; but, he will not accept 
less cash. The bill has to be paid in full. Pay it through repentance. You cannot deceive the Lord 
by insincerity or by ruses. Unless you correct yourself by detachment and sacrifice, you cannot 
reach God. Give up egoism; then only you can see him. 


Raama taught dharma, treading in his own life every one of its steps. Krishna paid more attention 
to teaching it through Arjuna. Small people who cannot overcome their egoism dare judge 
Krishna and point the finger at what they call his "pranks." Such men were found then, as well as 
now. They are ever engaged in seeking faults in the great. They dare declare that the Lord should 
be such and such, of this form and with such characteristics, as if they could ever glimpse the 
edge of His glory, as if the Lord will assume the form these men decide. 


Feel you are the instrument of God's Will 


The Lord can be understood only if you approach Him, develop attachment for Him, have faith 
in Him, and maintain unswerving loyalty to Him. He is understood only when you feel that you 


are but the instrument and that He wills every little movement everywhere. Who is there so bold 
that he can say, "the Lord must wear only this dress, the Lord must act only in this manner?" 
Who can limit His glory or set its direction! He is immanent in all beings and He gets done all 
activities through them, just as electricity makes the bulb shine, the mike to transmit the voice, 
the stove to cook, the refrigerator to cool. 


The river of life has four causeways, while the river Vankaperu, which flows in this taluk, has 
two: one on the road to Penukonda and another on the road to Dharmaavaram. The causeways 
are brahmacharya, grihastha, vaanaprastha and sanyaasa (celibate, house holder, recluse and 
monk). Of these, the grihastha causeway has sunk and become impassable. Repair it and become 
good grihasthas; then the path of life is smooth for the journey. 


On the road to Prashaanthi Nilayam from Kothacheruvu, the Bapanapalle culvert has broken 
down. But the villagers cannot of their own accord reconstruct it according to their sweet will. It 
has to be reconstructed by the very authority that first erected it. So too, when dharma has gone 
into disrepair, He who laid down the dharma has to come again and get it repaired. The four 
bridges were laid by the Lord, and He has come to rebuild them now. The engineers and others 
are here, in the Prashaanthi Vidhwanmahaasabha; very soon, the rebuilding work will be 
completed and the inaugural ceremony celebrated. 


Cultivate faith and detachment. Revere elders and take to heart the advice they give, out of their 
mature wisdom and experience. Cross the ocean of death and birth and be "children of 
immortality," (Amrithasya Puthraah), every moment of your lives. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 12-10-1964 


Once you rise to the 

higher level of consciousness 

and live at that level, 

all those events cease to have the same meaning 
and so have less and less effect on you. 

Instead, you remain happy and calm at all times, 
merely observing events 

as they come and go, for that is what they do. 
Shri Sathya Sai 


34. Neither different nor diminished 


Pandith spoke now about the many forms of bhakthi: Nishkaama bhakthi, paraa bhakthi, 
madhura bhakthi, (desireless, supreme and sweet devotion), karma bhakthi (devotion in action), 
etc. When you claim to have bhakthi, the question naturally arises, where have you placed your 
attachment, your affection, your unswerving loyalty and why. If you are drawn towards pleasure- 
giving objects and other material gains, you are in for unending worry, fear and anxiety, 
ashaanthi (absence of peace), in fact. The happiness they contribute is as unreal as the happiness 
you derive from similar things in your dreams. The experience of the waking stage is as unreal 
and fleeting as the dream. The seen is a dream; the unseen is the real. There is a mixture of 
reality and unreality in the variety of the universe. That is why it deludes; that is why joy and 
grief are fleeting. 


Bhakthi is really unswerving loyalty to God with form and attributes and a name. You can grasp 
with the reason that you are endowed with, only concrete name-attribute-full things. So, God has 
to appear before you with form and attributes (sakaara, saguna, swaruupa) so that you can love 
Him and serve Him and follow Him and get liberated by Him. But when He comes with form, do 
not think He is either different or diminished. Ghee when it is solidified is white and granulary. 
When it is heated it is a colourless liquid, having no shape or form. The niraakaara (formless) 
becomes sakaara (with form), when it is exposed to cold. So too, in the cool recesses of the 
bhaktha's heart, the niraakaara is rendered sakaara. 


When the formless transforms itself, it may appear as Vibhavaakaara or as Swaakaara (endowed 
with some particular glory or power or as the full manifestation of itself). That is to say, the 
avathaara might manifest only that part of the Divine glory as was essential for the task which 
brought the Form, or it might exceed the limited purpose for which it came and shine in full 
grandeur. Raama is a good example of the first and Krishna of the second. Krishna was not 
satisfied with the killing of Sishupaala and Dhanthavakra, the two demons who were formerly 
Jaya and Vijaya, or even with the overwhelming of various other evil persons who infested the 
world then. 


Fame and ill-fame go together 


He laid down in the Geetha and in the upadesha He gave to Uddhava and others, the 
fundamentals of spiritual life and the ways of removing primal ignorance, as a step to human 
liberation, ways that can be followed by various sections of the human community, from 
illiterate cowherds and milkmaids to learned scholars, practised saadhakas, ritualistic experts, 
adepts at social service, and experienced philosophers. 


Jonnalagadda Sathyanaaraayanamurthy gave you in his speech a fine description of the pangs of 
separation which agonised the village folk, when the Lord kept away from them, even for a short 
while. When they espied a dark-blue cloud in the sky, they shed tears of joy, for it reminded 
them of the Krishna they adored. But Krishna was scandalised in His time and people spread 
wicked stories about Him! It is always so; the supply of drinking water implies the laying down 
of pipes for both fresh water and for drainage. Ill-fame and fame go together. Revered 
personalities are the targets of irresponsible irreverence. 


Dedication must come naturally 


The sages declare that they become sad when worldly people call them happy or find them 
happy. Chaithanya felt happy when people reviled him for wasting his time in keerthan and 
when they broke his mridang and tal. He said, "These people are foolish; they think a tree can be 
saved if the leaves are watered; the root of joy has to be watered so that joy may grow in you. 
The root is Krishna, the Krishna in your heart." Water the root with tears, tears of joy that get the 
chance to sing His name, to praise His glory; not tears of sorrow, for such tears are a sacrilege; 
they should not contaminate the Lotus Feet of the Lord. 


It is dedication to the Lord that sanctifies all activities. He is the raison d'etre for activity. He is 
the prompter, the executer, the giver of the required strength and skill, the enjoyer of the fruit 
thereof. So, dedication must come naturally to you, for, all is His and nothing yours! Your duty 
is to believe He is the impeller of your activities, and draw strength from that belief. Until the 
wound heals and the new skin hardens, the bandage must protect the place. So too, until Reality 
is realised, the balm of faith, of holy company, and holy thoughts must be applied to the ego- 
affected mind. 


Every one of you has in possession a ticket for liberation from the cycle of birth and death. But, 
most do not know the train which they have to board; many get down at intermediate stations, 
imagining them to be the terminus and wander helplessly in the wilderness or are carried away 
by sights and scenes. 


Reference was made to ajnaana. This ajnaana (ignorance) is imported from outside; what is 
native to man is jnaana. His jnaana is fogged by the smoke of delusion, which makes things 
appear many or confused. Man has burdened himself with information on a multiplicity of 
things; he has acquired a variety of skills, but, he has no vision to see things as a whole, to see 
the basic unity of the objective world. Moreover, he has no equipment to live lovingly with 
others, to recognise the humanity of all men, to feel that the same Lord activates each of them. 


Gifts of reason must not be wasted 


How far can the learning which you acquire in schools and through books take you? There was a 
wife who was given a cheque-book so that she might imburse herself out of the bank account. 
She signed every cheque, "Your loving wife" and wondered why they were dishonoured. There 
must be adaptability, recognition of changed circumstances, awareness of the relative value of 
things, discrimination between the real and relatively real. The gifts of reason and conscience 
must not be wasted through neglect. Your story should not be a repetition of that of the wood- 
cutter, who was given a huge sandalwood forest as a reward, but, who out of sheer ignorance of 
the value of the trees, burnt the trees and sold them as charcoal at so much per bag! 


The Divinity that is man is ignored and the opportunity to unfold it (which is called "life") is 
wasted. You calculate wealth in terms of land and buildings, gold and silver, and finally, feel 
unhappy to leave them and go. You drug yourself in the attempt to escape from the hold of 
disease; but you are unaware of diseases that eat into the very vitals of your happiness and make 
you a social danger---the diseases of envy, malice, hatred and greed. Get the best advice to cure 
these. Believe that the Lord is living in every heart and so, when you inflict pain, physical or 
mental, on anyone, you are slighting the Lord or denying Him. He is everywhere. 


Purify the heart by being good to all 


Do you say that the Lord appeared from the pillar in the palace of Hiranyakashipu though He 
was not there? Or do you say that He appeared there, since He was there? He was there; He is 
everywhere. But since Hiranyakashipu said He was not there, he could not see Him; since 
Prahlaadha said that He was there He could be seen there. If you are blind, how can you see Him, 
though He may be right in front? You are blind to His Omnipresence; how then can you see Him 
everywhere? When the magnet does not attract the needle, the fault lies in the dirt that covers up 
the needle. When the Lord does not approach the devotee, the fault lies in the heart of the 
devotee; it is not pure enough. 


Purify the heart by being good and kind to all. Do not attempt to find fault with others. Look 
upon all with love, with respect, with faith in their sincerity. I would ask you to treat your 
servants kindly. Do not entertain hatred or contempt in your heart; show your resentment if you 
must, through words, not action. Repent for the errors that you commit and decide never to 
repeat them; pray for strength to carry out your resolutions. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 14-10-1964 


35. The bond that unbinds 


THE scholarship which revels in the number of texts mastered is of no use; one may know the 
Shaasthras and the Upanishadhs upside down; he may have all the seven hundred s/okhas of the 
Geetha in his head, but, if aachaara and vichaara are non-existent, it is a burden which is best 
avoided. Aachaara means, application in practice. Vichaara means continuous self-examination. 


The Shaasthry spoke of the incident of the golden deer, which enticed the heart of Seetha. One 
would naturally wonder why Seetha should fall in for that creature, or why Raama should believe 
in the existence of such a strange creature. He could have convinced Seetha that it was a 
stratagem of the Raakshasas to attract their attention and bring about dire mischief. But, like any 
ordinary husband infatuated with his wife, Raama followed the deer promising to bring it back 
alive, to be kept as her pet. Of course, if He was an ordinary human being, infatuation like this 
would be condemned. But, being the Lord Himself He has to be judged differently. All things are 
according to plan, His plan. 


Know that plan; it is laid down in dharma, depicted in the Upanishadhs. The Shaasthry that 
spoke next elaborated upon the dharma as laid down for brahmachaaris (celibates). What is 
brahmacharya? It means charya in Brahman---moving ever in Brahman. Cognise that your 
existence is in Brahman, through Brahman, for Brahman. It is that awareness that makes acts 
sacred and successful. Feel pure; that makes your act pure. The gopees moved about, not in 
Gokula but in the Lord's residence; they did not sell butter and milk; but, used: the opportunity to 
call out the names of the Lord. Pure words, pure speech; holy listening, holy reading, seeing holy 
things---these make the heart pure. The confusion and travail that now afflict you, are the 
consequences of impure speech and impure sight. 


Everyone must fit in with the Lord's plan 


When I was in the previous sareera (body), Das Ganu who was a police officer came to Shirdhi 
on account of his good luck. That visit transformed him. Moreover, Baaba accosted him as Das 
Ganu as soon as he saw him, and this stunned him. He asked Baaba that some parties that were 
opposed to him might be put down and that he might get promotion in his official career. Baaba 
invited him to remain in Shirdhi itself and escape all bother. He told him: "Do not wonder why I 
am suggesting this, when you craved for something else." 


Later, when promotions came, he ignored Baaba and his promise to come away as soon as his 
honour was vindicated by official promotion. So, Baaba had to bring about circumstances which 
compelled him to come at last, as per Baaba's plan. He composed a number of songs and 
sthothras (hymns); he began performing Harikathas on Baaba everywhere and he was 
instrumental in bringing the news of the advent of Baaba to thousands in the land. His life was 
spent in and through the Lord. 


Upaasini Baaba was also a similar personality. He was born in 1869 and known as Kaashinaath. 
He married thrice; practised as a doctor, earned much money and lost all; after hard penance, 
chanced into Shirdhi, where Baaba accosted him. "Hallo, Kaashinaath!" He directed him to 
Upaasana (contemplation) and guided his saadhana and so he was called Upaasini Baaba. He too 
was a part of Baaba's plan. 


The journey towards the Source 


Thus, every one must fit in with the plan; strive to know its main principles and be equipped for 
the task He allots you. Be ever vigilant in the tasks that the role involves, that is your swadharma 
(one's own nature and duty). Give your heart fully to the task. "Raama" means, he who pleases, 
attracts, and attaches himself through pleasing attributes. Krishna means the same thing; he who 
attracts. "Hah" means he who robs you of your self, your ego and reveals Himself as you. To 
attain Him you have to climb, and climbing from the animal to man and from man to Maadhava 
is a hard struggle with the forces that pull you downward. 


A decrepit old car whines and groans when it has to ascend an incline; for the engine is clogged 
and worn out. Keep the engine of the mind free from the dust and dirt of sensory yearning and 
you can ascend easily the heights of spiritual progress. It is like swimming against the fast 
current, this journey towards the source of Being. The Sanaathana Dharma (Eternal Religion) 
teaches you how to succeed in this journey; and, due to its innate integrity, it has flourished 
without losing its pristine glory, even after the onslaught of wave after wave of strange cultures. 
It can never decline, for it is Truth. It is the sum of experience of bhakthas like Hanumaan, 
Raadha and Meera. Remember this when the yajna (sacrifice) here is drawing to a close for that 
type of bhakthi alone ensures the aapthi or ‘attainment’ of Sama or ‘Brahman.’ That is the 
genuine samaapthi or finale. 


Many of you are inspired to start in your own places sanghams and samaajams (associations) for 
doing bhajana, but it is difficult to get bhakthas who are devoted to the Lord without any ulterior 
desire or intention. A. bhaktha must be full of joy, whatever may happen, for he knows it is the 
will of the Lord that is being worked out. I do not address gatherings as "Bhakthulaaraa" (Dear 
bhakthas), for, complete surrender and complete purity essential for a bhaktha are commodities 
that are absent. Ask yourself the question, whether each of you deserves the name, 'Sai Bhaktha' 
and you will know why I do not address you so. 


Keep your devotion within yourself 


Bhajana does not become effective through drums, cymbals, violins and other accessories. They 
cover up the absence of the essential thing---feeling, emotions, yearning, sincerity, faith. When 
you gather in groups, the evil qualities of envy, competition, pride and factionalism raise their 
heads. So, offer bhajana to the Lord in your own homes, and do not invite these obstacles by 
organising groups and mandalis and sanghams. 


Again there are some who extol others for the absurd reason that Sai Baaba speaks through them! 
Baaba has entered into them, they declare from the housetops. "0, Baaba has come upon this 
child, this person." How silly! Am I a ghost or a devil to possess someone and speak through 
him? It is all drama which cheats sick minds. Do not fall a prey to these. 


That is why I say, keep your devotion within yourself, under control, and not be led away by 
crooks and self-seekers. These lead you astray by giving you a wrong idea of the Lord's 
manifestation. They befoul the faith that their brothers and sisters repose in God. 


Institutions, societies and sanghams have another fault. Religious institutions must make people 
aware of God and of their own evanescence. But, these create a paraphernalia of officers, various 
grades of members, a secretary, a treasurer, a president and a batch of committee members, who 
strut about with their badges and revel in their own assumed greatness. A society named after 
God must help in the removal of jealousy, envy, vanity, egoism and greed; but, these foster them 


and allow them to grow wild. Real bhakthas will never crave for such positions; they will avoid 
them as traps which could lay them low. 


Your faith must be unshakable 


I do not need any publicity, nor does any other manifestation of the Lord. What are you daring to 
publicise? Me? What do you know about Me, let Me ask. You speak one thing about Me today 
and another tomorrow. Your faith has not become unshakable! You praise, when things go well, 
and blame when things go wrong. You flit from one refuge to another. 


And even before you bhakthi ripens, you strive to lead others, you collect donations and 
subscriptions and plan mandhirs and sanghams; all this is mere show, which brings spiritual loss, 
rather than spiritual gain. When you start publicity you descend to the level of those who 
compete in collecting clientele, decrying others and extolling themselves. 


Where money is calculated and garnered, and exhibited to demonstrate one's achievements, I will 
not be present. I come only where sincerity, faith and surrender are valued. So spend the silent 
hours in meditation and naamasmarana (remembering the Lord's name) in your own homes and 
deepen faith. I do not need bhajans which, like gramophone records, reproduce songs and 
naamaavalis, without any feeling or yearning while singing. Hours of shouting do not count; a 
moment of concentrated prayer from the heart is enough, to melt and move God. 


Practise detachment little by little 


If you deny God, it is as if you deny yourself. There is no God, you declare; but, you assert that 
"I exist." Well, who is that I that exists, that exists throughout the varying stages of growth, 
physical and mental, in joy and grief?. That 'l' is God; believe It. For that 'l' sees with eyes, tastes 
with the tongue, walks with the feet, argues with the intelligence; but, all the while, it is 
conscious that it is separate from all these. When you affirm "There is no God," you first assert 
and then declare the absence of that entity. You assert the non-existence of something that "is." 
That T must be conceived as a wave of the ocean of God, not as the first person singular. That 
"first" person leads you into the world of fear and greed. My house, my village, my community, 
my district, my language--it entangles itself thus more and more inextricably. 


There was a man from Puttaparthi who lived in a solitary hut on the banks of the Ganga, some 
miles above Haridhwaar. He was engaged in severe thapas and was greatly admired by other 
monks. One day, while bathing in the river, he overheard a party of pilgrims who had alighted 
from their bus at that site, talking among themselves in Thelugu. His attachment to the mother- 
tongue dragged him thither; he asked them where they came from. They said Rayalaseema. He 
probed further; they were from Ananthapur District; his ears ached for further details. They were 
from Penukonda Thaluk, Puttaparthi itself, in fact. So, that monk was very happy; he asked them 
about his lands, his family, his friends and when he was told that a few of them had died, the 
poor fellow started weeping like a fool. All his years of saadhana had come to nought. They 
broke down before the onslaught of language-attachment. He was so bound to his mother- 
tongue. What a pity! 


Practise detachment from now on; practise it little by little, for a day will come sooner or later 
when you will have to give up all that you hold dear. Do not go on adding to the things which 
bind you to them. Bind yourself to the great liberator, God. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 15-10-1964 


To describe the infinite aspects in terms of limited words and 
limited experience, is not possible. 


The Maharishis who were well versed in the Vedhas and Manthras 
realised that it is not possible to explain and describe the aspects 
of Brahman in terms of words, and they were only indicating by 
their silence. 


Shri Sathya Sai 


36. Prick the bubble of pride 


THE tongue that does not utter the name of God, the hand that knows no charity, the years of life 
that know no calm, talents that receive no reward, a life that has not garnered wisdom, a temple 
where there is no atmosphere of reverence, talk that does not communicate knowledge--all these 
are of no worth. 


Dr. Raamakrishna Rao spoke of the teachings of Raamaanujaachaarya and of the basic principles 
of prapathi, which is another word for sharanaagathi--surrender of the individual will to the 
Supreme Will. He also spoke of the need for an attitude of gratitude to the Lord for this human 
existence He has vouchsafed; and for the many chances given for acquiring enlightenment. 
Gratitude is a quality that is fast disappearing in human relations; it is a heinous sin to neglect 
this obligation. 


The Shaasthry elaborated on the assurance given in the Geetha, Yogakshemam Vahaamyaham. 
This does not mean that the Lord will ensure for you suwkham and santhosha (happiness and joy)- 
--but, it means that the Lord will endow you with steady unshakable peace, inner equanimity. 


Yoga means the acquisition of that which you do not have and kshema means the preservation of 
that which you have acquired. So the assurance means that the Lord will ensure that you acquire 
the shaanthi that you do not have and create conditions under which you can preserve that 
shaanthi. For the greatest happiness is shaanthi, inner peace. How do you get it? By knowing 
that you are the Aathma, which has no birth or death, no joy or grief, no up and no down. 


Just as underground water is the sustenance of all trees, the Aathma is the underlying source of 
all the aanandha that the jeevi experiences. You bring that subterranean water up by the process 
of boring; steady hitting, digging, thumping through a pipe, which contains and directs the drill. 
The borers have to take care that they do not allow air to go into the pipe; for, then the drilling 
cannot succeed. So too in the japam that you do, the drilling the Raam, Raam, Raam, you must 
be very careful not to allow vishayavaasana (attachment to worldly objects) to enter and interfere 
with the smooth working of the chill. If you do, the Aathma cannot be experienced. 


Paths of devotion and knowledge 


Underground water is perennial; it will not dry up. The pleasure one gets through physical, 
mental and intellectual pursuits is transitory. Good deeds may grant heaven; but, that too is a 
temporary habitation, from where man has to journey down to earth, to live his life again. It is 
like the short term an M.L.A. gets to bask in public fame, earned by the votes cast in his favour; 
when the term is over, he becomes a beggar once again, begging for votes, to win again the lost 
status. He starts shouting the same slogans for getting popular applause. 


Many people say that Bhakthi Maarga (path of devotion) is much easier than Jnaana Maarga 
(path of spiritual knowledge); but jnaana is easier. For, it comes in a flash to those who can just 
sit quiet for a few minutes and analyse themselves. A car moves on its four wheels, but the 
person who drives it is inside it, not outside. So, also, drive the intellect, the mind, the senses 
from inside; do not try to guide them from outside. Board the train of saalokya; that is to say, of 
constant thought of Godhead; it will take you to the station, saameepya, that is to say, nearness to 
God; then the next halt is saaruupya, where you earn divine attributes; finally, you reach the 


terminus, saayujya, when the individual Aathma is experienced as but a wave of the ocean of 
Paramaathma. 


How to destroy the mind? 


You must reach the terminus where ignorance dies and jnaana is born; then, there is no more 
journey. Along the route, there are many pseudo-terminii which tantalise you; but, you would not 
give up the journey until you reach the real one. Calumny, scandal, loss, dishonour, poverty, 
distress, fame, pomp, triumph---all these call on you to alight; but you should stick fast to the 
seat and never give up. 


Do not seek more and more sukham; seek more and more jnaanam. The mind is a fertile field for 
ignorance. Wipe out all traces of the mind (Mano Naasanam)---that is the task of the jnaani 
(man of realisation). How to destroy the mind? It is easy once you know what it is. The mind is 
stuffed with desire. It is a ball filled with air, like a football. Puncture it and it will not move 
from place to place. Nirvaana means, without air. In a square filled with water from an irrigation 
canal, it appears square; if the field is circular or oblong or rectangular or triangular, the sheet of 
water that fills it will have same geometrical shape. The mind takes on the form of the desire that 
fills it. To take another example, it is like a piece of cloth, the warp and the woof being the yam 
of desire. The texture, the colour, the durability, the feel, the shine of the cloth will depend upon 
the desire that constitutes the warp and the woof. Remove the yarn, the warp and the woof, one 
by one---the cloth disappears. That is the technique of mano naasanam (destroying the mind): 


Terrible nature of "desire" 


Korike (wish) is the elder brother of the mirage. You pursue it and suffer. It enters the 
consciousness softly, silently; it holds out prospects of pleasure and joy; it draws fine pictures in 
attractive colours; it gains a foothold, strikes root; then, it strangles, swamps and destroys 
relentlessly, unintermittently. That is the terrible nature. Raamakrishna Rao gave the instance of 
Yamunaachaarya conquering the nefarious hold of desire. Be a hero like him. If you entertain 
desire, you will lose contentment and peace. 


In the Thretha Yuga (Silver Age), there was a king called Vijaya ruling over his empire from the 
city of Chandhragopaalapuram. He was steadfast in the observance of truth, morality and peace. 
He was known far and wide for his deep sympathy with the poor and distressed. He was 
overcome with desire to widen his sway and conquer the border regions. His spiritual teacher, 
Garga, permitted him to essay this adventure, for he knew that he would not overstep the limits 
laid down by the scriptures. He even initiated him into a manthra, which would gain for him 
superhuman help. When the manthra (sacred formula) was mastered, Vijaya repeated it, and Io, 
Hanumaan, Jaambavaan and Sugreeva appeared before him, with all their attendants, demanding 
to be told what he wanted them to do! He told them that his desire was to conquer the four 
quarters and that he could not rest until that wish was fulfilled. Hanumaan and others told him: 
"That is impossible; go back home. That is possible only in Dwaapara Yuga (Bronze Age)!" So, 
he returned to his palace and died, to be born again as Arjuna. 


Arjuna's encounter with Hanumaan 


When Arjuna went South on this conquering expedition, on his coming to Raamasethu, where 
Raama has built the bridge to go over to Lanka, he was filled with pride at his unrivalled skill 
with the bow-, he felt that he was superior even to Raama, for Raama had piled it up laboriously, 


stone upon stone. Arjuna said rather aloud "If I were he, I would have twanged my bow and built 
an arch of arrows across the sea over which the army could have marched safely along." 
Hanumaan surprised him by presenting himself before him with a grin, which Arjuna felt made 
him even uglier. He challenged him to build one, so that at least one monkey could walk across, 
not to speak of the vast host. Arjuna shot arrows one after the other and they got entangled one 
with the other in such strong combinations that a huge structure was formed, bridging India and 
Lanka. Hanumaan declared that it was too fragile; Arjuna agreed to immolate himself if the 
bridge could not stand his weight. Then, Hanumaan walked a few paces on the bridge, it 
crumpled into bits! 


True to his word, Arjuna lit a fire and was about to expiate for the sin of pride that made him feel 
superior to Raama, when Krishna appeared and asked the reason, as if He did not know! In fact, 
that was the very reason why He appeared! When He was told of the wager and the failure of 
Arjuna, He declared that any agreement can be valid only when it was made before a witness. 
How could the parties be trusted, since it was in their interest to modify the conditions to their 
advantage? 


So, He wanted the bridge to be built again and Hanumaan to break it again. It was done and 
Hanumaan walked on it as before; but, try as he might with all his might the bridge was 
absolutely intact! Hanumaan jumped on it, but not a dent was caused. The secret was, Krishna 
was supporting the bridge with His back wherever Hanumaan's steps were placed, the same back 
that held the Mandhara Mountain in position, during the epochmaking churning of the ocean of 
milk by the gods and the demons. This was revealed to both Arjuna and Hanumaan, by the 
bleeding that was evident on Krishna's back! The Lord interceded to save the honour of His 
bhaktha! 


Hanumaan's offer of help to Arjuna 


Arjuna's pride was humbled; he fell at the feet of Hanumaan and prayed that he must help him 
win the battle. Hanumaan agreed to be present on the flag of Arjuna's chariot, shedding his halo 
over the warrior within. That was how the Thretha yuga wish was fulfilled and the Thretha yuga 
manthra proved effective. 


This relationship with the past is beyond the reach of human investigation. You can feel that you 
are inheritors of a long past, of a long history. You may not remember the incidents of a 
particular day ten years ago; but that does not mean that you were not alive that day. So too you 
may not recall what happened in the previous life or the life previous to that; but there is no 
doubt that you had those lives. If you eructate now, you will get the flavour of the food that you 
have consumed. This life is the eructation of the last one, which you consumed. The flavour of 
this is an indication of that. 


A mother holds a child that has soiled its shirt and puts on it a new one; death is the removal of 
the soiled shirt and birth, the putting on of the fresh one. Let the mother do her will; be a child in 
her hands. Have full faith in her love and wisdom. Be an instrument; submerge your will in the 
Will of the Lord. That will save you from worry and pain. Do not lose seeing people who have 
gone astray; it will be like judging rain water to be dirty, seeing a stagnant pool. Rain water is 
pure; it is the soil that soils it. 


God is in you and in all else 


I have been teaching people irrespective of age and circumstance. Years ago, there were no 
eating houses and the hundreds who came to this place had to be fed by Karnam Subbamma, 
who delighted in feeding them herself. The water in the big vessel on her hearth was always 
boiling and she had only to pour the washed rice grains into it in order to get a meal ready at 
short notice. She did this tirelessly for years; many came and learnt. Those who kept themselves 
at a distance then, are pining now for lost chances. That will be the fate of all who fall in faith, in 
spite of experiences that confirm and foster it. 


Vaasudhevas sarvamidham does not mean that all this is just Krishna, the son of Vaasudheva. It 
means that all this is God, by whatever name He is known. So, if you decry any one, you are 
decrying God, that is, His real core. If you become aware of the God in you and the God in all 
else, there is nothing to equal the peace and joy that you get. I bless you that you may attain that 
bliss. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 16-10-1964 


37. Keep the flag flying 


[In the poem that Baaba composed impromptu and sang before commencing His speech, He 
announced Himself as Shri Naatha, Loka Naatha and Anaatha Naatha (Lord of Lakshmi, of the 
world and of the helpless), the same He, who saved the Gajendhra, the boy Dhruva, the poor 
Kuchela and the helpless Prahlaadha!] 


THE hearts of bhakthas gathered here are all blossoming now like lotuses when the sun rises, for 
they believe this is the day when the Lord was born in human form. I may tell them that every 
day is Janmotasavam, a Brahmothsavam, an Aanandhotsavam (different kinds of festivals), at 
Puttaparthi; as well as wherever bhakthas are. The Niraakaara (the Formless) comes in 
Naraakaara (form of man) when the virtue of the good and the vice of the wicked reach a certain 
stage. Prahlaadha's devotion and his father's disregard both had to ripen before Narasimha 
avathaara could take place. To know the truth of the avathaar, the saadhaka must culture the 
mind, as the ryot does the field. He has to clear the field of thorny undergrowth, wild creepers 
and tenuous roots. He has to plough the land, water it and sow the seeds well. He has to guard 
the seedlings and tender plants from insect pests as well as from the depredations of goats and 
cattle; he has to put up a fence all round. So too, egoism, pride and greed have to be removed 
from the heart; sathya, japa, dhyaana (truth, repetition of the Lord's name and meditation), form 
the ploughing and the levelling; prema is the water that has to soak into the t;eld and make it soft 
and rich; naama is the seed and bhakthi is the sprout; kaama and krodha are the cattle and the 
fence is discipline; aanandha is the harvest. 


Knowledge is the final stage of karma 


Of course, you will get faith in God only when you have yourselves discovered that the universe 
must have a creator, a protector, an agency for both evolution and involution or a power that 
exercises all these three functions. To grasp that idea, the heart must be pure, the mind must be 
clear. For this, karma is very important. The Karmakaanda (section dealing with rituals) in the 
Vedhas is the major part of the shruthi, for jnaana is but the final stage of karma. The army will 
have many soldiers but only just a handful of officers; so too, karmas are many, and they all 
obey the jnaani. Of the hundred parts of the Vedhas, 80 will be karma, 16 upaasana and 4 
jnaana. Karma has to be done for educating the impulses and training the feelings. Then, you 
develop the attitude of upaasana, of humility before the great unknown, and finally, you realise 
that the only reality is you, which is the same as He. 


You hear nowadays of equality (Samaanathwa), of each being equal to the rest. This is wrong 
notion, for we find the parents and children differently equipped; when one is happy, the other is 
miserable; there is no equality in hunger or joy. Of course all are equally entitled to love and 
sympathy, and to the grace of God. All are entitled to the medicines in the hospital; but what is 
given to one should not be given to another. There can be no equality in the doling out of 
medicine! Each deserves the medicine that will cure him of his illness. 


I know that this struggle in the name of equality is only one of the ways in which man is trying to 
get aanandha. In almost all parts of the world, man is today pursuing many such short-cuts and 
wrong paths of achieve aanandha. But let Me tell you, without reforming conduct, daily 
behaviour, the little acts of daily life, aanandha will be beyond reach. I consider pravarthna 
(practice), as essential. 


A man or an institution is to be judged by his or its integrity, whether acts are according to the 
principles professed. The mind, the body, the word---all three must work in unison. By such 
disciplined karma the senses will be sublimated and prashaanthi won; then, out of this 
prashaanthi will arise prakaanthi (the great light), and from that will emerge Param-jyothi (the 
suprasplendour or illumination). That illumination will reveal Param-aathma (the Oversoul), the 
Universal. 


Now, I am hoisting on this Prashaanthi Nilayam the Prashaanthi Hag, according to the 
convention that has grown here, like the conventions in the material plane. The flag represents 
the spiritual discipline I have laid down for you: conquest of kaama and krodha, achievement of 
prema and the practice of japa yoga, leading to the blossoming of the lotus of the heart and the 
emergence of the jyothi of jnaana therein. When I hoist it over the Nilayam, you should convert 
your hearts into Prashaanthi Nilayams and hoist the flag there too, and keep it flying. 
Prashaanthi Nilayam, 23-11-1964 


38. Karma and karuna 


[After the song which Baaba opened His discourse, He thrilled every one by singing the two 
lines from the Bhagavadh Geetha, which declare "Yadaa yadaa hi dharmasya glaanir bhavathi, 
Bhaaratha, Abhyuththaanam adharmasya tadh aathmaanam srujaamyaham," and adding 
"Parithraanaaya saadhuunaam, vinaasaayacha dhushkrutaam, dharma samsthaapanaarthaaya 
sambhavaami yuge yuge." "Whenever dharma declines, I restore it and put down the forces 
which cause the decline, by assuming a form" and "I am born again and again in every crisis in 
order to protect the good, punish the wicked and restore dharma." He began His discourse after 
this announcement of His Identity with the source of all avathaars]. 


EVERYONE is now seeking comfort and pleasure; that is the be-all and end-all. If you tell a 
man that he can eat whatever he likes and as much as he likes, he is delighted; if you add that he 
might develop, as a consequence, some illness or other, he will treat you as an enemy. No 
regimen or control is popular. But strength is derived only from control, from restraint, from 
regulation. Man becomes tough and capable of endurance only if he welcomes hardships. 
Struggle, and you get the strength to succeed. Seek the basis for the seen, in the unseen. The tall 
skyscraper has a deep base reaching into the earth. This seen world has, as its base, the unseen 
Paramaathma; your body is but the vehicle through which you can search, investigate, and 
discover that base. 


There is no one fully good 


The body is the instrument for doing karma; the Shaasthry said that buddhi (intellect) is shaped 
by karma ---"Buddhi karmaanusaarini"; japa and dhyaana will purify the buddhi and make it an 
instrument for self-realisation and for winning grace. The warmth of divine grace will melt all 
ajnaana away; you can win it by engaging yourself in good deeds. Do the karma for which you 
are best fitted, which is your swadharma (one's duties that accord with one's nature); do it 
without complaint, without any malingering. That is the principle of varnaashrama dharma 
(duties of social groups and stages of life). 


India was the home of peace and prosperity when this was followed by rich and poor alike; but, 
now, the land is plunged in darkness and confusion. Therefore, another avathaar has come, for 
teaching people of dharma they have forgotten. Raama, Krishna and other avathaars had to kill 
one or more individuals, who could be identified as enemies of the dharmic way of life, and thus 
restore the practice of virtue. But, now, there is no one fully good, and so, who deserves the 
protection of God? All are tainted by wickedness, and so, who will survive, if the avathaar 
decides to uproot? 


Therefore, I have to correct the buddhi, by various means; I have to counsel, help, command, 
condemn and standby as friend and well-wisher to all, so that they may give up evil propensities 
and recognising the straight 'path, tread it and reach the goal. I have to reveal to the people the 
worth of the Vedhas, the Shaasthras and the scriptural texts, which lay down the norms. 


The easiest path to self-realisation is the surrender of the ego, sharanaagathi. Arjuna surrendered 
and so, the war in which he was engaged was transformed into a yajna, a spiritual exercise! 
Daksha performed a yajna; but he did not surrender; he was so full of egoism that he slighted 
God! So, his yajna was transformed into a war reeking with hate. Do not pit your tiny ego 
against the Almighty; leave it to His Will and you will have lasting peace. 


Grace can countermand all effects of karma 


You might say that the karma of the previous birth has to be consumed in this birth and that no 
amount of grace can save man from that. Evidently, some one has taught you to believe so. But I 
assure you, you need not suffer from karma like that. When a severe pain torments you, the 
doctor gives you a morphine injection and you do not feel the pain, though it is there in the body. 
Grace is like the morphine; the pain is not felt, though you go through it! Grace takes away the 
malignity of the karma which you have to undergo. 


You know there are dated drugs, which are declared ineffective after a certain date; well, the 
effect of karma is rendered null, though the account is there and has to be rendered! Or, the Lord 
can save man completely from the consequences, as was done by Me to the bhaktha whose 
paralytic stroke and heart attacks I took over some months ago, in the Gurupoornima week! It is 
wrong to say the "Lalaatha likhitham" (what is written on the forehead, i.e. fate) cannot be wiped 
out; that what one has earned in previous births must be consumed in this birth. Grace can 
countermand all that; nothing can stand in its way. It is the grace of the "Almighty," remember. 


Of the avathaars, some are for a definite limited purpose like Vaamana or Narasimha. They are 
just manifestations, to counter some particular evils. They are not full-fledged, long-lasting, 
expansive, like Raama and Krishna. The Lord has no hate in His composition; He is all mercy. 
That is why Krishna proceeded to the Kaurava court, as a messenger of peace, with compromise 
proposals. He showed man how patient he should be in spite of provocations, how self-control 
wins in the end. 


God has no favourites or rivals 


Krishna demonstrated that if you practise the saadhana of the constant presence of God, you are 
bound to achieve victory. Take Him as the charioteer; He will steer you through the heaviest 
odds. He has no favourites or rivals. Like fire, He spreads warmth to all who are near Him. If 
you do not feel the warmth, do not blame Him: blame yourself that you are far from Him. Look 
at Bheeshma! He prayed to the very Krishna who had vowed to kill him; he prayed that Krishna 
should grant him a vision of His divine splendour! That is true bhakthi, real jnaana! He had the 
faith, the vision, and Krishna blessed him. 


Hiranyakashipu said, 'He is nowhere’ and so, He was nowhere for him; Prahlaadha asserted 'He 
is everywhere,’ and He appeared from the pillar to prove him true. God did not have to run into 
the pillar in order to come out of it, to reply to the challenge of the father. He was there all along, 
just as in everything else. He had only to make Himself visible! 


I too am like that; if you accept Me and say yes, I too respond and say S S S! If you deny and 
say, no, I also echo, no. Come, examine, experience and have faith; that is the method of utilising 
Me. 


Do not demean your talents 


Dakshinamurthy taught his disciples by his silence, Shaasthry said. Yes; what he did was to 
make the disciples rely on their own intelligence. Do not demean your talents; when you dive 
deep into yourselves, you. can discover the source of all strength. Ants creeping over a rock, 
millions of them, can carve a deep groove along their path. The minute feet of the ant have that 
power. You might have seen on the walls around the village wells, hollows produced on granite 
slabs by the continuous placing of water pots! The pots are made of mud, but, they erase even the 


hardest granite over the years and cause the hollows where they rest! The Aathma-swaruupam 
(embodiment of Self)is not alpa-swaruupam (an insignificant embodiment)! The aathma is not 
anaemic. It is a powerful dynamo, capable of generating enormous power. The guru (spiritual 
teacher) shows you the guri (goal); but, you must generate the power yourself, by your own 
saadhana (spiritual effort). 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 23-11-1964, 8 p.m. 


[Speech delivered after the offering of flower-garlands by devotees continuously at one sitting, 
from 10-30 a.m. till 7-30 p.m.] 


39. Through mirth and moan 


The revered old man who spoke of the upaasana of Hanumaan referred to the Ashtotthara 
Sathanaama (the 108 names) of Aanjaneya. I wonder how many of you know the significance of 
that number 108. Why is it that the strings of the names of the gods are always 1087 They could 
as well be 110 or 112 or 50 or 120, isn't it? All such mystic numbers have a deep meaning. Man 
breathes at the rate of 900 per hour, 21,600 times per day, 10,800 during daytime. With every 
breath, man is supposed to repeat Soham, "I am He," and so, the figure 216 and its hall 108 has a 
deep significance. It is also 9 times 12, 9 being the number indicative Of Brahman, since it is 
always 9, however many times you may multiply it (9 x 12 -108, 1 +8-9,9x9=81,8+1=9) 
and 12 is the number of the Sun; also, the Sun moves through 12 raasis or points, each raasi 
representing one month. 


Just as 9 is the symbol of Brahman, 8 is the number of Maayaa. For, multiples of 8 go on 
diminishing in total value, instead of remaining the same or increasing, (2 times 8 is 16 which 
adds up to 7; 3 times 8 is 24 and so, the total has come down to 6; 4 times 8 is 32 which adds up 
to 5 and 5 times 8 is 40 adding up to only 4! 6 times 8 is 48, that is, 12 adding to 3. And 7 times 
8 adds up to 2. 8 times 8 is 64 and so, only 1). This decrease in value is the best symbol of 
Maayaa. Every number has many such valuable inner meanings. It is an interesting subject. You 
must investigate and reason out, not laugh cynically and condemn. If you stand on the seashore 
and hesitate to dive into the waters, you cannot secure pearls. 


The message of the Vedhas 


One bhaktha sings, "O Krishna! You are dark; the 'Kalindi deeps' in the Yamuna river into which 
you have descended is also dark with rain clouds; my eyeball is dark; my heart too is darkened 
with dark thoughts. How then can I discover You? Your secret is beyond me; your majesty is 
ever receding before my imagination." Now, the dark colour of the Lord is the colour of the deep 
sea and the deep sky. It signifies the fathomless, unfathomable. What has to be changed is the 
heart, the intelligence. Above all, do not be traitors to yourselves. If you say one thing and do 
another, your conscience will itself condemn you as a cheat. You are your won witness. Not all 
the stones which Raama trod on were converted into humans; only one stone changed into 
Ahalya, for, repentance and penance had elevated it to that status. 


Nothing ever is born without the will of God, nothing ever happens without His will; that is the 
message of the Vedhas; understand the Vedhas well and this lesson will be instilled into you. 
Fleas drink only the blood of the cow; but men draw from her the sweet and nourishing milk. So, 
learn from the Vedhas the potence of the Will of the Lord. Once you are fixed in that faith, you 
will be able to brave all dangers. You complain that God is invisible; but the fault is yours, not to 
recognise God in all His various manifestations. You are yourself "manifestation of God." But 
you do not know it; you call yourself a sinner, worm born in sin, wallowing in sin, essentially 
wicked. But, let some one, who takes you to your word, call you, "Hello sinner!" you resent it' 
Why? Because your real nature is purity, peace, joy. Manas, buddhi, chiththam, ahamkaaram, 
indhriya (mind, intellect, thought, egoism and senses)--these are like the bricks, iron rods, 
cement, wood, etc., that go to make up a house for the Aathma to live in. They are jewels that the 
Aathma wears. They are not you; they are only incidental. The real you is the Aathma. This can 
be learnt only by constant meditation, by moving in good company, by listening to the talks of 


realised men, by following some prescribed course of discipline. That is why I lay so much 
emphasis on discipline. 


The co-operative commonwealth 


The Varnaashrama (social groups and stages of life) disciplines, to which the Shaasthry referred, 
is very useful in this field. Varna or what is called caste, is a convenient arrangement for the 
conduct of worldly affairs; the aashramas or the stages of life are roots of supra-worldly joy. The 
four varnas are universal; they can be found in any country. The leaders of thought are the 
Brahmins; the fighters carrying arms are the Kshathrivas; the entrepreneurs and the business 
executives are the Vaishyas; the busy producers and labourers are the Suudhras. 


Whether head or heels, it is the same blood that circulates through each; it is the same body 
which claims them as limbs. Each limb has to perform its task, the task for which it has 
specialised. You cannot walk on your head or think with the feet. It is a co-operative 
commonwealth, the body as well as the body-politic. The eye is the master of sight; the ear 
cannot question the authority of the eye, nor the eye that of the ear about sound, or the ear that of 
the tongue so far as the taste is concerned. Each is the master in its own field. The aashramas are 
also steps towards the attainment of detachment and fulfilment. They ensure experience and the 
unfoldment of personality. 


God cannot be bamboozled 


Each varna and aashrama has it own rules, regulations and restrictions. A bullock cart cannot 
move on rails nor a locomotive on the road. Each type of vehicle has its own type of road. But, 
all move forward and reach the goal in their own good time. When the heart is pure, the Lord is 
revealed. He is the judge; He cannot be bamboozled. The doctor may assure you that you have 
no fever, but the thermometer cannot lie. The doctor may say so to save you from panic, but the 
thermometer declares the truth. God knows and God will deal with you as you deserve. Have the 
faith. Repent for all wrongs done and resolve not to repeat the mistake; then God will extend His 
grace. 


You feel that there is something behind and beyond all this fleeting fantasy; something that 
persists through all the successes and defeats, all the tears and smiles, all this mirth and moan; 
but, you are unable to grasp it and realise that it is the same entity that underlies the entire 
universe. You are one with most distant star and the least little blade of grass. You shine as dew 
on the petal of the rose; you swing from star to star; you are part and parcel of all this 
manifestation. The Shaasthras teach you this truth through many a parable and story, and even 
directly, supported by the experience of sages and mystics. Hanumaan may have the form of an 
ape; but that is simply the outer casement, the upaadhi. The Lord is the very breath of 
Hanumaan: every hair-end of his was echoing with Raamanaama. 


All forms of divinity are equally sweet 


Through dhyaana and upaasana, you can be aware of yourselves as all this. Mud existed before 
plates and pots; pots and plates are mud; mud there will be when plates and pots are no more. 
The plate and the pot must be aware of their being always mud; that, in other words, is self- 
realisation. When that is achieved, wherever your eyes are cast, you find yourself; wherever your 
attention is directed, you find your reflection. Begin to feel for it now, this very moment. 


Do not hold japam and dhyaanam as the games of 'cracks'; hold fast to them, for they alone can 
save you from ruin. Offer the Lord, not the flowers got in exchange for a few paise from the 
shop, but the fragrant flowers of your own virtues. Let tears of joy be the holy water with which 
you seek to wash the feet of the Lord Let your upaasana dhevatha (deity being worshipped) be 
A anjaneya as in the case of this Shaasthry, or any other form; treat that dhevatha as comprising 
all forms of divinity; do not argue that one form is less and another is more; all are equally sweet. 
Seek to identify yourself with some grand and glorious Entity, for all Grandeur and all Glory is 
His ultimately, 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 25-11-1964 


Life is a game: Play it. Life is Love: Share it. 
Life is a challenge: Meet it. Life is a dream: 
Realise it 

Shri Sathya Sai 


40. Naama and naami 


IT appears as if, in this Bhaagavatha Bhaktha Samaajam, they impose restrictions on all, except 
Myself! For, they warned all speakers so far to stop early, and now they ask Me to take as much 
time as I please! Of course, some 60 members of the Samaajam have come here and each of 
them wishes to partake in the three-day programme, which is possible only when severe 
restrictions are insisted upon the length of their speeches and musical recitals. They are masters 
in their own fields and endowed with bhakthi and shraddha; so I feel that they must be given 
longer time in the coming years when they would be here. 


Man suffers from two types of agony; the first, which can be allayed through the intercession of 
others and the second, which can be allayed only by the individual's own effort. Hunger and 
thirst can be overcome only when the individual eats or drinks; however much others may eat, 
hunger will not abate even an iota. If your wife or father or mother or son or brother offers to 
take an injection on your behalf, can your illness be cured thereby? The hunger of the spirit, the 
illness of inner man is also the same. You must help yourself. The illness has come due to some 
excess, some infection, some breach of rules. The infection is produced by the viruses of kaama, 
krodha, lobha, moha, madha and maathsarya (desire, anger, greed, delusion, pride, jealousy). 
They do not allow your divinity to shine forth; they cause discontent, worry, grief and pain. You 
can brave them only by manifesting your inner strength. Do not yield to them; fight them with 
faith that you are unconquerable. 


Give up the idea that you are the body 


How did this fatal ignorance enter into your makeup? Well, there was once a huge mirror inside 
a room in a rural home. They wanted to take it out, but the door was found too narrow and .too 
short! Some suggested that the wall be broken open while others said that the mirror itself be cut 
into two! How did they place it in this room, one shrewd villager asked. Yes, how did it get in? If 
they only knew that, they could manage to take it out too. Before the room was ready, the mirror 
had got in. So too, ere this body was formed, ignorance had established itself; it is a product of 
the sloth of previous lives. Do not worry about the house, and the mirror will cease to be a 
problem. Give up the idea that you are the body and ignorance will vanish. You can see yourself 
in the light. 


The members of the Samaajam enabled you to listen to very valuable discourses and inspiring 
Harikathas, which made you know many facets of the Raamaayana, Bhaagavatha, the Puraanas, 
the Vedhas and Shaasthras. You heard from them that Raama was "Vigrahavaan-dharmah" 
(Dharma embodied), that Krishna was "Leelaamaanusha vigraha" (sporting in human form), 
but, how does that affect you? Have you felt that you too are kith and kin of Raama and Krishna, 
that every maanava (human) can be a Maadhava, that every nara (man) can be a Naaraayana? 
Unless you adhere a little to Raama dharma, how can you claim to be a bhaktha of Raama? 
Unless you evince a little of the prema that Krishna had, how can you pride yourself on being a 
Krishna-bhaktha? Do not be different from your ideal; approach it as close as you can. You must 
be as golden as the gold you idealise, though you may be a tiny jewel and He, a vast treasure. 
The Lord is Kavi and Vaalmeceki is also a Kavi; both create---one the Joka (world) and the other, 
the slokha (verse). The bhaktha must form himself on the model of Bhagavaan; otherwise, he 
can lay no claim for saaruupya (sameness of the Form of the Lord). 


Maayaa is a false enchantress 


Krishna-avathaara is a Sampuurna Avathaara, the Lord appearing with all the 16 kalas 
(distinctive marks); whereas Raama shared the kalas with other brothers. Raama appeared as if 
He was associated with gunas (qualities), or as having qualitative behaviour, whereas Krishna 
was above and beyond such. Krishna never prayed, even in the direst crisis! But, Raama does so, 
to Aadhithya (Sun God), for instance; the intent of that Avathaara was different. Krishna was 
unaffected by the gunas. His relationship with gopees was pure. A person like Dharmaraaja 
selected Him above all the sages and saints of the day for special worship at the Raajasuuya 
sacrifice. 


The best armour against the tendency to read gross meanings into the /edas of Krishna is Faith--- 
faith in Krishna as the Lord. You can also remember that Krishna was a boy of seven, when the 
raasaleela (sportive dance) happened. King Pareekshith asked Sukha, the immaculate saint who 
extolled Krishna as God, the same question: How could the gopees attain moksha? Sukha 
replied: They knew that Krishna was the Lord and they regarded Him as God and no less. He 
also reminded Pareekshith that he himself owed his life to the divine touch of Krishna which 
changed him from a still-born child into a hefty baby. The miasma that makes you miss these 
points and drags your imagination into the mire is called Maayaa. Identify it as a false 
enchantress---that moment she will vanish and you are free. 


There was once a brahmin who passed through a forest on his way to a village, with a heavy load 
on his head. He could not carry it any further and there was no one in sight, except a chandaala 
(outcaste) youth, who offered to carry it for him only as far as the edge of the jungle, for as an 
outcaste, he was afraid to enter a village of the upper classes. The brahmin persuaded him to 
accompany him into the village itself; he advised him to pretend to be dumb and not answer any 
question put to him. At the village all went well, until the master of the house to which the 
brahmin had gone asked the outcaste to keep aside a pair of sandals. When he hesitated, the 
master chided the fellow, as was his wont: "Eh, you chandaala." As soon as he suspected that his 
identity was discovered, the chandaala fled! Maayaa too will do likewise. 


Maayaa can be driven out 


Maayaa can be recognised and driven out only when the mind is purified by prema and the 
avoidance of envy and hatred, born of egoism. No act done without love can be commended; 
there are many who come here, thousands in fact, year after year, sharing in the bhajana, 
listening to discourses, lectures, and staying put exactly where they were when they first arrived. 
Naama without bhaava (Godward inclination of the mind) seldom reaches the mark. The name 
of the Lord must be recited with awe and wonder, humility and reverence. The bow has to be 
drawn full before the arrow is released; then it will pierce the target. Feeling is the force that 
draws the string taut and makes the Naama reach the Naami (the bearer of the name). 


The Lord is approachable by all; do not have envy towards others or feel that they are your rivals 
or your inferiors or even superiors; each has a place in His mansion. Sathyabhaama suffered 
from envy and so she was never happy. Dhroupadhi had five husbands, but she was able to serve 
all impartially without envy and so Krishna was ever rushing to her rescue. Give your heart over 
to the Lord and move in society as a dedicated being; then, no harm can come to you. As a jeeva, 
you may be an individual; but, as Aathma, you are Vaasudheva, the Samashti (path of the 
Universal whole). 


The gopees were sages in previous births 


First save yourselves and then save others, or try to. Being yourselves caught by the wily slush, 
how can you pull another out? Stand firm and safe on hard dry land and then lend a helping hand 
to the man struggling in the mire. You may wear the ochre robe but the robe may hide an ogre! 
You may advise others on yoga, but you may be full of toga (disease) yourself! Be sincere; talk 
only about your genuine experience; do not distort, exaggerate or falsify that experience, 


Have the Aathmic experience; only then can you understand the Bhaagavatha and explain it to 
others. For example: the incident where Krishna carries away the clothes of the gopees. The 
gopees (cow-herd girls) were rishis (sages) in previous Avathaar periods; the vaanaras 
(monkeys) of Raama avathaara come again under special charter; so their hearts are pure and 
their motives holy. When the gopees pleaded, "Krishna! is it dharma for you to treat us thus?" 
Krishna replied, "My act is not adharma; but yours is, for body-consciousness is against the 
highest spiritual dharma." 


Vyaasa once asked some persons, who came to him for advice to cross the Yamuna near his 
ashram, to bring him milk and fruits and after eating his fill, he told them, "Well! If I have 
maintained my vow of fasting go now and the Yamuna will make way for you!" They said, 
"Then we are lost; for, we saw you eat your fill with the things we ourselves brought you." But, 
Vyaasa said, "I did not eat them. I offered all to Krishna; I have no body-delusion. I am the 
Aathma dwelling in this body." His Aathma-consciousness was so well grounded that he could 
assert that he had not broken his vow! 


World is changing but God is steady 


What is realisation? The moment you see your own beauty and are so filled with it that you 
forget all else, you are free from all bonds. Known that you are all the beauty, all the glory, all 
the power, all the magnitude of the Universe. This Nature is but an infinitesimal fraction of His 
Glory; yet, you feel content with the pleasure it gives, the knowledge you gather about it, the 
wonder it reveals. The reflection of Shivam (auspiciousness) in the mirror of Prakrithi (Nature) 
is jeeva (individual being). 


Look into the mirror and see your own image; you assert - "That image within is mine; but, I am 
different." So too, the jeeva is Shiva but Shiva is not jeeva. The image of the Sun in the water 
shakes, though the Sun is steady, up above; that is the nature of water, not the Sun; so too 
Prakrithi is changing, but Shiva is steady, unchanging, ever the same. You do not believe that 
dreams indicate reality, because the dream is negated on waking. When you get knowledge, the 
waking experiences will also be negated. Until then, you will take all this as real; after that, you 
will find that this has only relative value. 


The drug has to be revised, when the disease takes a turn. So, I shall tell you one more point 
before I close. We hear of many things and see many things. Man fills these with his own 
illusion and garnishes or tarnishes each thing with that illusion. A baby is born and dies within 
two hours or two months. If it survives and dies when it is 16 or 18 years old, the pain is greater, 
for the sense of "mine" has deepened its roots, through association and the development of 
hopeful attachment. No one is worried if the neighbour's son dies. This is due to the egoism and 
exaggerated attachment. 


Give each problem the attention it deserves; but do not allow it to overpower you. Anxiety will 
not solve any difficulty; coolness comes from detachment. Above all, believe in God and the 


efficacy of prayer; the Lord has said that he who does good, thinks good and speaks good will 
not come to harm. That is the way to get Equanimity, Shaanthi. 


You have designed the chains that bind you 


Some of you may imagine that it is a source of joy for the Lord to take a human form. If you are 
in this state, you will not feel so. I am always aware of the future, the past as well as the present 
of every one of you. So, I am not moved so much by pity. Not that I am hard-hearted, or that I 
have no dhaya (pity). If you bolt the doors fast, how can the rays of My Grace be available to 
you? "Swaami," you cry, "I have no eyes; I am yearning to see you. Won't your heart melt at my 
plight?" Of course, this pitiable condition melts your hearts; will it not melt Mine? But, since I 
know the past, the background, My reaction is different. If only you knew, you too will react 
differently. It is the consequence of evil, deliberately done in previous births, and so, I have to 
allow the suffering to continue, modified, often by some little compensation. I do not cause 
either joy or grief; you are the designer of both the chains that bind you. 


Remove the weight from your head by transferring all burdens to the Lord; leave everything to 
His Will, His law. Feed your mind with sweet and wholesome food---Sathsangha, 
Sathpravarthana, Sarveshwara-chintha (company of the holy, speaking of God, thinking of the 
Lord of the Universe); then you are full of joy. Iam of the nature of Bliss (Aanandhaswaruupa); 
come and take Aanandha from Me and returning to your avocations, dwell on that Aanandha and 
be full of Shaanthi. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 26-11-1964 


The traits of Raavana's lust, 
of Shishupaala's pride, 
of Kamsa's hate, 
of Hiranyaaksha's envy 
are tainting every human heart. 
Only the discipline of spirit 
through Japam and Dhyaanam 
can quench the flames 
and sooth the conflagration. 


Shri Sathya Sai 


41. Swinging from yes to no 


THE dharma that is the heritage of India is the staff of life for all men; it is the backbone of 
morality and well-being. It is the nectar which can confer immortality. Others may in their 
ignorance laugh at Indians for taking a stone to be God, but, what they do is to realise even the 
stone as God. It is transformed into God, an act which is a grand victory. The highest energies of 
man in this land are used for conquering death, while in other countries, they are misused in the 
diabolic attempt to make weapons of mass destruction. People here offer themselves to 
Mrithyunjaya (Shiva, the conquerer of death); those others fall at the feet of mrithyu (death)! 
Others are content with tinsel and trinkets; in India, people are taught to dive deep, and win the 
pear, and not wander on the sandy shore, collecting shells. 


But, it is a pity that here, too, the infection is spreading and people are fast losing all sense of 
values and running after vanities and inanities. People attach more value to the many and they 
forget the One; they do not seek the One Persistent Truth; they follow the ever-changing 
falsehood and so, naturally, fall into grief and resentment. Take the simple rite of namaskaaram- 
--the folded palms with which you greet reverentially elders and others. What does it signify, that 
gesture? The right palm is Thath (that entity, the unseen base, the other) and the left palm is 
Thwam (the I, the separate, the individualised, the thing that feels limited, alone, apart). When 
the two palms are brought together and kept in contact, the One-ness of that and this, of all that is 
outside you, and all that is in you, is emphasised and demonstrated: Aham-Brahmaasmi (I am 
Brahman), in fact. What greater and grander greeting can human aspiration discover and 
prescribe? You greet the other with as much joy as you would greet yourself; no man loves 
another more than himself; all are loved for the sake of the self. 


Or, consider another interpretation of this act of folding the palms. The five fingers of the right 
hand are the five karmendhriyas (organs of action), the five of the left are the five 
jnaanendhriyas (organs of perception); they are together ten, dedicated to sage or guru or elder to 
be used for his service or at his bidding. That is the surrender which is called Sharanaagathi, the 
same that Hanumaan practised. 


Principle of idol worship 


Take the case of the Bhagavadh Geetha, to which reference was made. When and where was it 
taught? On the battlefield, in the midst of the opposing forces, to solve a mental crisis. It is when 
such crises affect man that the Lord starts His mission of instruction. For those who have realised 
the goal, there is no need; for those who have known neither goal nor path, neither thirst nor 
yearning, it is of no use. It is only to those who are afflicted by doubt, swinging from yes to no, 
that instruction will be useful. A mental crisis is solved by the word of God. 


Again, the worship of idols has to be looked upon as but the worship of the Formless. Water or 
milk has no form as such; they assume the form of vessel which contains it, is it not? Take milk 
in a cup or a flask, or a kettle or jug or mug, it assumes those forms. So also the form of Krishna 
is the form of a vessel in which you fill the formless entity; the form of Raama, Shiva, Linga, 
Chaamundeshwari, Ganesha--all are forms of vessels in which, according to your fancy, you take 
the Formless, Unpicturable! The Naama is the nectar, the Naami is the cup, the idol. 


Story of crow-demon and its meaning 


Take the story which the Bhaagavathar related just now: the story of Kaakaasura, the crow- 
demon, that wounded Seetha when Raama was sleeping on her lap, when Seetha was there 
helpless to ward him off. What happened to him? Raama made him and all his race one-eyed; the 
one eye-ball rolls from the right to the left and from left to right so that he may see this side and 
that. The meaning is that if you crave for Seetha (Prakrithi, the pleasing, the objective world) 
you cannot get a perfect picture, a synoptic vision; you become one-eyed, warped, defective. 


Again, the Bhaagavathar who gave the musical discourse on Santh Raamadaasa described how a 
vimaana (aerial chariot) came down from the skies to carry the saint to heaven, when his earthly 
career was over. The word vimaana does not mean an aerial chariot, as Bhaagavathars describe 
it; it has a deeper and truer meaning. It means that a person who has given up maana (pride or 
egoism), ascends to Heaven, that is all. Or else, consider this: Vi means a bird, maana means 
measure, dimension. So, the idea of going in a vimaana means that the soul moves through the 
infinite, like a bird through the sky, unopposed. It has gained freedom. 


You heard the stories of the lives of Saints Thyaagaraaja and Naamadheva, described by 
members of this Samaajam. I hope you have learnt the lesson of prema, of Vishwaprema 
(Universal Love), that they conveyed. Imagine the prema of the gopees. One noon, Krishna 
stealthily entered the house of a cowherd and drank all the milk in the pot. The gopee discovered 
Him and when she admonished Him, Krishna took to His heels; when the gopee saw Him 
running over the hard cobble-stones of the street she shed tears of contrition. Those lotus feet 
must pain much, she felt, and wept. "O, what a great sinner I am!" she wailed. Krishna will make 
the wickedest heart melt in repentance. He is Premaswaruupa and Shaanthiswaruupa (of the 
embodiment of Love and Peace) and so He makes every heart sprout into prema and shaanthi. 


Withdraw into yourself like a tortoise 


His prattle, His pranks, His innocent tricks were all-conquering. He gave the gopees a heap of 
bother and a heap of joy. That was the thapas (penance) for them; the bother was anugraham 
(favour); the joy was prasaadham (grace). You cannot have only one. Bhadhram was reading 
from some piece of paper, on one side of which he had written the poems he hastily composed 
on Me this afternoon. The other side of that paper contained some scribbles, but he could not 
avoid bringing those also here. You cannot bring just one side of the paper, the side that you 
want; you have to bring the other side too though you may not like it. Do not get puffed up with 
pride when you succeed; do not get punctured when you fail. Be like the tortoise that is able to 
withdraw its feet under its shell; withdraw into yourself the outgoing senses and be happy in the 
contemplation of your reality. The Lord took the Tortoise Avathaara because it represents the 
true saadhaka. Be also like the swan, which on coming up from the lake, gives a vigorous shake 
to its wings, a shake which scatters the waterdrops off; so too, the saadhaka must shake off the 
attachments that are likely to grow when the world impinges on him. 


Three friends you earn in this life 


Mere scholarship is of no use; it results only in swelled heads. Vedhaantha, really practised, 
makes you fearless, like the lion in the forest. You roar and they flee in terror. The Brahma 
thathwam (Reality of the Supreme Being) expounded in Vedhaantha will make you master of the 
universe. So, do not attach yourself too much to this body or to the things that bring comfort to it. 
You earn three friends in this life. 


The first: The riches you accumulate, which refuse to come with you when you move out of this 
life. 


Tile second: Kith and kin who accompany your body up to the burial ground or cremation-ghat. 
The third: The merit and demerit you have earned, which accompany you to the last. 


Sleep inside the mosquito curtain; the insects can do no harm; so also, do not allow the insects of 
kaama, krodha, etc., to harm you. Get inside the curtain of saadhana while you are in the world. 
Be in the world, but do not let the world into you. That is the sign of viveka (discrimination). 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 27-11-1964 


42. Life's balance sheet 


THE opening of this Shrinivasa cloth market is just an excuse for My coming to Kurnool and 
meeting all of you, including the two ministers, Dr. Lakshminarasiah and Alapathy 
Venkataraamiah. Life itself is a market, where giving and taking, bargaining and speculating are 
part of the game. Life has its ups and downs, its profits and losses, its balance sheets and 
disappointments, its joys and sorrows. But the giving of bhakthi (devotion to God) in exchange 
for mukthi (liberation) is the most profitable business of all; and I am interested in telling you 
about that only. 


Bhakthi is not simply the worship of the Lord; it is much more than that. Primarily it is the 
control of the senses; for, when life is offered as worship, the senses do not run after transient 
things. They can be thus controlled, for man is not a weak animal; he is endowed with mighty 
spiritual power and he can learn to use it; he can tap this power through prayer, which brings 
down Grace to fill the reservoir of his heart. Man tames the lion and the elephant to obey his call; 
can he not tame his emotions and passions? Make your strength evident in the face of hardships; 
when all goes well, you become soft, the blows of defeat toughen you into heroes. The 
difficulties that the organisers of this market encountered, as described to us in the report, show 
that they but deepened the determination of Raamalingiah and others to plod on, until they won 
through. 


Alapathy Venkataraamiah is the Minister in charge of temples in Andhra and the words of advice 
which he gave now are worthy of attention. He spoke of the culture of India and its excellence. It 
held up to mankind for reverence of not conquerors and millionaires but hermits and saints. He 
has also a great love for Sanskrit, the language of our scriptures, which give this land the 
inspiration to advance along the spiritual path of discrimination and non-attachment. The 
scriptures are so framed that they serve the highest needs of all classes of people, whatever their 
age, avocation or attainment. Like a loving mother the Vedhas guide and guard all her children, 
wherever they may be. 


The body is worn by the jeeva to realise God 


Venkataraamiah also said that the attitude of bhakthi is the important thing, not the name and 
form which has drawn it out. Yes; the Lord has a thousand names. In fact, all names are His; 
there is no name that is not His. Krishna, Shrinivasa, Sai Baaba---all are names of the same 
entity. The body is worn by the jeeva in order to realise God, the source from which the jeeva 
came. That is why it is said that it is very lucky for living beings to get equipped with the human 
physique. To be endowed with a desire for things of the spirit is the height of fortune. 


A grandfather was fondling his grandson, a little lad of four; the boy asked him his age; the 
grandfather said he was seven; the lad refused to believe; how could a boy of four have a 
grandfather of seven? But, the old man said, "My dear boy! I do not care for all the sixty-three 
years I spent in the darkness; it is only seven years since I came under the influence of a guru, 
who opened my eyes and led me along the path to realisation. I have lived only seven years so 
far; the rest, I could as well ignore as wasted. I speak the truth always; this the truth." 


That is the proper attitude. Do not admire and gape at the engineering achievements of countries 
that are able to shoot a rocket round the earth or over the moon or invent a bomb that can wipe 
out an entire city. That is the culmination of the strife for death and for mastery over other 
nations. That path leads only to misery, loss, hatred, and waste. The competition is about who 


will earn more in less time. All this comes about because man mistakes himself to be just a 
bundle Of the senses, packed into this body. Really speaking, he is a spark of divinity waiting to 
illumine the intelligence. 


Man has to develop spiritual attitude 


India has been announcing this Truth to the world since ages; this is the land where holy 
personages, divine personalities, saints and sages, avathaars, carrying the authentic stamp of 
God, have demonstrated that nothing else can give man the peace and joy that the contemplation 
of the Universal Aathma can give. 


The poor ryot who throws a paisa into the river Godaavari when he passes over the bridge might 
appear - to the half-educated boor, smoking in the comer, to have wasted a precious coin, which 
he could have put to better use, perhaps, buying a bidi! But, what he did is a spiritual act; he felt 
that the Godaavari was a living mother, who gave food to men and cattle, and his paisa is not just 
a coin, it is an attitude of mind, a token of gratefulness, a flower of worship. He has the Aathma- 
bhaava (spiritual attitude), while the critic who sneers at him is suffering from anaathma-bhaava 
(unspiritual attitude). Hindhu dharma teaches man to see and develop this aathma-bhaava not 
only with all mankind who are bound by the same tie of kinship, but, with all beings and all 
nature. Man is not isolated; he is one with all. All have to be served:, all have to be known, for he 
is this all. 


Kurnool, 4-12-1964 


As the carpenter shapes the wood, the blacksmith shapes the iron, 
the goldsmith shapes the gold, so the Lord shapes in His own way, 
as the fancy suits Him. 


He created the Universe, the manifold, woven of space, time and 
guna. 


Know the Lord is the basis; and lose all fear. 


Shri Sathya Sai 


43. Actors and action 


RARELY do I preside over a dramatic performance; I have come here tonight, because you are 
having a play on "Shri Sailam" and on a great devotee drawn by the deity to that temple and also 
because the author is a devotee for years. What exactly is a drama? It is a dream within a dream. 
It is a dream which unfolds before you, even while you are "awake," another dream. It tries to 
shed some light, some joy, some courage, some faith, some hope, some meaning on the dream 
called life. Naturally, man has to seek all means of discovering the meaning of life. For, without 
knowing it, he is lost; he wanders from birth to birth, receiving knock after knock, and is seldom 
the better for all the experience. 


He must first know that he is deluded into taking the body, the objects and the sense-experienced 
world, as real. Then, he must seek to know the real basis, which is mistaken to be something 
else. That delusion is deep-rooted; it has warped the outlook and put man on the wrong track. 
The drama must be aimed at showing man that he is deluded by a false sense of values; that he is 
running after vanities, leaving reality behind. It should instill into man faith, strong enough to 
make him recoil from that pursuit, and gain the glory of discovering his great illusion. 


The sorrows of life can be ended not through hatred and injustice; these only breed more of the 
species. They will yield only to nobler and higher thoughts and experiences, germinating from 
the pure heart where the Lord resides. This drama, on Hemareddy Mallamma, deals with such 
experiences arising from the heart of a sincere devotee and that is the reason, as I already said, 
why I agreed to preside over this second anniversary of the Kurnool District Kalaa Parishad and 
why I stayed on until the entire play was enacted. 


Service to man is service to God 


Whatever talent a person has, should be dedicated to the service of the rest of humanity, indeed, 
of all living beings. Therein lies fulfilment. All men are kin, they are of the same likeness, the 
same build; moulded out of the same material, with the same divine essence in each. Service to 
man will help your divinity to blossom, for, it will gladden your heart and make you feel that life 
has been worth-while. Service to man is service to God, for He is in every man and every living 
being and in every stone and stump. Offer your talents at the feet of God; let every act be a 
flower, free from creeping worms of envy and egoism, and full of the fragrance of love and 
sacrifice. If you have the talent for acting dramatic roles, well, use it for the glorification of God, 
for the uplifting of man. 


A question often raised when people talk of dramas or films is this: Are the people who flock to 
them bringing down the level of these items of entertainment? Or, are the artistes responsible for 
lowering it? I must say that your responsibility as artistes and writers is much greater, you must 
not stoop to methods and tricks that will bring in more money perhaps, but, which sow seeds of 
evil and vice in the minds of the people, who flock to the theatres. A person who comes in to see 
a play or a film must move out of the theatre a better man, a stronger and more courageous man, 
and, not a poorer and weaker man, less equipped to resist the temptations of the world. 
Remember this when you select a play for the stage or when you take up your pen to write one, 
and you will be on the right path. 


To the actors, I must speak a word. You wear the dress and equipment of noble souls and saints; 
you impersonate even divine characters; you reel off words of high purpose and noble ideals, and 
exhibit deeply thrilling experiences. You do all this very realistically. It is a sign of your skill and 


your untiring practice. You inspire people to better their lives; from you, they learn the path of 
inner peace and devotion, for you re-enact before their eyes the lives of great saints. 


Develop the saadhana of self-effacement 


All this is very good. But, is it too much to ask that you show in your own lives, outside the 
stage, that the godly path is the best and the safest and perhaps even the smoothest? Take this 
role of the actor as a good guide for your own betterment. It is a saadhana which will give you 
peace. Raamakrishna Paramahamsa actually lived the roles of Puraanic characters like Raadha 
and Hanumaan and realised Krishna and Raama through identification with the experiences of 
each. 


Become one with the holy characters you represent; derive inspiration and joy therefrom, your 
acting too will thereby improve vastly; you will earn the gratitude of thousands. Feminine 
characteristics appeared in Raamakrishna's physical body when he intensely believed himself to 
be Raadha yearning for a vision of Krishna; when he identified himself with Hanumaan and 
spent months on trees, uttering only Raamanaama, his anatomy changed; he grew an incipient 
tail. That was the measure of the depth of his bhaava (thought power), of the self-effacement. 
Use the dramatic art and the chances it gives you to develop the saadhana of self-effacement, for 
that is the quickest means of realisation of the real Self. 


Make the theatre holy and sanctifying 


I must mention another point also. The author of this play is also here and you have this day 
honoured him for services to your Parishath and to the cause of "drama". Whenever you write a 
play, transform all that is low and worldly into the high and the other-worldly. Do not treat the 
low things as low; treat them as lapses, as mistakes, failures, incomplete attempts, errors to be 
avoided. Increase the aloukika (non-worldly) aspect of all relations between person and person. 
Human beings are not mere bodies, appetites, hungers and thirst, passions and prejudices. These 
are impediments, lapses. 


Consider rather the aspirations, the ideals, the dreams of unity and universality, the struggle for 
truth, for mercy, for grace, for sympathy, for liberation, and depict these in the plays you write. 
That will change the atmosphere of the theatre and make it holy, sanctifying. You will then be 
helping men to become stronger and the nation to become more enduring. Now, people are 
sliding down the easy gradient of vice and vanity; arrest that process. Open their eyes to the 
chasm that yawns below. 


I bless you that you succeed in raising the standard of conduct and behaviour, the standard of 
morals and manners, the standard of social and individual discipline and instill deep desire for 
discovering the inner Divinity. 


Kurnool, Zilla Parishad Hall 5-12-1964 


44. Are words mere sound? 


THOSE who listen to the teachings of these Pandiths have a great responsibility: they should not 
by their acts defile the lessons they learn. As you grow in years, detachment too should grow; as 
time passes by, the fruit must get ripe and become sweet. Life should not be frittered away in 
accumulating riches; it should be spent in knowing about the glory of God and in realising Him 
in the innermost being of oneself. No other intellectual exercise can give such joy. To discard 
this attempt as only seeking to discover the unknowable, as some men are prone to argue, is the 
height of foolishness. They are labelling the true as "trash" and cherishing the trash as "true"! 


The saadhaka (spiritual aspirant) should be like a good farmer; he removes the thorny bushes 
and plants; he ploughs, waters, sows, manures, fences, destroys pests, and then reaps the harvest 
and fills his granary. Similarly, you have to remove wasteful and wicked thoughts from your 
heart, plough the heart with good deeds, water it with love, manure it with faith, plant the 
saplings of the Name of the Lord and fence the field with discipline, destroy pests with shraddha 
(faith) and reap the harvest of jnaana. Do not be content merely with being in sathsangh (good 
company) or thinking of God, or listening to such discourses; they are but preliminaries, helping 
to awaken interest in 'farming.' Many people spend all their time in fencing; they have little time 
left for attending to the crop which the fence is designed to protect! 


What is the jnaana that you should achieve? It is the giving up of deha (identification), the 
escape from the belief that "you" are the "body." You say, "My hand," "My foot," just as you 
say, "My watch," "My shoe;" but, yet feel you are the body. Examine the reality of the body, and 
escape from this false identification; that is the hall-mark of Jnaana. The 'T' that sees, 
experiences, feels, knows---that 'T' is the Paramaathma (Supreme Soul). 


There are three types of men 


The truth can flash only in a mind clear of all blemishes. The first blemish that I would like to 
warn you against is "inability to bear the success of others." Envy is the greatest of sins. Vanity, 
envy, and egoism---these three are kin. They cut at the root of man's real nature. To feel proud 
that you are a bhaktha is also a blot. Though you may be a mountain, you must feel you are a 
mound; though a mound, you should not pretend to be a mountain. 


There are three types of men: Those who consider the Aanandha of others to be their own 
Aanandha; those who seek Aanandha for themselves, with no attention paid to the Aanandha of 
others; and those who try to prevent others from getting Aanandha, even at the cost of their own. 
There are no Naasthikas (atheists) really speaking, though some of you might aver that there are. 
For, when love is God and when even those, who do not assert that God exists, love some one or 
something, that love itself guarantees that they are capable of sacrifice, selflessness and pity. 
Probably, you believe that those who have no faith in Vedhas and Shaasthras and those who do 
not aver that there is some Omnipresent, Omniscient Being are atheists; but let me tell you, those 
who revere their parents and foster them, those who 10ve and protect with care their brothers and 
sisters---these are Aasthikas (theists), believers in gratitude, love, affection, duty, dharma, etc., 
and these qualities are enough to save 'them' from perdition. 


Love all; revere all; help all to the best of your ability. Endeavour to be as beneficial, as sweet, as 
soft as possible. Then the spot on which you stand become as sacred as Kaashi; the words that 
you utter will be as holy as scripture. This saadhana will lead you to Realisation. 


Manthras can reach the deities 


Aadhithya (the Sun) must be propitiated by manthras, it was said, just now. Aadhithya is the 
deity presiding over time. Propitiate Him better by using time well; the manthra is the vehicle of 
prayer so that the buddhi which Aadhithya has accorded man may be put to the best use. You 
might ask how manthra can reach Aadhithya. I am surprised at the question, for you know 
already how it is possible for people in an aeroplane to communicate with the station they have 
left and the station to which they are proceeding. How do they do that? There are subtler waves 
which will carry the manthras too to the deities to whom they are addressed. The one is yanthra 
shakthi (power of instruments). If you trust in inert matter, life becomes inert; trust in the active 
principle and life is activated. 


Then, there are people who dispute among themselves whether God is Saguna or Nirguna, (with 
or without attributes), Saakaara or Niraakaara! (with Form or formless). Now, who are you, 
among these? Are you Saguna or Nirguna? Are you Saakaara or Niraakaara? Of course you are 
Saguna and Saakaara, because you are with body. So long as you feel you are with body, you 
cannot transcend the Saguna, and realise the Nirguna. When you liberate yourselves from 
bondage to this limitation, you become Nirguna. That happens in a flash. When the Truth dawns, 
all is Light. There is no more darkness. There is no more fear or hate or even love. All are 
subsumed into the One without a Second. 


Words have tremendous power 


You do not know the gem shining inside you, the Divinity whose effulgence is your to intellect, 
whose reflection is the Prema you evince. You know many other things other than this, but not 
this essential thing: you do not know where such and such a scholar lives in Venkatagiri, but 
know where a certain film star lives in Madras! This is something to be ashamed of--this loss of 
the sense of values! You must recognise the Higher, the Highest. Death stalks you at every step. 
Before he mauls you mortally, know the Truth and be blessed. The Name of the Lord is the rifle 
which guards you against beasts of prey in the jungle of life. The rifle makes a loud noise when 
the bullet is ejected fast. So too, along with the sound of the holy Name, eject the bullet of 
feeling too, so that the target is hit. 


Nowadays, people laugh at the idea of Naamasmarana and Naamasankeerthana (remembering 
and singing God's holy Names). They ask, what is in a Name? It is just an assortment of sounds. 
My words too are assortments of sound, but, when they enter your hearts, you feel content, you 
feel encouraged, is it not? Words have tremendous power; they can arouse emotions and they can 
calm them. They direct, they infuriate, they reveal, they confuse; they are potent forces that bring 
up great reserves of strength and wisdom. Therefore have faith in the Name and repeat it 
whenever you get the chance. 


Venkatagiri, Prashaanthi Vidhwanmahaasabha, 12-12-1964, 


Reawakening of man is at hand---reawakening to the knowledge 
that man himself is God. The human body is not you, it simply 
houses the soul, or the spark of Divinity within, for God dwells 


in the heart of every man and that indwelling spark of the Divine is 
you---yourself. All else is illusion. Contemplate on that thought 
and, when the truth unfolds, you will find your true identity; then 


your whole life pattern will change, and you will see everyone in 
the same light. 


Shri Sathya Sai 


45.  Ishwara grants Aishwaryam 


I SEE that this quadrangle has become too small for this vast audience; but, if all of you exercise 
a little patience, you will be able to benefit by the discourses given by the Pandiths. If you allow 
the inconvenience to distract your attention, you will only be losing the chance of a lifetime. 


What is the lifetime? Is it to struggle in the mire or march straight on to the eternal? You will get 
millions to tell you what is pleasing to you; but, it is difficult to get one in a million who can tell 
you what is good for you. What is good for you is akin to truth; truth is hard: but beneficial. It is 
unpleasant advice to tell a man to stick to truth at all costs; but, truth alone pays dividends that 
satisfy. 


Sit quiet for a just a moment and inquire within yourself what is it that stays and what is it that 
does not. You try to know the news of the world, the changing fortunes of men and movements, 
in all the countries of the world; but you have no thirst to know about the conditions and 
conflicts of your own inner world happening against the permanent backdrop of the unchanging 
Aathman, which is your innermost core. Know that and everything becomes known; act and no 
other act is needed; possess that and all things are possessed by you! 


That Aathma is the Universal Aathma; that 'T' is the Universal "I." Consider the magnitude of the 
Aanandha that will fill you when you know that you are all this, that all this is you! The joy that 
you experience through the senses is a minute fraction of this Aanandham; you will not get it if 
the Aathmic bliss is not reflected through the senses. When a pot with nine holes is placed over a 
burning lamp, the light that comes through the holes is the light of the lamp, is it not? When the 
body is negated, that is to say, when the lamp is revealed, the jyothi (light) is seen fully the 
Aathma is realised. But, when the thick cover of ajnaana (ignorance) is placed over the pot, you 
cannot even recognise that there is lamp inside, which illumines the senses. 


Get immersed in the Bliss of Aathma 


There is a deep urge in man to visualise the One behind the many; scientists seek to find a law 
that will explain all sources of energy and all forms of matter. You can also know that, which, if 
known, all else can be known; only, you have to get immersed in the Bliss of Aathma. In the 
grindstone the base is steady, unmoving; the upper grinder moves; but both are stones. So too, 
the chara and the achara (the fixed and the changing), the base and the superstructure, are all 
Brahman. Prakrithi (objective world) moves; Brahman (Supreme Being) is steady; both are 
inextricably inter-related, the one with other in Avinaabhaava-sambandha (relationship of 
interdependent existence). 


God should be the bedrock on which you resolve; then, life would be smooth. The physical, the 
mental, the objective world--these revolve around God, and if that close relationship with God is 
recognised, they lead you into Light. Like the strokes of the hammer, which lend shape and 
beauty to gold. Aathma gets Name and Form through the strokes of multifarious karma, from 
birth to birth. The Aakaaram makes it Vikaaram (Form makes it deformed). The deformity has to 
be set right by Aadhyaathmic rigour--spiritual discipline. 


No effort is made now for this kind of discipline, no lessons are given in the educational 
institutions of the country. It is wrong to lay the blame on want of time; time can never obstruct 
it. Your are the obstructor, not time. The monkey that cannot pull out its clenched fist from the 
narrow neck of the pot lays the blame on the pot or the maker of the pot. But, if only it releases 


the hold on the peanuts it has grasped in that fist, it can easily take its hand out. The fault lies in 
itself. So too man's greed is the reason for this want of time. No one thrust the hand into the pot; 
no one forced the monkey to grab the nuts. It has become the victim of its own rapacity, that is 
all. 


Why should the Lord Himself incarnate? 


Man too is suffering because he cannot rid himself of the greed for sense-objects and sense- 
pleasures (vishaya vaasana). He knows that he has to give up whatever he earns and collects, 
sooner or later; but, yet his attachment waxes instead of waning, as the years go by. If every man 
on earth could take with him on death, even a handful of mud from the Earth, there would have 
been nothing much left and mud would have been rationed at so many ounces per head! 


When people forget the One and run after the Many, Dharma declines; for, there can be no love, 
no sacrifice, no detachment in human affairs then. So, the Lord takes human form and comes 
among men to restore his sense of values. You may ask, why should the Lord Himself incarnate? 
Why can He not set about the task of restoring Dharma through the many minor gods He has at 
His command? This question was passed before the courtiers by Akbar himself for, he laughed at 
the Hindu idea of the Formless adopting Form, and descending into the world as an Avathaar to 
save dharma. Tansen asked for a week's time to furnish the answer and got it granted by His 
Imperial Majesty. A few days later, when he was in the pleasure boat of the Emperor sailing 
across the lake with his family, Tansen cleverly threw overboard a don made to look like the 
Emperor's little son, crying at the same time, "O, the Prince has fallen into the water!" Hearing 
this, the Emperor jumped into the lake to rescue his son! 


The truth behind the Lord's incarnation 


Tansen then disclosed that it was only a doll and that the son was safe. He allayed the anger of 
Akbar by explaining that he had perforce to enact this drama in order to demonstrate the truth of 
the Hindu belief that God takes human form Himself, to save Dharma, without commissioning 
some other entity to carry out that task. Dharma is as the son, God loves it so deafly. Akbar 
could have ordered one among the many personnel he had on board to jump in and rescue his 
son; but his affection was so great and the urgency so acute that the Emperor himself plunged 
into the lake to pull out the "son." 


The decline of Dharma is so acute a tragedy; the intensity of affection that the Lord has for good 
men is so great that He Himself comes. The Lord is Love itself. He comes in human form so that 
you can talk to Him, move with Him, serve Him, adore Him, and achieve Him, so that you can 
recognise your kinship with Him. 


People who discard the precious wisdom of the past are doomed to disaster. That is why, when 
people started decrying and disregarding the Vedhas and Shaasthras, they started to decline in 
morality and strength, courage and confidence. One argument used to find fault with the Vedhas 
by these conceited critics is that the Varna (caste) system is not found in advanced countries of 
the West, as if there too we have no religious leaders, social guardians, traders and workers and 
farmers. Inevitably, human society will get itself divided into these four sections, and they tend 
to harden into castes, each with its own moral code. 


God is the greatest mystery 


What is the basic teaching of the Vedhas? It is that, to whichever economic or social or 
intellectual group you belong, you are child of Immortality, Amrithasya puthraah! It says that 
man is not a product of slime or mud; man is one who manages to live with viveka, so that he is 
able to attain the Divinity latent in him. Ma means 'Ajnaana' (basic ignorance), n, na means 
‘without.' He who is without ignorance, who is wise, who knows himself, who knows that he is 
immortal, is Man. 


God is the greatest mystery; the dark blue colour in which He is depicted is a symbol of the 
depth of that mystery. The sky and the sea are blue on account of their vast depth. Some one 
described the Kaalingamardhana (killing of the cobra Kaalinga) episode of Krishna as the height 
of mystery, for, in the dark depths of the dark Yamuna, where the dark sky was reflected, the 
dark Krishna was dancing on the dark hoods of the deadly dark cobra called Kaalinga! And, he 
blamed his eye which sought to visualise this scene as itself equipped with a dark cornea! 
Remove from the heart the darkness of vice and ignorance; then, in that white background, the 
Meghashyaama, (He whose colour is that of a rain-cloud) can easily be seen. Instead of this, man 
is further darkening his consciousness, while blaming God for evading his search. Seeking light, 
man's steps are moving further and further towards darkness; this is the pity. Better live a 
moment as hamsa (swan) on milk than live for a century as crow, feeding on carrion. 


The tongue should be used for spelling the name of the Lord, not for hissing like a serpent, or 
growling or roaring with intention to strike terror. That is not the purpose for which the tongue is 
granted to man. Speech indicates one's character, reveals one's personality, educates others, and 
communicates experience and information. So, be vigilant about words. Slip while walking: the 
injury can be repaired! Slip while talking: the injury is irreparable! 


Meaning behind coconut breaking 


The most desirable Aishwaryam (prosperity) is Ishwara anugraha (the Lord's Grace); that is to 
say, the most desirable form of wealth is the Grace of God. He will guard you, even as the lids 
guard the eye; do not doubt this. Faith in Providence is as the very breath of life. The bliss that it 
bestows has been experienced by many saints and sages, who have, with faith in their hearts, 
withstood the onslaughts of poverty, neglect and cruelty. Instead of fixing attention on this, man 
fritters his energy on collecting tawdry tinsel, forgetting the diamonds he could well have. Both 
are available on earth; but man is led by glitter and not by worth. 


When you break a coconut in the temple, you should feel that your egoism is broken too. The 
coconut offering is not made so that God may consume the kernel! It is a symbol of the 
destruction of Ahamkaara (egoism), which has to split into two at one stroke, the stroke of 
wisdom. When do you get that effect? When does the coconut break at one stroke? When the 
fibrous cover of the shell is removed, is it not? So too, man must remove the fibrous matter that 
encases his heart--lust, anger, envy and the rest of the wicked brood. Man is the repository of 
vast power; he is no weakling. It is the dhur-vaasanas (vicious tendencies) that make him weak. 
Draw inspiration from the Divine in you and earn the glory of being good, sincere, honest, self- 
sacrificing, lovable. Hear good things, see good, do good, think good; then, all the evil 
tendencies will be uprooted. 


Training ground for spiritual life 


You can be involved in samsaara or the qualities of life. But, remember, no harm can accrue if 
you consider the life of a house-holder, with wife and children, as a training ground for spiritual 
life. You wear glasses to correct the vision, to improve the sight. So too, enter the family, society 
and also politics to correct the vision and improve the sight. Use the opportunities confronting 
you there for developing detachment and self-sacrifice. If you don't, you are like the fool who 
puts on wrong glasses and spoils his vision! 


This mike is in front of Me, obstructing Me from some of those before Me! But, you put up with 
it, because you can hear Me better on account of it. So also, you must put up with the body that 
you are encased in, for, it enables you to realise the Reality, the Divine that you are. It is a means 
to that glorious end. It is not an end in itself. It may be fed well, clothed well, kept well, housed 
well--but, yet, if you have not delved into the depths of Joy that lies in you, it will have no peace. 
That Joy is immeasurable, indescribable. The joy derivable from material possessions is limited, 
in danger of diminution or destruction. Too much of material comfort is harmful to health and 
happiness. Too many dishes spoil the banquet, and turn the appetite askew. 


There are many women present and so, I must tell them this: though they have faith and 
devotion, they promote ashaanthi (turmoil) by their attitudes and behaviour. They have a great 
responsibility which they have neglected; anxiety and worry are growing in the family and in 
society due to their neglecting the discipline that trains people to live self-controlled lives. They 
do not distinguish between a cinema hall, a market or an exhibition, but talk and chatter 
everywhere, even in a temple, or a holy gathering. Children learn from them and they too when 
they grow up lose all reverence for elders and holy places. They talk loud and long and very 
irreverently, and add to the ashaanthi, instead of reducing it. They were once the pillars of 
dharma but, now, do not know what it means, how it has to be practised in daily life. 


Means must be as pure as the end 


Once you have tasted Amrith (nectar), can you relish any other food? India has once tasted the 
Amrith of Sanaathana Dharma (Eternal Religion); how foolish is it then to run after foulness and 
frivolity? There are some cynics who spurn Sanaathana Dharma as' out of date, meaningless, 
foolish, etc. This is because that Dharma insists that the means must be as pure as the end, that 
every act must be done as efficiently as an act of worship, that true Love must forget all 
differences of status, age and wealth, that without self-control and detachment, man cannot claim 
humanity. A man can nowadays become a ‘hero' for millions, without acquiring any virtue, being 
a 'zero' so far as Dharma or morals are concerned. That is the sad state of affairs. An image is 
seen as a stone; but, in the past, in every stone, they saw the Divine, lying latent. Now, 
intelligence is the handmaid of cleverness; then, it was the first step towards wisdom, which saw 
all things as permeated by the Divine Principle. 


If your wish is not fulfilled, you start blaming the God to whom you prayed; the fault lies in you, 
in your not having the needed qualification to earn the fulfilment. Or, it may lie in the feeling at 
the back of the wish. You cannot discover which. My acts are the foundations on which I am 
building My work, the: Task for which I have come. All the "miraculous acts" which you 
observe are to be interpreted so. The foundation for a dam requires a variety of materials; 
without these, it will not last and hold back the waters. 


Purpose of "miraculous acts" 


When the Lord has incarnated, He has to be used in various ways by man, for his uplift. Krishna 
held aloft the Govardhana Girl, not to demonstrate His siddhi or attainment, but to protect the 
gopas and gopees (cowherd boys and girls) and the cattle they held dear. He had to do something 
which man could not accomplish. He had no intention to publicise Himself. Only inferior minds 
will revel in publicity and self-aggrandisement. These have no relevance in the case of 
Avathaars. They need no advertisement. Those who decry the superhuman are the ignorant or the 
wicked, that is, those who have no authority to judge the spiritual. The establishment of Dharma 
is My aim; the teaching of Dharma, the spread of Dharma---that is my objective. These 
"miracles" as you call them are just a few means towards that end. 


Some people remark that Raamakrishna Paramahamsa said that siddhis are obstructions in the 
path of the saadhaka (spiritual aspirant). Of course they are; he may be led astray by siddhis; he 
has to keep straight on without being involved in them. His ego will increase if he yields to the 
temptation of demonstrating his siddhis. This correct advice, which every saadhaka should heed. 


Cynics carp without knowledge 


The mistake lies in equating Me with the saadhaka whom Raamakrishna wanted to help, guide 
and warn. This is merely the nature of Avathaara: the creation of things, ab initio, with intent to 
protect, guard and give joy, a creation that is spontaneous and lasting. Creation, Preservation and 
Dissolution---these three, only the Almighty can accomplish; no one else can. Cynics carp 
without knowledge. If they learn the Shaasthras, they can understand Me, or they should 
cultivate direct experience. 


Your innate laziness prevents you from the spiritual exercises necessary to discover the nature of 
Godhead. The Guru says, "Through karma, clarify your intellect." The disciple is lazy; he prefers 
dhyaana, sitting quiet in one place. After a few attempts, he asks that some other path be laid 
down for him. The laziness should go out of man's nature, in whatever shape it appears. That is 
My mission. This is the first step in converting Maanava into Maadhava---man into God. 


God alone is eternal, man is a momentary flash, a tiny wavelet, that rises and falls. So, fill 
yourselves with vast thoughts, magnificent ideas, indefinable splendour, by reciting the Names 
of God, names that describe Him to your receptive consciousness. That is the main discipline for 
this Age. 


Venkatagiri, Prashaanthi Vidwanmahaasabha, 13-12-1964 


46. The human raft 


MAN is the victim of many a pain; to those who identify themselves with body, life is a series of 
trouble and misery. But to those who know that the body is but a vehicle, these cannot cause 
anxiety. I must emphasise this now, when I am inaugurating this Primary Health Centre. Bodily 
health is important, for ill-health affects mental poise and concentration. When the body is fit, 
mental functions too run smooth; when the body suffers, the mind too gets unsettled. So, this raft 
called body which is the only means of getting across the sea of samsaara (worldly life), has to 
be kept in good trim. 


Untruth, injustice, anxiety---all cause leaks and loosen the knots of the raft. With such a poor 
raft, it is foolish to attempt the crossing. The raft has to be cast aside when the crossing has been 
effected; there is no more use for it. The human raft is the most efficient, for it is built out of 
viveka, vichakshana and vairaagya (discrimination, ability and non-attachment), hard timber that 
can stand the beat of wave and the sway of current. If one does not make the best use of this 
chance, it may not come again for a long long time. 


Devotion and morality are as important for physical health as they are for mental health. They 
free the mind from agitation, they feed it with joy and contentment; they quieten the nerves and 
help even bodily processes. The flowers of this garland were buds yesterday; they bloomed this 
morning; they have started to fade now and tomorrow they will rot and dry. But, the string that 
holds them together interpenetrating them, is not subject to such change; It was string yesterday, 
it is string now and it will be string tomorrow. The unchanging Aathma and the changing body--- 
analyse them thus and be convinced of the eternal universal core of your being. As a thinking, 
discriminating human being, it is your responsibility to discharge this duty to yourself. And also 
to your country! For, India deserved the honour of the "World Teacher" because her people 
always insisted on this great responsibility and tried to discharge it. But, when Indians neglected 
this and attached value to physical comfort and social status, the land fell into the morass of 
competitive struggle. 


Treat your family as a sacred trust 


Now, man encased in rockets takes pride in zooming round the world at terrible speeds and even 
racing to the moon; but he has not succeeded in penetrating even an inch into the innermost 
recess of his own mind and controlling the vagaries rampant there. To save yourself from being 
carded away by the current of change, you must swim up the river, which is a hard enterprising 
process, indeed. 


Hold all your property and wealth in trust for the Lord who gave them to you; even your family, 
you must treat as a sacred trust, as persons given to you by the Lord to love, foster and guide. 
Thus, you must elevate your attachment into worship and make it an instrument for spiritual 
progress. 


Minister Balaraami Reddy expressed his wish that this Health Centre, named after Velugota 
Venkataraaja Gopaalakrishna Yachendhra, should prosper from year to year. But a hospital's 
progress is to be judged, not by the number of patients coming for treatment. It must educate the 
people around in the principles of health and see that the area is freed from disease. And among 
the means to ensure health, spiritual discipline is the most important 


Let your love flow towards all 


You should not be ever entangled in the meshes of this world and its problems. Try to escape 
into the purer air of the spirit as often as you can, taking the name of the Lord on your tongue. Of 
the 24 hours of the day, have 6 hours for your individual needs, 6 hours for the service of others, 
6 hours for sleep and 6 for dwelling in the Presence of the Lord. Those six hours will endow you 
with the strength of steel. 


Gopaalakrishna Yachendhra, the Chairman, described the green fields that surround the villages 
and declared that there is nothing so congenial to happiness as village life. Villages are the 
backbone of the nation. Cities pant for the contentment and joy of villages. Cities are lost in 
confusion, noise and selfish fury. The ryots who till the soil and feed the people are indeed holy 
men, who help their brothers and sisters in their dire need. They bear hard ‘oil, silently and 
gladly. But you need not feel small. Be like gods and you can partake of Amritha (nectar), as the 
gods did once. If you are like Asuras (demons), you can have no share in the Divine Nectar. 


Let your love flow towards all; you have love but, now, it is distributed selfishly and sparingly. 
Or at least, do not hate other people and talk ill of them or seek to estimate their faults. Do not 
feel sad or hurt when others are happy; try to share their happiness and be happy yourself, when 
those around you are. Your speech has to be soft and sweet; do not imitate the roar of the lion or 
the hiss of the serpent. In a village where everybody knows everyone else and where living is so 
intimate and interdependent, this kind of sweet talk, motivated by love, is essential. The tongue 
is now the sharpest weapon in the armoury of the villager, it ruins many homes, it divides 
brothers and neighbours; it does more havoc than a bomb! 


Let not pests of greed spoil the harvest of plenty 


This Health Centre will become efficient if villagers appreciate its service and co-operate with 
these doctors and if you do not frustrate its efforts by wrangling among yourselves. Develop love 
and co-operation; then villages can thrive. Otherwise, even the best of intentions on the part of 
the Venkatagiri Royal Family or Government Agencies will be frustrated. The presence of the 
Minister and of the President of the Samithi here is a sign that they will do their best for you; it 
now lies with you whether you will make the best use of the help that they so readily grant. If 
you do that, I know, the Venkatagiri Royal Family will be really happy. 


I have to tell you something more about this Health Centre. The Malayaala Swaami who made 
this place famous and popular by establishing his Aashram and School was desirous that a 
hospital should be added to the amenities of this village. Now that this Centre is inaugurated, his 
wish has been fulfilled. Let not the pests of anger, lust and greed spoil the harvest of plenty that 
you seek through your earnestness and steadiness. Do not use your hands to harm or injure 
another, use them rather to beat time, when you recite the Names of the Lord, Names which are 
redolent with His Glory. That is my advice to you today. 


Yerpedu, 14-12-1964 


47. You are born for your own sake 


Prashaanthi 'Vidwanmahaasabha is meeting here for the second time and I am glad I am here to 
witness the dawn of Aanandha that is lighting up every face. I have also come to confer on you 
Aanandham. Really, all this misery is caused by mankind itself, not by any extraneous agency. 
Having all the instruments of joy and contentment in one's possession, if man is miserable, it is 
only due to his perverseness, his stupidity. He has been warned, over centuries, by the scriptures 
of all languages that he should give up greed and lust, give up the habit of catering to the senses, 
give the belief that he is just this body and nothing more. But, yet, he does not know the illness 
that is torturing him. 


The disease is due to 'vitamin deficiency,' as they say; the vitamins are sathya, dharma, shaanthi 
and prema (truth, righteousness, peace and divine love). Take them and you recover; assimilate 
them into your character and conduct and you shine with fine mental and physical health. The 
more material wealth you collect, the greater the bother and the greater the sorrow when death 
calls. You have no peace if you struggle to win it through the accumulation of wealth. You have 
come from your villages, so many thousands of you, to this place to see Sai Baaba and to hear 
Him, is it not? Well, over and above those two aims, you must have a third one too. You must 
also see yourself and hear your inner voice, urging you to discover your own truth. I am 
prompting you to discover your Reality. That is My Mission. 


Save yourself by yourself 


You should not be swayed by the demon of doubt. Doubt comes only from ignorance; it 
disappears when knowledge dawns. When a man was tiding on horseback with another carrying 
a bed behind him, passersby concluded that the rider was the master and the man behind was his 
servant. When both reached a caravanserai and when the rider was feeding the horse and the man 
with the bed was sleeping on it in the verandah, men thought the former was the servant and the 
latter, the master! Conclusions drawn on flimsy grounds are always subject to revision. You are 
born for your own sake, not for the sake of any one else. You have to cure yourself of the disease 
of ignorance, just as you have to cure yourself of the disease of hunger. No one else can save you 
from both. "Uddhareth aathma-na athmaanam": "Save yourself by yourself" 


God is in you, but like the woman, who fears that her necklace has been stolen or lost, recognises 
that she has it round her neck when she passes a mirror, man too will recognise that God is in 
him, when some Guru reminds him of it. The joy' that you then get is incomparable. Every 
Indian must realise that the science of self, discovery is self-heritage. He must value it and earn 
it. Now, there are many scholars, able to expound that heritage, but few who practise it and earn 
the reward. That science was explored by sages and laid down in clear and simple terms. Not to 
know it and not to practise it is the greatest loss that this country suffers from. Fancy for 
naveenam (the modem) in preference to the sanaathanam (the classical and the eternal), is the 
cause of this misery. Sugarcane should not be equated with any cane! Only those who do not 
know the taste of sugar will do so. 


Seek jnaanam (spiritual knowledge), which is the seat of sweetness. Get rid of the desire for 
sense-enjoyment, which like the pleasure you get while scratching itching eczema, only makes 
the complaint worse. You cannot cure it by yielding to the temptation to scratch. The more you 
scratch, the more you are tempted to continue, until bleeding intervenes. So, desist from that vain 
pursuit and concentrate on spiritual matters, or at least, move in the world with the everpresent 


consciousness that it is a morass, a net, a trap, into which attachment and desire will precipitate 
you. Be a true bhaktha and become so small that you wriggle out of the shackles of the senses or 
be a true jnaani and become so huge, that you escape by breaking the shackles. 


Naayudupet, 16-12-1964 


Every being needs Prema inhales and exales Prema, 

for Prema is the basic breath; 

everyone Is the embodiment of Prema. 

Love knows to fear, so love needs no falsehood to support it. 
Love seeks no reward; love is its own reward. 


Shri Sathya Sai 


48. Diagnose your own disease 


ON My way to this place, thousands of eager men and women stood across and insisted that I 
should meet them at the Sai Mandhiram. Some delay was caused thereby. I could not come here 
in time. I have therefore to shorten My discourse to you. Bhakthas bind Me; I have no chance to 
have My way when people plead so. My Aanandham as well as their Aanandham were both 
indescribable. On account of this delay, I know, some people left and went home. Well; yours is 
the luck; you stayed on. The chakora bird gulps the first rain-drops as they fall; it waits long and 
with profound yearning. It is content if four drops wet its parched throat. 


Life is many-directional; it has many faces. But, there are some directions which are auspicious, 
some which are ruinous. Most of it is spent in pursuit of mirages, in building castles in the air. 
Keenness to slake the thirst in the mirage-lake is never satisfied. Desire multiplies itself; the 
fulfilment of one leads to proliferation into many. You can never say, "That ends all my desires; 
I have no more wants." The love that is concentrated on oneself is as a bulb that illuminates the 
room only, without shedding light outside the four walls. It is confined to the senses and never 
opens out to others, who are your kith and kin in God. 


There is another type of love, larger and deeper, which expands into the members of one's 
family. It is as moonlight, not strong enough to make things clear, but, enough to move about in. 
It also undergoes rise and fall, increase and decrease. But the most desirable type of love is as 
sunlight, ever engaged in purifying, activating, illumining, knowing no distinction. This love will 
make man act ever in the spirit of dedication to the Lord. And, so, the acts too would be 
elevating and holy. 


Liberation gives the highest Bliss 


Dedication is different from service; in service, there is the element of ego. "I serve, He is the 
master, He requires my service, I am necessary for Him." But, in dedication, the I is wiped out. 
There is no desire for the fruit; the joy consists in the act being done. To cultivate that attitude of 
dedication, every one must think of God, remember the Name of God and deepen faith in God. 
University degrees will not give, riches cannot buy, kinsmen cannot hand over and teachers 
cannot confer the pre-requisites for Shaanthi---Faith and Devotion. 


The most chronic disease of man is Ajnaana---ignorance of the undying Aathma within him. One 
must know the reason why he caught this aphasia and try to get cured. The general cause of this 
illness is infatuation for the objective world and subservience to senses. There is even a deeper 
cause - the undue prominence given to the body, imagining it to be the touchstone of value. The 
body is like a temporary shelter where you reside for a short while, on your journey. The 
gamyam is kaivalyam---the goal is liberation. Liberation gives the highest Bliss. 


Have faith in the Ocean, not the wave; believe in the Lord, not in little things. But, the tragedy is, 
you put your trust in little men, in wicked men, in men who you know are vicious and greedy; 
but you hesitate when asked to put faith in the Lord, who is more merciful than any father, more 
loving than any mother, more powerful than any earthly authority, more considerate than any 
kinsman. You do not doubt each other; but, you develop doubt regarding God. Even laymen talk 
long and loud when the topic for discussion is 'God!' No one asks them their credentials. 


God asks for the heart, the full heart 


"'Doubt' is easy and faith difficult. Dwell on the Naama and its sweetness will saturate your 
tongue and improve your taste. Do not count the number of times you have repeated it. For, 
whom are you going to impress with the number? The Lord will respond even if you call Him 
just once from the depths of feeling; He will be deaf, even if you call Him a million times, 
automatically, artificially, with the tongue not with the heart. It is easy to amass figures. 


When Akbar challenged his courtiers to give him the exact number of birds in Delhi, one 
illiterate servant offered to do it. After a few days, he came to the court and said that there were 
99 lakhs 99 thousands of them! "Suppose, I have the figure verified and it is found that there are 
more, what punishment shall I inflict on you for your wrong calculation?" asked the Emperor. 
The servant said, "Some might have flown in from the surrounding areas." "What if the total 
number is found to be less?" asked the Emperor. "Some birds must have flown out of the City," 
he replied coolly. Numbers are easy to manipulate, but Grace does not depend upon them at all. 
He asks for the heart, the full heart and nothing but the heart. 


If the heart has many leaks, the sweetness will be drained away and you cannot offer Him the 
full heart. Egoism, pride, thirst for fame--all these are leaks, if you donate something to a good 
cause, hoping that your name will appear in the Andhra Patrika, exulting when it is seen there, 
dejected when it is not found, then that charity springs a leak. Such sacrifice is superficial and 
selfish. The seeds will sprout only when they are well within the soil, not when they are on the 
surface. Karna lost his life when he recalled in despair the sacrifices he had made; they should 
not be counted in the memory. 


"The fever of arrogant youth" 


Bargaining and calculating are useless in the spiritual field. You cannot higgle with the Lord and 
ask for proportionate rewards. Ask for proportionate reward and you lose all. He has his own 
arithmetic. Food, Head, God---that is the series; eat food for developing the intelligence, the 
head; then, with that intelligence, realise God. The senses can inform you only of the obvious, 
what comes within their ken. But, the intuition of the sages as recorded in the Vedhas speaks of 
that which cannot be reached by the senses or intellect or imagination. To treat the Vedhas 
lightly is the height of foolishness. 


"The fever of arrogant youth," which I call Youvana sannipaatham, fogs the intellect and makes 
youth ungrateful and callous. Parents are neglected; elders are dishonoured; teachers are 
ridiculed; scriptures are scoffed at by them. They boast that they will not bow their heads to any 
one; but, they have to bow their heads at least to the barber! They cause grief to the very persons 
to whom they owe their very life. Do not be led away by the belief that this is respectable. Have 
as your ideal Lakshmana or Dharmaraaja or Seetha or Meera. Strive to see good things, hear 
good things, speak soft and sweet, instal the Lord in the altar of your heart. Believe in the 
consequences of karma, done now and in the past. No one can avoid the reactions of his actions; 
the effects have to be consumed by the 'actor' himself. 


Serve to share and spread Aanandha 


You are undergoing training to become better Graamasevakas (village social workers); this is a 
great chance that has come in your way to render seva (service) and to share and spread 
Aanandha. The seva that you do will become useful and lasting, provided you invite great 


Pandiths to the village and through them instruct the villagers to cultivate contact with the Lord' 
devotion to God, love towards men. I wish that you strive to provide bhajans, keerthanas and 
Harikathas in order to inspire them towards the higher life of the spirit. 


It is now rather late; the night is already far advanced. I am going to Madras right from here, but, 
it does not matter to Me; I do not care about the exhaustion; but, you have to reach home and 
many of you have gathered from the villages around. So, I shall stop now. I feel the exhaustion 
only when you do not practise what I tell you. If you are determined to act according to My 
advice, I shall be with you all the 24 hours. Now, I ask you only to ruminate, like the cow, on the 
precious words you have heard and assimilate them into your life. 


Village Level Workers' Training Centre, 
Kaalahasthi, 17-12-1964 


49. No srama in aashrama 


I HAVE been moving about in this region for fifteen years but, this is the first occasion on which 
I have appeared in this charming Aashram. I need not say that this is a great chance for you, a 
Sumuhuurtham, as they say, an event of auspiciousness. A State will have a Constitution and a 
set of great laws; Sanaathana Dharma is the law and the Vedhas are the Constitution of the State 
of Man. These were laid down by sages who "saw" them in their moments of ecstatic intuition; 
that is why they are called Seers. Hence the Vedhas are called A-pourusheya (not ascribable to 
any particular author). They are named Shruthi, that which is heard, remembered, and ‘held as a 
treasure in the memories of men. The Vedhas are their own authority; just as the eye is the judge 
of what the eye reveals. You cannot smell a thing and judge its colour. So the Vedhas have robe 
judged by the Vedhas only; the experience of the sages has to be tested by sages who seek that 
experience through the processes laid down in the Vedhas; and, in every case the process is 
followed, the experience is won, correctly and dearly as described. 


The Vedhas have to be practised; that is the purpose of these revelations. Merely learning them 
by rote is of no use. The Uththarameemaamsa section provides the knowledge necessary to 
liberate oneself from bondage and blindness. That is called Brahmajnaana, for, when one 
reaches a certain stage in saadhana, he realises that all this is identical with Brahman, which is 
cause and effect, being and becoming, both. 


The Bhaarathabhuumi (land of Bhaarath) which is inherently Yogabhuumi and Thyaagabhuumi 
(land of godliness and sacrifice) is being dragged along the tracks of other Bhogabhuumis (lands 
of enjoyment), and putting on the paraphernalia of worldly happiness. This is the path of 
ignorance, of hatred, of greed, of wickedness, and competition. What the Rishis laid down is the 
best, for, they trained themselves to be impartial and detached. The teachings of the Vedhas were 
explained and elaborated in the Raamaayana, Mahaabhaaratha and Bhaagavatha, and in the 
commentaries by Shankara, Raamaanuja and Madhvachaarya. Even those who were the 
custodians of Vedhic learning have now neglected it and taken to lesser studies. 


Dedicate your work as offering to the Lord 


Vimalaanandha, the Head of this Aashram, was in the previous status of life, at Prashaanthi 
Nilayam for about a year. He had asked for My Blessings when he took up this responsibility and 
this Sanyaasi's status, on the passing away of his Guru, the Malayaala Swaami. Like the ocean 
calling to the river, the role of a monk was calling him; the jeeva and the Aathma are so 
inextricably associated. It is the devotion and saadhana of aspirants that has taken such grand 
shape here. Do not ascribe it to one person; he inspired, but hundreds caught the inspiration, and 
dedicated themselves to the task. Raama 


did not live in the forest, away from the cities, for the sake of its charm; he took it as an 
opportunity to be of service to the Maharishis doing penance there, eager to come face to face 
with God. He moved about so that He could give Aanandha to them. Malayaala Swaami came 
here to help the saadhakas and the efforts of devotees are clear in the development of this 
Aashram. 


Have a pure sense of vision and hearing 


People have read much; but, how much of their reading have they applied in life? They repeat 
that the senses are enemies of the higher life; but they continue to be their slaves. Have a pure 


vision; then, you will not find faults in others. Have a pure sense of healing; then, you will not 
relish the scandals regarding others scattered by foolish men, who do not know that they are but 
scandalising themselves. Care more for Sarveshwara Chintha---thought of the Lord of All; not 
Sareera Chintha---thought of the care and upkeep of the perishable body. 


Every farmer knows that good seeds must be sown for getting a rich harvest. If the seeds are bad, 
his efforts are fruitless. Sow the seeds called Name of God in the well-prepared field of the heart; 
feed it with the manure of Faith; have Discipline as the fence to keep out stray cattle. Without a 
fence guarding the crop, farming will be like shooting without a bullet: all sound and no game! 


Prayer must come from the depths of feeling; the Lord looks for bhaava (sincerity of feeling), 
not baahya (outward pomp). With feeling, you can make the Divine Heart bloom in joy. The 
Karma kaanda and the Upaasana kaanda (sections of the Vedhas dealing with rituals and 
worship) insist on the worship of God and devotion to Him. They sing His Glory and instruct 
man how to meditate on His splendour. They say that He is known by many Names and appears 
under many Forms. Ekam sath, they say: only One exists; but, Vipraah bahudhaa vadhanthi--- 
but, the same One is known and described in many different ways by the wise. To know that you 
are that One, and therefore Immortal, is your right, your heritage, That is why the Vedhas 
acclaim man as Amrithasya Puthraah: Children of Immortality. 


The Guru dispels darkness like the Sun 


Act in conformity with that ancestry, that status. The generality of people are unaware of the 
Glory and Grace of God; the Malayaala Swaami made every one who came to him understand 
the Real behind the Unreal. He had known it by study and saadhana. The Guru is the teacher of 
Aathma-vidhya (science of the Self); he dispels darkness, like the Sun. His sankalpa (resolve) is 
that this Aashram must progress in the task of spiritual enlightenment. Vimalaanandha wrote to 
Me, when he was selected to succeed him as head of this Aashram asking for My blessings. I 
wrote back "Since he has selected you, his blessings will guard and guide you and you will 
surely achieve Digvijaya (conquest in all directions)." He was a little nervous, not because he 
had no faith in the efficacy of the Guru's blessings, but because he had little experience in 
bearing such burdens. I am glad all those attached to the Malayaala Swaami and this Aashram 
have strung together their loyalties and prepared a garland for honouring Vimalaanandha. 


- You have a committee of elders, who will also look after the affairs and come to his help. Every 
one should be prompted by reverence to the Guru which means not worshipping his photograph, 
but acting according to his orders, his commands, his Aajna. If you are right on the path laid 
down by him, then you can march boldly on, regardless of praise or blame. Do not doubt this. 


Here I must tell you something about Myself, like leaving a Visiting Card, here. My task is not 
merely to cure and console, remove individual misery. It is something far more important. The 
important task of the mango tree is to produce mango fruits. The leaves, the branches, and the 
trim of the tree are useful, in their own way, no doubt; but the main aim is the fruit. So also from 
the plantain tree, the fruit is the main gain. The leaves, the edible core of the stem, these are all 
incidental. So too the removal of misery and distress is incidental to My Mission. 


Lord's resolve cannot be hindered 


My main task is the re-establishment of Vedhas and Shaasthras in the heart of Bhaarathavarsha 
and the revival of knowledge about them in the people, This task will succeed; it will not be 


impeded by any obstacle. It will not be limited or slowed. When the Lord decides and wills, His 
Sankalpa (Resolve) cannot be hindered; it will not be hindered. You must have heard people say 
that Mine is all magic, black or white. Well, these people may also say that Krishna lifted 
Govardhanagiri by means of black magic, or that Raama built a bridge over the sea, by black 
magic! 


Of course, there is magic in the world both white and black; but, the manifestation of Divine 
Power must not be interpreted as magic. Can the crow's egg and the cuckoo's egg be identified as 
belonging to one class? Magicians play their tricks for earning a livelihood. They use it for 
worldly fame and wealth. They are based on falsehood and they thrive on deceit and ignorance. 
This Body can never stoop to that level. No; never. This Body has come through Divine 
Sankalpa (the Lord's Resolve), to come. That resolve is intended to uphold Sathya. Bhagavath- 
sankalpa (God's resolve) is always Sathya-sankalpa (resolve that comes true). Everyone knows 
the strict discipline of Prashaanthi Nilayam; the order is "Not even a flower is to be brought!" 
Due to ignorance and vicious motives they do not grasp correctly the nature of Sai Shakthi. They 
interpret it as something else. That shakthi (power) is unlimited; the fault lies in their vision, if 
they cannot see it as it is. There is nothing that Divine Power cannot accomplish. 


It can transmute earth into sky and sky into earth. To doubt this is to prove that you are too weak 
to grasp the grandeur of the Universal. 


Honour the Dharma of your profession 


I have come to instruct all in the essence of the Vedhas, to shower on all this precious gift, to 
protect and preserve Sanaathana Dharma. Each profession has a Dharma, a set of moral 
restrictions and regulations guiding its exercise; if these are honoured, then the joy of the 
participant will go on adding itself, plus, plus, plus. There are differences of innate 
characteristics, impulses, attitudes, prejudices, excellences and character tendencies which mark 
out man from man. You do not treat all mangoes alike and buy them in a lot; some may be sour, 
some small, some big, some tastier, some tasteless, some juicy, some fibrous, etc. You appreciate 
them by their taste, is it not? You select them according to the species, the jaathi. 


Of course, all are equal before the Lord; no one has any special claim for preference, except 
probably the miserable and the distraught. But, in human societies there must be distinction 
based on qualification and merit, whether it be intellectual, moral or spiritual. If all felt that the 
goal is the same, there will not be faction and fights on the way. The work that each does is 
important for the whole community; there is no high or low. It is not for this, that one has to 
compete with others; these earthly statuses and superiorities and inferiorities are tawdry tinsel, 
temporary pinpricks. Compete with others in the quickness with which you march on to God. 
Years ago, this place was deserted waste; today, it has become so full of promise, so rich in 
spiritual potentiality. How did this happen? How did the plan of Malayaala Swaami bear fruit? 
Because he stuck to his ideal; his spiritual authority was respected. 


Insist on discipline during student-life 


You must observe strictly the karmas (duties) laid down in the Vedha, for you are teaching the 
Vedhas here. Men must observe the Dharma laid down for them and must be allotted the status 
they have to be given; women must be allotted the status allowed for them. Both are the children 
of God, no doubt; but, discipline demands that men and women must be allotted the spheres that 
are conducive to Dharmic life. Insist on discipline during student-life; only good can come out of 


this strictness. Let boys and girls grow as disciplined, self-restrained citizens; that is a greater 
contribution to the country than a number of well-read but ill-disciplined persons, who will 
plunge society into confusion. Those who are engaged in the game will be so immersed in its 
hurly-burly that they may not see it whole. The spectator will be able to give better directions for 
playing the game. So, respect the advice of those who come and see. 


The Samaadhi (memorial structure) that you have built for your Guru, Malayaala Swaami, is 
proclaiming the devotion you have towards Him. That devotion must be evident in every act and 
thought of yours; see that you follow his teachings and demonstrate that you deserve to be 
known as his disciples, by even the smallest act of yours being filled with the Love that a true 
Adhwaithin will have. The Malayaala Swaami had saturated his mind in the Geetha. He had 
dedicated himself to the Geetha ideal. 


He placed this Aashram on the shoulders of Vimalaanandha and passed away. Now, all those 
who revere him must give full support to Vimalaanandha Swaami and see that the Guru's 
command is fulfilled. The Aajna (command) should not be neglected or ignored. I have much to 
speak to Vimalaanandha Swaami taking him apart. So, I shall stop now. I am happy that I came 
to this place and shared My Aanandha with you all. I changed the programme for today and 
came here in order to meet you and Vimalaanandha Swaami. 


Vyaasaashram, Yerpedu, 17-12-1964 


Good Conduct has to be 

the main key to life of men. 

It is the way of living the path of virtue, 
that keeps one in the memory of people 
long after death. 

If it is not the virtuous way, 

the person is as good as dead. 

It is often declared that 

knowledge is power. 

No, No. Character is power. 

Nothing can be more powerful 


on earth than character. 


Shri Sathya Sai 


50. Beacon in the dark 


THE reason why this land is today plunged in various types of distress is to be sought in our own 
deeds, behaviour and relations with others, which deny the faith in the innate divinity within us! 
Of what benefit is it to lament when stricken by disease? One ought to lament and be warned 
when the first false step was taken towards damaging the health. Ignorance of the rules of health, 
gleaned by the experience of generations, is the root cause of the illness which had laid India 
low. The ancients had discovered a cure for death itself and for birth which is the concomitant of 
death. They were votaries of Mrithyunjaya (the victor over death), not of Death which many 
nations worship today out of their greed for glory. 


We praise our ancient seers but discard their heritage; we revere the texts they collected, but 
disregard their teachings. We expound their doctrines and discoveries, but decline to practise 
them! We are beggars living in a house of gold. The fact that it is precious metal that surrounds 
us is unknown. Discover it and you are saved! 


This is called Praaptha-praapthi (attaining the already existing). This mike was purchased from 
a shop; it was not in the possession of the man who wanted it. But, peace and joy are not like this 
mike. They are not available in shops; they are in the possession of the very men who are in need 
of these. A friend comes into your room when you are desperately in need of money and you ask 
him for a loan; but, just then, quite by accident, he finds inside the pages of a book from your 
book-shelf that he starts reading, a tenner that you had kept there and forgotten. It is your money, 
but you had ignored it; it was out of sight; he drew your attention to its existence and saved you 
from the shame of a loan. That is an example of Praaptha-praapthi. The Guru reveals the 
treasure within. 


Spread the rules of religion 


More than the Guru, the Guri (Goal) is essential for attaining the Divine. The very pursuit of the 
goal will evoke the Sathwa guna (quality of serenity) and weaken the hold of the inferior Rajas 
and Thamas (qualities of passion and inertia) in your composition. Dhaanavathwam 
(fiendishness) is caused by Thamas and Maanavathwam (human nature), is stabilised by Rajas; 
but, Sathwa alone can guarantee the elevation into Divinity. Sathwa guna fertilises the upward 
tendencies of man; it cleanses the mind, removing the weeds of evil. Sathya is the very basis of 
Sathwa guna. Sathya and Sathkarma (Truth in word, deed and thought) are acts, which are 
beneficial to others. 


Matham (religion), wherever it is practised, by whomsoever established, lays down the rules and 
regulations by which the Sathwa guna can be fostered and the impact of the two other gunas 
(human qualities) lessened. Therefore, it is very necessary that the adherents of religion spread 
the knowledge of these rules, both by precept and example. Christians and Muslims carry on this 
work with great enthusiasm; but the followers of Sanaathana Dharma have not got the faith in 
its excellence which alone can induce them to talk about it to others, and to make others listen to 
their talk. I find many are ashamed to accept the principles of Sanaathana Dharma (Eternal 
Religion), like Varnaashrama, Vigraha aaradhana (division of castes, idol worship), etc. 


While western aspirants find the ancient texts of Sanaathana Dharma valuable sources of 
inspiration and they adore Bhaarath as a beacon in the darkness, the children of Bhaarath admire 
the tawdry victories in the field of material research which other countries have won. The Vedhas 
and the Shaasthras are the two eyes of Bhaarathamaatha; by neglecting both, her vision is 


dimmed and damaged. Her vision can regain its clarity and sharpness, only when the Vedhas and 
Shaasthras enter into the daily life of her children. Then, the children will have faith in the 
Supreme, and in their destiny of ultimate merger with it. This will make them true devotees, for 
they will then be devoted to their true Goal. 


Bhaktha is the supremest creation 


When Naaradha once told the Lord that the earth was the grandest in creation, doubt was raised, 
because the ocean occupies more than two-thirds of it. But, the ocean was drunk dry by the sage 
Agasthya, who is but one single star in the vast firmament. Can we then Count the sky as the 
grandest in creation? No, for the Lords Thrivikrama strode the sky with His one Foot! However, 
even the Lord, who encompasses the three regions, is imprisoned by the bhaktha in his heart. 
Therefore, it was decided that the bhaktha is the supremest in creation. Such is the glory of the 
bhaktha, a glory that is conferred by his close study and practise of the Shaasthras. 


The Shaasthras are now kept at a distance, because people are unaware of the sweetness and 
light that they can acquire through them. They are condemned as outdated, as kill joys, as unduly 
restrictive and reactionary. But, all this is simply the patient's condemnation of the doctor and the 
drug that can cure him. The patient is suffering from anxiety, fear, despair, cowardice, greed, 
envy and the consequent weakness of mind and body. The Shaasthras can confer on him peace, 
courage, confidence, contentment and friendliness, if only he would take the first step of obeying 
their dictates. For, the very first lesson they teach is the Immanence of God. God is in the heart 
of every being, and so, one has to love another, as one loves God. God is residing in one's own 
heart and so there is no need to fear or despair. How can you hate another, when the God you 
adore is in him too? How can you covet his wealth? Or compete with him? Or be deaf to his 
entreaty? 


Scholars should not feel scholarship as burden 


The body is the tabernacle of God, the chariot in which He is seated in all majesty. Do not 
identify yourself with it and its modifications and transformations. You are the Aathma and so, 
you are above these affections of the body. Cleanse your mind of the temptations and tenets of 
ignorance; make it free from dust, so that God may be reflected therein. God cares more for the 
motive behind the deed, the ideal that prompts the effort---the bhaava (depth of feeling), not the 
baahya (outer pomp). The goldsmith who is purchasing the golden idol offers equal sums for 
every gram of gold, whether the gold is the crown, the foot or the head of the idol. God too says, 
"I care for the depth of your thirst for Me. I do not care what Form you select for your 
adoration." 


This Prashaanthi Vidwanmahaasabha has been formed to teach men this path and this endeavour, 
revive this pilgrimage which is fast being overwhelmed by the pressure of paltry journeys into 
the waste-land. The Vidwaans (scholars) are fast declining in numbers and influence. They must 
be revered and fostered. Do not say that this is a difficult assignment. I am not asking you to 
improve their material standard of living more and more; what I want you to do is to remove 
their fear that their scholarship is a burden. Use them, to learn the essentials of Sanaathana 
Dharma and they will feel happy and contented. Their estimate of themselves will then be 
proved true. They will live in peace, if not in plenty. 


Any good deed done with sincerity will be rewarded. Do not have an eye on the reward when 
you do it, that is enough. It is natural that you are agitated by the gathering of clouds over the 
Indian sky;, but, prayer to 


God and the constant remembrance of His Grace will remove all anxiety. There is no other 
support in times of dire need than God. To know Him, to cling to Him, to merge in His 
immeasurable splendour---that is the highest goal of man. The Governor, the Chief Minister 
and other officers who are here plan and execute schemes to keep bodies free from disease, 
brains sharp and skilled; but the mind has to be tended by ourselves. 


Prashaathi Vidwanmahaasabha: Ist Day 
Hyderabad 7-12-1964 


It is easy to conquer anger through love, attachment through 
reasoning, falsehood through truth bad thoughts through good and 
greed through charity. 


Shri Sathya Sai 


51. Travel Light 


THE number of those who talk pleasantly is legion; because, they need only cater to the desire of 
man for pleasure. But the number of those who talk usefully, profitably, beneficially is small for, 
few know what is really useful, profitable and beneficial for man. Most people are concerned 
only with the short run. The doctor who prescribes dietary and other restrictions and regimen is 
generally disliked by the patients. They gnash their teeth at such orders. But a doctor should 
ignore such responses and do his duty. He should insist on the prohibitions and preferences, even 
risking the consequent unpopularity. 


At the present time, the learned and the scholarly in every field suffer from a dire disease, 
namely, "under-development of the moral tissue." No emphasis is laid on the growth of virtue in 
the plans for national development; the virtuous man is laughed at as an "ignoramus" who does 
not know the art of getting on in the world. But, as the Karma kaanda in the Vedhas proclaims, 
all acts must contribute to the elevation of character, the purification of the emotions, passions 
and impulses that infest the mind, the broadening of the vision and the strengthening of man's 
bonds with the Universal, of which he is a part. Arjun is addressed in the Bhagavadh Geetha by 
Shri Krishna as "Kurunandhana"; kuru means karma; the expression means that one is the 
product of one's karma or activities. One is shaped inevitably by the words and deeds and 
thoughts which one indulges in. So long as one has a trace of Ajnaana (spiritual ignorance) one 
is kurunandhana; so, Krishna addresses Arjuna thus in order to entice him into the realm of 
bhakthi and jnaana, from the region of karma. The immortal spark in Man can be discovered 


Man can be certified as healthy, only when he is fully conscious of his reality and is gladly 
striving to reach it. Now, he is the child of Immortality (Amrithaputhra), swirling along 
helplessly towards Death! What a pitiable fate is this? The little ego in him is fed into a huge 
conflagration by the mind and the senses and he is caught in the fire of distress. Egoism makes 
him see glory in petty achievements, happiness in trivial acquisitions, joy in temporary authority 
over others. But, the Immortal in him is awaiting discovery to confer bliss and liberation from 
birth and death. 


There is a definite technique by which that Immortal spark can be discovered. Though it may 
appear difficult, each step forward makes the next one easier and a mind made ready by 
discipline is able to discover the Divine basis of man and of Creation in a flash. There is no 
short-cut to this consummation. One has to give up all the impediments which one has 
accumulated so far and become light for the journey. Lust, greed, anger, malice, conceit, envy, 
hate, all these pet tendencies have to be shed. It is not enough if you hear the discourses of Sai 
Baaba and count the number that you have listened to. Thousands are here before Me now; but, 
that figure has no significance. Only those who practise at least one of the things I emphasise, 
count. 


The Lord appeared before Bheeshma after the Mahaabhaaratha war, for, Bheeshma was praying 
to have Him before his eye when he left this world. The bhaktha yearns for Bhagavaan, but, 
believe Me, Bhagavaan also yearns for the bhaktha. That is why He assumes human form and 
moves among them. He derives as much Aanandha as the bhaktha derives when He moves with 
him. In fact, when the bhaktha takes one step towards Him, He takes ten towards him. That is the 
measure of His Grace and His Aanandha. The Lord is everywhere, in the house, outside it, 
before, behind, beside the bhaktha; but, men do not recognise Him or realise the value of so 
recognising Him. 


God is the mainspring of your life 


The Lord is the unseen foundation on which your life is built. He is the source, sustenance and 
strength. Without His Will, no leaf can turn, no blade of grass can quiver. What firmer 
foundation can you desire than this? Once you know that the Lord, the Omnipotent Power, is the 
mainspring of your life, there will be no fear any more. When you suspect the strength of the 
foundation of a house, you are afraid to enter it; when you suspect the skill of the manufacturer, 
you are nervous to ride in the car. Bheeshma and other bhakthas as well as Shankara and other 
Jnaanis knew that the Lord is the Aadhaara (basis), and so they had no fear at all. But, that faith 
has not taken root in men today and so, this has become an Age of Fear and Anxiety, of 
Ashaanthi (absence of peace). 


Gandhi relied on the Lord's Grace and the Lord's Might and he won. The atom bomb will only 
recoil with all its deadly potentialities on the very nations that trust in it. You know the story of 
Bhasmaasura, how he won from the gods the deadly boon by which he could turn to ashes all the 
things and beings upon which he placed his hand! In an unguarded moment, he placed his hand 
on his own head and the boon proved to be a bomb that finished him. 


How to purify the mind? 


Know the Aathma which is your Reality; know that it is the same Inner Force of this Universe. 
Let your intelligence penetrate into the truth. Analyse yourself and discover the several layers of 
Consciousness---the physical, the sensory, the nervous, the mental, the intellectual--and arrive at 
the very core of even the last layer, the layer of joy. The five sheaths have to be transcended, so 
that you may attain your truth, which is Aathma. 


The Aathma can be grasped only by a sharpened intellect and a pure mind. How to purify the 
mind? By starving it of the bad food it runs after, namely, objective pleasures, and feeding it on 
the wholesome food, namely, thought of God. The intellect too will be sharp if it is devoted to 
discrimination between the transient and the eternal. Let your thoughts be concentrated on God, 
His Name and His Form; you will then find that you are always with the Pure and the Permanent; 
you will then derive pure and permanent joy. That is the reason why I attach so much importance 
to Naamasmarana as a Saadhana. 


Prashaanthi Vidwanmahaasabha: 2nd Day 
Hyderabad 8-12-1964 


52. Anna and amritha 


You must all be getting very tired by this long sitting though I know you are benefitting by these 
discourses since three days. To reach the goal, one must know where it is, how glorious it is, and 
what the obstacles are, and what the preparatory discipline is. A little tiresomeness is inevitable, 
in the attempt to know these. These Pandiths explained the statements of the Vedhas and the 
Shaasthras, which reveal these points and you must be grateful to them for the care they have 
taken to preserve such valuable wisdom. 


The first requisite for the seeker is the quality of detachment, of Vairaagya, a quality that is the 
product of deep discrimination on the nature and characteristics of the senses, the mind and the 
intellect, besides the nature of the objects around us. Think deeply of the relative validity of 
experiences during the waking, the dream and the deep sleep stages and of the 'T' or Self that is 
the witness of these experiences. 


That witness is you, the real you, a spark of the Eternal Universal Witness. How then can you, 
with such a grand’ heritage and such a grand destiny, run after mean ends and short-lived 
successes? It is by such discrimination that you get established in detachment. When you know 
that the 'diamond' which you treasured so carefully is just a piece of glass, you need no 
persuasion to cast it out. Employ yourself usefully; earn, but do not clasp the riches with fanatic 
zeal. Be like a trustee, holding things on trust, on behalf of God, for purposes which He likes and 
approves. 


A headmaster when transferred from one school to another, goes to the new place, unconcerned 
and carefree, leaving behind him the laboratory, library, the furniture, the desks and boards 
which he cherished and loved; he knew even when he cherished them and loved them for their 
usefulness, that they were only in his custody for some time, that he held them on trust, and that 
a day may come sooner or later when he will have to leave them and go. Develop the same 
attitude towards the riches you accumulate and adore. Then, you can die in peace and live in 
contentment. 


Today Man is sliding into paltry pomp 


One great temptation for weak minds nowadays is the opportunity for publicity. Even a gift of 
five rupees to some charitable organisation is announced in thick banner headlines! Conceit is 
thus encouraged and man slides into paltry pomp. Kindness has to be fostered in the silence of 
the mind. The seed should not be scattered on the rocky surface, it has to be embedded in the 
depths, so that it can germinate. 


Life nowadays lays before man many a handicap, in his march towards God. All around, the 
forces of evil lie in wait to drag him down in the quest. Faith in God and in His Omnipresence 
has to be unshakable so that man can win. Cynicism is such a force, cynicism in conversation, in 
judging works of art, the achievements of science, the attainments of adventure, the heights of 
saadhana, the pronouncements of the wise. "If you sit in one place, reciting God's Name--- 
Raama, Krishna, Govindha, etc." they ask "can they get food and clothing?" They do not know 
that God can give such men not merely Anna (food) but Amritha (Divine Nectar). The Name is 
enough; it has all the potentiality needed. A single gasp, a tiny gesture, an anguished cry, an 
agonised shriek, is enough to win the answer of God. 


I Surrender the ego, dedicate every moment and every movement to Him; He has assured 
mankind that He will ensure liberation from pain and evil. When asked where God is, people 
point towards the sky or some far distant region; that is why He is not manifesting Himself. 
Realise that He is in you, with you, behind you, before you and all around you; and He can be 
seen and felt everywhere. Realise also that He is all mercy, eager and anxious to fulfil your 
prayers, if they arise from a pure heart. 


Pray to God to illuminate your mind 


He who tells you of this all-pervasive God is the real Guru; not he who promises you salvation if 
you place a purse at his feet. Do not be misled by such worldly men full of greed and egoism. 
Pray to God to illumine your mind, awaken your intelligence and be your Guru. He will surely 
guide you allright, from the altar of your own heart. For many a Guru today, the fence is more 
essential than the crop, so he emphasises the restrictions and rules, to the detriment of the 
saadhana, which they were designed to protect. So they insist fanatically on the observance of 
out-dated regulations and checks, while the very purpose of the regulations is allowed to decay. 
They magnify the role of Fate, and of the consequence of karma, without at the same time, 
consoling man by describing the overpowering might of God's grace. 


If there is an iron law of Karma which binds man hand and foot, why do the Shruthi and the 
Smrithi extol the earnest efforts and penance of aspirants? Those efforts and that penance can 
surely transmute the evil consequence of karma, and save man from the fate that he has woven 
for himself. The story of Maarkandeya, whose date with Death was cancelled, is an instance in 
point. His thapas achieved that victory, by drawing down the Grace of God. There are countless 
instances in the earthly careers of all Avathaars to show that Grace is greater than garnered 
karma. 


God has no likes and dislikes 


Whatever God grants is for your good, for your liberation, not for your fall or bondage. A God 
who does evil is no God at all. God had no likes and dislikes; he is above and beyond all traits 
and characteristics. He is Gunaatheetha (beyond all gunas). So, how can He be hating or 
revengeful? He is Love. He is Mercy. He is Goodness, He is Wisdom, He is Power. He gives you 
what you ask; (so be careful what you ask). Learn to ask the really beneficial boons. Do not go to 
the Wish-fulfilling tree and come back in glee, with a towel that you asked and got! 


I do not prescribe elaborate Japam and Dhyaanam for you to win Grace. Control your tongue, 
make it sweet and soft, do not yield to the whims of the senses, dwell always in the thought of 
God, remind yourself always of the glory and majesty of God---that is enough religious 
discipline for you. Spend all the time that you can command in the recitation of His name--that is 
sufficient Saadhana for you. 


Prashaanthi Vidwanmahaasabha: 3rd Day 
Hyderabad 8-12-1964 


