WOON AU BRWN 


. Maanasa Bhajare 

. Sharanaagathi 

. God as Guide 

. Divine Life 

. Japasahitha Dhyaana 

. An attitude of challenge 
. Courage 

. Many roads 

. Examine, experience 

. Viveka and vairaagya 

. Nara and Naaraayana 

. Tolerance 

. Aanandha through dedication 
. The wise ryot 

. Be heroes, not zeros 

. Shikshana 

. Gunas and Money 

. Education and Peace 

. The Moon and the Mind 
. Neither Scriptures nor Logic 
. Jada and Chaithanya 

. The screen within 

. The temple 

. Bahumathi and ekamathi 
. Manushya and manas 

. The world, My mansion 
. The underlying truths 

. The best tonic 

. Sathya Sai Geetha (i) 

. Sathya Sai Geetha (ii) 

. Sathya Sai Geetha (iii) 

. Sathya Sai Geetha (iv) 

. Foundation for vidhya 

. The click of the camera 
. The dangers of doubt 


Glossary 


Publisher's Note 


"SATHYA SAI SPEAKS" Series is, according to late Prof. N. 
Kasturi, the original translator and compiler, "a fragrant boquet of 
flowers that never fade or falter". These discourses were delivered 
by Swaami out of profound compassion towards seekers of Truth 
during the last few decades. 


The need for revised and enlarged editions of the Series was 
strongly felt and expressed by devotees, especially by foreigners. An 
attempt has therefore been made in these volumes to meet their 
needs. The discourses have been presented year-wise so that there 
is no overlapping of the discourses delivered in a year, in more than 
one volume pertaining to the same calendar year. This 
rearrangement has resulted in an increase in the number of 
volumes, from the previous twelve to the present fifteen volumes, 
covering the years 1953 to 1982. Further new volumes will also be 
added in due course, to cover the discourses delivered after 1982. 


The retention of Sanskrit words on page after page, in the 
previous volumes, without their English equivalents in most cases, 
Was causing great confusion to readers, especially foreigners, who 
were not familiar with Sanskrit. In the present revised volumes, an 
attempt has been made to aid easy reading by replacing Sanskrit 
words with English equivalents wherever they do not affect Baaba's 
Original expression. Sanskrit words have been retained wherever it 
was felt necessary to preserve the essence of the original expression 
of Baaba and where the English equivalents may not do full justice 
to the text in the particular context. However, in all such places the 
English equivalents have been given along with the Sanskrit words. 
Some very commonly understood Sanskrit words or Sanskrit words 
which are repeated too often are retained without English 
equivalents to retain the original flavour of Baaba's discourses. 
Further, in this revised volume, phonetic spellings have been 
adopted for all Sanskrit words uniformly to enable readers who are 
new to these words to pronounce them correctly and to remove any 
vagueness in the pronunciation of these words. 


A Glossary has been added in these revised editions to provide 
comprehensive and detailed explanation of the more important 
Sanskrit words for the benefit of lay readers who may be interested 


in Vedhic religion and philosophy. It is hoped that this will be of 
great help to devotees to understand more clearly the topics of 
Baaba's discourses covering a wide spectrum of Vedhic philosophy. 


The revised series of volumes are being brought out in a larger 
format, Demy Octavo size, so that they can be companion books 
with other publications in private libraries. Computerised typesetting 
using a larger size of type, a more readable type face and better line 
spacing have been adopted for more comfortable reading of the 
books, especially by elderly readers. Very long paragraphs have 
been split into shorter paragraphs and suitable sub-headings have 
been added in every page, to relieve the monotony on the eye and 
make reading a pleasure. 


Better quality paper, improved binding, dust cover with new 
design and foil printing and plastic cover have been adopted for the 
revised volumes for better preservation and durable shelf-life of the 
volumes. 


With these changes, it is hoped that the revised and enlarged 
volumes of "Sathya Sai Speaks" Series, will be of great benefit to 
earnest seekers in spiritual realm. 


Sathya Sai Speaks 


Have you heard our Baaba speak 

At public meetings anywhere? 

He never calls it speech; 

Nor will you name it so! 

He does not raise His voice, harangue, 

Or rouse the mob or rail or flail; 

He does not hesitate, He will not calculate, 

Hum and haw and pause and ponder, 

Making you wonder why you came! 

He does not waver, wander, 

Collecting thoughts, contriving notes; 

He does not waste a moment, decorating thoughts 

In showy lace and frills, clothing borrowed texts 

In shimmering gauze. He is no orator-pompous, proud, 
Clamouring for claps, publicity-mad! 

He will not circumambulate, declaim.... or, even 


He is the Rain-cloud, bringing Life 
To the parched ones here below! 


He ‘talks’ ...... He 'talks', to you, and you, 
and every single you that has gathered there. 


To every single Arjuna, with heavy heart and empty hand, 
Afraid to fight the battle of Life on to Victory. 

You feel He has come for you, to you. 

You see Him, silently looking around! 

The searchlight eye full circle swings! 

How lucky, you are there! 

He smiles; He wins you by that smile! 

You scarce can take your eyes from off that Face, 
So alluring, so Divine! 

You scarce can pull your heart from off His grip; 
The clasp is cool comfort! The silence deepens ....... 
Though thousands have been squatting, waiting, 
For hours and hours ...... 

Himaalayan stillness; twilight calm! 


Premaswaruplaara! 


The Golden Hour has come! Heaven's Gate ajar! 
Thes voice is sweet as honey 

Hived by Heavenly bees from Paarijatha trees! 

His call is clarion clear! 

O! 'Tis thrilling, 'tis filling rapture in the soul, 
Flowing like the Ganga, freeing the bound, 

Yielding rich reaping, for just ploughing and sowing 
Welling and swelling like Gersoppa Falls, 

Yielding vast power, for just wheeling and wiring! 


His talk is a cascade, so limpid and pure, 
Teaching, never preaching, unravelling all knots, 
Stilling the questionings ere they emerge in mind; 
Defining, refining, consoling the pining, 


Commanding, yea, demanding the bending of pride, 
Sparing no one, be he ruling or serving. 


Chiding, reprimanding the fool, and fanatic; 
Joking and coaxing, poking fun at all hoaxing; 
Quoting from what He said in the past ages, 
Detailing facts of His incarnating. 


Resplendent poetry, spontaneous, sublime, 
Painting pictures of transcendent Truth, 
Parable, proverb, scintillating bright, 

Tinkling, twinkling, tintinnabulating lilt, 

Every hour a minute, every minute a second; 
Every word a manthra, every phrase, Suuthra, 
A Gaayathria sentence, Upanishath a speech! 
For He is no well or tank or river! 

His is the ocean of Wisdom Divine! 


Oh! His words shower mercy, like morning dew 
On every heart-bud awakening from dreaming. 


He is feeding your roots and speeding the sap, 
Sprouting the buds, painting the petals, 

Perfuming them well, inviting the bees, 

Ripening the pods, with each word of His! 

There! The meaning of His word, a tiny seed 

Drops on your rock-like heart! And wonder of wonders! 
It germinates there!.., sprouts and puts forth leaves! 
The silken half-blind baby-roots do run about 

Tickling the stone, jabbing, pleaading for suckling! 
Succeeding at last, it grows; and, growing into a tree, 
Your rock is broken into clay! 


His talk, you will find, is cooling, not freezing 
Warming, not burning; raining, not flooding; 
Healing the ailing and hearts bewailing; 
Soothing, not searing; no toxin, but tonic; 
Balming and calming; all fact and no fiction! 


Every sentence spreads joy and scorches gloom, 
Impelling attention, compelling assent, 

Dispelling dejection, repelling sloth, 

Attracting you nearer, detaching from bonds, 
Infusing courage, and fusing creeds, 

Imposing no doctrine, composing all feuds, 
Informing (so charming!), never harming, disarming! 
Sifting the responding, lifting the desponding. 


Stressing on 'Doing, Behaving and Living’, 

Appealing for 'Feeling, Believing and Acting’. 

Calling all listening, to spurn imitating, 

Vsinly disputing, blind leading the blind, 

Knocking at Paradise through power and pelf, 

Or boasting of branches of family tree, 

And seeking for peace, in earning and spending 

And wanting and panting and hoarding and guarding. 


As you hear Him talking, you quietly resolve 

To take a step forward on the pilgrim road; 
Unfold your wings and soar into the sky! 

You feel you are a Lion, cheated into bleating! 
A diamond, set in dirty lead! 

Engaging in no fray, enraging no foe, 

He is welcoming all, who are thirsty or starving, 
Or limping, or blinking, or climbing and sliding, 
Raising the stooping, embracing the drooping 
Assuaging pain, assuring His Grace. 


He reminds us all of the road we have missed. 

He describes the joy of the journey's end. 

He opens our eyes; He strengthens our limbs; 

He heartens the struggling, groping his way, 
Awakening the sleeping, making the sitting stand, 
The standing to walk; the walking to reach! 


Proclaiming, revealing, announcing to all 
Asserting His coming for our burden assuming, 
Redeeming the wayward, the downcast, diseased; 
Underlining the Truth, undermining the false; 


Ah! What is this? What luck! What Grace! 
Even as He talks, 'it' blossoms into song, 

Oh! Captivating Song! He teaches us to pray 
Tranquilising all the furious waves, 

Steeling the nerves and strengthening the will, 
Attuning our soul to Dharma! Sathya! Prema! 


And when it stops 

And you open your eyes, 

You find them full of tears! 

Your neighbour weeps like child for mother, 

But Why? Look up and see; He has left the dais! 


Be proud you had the chance. From this moment, 
I know You are bound to be an ascending, 
attempting, adventurous soul. 

Arjuna, resuming arms for the fray 

With Krishna leading the horses aright- 

How lucky you heard Him talk! 


N. KASTURI 
(Poem read in the Holy Presence on 16-10-58) 


1. Maanasa Bhajare 


WHEN I was at Uravakonda studying in the High School, you 
know I came away one day and threw off my books and declared 
that I have My work waiting for Me. The Thelugu Pandith (scholar) 
described the incident of that evening to you all in his speech. Well, 
that day when I came out publicly as Sai Baaba, that first song I 
taught the gathering in the garden to which I went from the 
Thelugu Pandith's house was: 


“Maanasa bhajare guru charanam 
Dhusthara bhava saagara tharanam" 


I called on all those suffering in the endless round of birth and 
death to worship the Feet of the Guru (spiritual preceptor), the Guru 
that was announcing Himself, who had come again for taking upon 
Himself the burden of those who find refuge in Him. That was the 
very first Message of Mine to MHumanity."Maanasa bhajare." 
"Worship in the mind!" I do not need your flower garlands and 
fruits, things that you get for an anna or two; they are not 
genuinely yours. Give Me something that is yours, something which 
is clean and fragrant with the perfume of virtue and innocence, and 
washed in the tears of repentance! Garlands and fruits you bring as 
items in the show, as an exhibition of your devotion; poorer 
devotees who cannot afford to bring them are humiliated and they 
feel sorry that they are helpless; they cannot demonstrate their 
devotion in the grand way in which you are doing it. Install the Lord 
in your heart and offer Him the fruits of your actions and the flowers 
of your inner thoughts and feelings. That is the worship I like most, 
the devotion I appreciate most. 


Re-education of man persists in all eras 


In shops, things are kept in separate packets and each one 
specialises in some particular article or sets of articles. But in an 
Exhibition, hundreds of shops join to make all varieties of things 
available and there is a great deal of window-dressing, arrangement 
and display. I have been all these days generally giving individual 
advice, like the packets available in shops and giving answers to 


individual questions. This 'speech' today, is a new experience for 
you. I am addressing a gathering today; but even though it may be 
new to you, for Me it is not new. I have given advice to large 
gatherings before, though not in this Appearance. Whenever 
Niraakaara (formless) becomes Sakaara (one with form), it has to 
fulfil the Mission and it does so in various ways. But the one 
purpose, the re-education of Man persists, whatever the yuga (the 
era), 


The first sixteen years of this Life have been, as I have often 
told you, the period when Saala /eela (divine child sport) 
predominated and the next sixteen is being spent mostly in 
Mahimas (miracles) in order to give santhosha (joy) to this 
generation. Joy and contentment are short-lived sensations; you 
have to catch that mood and make it a permanent possession: 
Aanandha (bliss). After the thirty-second year, you will see Me 
active more and more in the task of Upadhesa (spiritual instruction)- 
--teaching erring humanity and in directing the World along the path 
of Sathya, Dharma, Shaanthi and Prema (Truth, Righteousness, 
Peace and Love). 


Not that I am determined to exclude /ee/a and mahima from 
My activity after that. I only mean that re-establishing Dharma, 
correcting the crookedness of the human mind and guiding 
humanity back to Sanaathana Dharma (eternal universal religion) 
will be My task thereafter. 


Do not be led away by doubt and vain argument; do not 
question how and whether I can do all this. The cowherds of 
Brindhaavan also doubted whether the little boy who grew in their 
midst could lift Govardhanagiri and hold it aloft! The thing needed is 
Faith, and yet more Faith. 


Secret of Spiritual Success 


Once Krishna and Arjuna were going together along the open 
road. Seeing a bird in the sky, Krishna asked Arjuna, "Is that a 
dove?" He replied, "Yes, it is a dove." He asked Arjuna, "Is it an 
eagle?’ Arjuna replied promptly, "Yes, it is an eagle." "No, Arjuna, it 


looks like a crow to Me. Is it not a crow?" asked Krishna. Arjuna 
replied, "I am sorry, it is a crow beyond doubt." 


Krishna laughed and chided him for his agreeing to whatever 
suggestion was given. But Arjuna said, "For me, your Words are far 
more weighty than the evidence of my eyes; you can make it a 
crow, a dove or an eagle and when you Say it is a crow, it must be 
one." Implicit faith is the secret of spiritual success. 


The Lord loves, not the Bhaktha (devotee) but his Bhakthi, 
remember. The Lord's Grace is like rain, pure water, falling equally 
everywhere; but its taste gets changed according to the soil through 
which it flows. So also the Lord's words are sweet to some, bitter to 
others. The Lord's ways are mysterious; He blessed Vidhura with the 
words, "Be destroyed" and Dhusshaasana with the words, "Live for 
a thousand years;" He meant that Vidhura's 'T' will be destroyed and 
that the wicked Dhusshaasana will have to suffer the ills and 
tribulations of this world for ten centuries. You do not know the real 
reasons behind the actions of the Lord. You cannot understand the 
motives of other men who are almost like you in everything, 
actuated by the same motives and having the same likes and 
dislikes! But yet, how easily you discover the motives of One who is 
far, far above the level of Man! How glibly you talk and judge of 
something that is as strange to you as atmosphere to a fish! 


Pains indicate birth of new life 


There are four types of persons; the ‘dead,’ who deny the 
Lord and declare that they alone exist, independent, free, self- 
regulating and self-directed; the ‘sick,’ who call upon the Lord when 
some calamity befalls them or when they feel temporarily deserted 
by the usual sources of succour; the ‘dull,’ who know that God is 
eternal companion and watchman, but who remember it only off 
and on when the idea is potent and powerful; and lastly, the 
‘healthy,’ who have steady faith in the Lord and who live in His 
comforting creative presence always. 


You proceed from ‘death’ to '‘life' and from ‘illness' to ‘health’ 
by the experience of the buffetings of the World. The World is a 
very essential part of the curriculum of man; through the agony of 


search is born the infant, wisdom. The pains are worthwhile; they 
indicate the birth of new life. From Ashaanthi (restlessness) you get 
Prashaanthi (absolute peace), from Prashaanthi to Prakaanthi 
(bright spiritual illumination); and from Prakaanthi, Paramjyothi 
(Supreme Divine radiance). It is like the alternating of night and 
day, this recurrence of joy and grief. Night and day are twin sisters, 
both are necessary to increase the fertility of the soil, to activate 
and refresh Life. They are like summer and winter. There are some 
who ask Me, 'Baaba! Make this summer less hot!’ But in the heat of 
summer the Earth takes in the needed energy from the Sun, so that 
when the rains come, she may yield a plentiful harvest. 


Shine forth in your real nature 


‘Cold’ and 'heat' are both in the Plan of God and yours is only 
to know this and treat both as valuable. Thorny plants and thornless 
plants are both there in nature; the wise man knows the value of 
both; he plants the thornless one and surrounds it with the thorny 
ones, so that what he fosters is left unharmed. Activity can save, as 
well as kill; it is like the cat which bites; it bites the kitten in order to 
carry it in its mouth to a place of safety; it bites the rat in order to 
kill and eat. Become the kitten; and work will rescue you like a 
loving Mother. Become a rat; and you are lost. 


God draws the Individual towards itself; it is the nature of 
both to have this affinity, for they are the same. They are like the 
iron and the magnet. But if the iron is rusty covered with layers of 
dirt, the magnet is unable to attract. Remove the impediment; that 
is all you have to do. Shine forth in your real nature and the Lord 
will draw you into His Bosom. Trials and tribulations are the means 
by which this cleansing is done. That is why Kunthi prayed to 
Krishna, "Give us always grief, so that we may never forget Thee." 
They are like the dietary and other restrictions that the doctor 
prescribes to supplement the effect of the drug of Naamasmarana 
(remembrance of God). 


Do not give up saadhana 


Sai is Sarvajanapriya (beloved to all people) and so any name 
which gives you joy, you can take up. Tastes differ according to 
temperament and the character one has earned by generations of 
activity as a living being in this world. The proprietor of a coffee 
house goes to the nearby druggist for a pill to ward off his 
headache, and the druggist when he gets a headache goes to the 
coffee house for a cup of coffee which he thinks will cure him. Men 
are like that; /oko bhinna ruchih (tastes of people differ). The Jnaani 
says, “Sarvam Brahma mayam:"In God is All;" another, a yogi, says 
all is energy; a third, who is a bhaktha, says all is the play of 
Bhagavaan (the Lord). Each according to his taste and according to 
his progress in saadhana (spiritual practice). Do not hurry or ridicule 
them, for they are all pilgrims trudging along the same road. 


Saadhana is most required to control the mind and the desires 
after which it runs. If you find that you are not able to succeed, do 
not give up the Saadhana but do it more vigorously, for it is the 
subject in which you did not get passing marks that requires special 
study, is it not? Saadhana means inner cleanliness as well as 
external cleanliness. You do not feel refreshed if you wear 
unwashed clothes after your bath, do you? Nor do you feel 
refreshed if you wear washed clothes, but skip the bath. Both are 
needed, the baahya and the bhaava (the external as well as the 
internal). 


Children believe your words when you say that the policeman 
will catch them or the ghost will beat them. They are full of fear, 
fortitude and faith! But having grown old and stuffed your heads 
with all kinds of doctrines and dogmas and theories and arguments, 
you have now to use your viveka (discrimination) and discover God 
the hard way. This I will tell you, there is no escaping it; all 
creatures have to reach God some day or other, by the long route or 
by the short route. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, Vijayadhashami, 1953 


One wish leads to another; one bond brings about ten others. 
It is in the very nature of human desire; for, the joy one gets 
through its satisfaction is imperfect, limited, temporary, pregnant 
with grief. 


You sow bitter seeds and pray for a harvest of sweetness. You 
wail over the soil, the plant, the rain. What can they do? The seeds 
themselves are diseased, defective. 


Shri Sathya Sai 


2. Sharanaagathi 


I DO not give 'speeches'; My talks are more of the 
conversation type; I want that you should follow every word of what 
I say with reverent attention, for your Aanandham is My Aahaaram-- 
-your joy is My food. You can get Aanandham only by following the 
advice I give you and this is why I am particular that you should 
listen carefully and take to heart all that I say. This is not a mere 
lecture, wherefrom you do not seek new lessons for life. 


The Lord is a Mountain of Prema (Love); any number of ants 
carrying away particles of sweetness cannot exhaust His Plenty. He 
is an Ocean of Mercy without a limiting shore. Bhakthi (devotion) is 
the easiest way to win His Grace and also to realise that He 
pervades everything; in fact, is everything! 


Sharanaagathi (total surrender), leaving everything to His Will, 
is the highest form of Bhakthi. (devotion) Once a Brahmin was 
crossing a river bed near which some men were washing clothes. 
Finding a nice new silk shawl on his shoulder, they fell upon him in a 
group, shouting that it belonged to the Palace and had been given 
to them to be washed, but had been stolen and had not been 
traced. The poor Brahmin yelled 'Naaraayana, Naaraayana,’ when 
the blows rained on him and so, Naaraayana rose from His Seat in 
Vaikunththa and proceeded forward; but in a moment, He walked 
back and resumed His Seat much to the surprise of His Consort who 
asked Him the reason for the strange behaviour. Naaraayana said, 
"I wanted to help that poor Brahmin who has fallen into a den of 
scoundrels, but he has started beating them, blow for blow; My Help 
is no longer needed." 


Conquest of ego needed 


When Bhakthi is just emerging as a sapling, a fence is needed 
to protect the tender plant; that fence is Sanaathana Dharma 
(Eternal Religion) and its rules, regulations and _ restrictions, 
directions and commands. When the fruit is green, it will not fall 
even when the gale is furious; but when it is fully ripe, it drops to 
the ground even in the silence of the night. A small fire will go out 
in smoke even if a little green is placed on it, but the forest fire will 


reduce to ashes even the greenest tree which impedes its fierce 
march! What is needed is the conquest of the ego. 


The bullock shouts am hai’ ‘ham hal' (I am, I am), in its 
egoistic pride. And so, when it is just a few days old, you tie it to a 
post, apart from its mother; you work it to skin and bones; but yet, 
the animal does not learn the lesson of humility. Even its skin when 
drawn tightly across a drum resounds egojistically,'‘Ham Ham Ham. 
And so, the skin has to be cut into slender strings and then when 
the strings are pulled, the bullock reveals that it has benefitted by 
all the punishment it has undergone; it murmurs thum thum thum, 
(you you you), and its ego is gone. 


The Haridhaasa (mendicant) goes along the streets, singing 
the glories of the Lord. He has the sounding cymbals, two of them, 
the eternal duet of good-bad, joy-grief, pain-pleasure in his right 
hand and he twangs the thambura (stringed musical instrument) of 
samsaara with his left. Samsaara (worldly life) is the tune to which 
his songs have to be adjusted, it is the shruth/ (musical note). But 
both the shruthi and thaala (marking of time) are for the purpose of 
heightening the effect of the song which issues from his mouth, the 
song of the glow of God. 


Three types of devotion 


I remember telling a questioner in Maharaashtra, while in the 
previous Body, that there are three types of devotion: the vihanga 
method, where like a bird swooping down upon the ripe fruit on the 
tree, the devotee is too impatient and by the very impatience he 
exhibits, he loses the fruit, which falls from his hold; the markata 
method where like a monkey which pulls towards it one fruit after 
another and by sheer unsteadiness is not able to decide which fruit 
it wants, the bhaktha too hesitates and changes his aim much too 
often and thus loses all chances of success; and the pipeelika 
method, where like the ant which slowly but steadily proceeds 
towards the sweetness, the devotee also moves direct, with 
undivided attention towards the Lord and wins His Grace! 


Bhakthi and shraddha (devotion and faith) are the two oars 
with which you can take the boat across the sea of samsaara. A 


child told its mother when it went to bed at night, "Mother! Wake 
me up when I get hungry." The mother answered, "There is no 
need, your hunger will itself wake you." So too, when the hunger for 
God comes, it will itself activise you and make you seek the food 
you need. God has endowed you with hunger and He supplies the 
food; He has endowed you with illness and He grows the specifics 
you need. Your duty is to see that you get the proper hunger and 
the right illness and use the appropriate food or drug! 


Man must be yoked to samsaara and broken; that is the 
training which will teach that the world is unreal; no amount of 
lectures will make you believe it is a snake unless you actually 
experience it. Touch fire and get the sensation of burning; there is 
nothing like it to teach you that fire is to be avoided. Unless you! 
touch it, you will be aware only of its light. It is light and heat both; 
just as this world is both true and false, that is to say, unreal. 


Habit of judging others as atheists or theists 


There is a widely prevalent habit now of judging others and 
labelling them as theists or atheists. What do you know, what can 
you know of the inner working of another's mind? There was once a 
queen who was a great devotee of Raama; she felt so sad that her 
husband, the Raaja, never even uttered the name of Raama and 
had no bhakthi. She had vowed that the first occasion on which she 
got evidence of his bhakthi or at least respect for Raamanaama, she 
would conduct puuja (ritualistic worship) in all the temples and feed 
the poor on a lavish scale. Then, one night, while fast asleep, the 
Raaja uttered the name of Raama thrice plaintively and prayerfully. 
She heard the Naamasmarana and was happy at the discovery of 
her husband's devotion to Raama; she ordered general rejoicing 
throughout the kingdom and the feeding of the poor. The Raaja did 
not know the reason for the celebration for he was only told that it 
was an order of the Raani, which the officers carried out. Similarly, a 
husband may not be aware of the excellence of a wife's spiritual 
attainments. 


There is the case of a couple who were proceeding through a 
thick jungle on pilgrimage to an inaccessible shrine. The husband 
saw on the footpath a precious stone, shining brilliantly when the 


sun's rays fell upon it from between the leaves. He hastily threw 
some sand over it with a movement of his foot so that his wife may 
not be temped to pick it up and become a slave to the tinsel. The 
wife saw the gesture and chided the husband for still retaining in his 
mind a distinction between sand and diamond. For her, both were 
the same. 


Keep the Name as constant as breathing 


The Raaja who spoke in his sleep the sacred name of Raama 
felt very sorry, according to the story, that he let Raamanaama out 
of his mouth, for he believed that no one should know of his ‘love’ 
for Raama. There are many who will not shout about their Guru or 
their favourite Name and Form, but whether you declare them to 
others or not, keep them ever in your consciousness. Raamanaama 
or any other name must be as constant as breathing. For this, 
practice is essential. 


A person once told Dr. Johnson, the famous English thinker, 
that he could seldom get time to recite the Name of God, what with 
the hundreds of things he had to do from morning till nightfall and 
even far into the night. Dr. Johnson replied with another question. 
He asked how millions of people found space to live upon the face 
of the earth, which is two-thirds water and the rest is too full of 
mountains, deserts, forests, icy regions, river beds, marshes and 
similar impossible areas. The questioner said that man somehow 
struggled to find living space. So too, said Dr. Johnson, man must 
somehow find a few minutes a day for prayer to the Lord. 


Example of the highest type of detachment 


Bhakthi and the attitude of surrender that is its final fruits will 
give you great courage to meet any emergency; such courage is 
what is called Renunciation. The story of Mohajith is a good 
example of this highest type of detachment. 


Mohajith, the Prince, went to a Sage in the forest and sought 
guidance in the spiritual path. The sage asked him whether he had 
conquered attachment as his name indicated. The Prince said that 


not only he, but every one in his kingdom had! So the Sage started 
to test the truth of this claim. 


The sage took the Prince's robes, soaked them in blood and 
hastened to the Palace Gate with the gruesome stow of the murder 
of the Prince by some ruffians in the jungle. The maid whom he met 
refused to hurry with the news to the Royal apartments because she 
said, "He was born, he died; what is the special urgency of this 
news that I should interrupt my regular routine and run to the King 
and Queen?" 


When at last he got an audience and was able to 
communicate the sad news to the father, he sat unruffled, 
whispering to himself, "The bird flew off the tree on which it had 
alighted to take rest." The Raani too was unmoved. She told the 
sage that this Earth is a caravanaserai, where men come and stay 
for the night and when dawn breaks, one by one, they tramp their 
different ways. Kith and kin are the words we use for the 
attachment to the travellers cultivated in the caravanaserai during 
the short term of acquaintance. 


The wife of the "dead" Prince was also unaffected; she said, 
"Husband and wife are like two pieces of wood drifting down a 
flooded river; they float near each other for some time and when 
some current comes between, they are parted: each must move on 
to the sea at its own rate and in its own time. There is no need to 
grieve over the parting of the two; it is in the very nature of Nature 
that it should be so." 


Grow with self-respect and dignity 


The sage was overjoyed to see this steady and sincere 
Vairaagya (dispassion) in the rulers and the ruled. He came back to 
the forest and told the Prince that while he was away, a hostile 
army had invaded his Kingdom and slain the entire royal family and 
captured his Kingdom and enslaved his subjects. He took the news 
calmly and said, "All this is bubble, 


impermanent, flimsy. Let it go the way of the bubble. Guide 
me to reach the Infinite, the Imperishable." 


Such courage comes out of the Grace of the Lord; it needs 
generations of learning and struggle. Meanwhile, you must start 
with the first step, the cleansing of the mind and the cultivation of 
virtue. Even if you do not start with that step, at least do not laugh 
at those who do, and discourage them. Do at least this much! Then, 
do not depend upon others for doing your work, like attending to 
your personal wants. Do them yourself; that is real freedom. Again, 
never accept anything ‘free’ from others, pay it back, in service or 
work. 


That will make you self-respecting individuals. Receiving a 
favour means getting bound to the giver. Grow with self-respect and 
dignity. That is the best service you can do to yourself. 


There is no seniority or juniority among devotees 


‘Uncle’ Moon is 'uncle' to all the children of the world. So also, 
the Lord is every one's Father, in whose property every one can 
claim a share. But in order to get it, you must reach a certain age, a 
certain standard of intelligence and discrimination. The infirm and 
the idiotic, He will not consider fit to receive property. His property 
is Grace, Prema. But if you have Discrimination and Renunciation, 
you can claim your share, as of right. 


Bring ‘®Bhakthi' and lay it here and take from here spiritual 
strength! The more such business is done, the more pleased am I. 
Bring what you have, namely, your sorrows and griefs, worries and 
anxieties, and take from Me joy and peace, courage and confidence. 
In My view, there is no seniority or juniority among devotees. The 
mother spends more time tending the sickly child; she just asks the 
older children to look after themselves; she feeds with her own 
hand the infant. That does not mean that she has no love towards 
the grown-ups. So too, do not think that because I do not ostensibly 
pay more attention to one person, he is beyond the ken of my 
Prema. 


Note this also. In this Avathaar (Divine Incarnation), the 
wicked will not be destroyed; they will be corrected and reformed 
and educated and led back to the path from which they have 
strayed. The white-ant infested tree will not be cut; it will be saved. 


Again this Avathaar will not select some place other than the place 
where the Nativity took place for the centre of Its Leelas, Mahimas 
and Upadhesha (divine sport, miracle power and divine instruction). 
This tree shall not be transplanted; it will grow where it first rose 
from the earth. Another speciality is this: the Avathaar has no 
affinity or attachment in Its Career to members of the Family 
wherein it appeared. Unlike the appearances as Raama, Krishna, 
etc., where the Life was played out mostly among and for the family 
members, this Avathaar is for the Bhakthas, the Saadhus and the 
Saadhakas (devotees, noble souls and aspirants) only. It has no 
japa (recitation of holy name), dhyaana (meditation) or yoga 
(practising union with God). It knows no worship; It will not pray to 
anything, for It is the Highest. It only teaches you to worship and 


pray. 


To a worldly man, a God-intoxicated person will appear mad 
and he will laugh at him for it. But to the God-intoxicated man, the 
worldly appear insane, foolish misled, blind. Of all the insanities that 
harass man, God-madness is the least harmful, the most beneficial. 
The world has suffered untold damage due to its "mad" rulers and 
"mad" guides; but nothing but harmony, peace, brotherliness and 
love have come out of the 'God-madness' of man! 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, Mahaashivaraathri, 1955 


3. God as Guide 


God is Mahaashakthi (Supreme Energy) and Jeeva (individual 
being) is Maayaashakthi (Deluding Power); He is the genuine, the 
jeeva is but the shadow, the appearance, the delusion. Even I have 
to put on Maayaashakthi to come into your midst, like the policeman 
who is compelled to wear the dress of the thief so that he can get 
entry into the gang of thieves to apprehend them and bring them to 
book! The Lord cannot come down with. His Mahaashakthi 
unimpaired; He has to come with diminished splendour and limited 
effulgence, so that He can become the object of Bhakthi and 
Dedicated Service. 


In this world which is impermanent and ever transforming, the 
Immanent Power of the Lord is the only permanent and fixed entity. 
In order to realise the eternal and the true, one has perforce to 
attach oneself to that Source and Sustenance. There is no escape 
from this path. It is the destiny of one and all, irrespective of age or 
scholarship, clime or caste, sex or status. 


While proceeding along the road, you can watch your shadow 
falling on mud or dirt, hollow or mound, thorn or sand, wet or dry 
patches of land. You are unaffected by the fate of your shadow, is it 
not? Nor is the shadow made dirty thereby. It does not worry in the 
least where it falls or what it wades through. We know that the 
shadow and its experiences are not eternal or true. Similarly, you 
must get convinced that 'you' are but the shadow of the Absolute 
and you are essentially not this 'you' but the absolute itself. That is 
the remedy for sorrow, travail and pain. 


The First step in spiritual discipline 


Of course, it is only at the end of a long and systematic 
process of Saadhana that you will get fixed in the truth; until then, 
you are apt to identify yourself with this body and forget that the 
body which casts a shadow is itself a shadow. The first step in 
Saadhana is the adherence to Dharma in every individual and social 
act. The Dharma (righteousness) which is followed in relation to 
Prakrithi (objective world) will automatically lead on to Dharma in 
the spiritual field also; only you must stick to it through thick and 


thin. When Aswathaama in the blindness of his fury slaughtered the 
children of the Paandavas, Arjuna who caught him prisoner 
threatened to cut off his head; but Dhroupadhi the bereaved mother 
interceded to save him! She said it was not Dharma to return 
murder for murder, to slay the son of one's own Guru. Such 
steadfastness is needed in the path of Dharma (virtue); that alone is 
the sign of true surrender: "Let the Will of the Lord prevail; one's 
duty is but to connect oneself with the current of His Grace." While 
in jail the prisoner cannot call even his clothes his own; so too, 
while in this jail serving your term, what can you call your own? He 
gives you food and clothing. He lets you go when the sentence 
ends, or perhaps sooner if He is pleased by your behaviour while in 
prison. 


Keep the faith in the Lord undiminished 


The greatest obstacle on the path of surrender is ahamkaara 
(egoism) and mamakaara (mineness or possessiveness). It is 
something that has been inhering to your personality since ages, 
sending its tentacles deeper and deeper with the experience of 
every succeeding life. It can be removed only by the twin 
detergents of discrimination and renunciation. Bhakthi is the water 
to wash away this dirt of ages and the soap of Japam, Dhyaanam 
and Yoga (repetition of God's name, meditation and communion) 
will help to remove it quicker and more effectively. The slow and the 
steady will surely win this race; walking is the safest method of 
travel, though it may be condemned as slow. Quicker means of 
travel mean disaster; the quicker the means, the greater the risk of 
disaster. You should eat only as much as you feel hunger, for, more 
will cause disorder. So proceed step by step in Saadhana (spiritual 
effort); making sure of one step before you take another. Do not 
slide back two paces when you go one pace forward. But even the 
first step will be unsteady, if you have no faith. So cultivate faith. 


Sathyabhaama once asked Krishna, "Why are you: doing 
things like ordinary men? Yudhishthira, the eldest of the Paandavas 
is the best of the brothers but you hobnob always with Arjuna, 
whose reputation is not above board." Her faith was not steady! 
What do people know of the motives that prompt the Lord and His 
actions? Some found fault with Naaradha for repeating the name of 


the Lord, always, without intermission. But until Saayujyam 
(merging in the Absolute), the name has to be used; the idea of 
separation will end only with mergence, not before that. Do not 
waver or doubt when once you are convinced. Seek to understand 
and satisfy yourself. After that, do not be misled. When the Sun is 
over your head there will be no shadow; similarly when faith is 
steady in your head it should not cast any shadow of doubt. 


When man loses his way and strays into the wilderness, 
believing that he is the body or gunas (qualities) or the object, then 
the Avathaar comes to warn and guide. Keep the faith in the Lord 
undiminished; you can then safely move about in the world. No 
harm can come to you! Be like the village women with pots over 
their heads, one over the other, keeping balance even while talking 
and walking along the winding lane. They do not forget or ignore 
the burden or the goal. They are vigilant, conscious of the hardships 
on the way, the stones and the pits; it is the inner concentration 
that pays dividends. 


One should depart the world with a smile 


Every one has to make his exit some day; that moment should 
not be a moment of anguish; one should depart gracefully, with a 
smile and a bow. In order to do that, a lot of preparation is 
necessary. To depart, leaving all that has been accumulated during 
a long lifetime, is a hard task; so prepare for it by discarding 
attachment to one thing after another from now on. 


You see many things in dreams and many things are acquired 
by you during dreams: power, pelf, status, reputation. But when 
you awake, you do not weep over the loss, even though for the 
duration of the dream all that was very real and gave you real 
satisfaction and joy. That was a ‘dream’, you tell yourself; what 
prevents you from treating with similar nonchalance the possessions 
gathered during the waking stage of your life? Cultivate that attitude 
and you can depart with a smile whenever the curtain falls on this 
dreamland stage. 


Pray to the Lord to show you the way 


In order to bring conviction to you in all this, it is best you 
approach a Guru (spiritual preceptor) who knows the Truth by 
experience and whose daily activities, words and thoughts reflect 
this realisation. The Guru is called so because the letter GU signifies 
Gunaatheetha---one who has transcended the three gunas 
(qualities)---the Thaamasik, the Raajasik and even the Saathwik 
(ignorant passionate and virtuous); and the letter RU signifies one 
who is Roopa Varjitha (one who has grasped the formless aspect of 
God-head). Of course, he could come to that stage only through the 
sublimation of the lower into the higher qualities and the steady and 
conscious ignoring of the part played by mere name and form. 


In the preliminary stages of spiritual Saadhana, name, form 
and quality all have their part to play in the moulding of the spirit. 
The Guru destroys the illusion and sheds light; his presence is cool 
and comforting. That is why this day, a Pournami (Full Moon day), is 
allotted for paying due honour to the Guru. Moreover, the Moon is 
the presiding deity of the mind and Pournami is the day on which 
the mind has become fully beneficent. Of course, you must know 
what you have lost, so that you may start on the search to recover 
it! The Guru has very often to tell you that you have forgotten your 
real name or that you have lost the most precious part of yourself 
and yet are unaware of the loss. The Guru is the physician for the 
illness which brings about the suffering of alternate birth and death. 
He is an adept at the treatment needed for the cure. If you do not 
get such a Guru, pray to the Lord Himself to show you the way and 
He will surely come to your rescue. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, Guru Pournami, 1-8-1956 


The mind must become the servant of the intellect, not the 
slave of the senses. It must discriminate and detach itself from the 
body. Like the ripe tamarind fruit, which becomes loose inside the 
shell, it must be unattached to this shell, this casement called body. 


Strike a green tamarind fruit with a stone and you cause harm 
to the pulp inside; but, strike the ripe fruit and see what happens. It 
Is the dry rind that falls off; nothing affects the pulp or the seed. 


The ripe aspirant does not feel the blows of fate or fortune; it 
Is the unripe man who is wounded by every blow. 


Shri Sathya Sai 


4. Divine Life 


A CONVENTION of the Workers of the Divine Life Mission must 
include all humanity, for no one is outside its pale; all are plodding 
along the road to the realisation of the Divinity that is immanent in 
each. The mission on which every individual has come is to merge 
the individuality in the Universal. The life that each being is leading 
is saturated with the Divine; Existence or Sath is derived from the 
source of all Sath, Brahman (Supreme Reality) Itself; Consciousness 
or Chith is derived from the source of all Chith, Brahman Itself. Bliss 
or Aanandha is derived from the source of all. Aanandha, Brahman 
Itself. 


You are all Sath-Chith-Aanandha swaruupa (embodiments of 
Existence - Consciousness-Bliss); only, you are unaware of it and 
imagine yourself to be this individual or that, and subjected to this 
limitation or that! This is the myth that must be exploded in order 
that Divine Life may start. It is the Divine that inspires, that 
activates, that leads and fulfils the life of each being, however 
simple or complex its physical structure may be. From the Anu 
(atom) to the Brihath (Universe) every single entity is moving 
towards the estuary where it merges in the sea of Bliss. 


Divine Life is the very breath of all beings; it consists of 
Sathya, Prema and Ahimsa (Truth, Love and Non-injury). For, how 
can any one be false to another when there is no other at all? 
Falsehood comes out of fear. When there is no second, there is no 
fear at all. No one is loved more than the Self: so, when all is the 
self-same Self, all is loved as the Self is loved. As for Aimsa, who is 
to injure whom, when all are but one? 


Faith in the Almighty will remove anxiety 


How to lead the Divine Life? There is no special membership 
that entitles you to it. Every struggle to realise the Unity behind all 
the multiplicity is a step on the path of Divine Life. You have to 
churn the milk if you wish to separate and identify the butter that is 
immanent in it. So too, you have to carry on certain processes of 
thought and action in order to get to the hard core of faith that this 
world is a funny mixture Of Sathyam and Asathyam (real & unreal), 


that it is m/thya (false), in fact. The Divine Life does not admit of 
the slightest dross in character or delusion in intellect. So, people 
dedicated to it must emphasise this by precept and example. 


Wipe out the root causes of anxiety and fear and ignorance. 
Then only can the true personality of man shine forth. Anxiety is 
removed by faith in the Lord; the faith that tells you that whatever 
happens is for the best and that the Lord's Will be done. Quiet 
acceptance is the best armour against anxiety; not the acceptance 
of the heroic. Sorrow springs from egoism, the feeling that you do 
not deserve to be treated so badly, that you are left helpless. When 
egoism goes, sorrow disappears. Ignorance is just a mistake, 
mistaken identity of the body as the Self! 


In fact, you must each one try to become ego-less and then 
the Lord will accept you as His Flute. Once, when a number of 
people were asked by Me what they would like to be in the hands of 
God, I got various answers: some said the Lotus, some the Shankha 
(Conch), some the Chakra (Discus) but no one mentioned the Murali 
(Flute). I would advise you to become the Murali, for then the Lord 
will come to you, pick you up, put you to His lips and breathe 
through you and, out of the hollowness of your heart due to the 
utter absence of egoism that you have developed, He will create 
captivating music for all Creation to enjoy. Be straight without any 
will of your own, merge your will in the Will of God. Inhale only the 
breath of God. That is Divine Life, that is what I want you all to 
achieve. 


Venkatagiri, April 1957 


A mere five-minute inquiry will convince you that you are not 
the body, or the senses, the mind or the intelligence, the name or 
the form, but that you are the Aathma Itself, the same aathma that 
appears as all this variety. Once you get a glimpse of this truth, hold 
on to it; do not allow it to slip. Make it your permanent possession. 


Shri Sathya Sai 


5. Japasahitha Dhyaana 
(Meditation on the Lord's Form and Fame) 


The devotee who spoke first here now was, let me tell you, 
denying God for 25 years and it is only since five years, after seeing 
Me, that he has changed. Of course, many people have had no 
experience which could change them and so they are not to be 
blamed for their want of faith. So too, this Seshagiri Rao here was 
finding fault with his son and daughters for coming to Puttaparthi, 
and himself for long refusing to come! One day at Bangalore, there 
was a function in the house opposite his, for I had gone there. 
During Bhajana (group singing of devotional songs), this man 
hesitantly crossed the road and peeped into the hall and I went 
forward and called him and made him sit near Me. I asked him to 
come to Puttaparthi and invited him to 'examine'’ and ‘experience’. 
He has been with Me ever since; it is now 18 years since he first 
came here. This is just the reason why I came to sow the seeds of 
faith, in religion and in God. You might have heard some people say 
that I became Sai Baaba when a scorpion stung me! Well, I 
challenge any one of you to get stung by scorpions and transform 
yourself into Sai Baaba. No, the scorpion had nothing to do with it! 
In fact, there was no scorpion at all! I came in response to the 
prayers of sages, saints and spiritual aspirants for the restoration of 
Dharma (Righteousness). 


The root cause of all this restlessness 


When there is a sign of a little unrest, the police constable 
appears on the scene; if the mob gets unruly, the Inspector rushes 
in; and if it becomes violent, the Superintendent of Police has to be 
personally present on the scene to quell it. If, however, the situation 
waxes hot, the Inspector-General has to make himself available, is it 
not? This is a situation in which the I-G. is taking over-all charge of 
the situation. The Mahaapurushas, the Mahaathmas, the Jnaanis, 
the Yogis and the Dhevaamsa-sambhuuthas (sages, savants, saints, 
yogis & divine personalities) have had their try, and they will all be 
co-operating in the task of re-establishing righteousness and 
clearing the path for the world attaining Shaanthi (absolute peace). 


The greatest defect today is the absence of Aathma vichaara 
(the inquiry into the nature of the Self). That is the root cause of all 
this ashaanthi (restlessness). If you are eager to know the truth 
about yourself, then even if you do not believe in God, you will not 
go astray. The pots are all of mud, the ornaments are all of gold, 
the clothes are all of yarn. There is unity where one saw only 
diversity; the basic substance is one and indivisible. That is Brahman 
(Supreme Reality), that is the Aathma, which is your own basic 
substance too. 


This Aathma vichaara is best found in the Upanishaths. Just as 
a river's flow is regulated by bunds and the flood waters are 
directed to the sea, so too the Upanishaths regulate and restrict the 
senses, the mind and the intellect and help one to reach the sea 
and merge individuality in the Absolute. Study the Upanishaths with 
a view to act accordingly, to put the advice into practice. 


Scanning a map or turning over a guide-book will not give you 
the thrill of the actual visit, nor will it give you a fraction of the joy 
and knowledge of a journey through that land. The Upanishaths and 
the Geetha are only maps and guide-books, remember. 


Call upon the Lord in your own heart 


There is the story of a rustic who sat among a gathering of 
devotees and listened to the exposition of the Geetha by a great 
Pandith. All were wonder-struck by the scholarly commentary which 
the Pandith gave and his learned disquisition on each word and 
phrase and the rustic, though the exposition was very much over his 
head, seemed to attend very closely for he was all the time in tears! 
When at last the Pandith asked him why he was weeping, he 
surprised everybody by the sincerity of his Bhakthi. For he said that 
he wept at the predicament of the Lord, who had to sit at the head 
of the chariot and half turning his neck hold forth so long to 
convince the dull-witted Arjuna. "How much pain must He be 
suffering in His neck?" he asked and wept. That was real devotion, a 
sure passport to spiritual victory. He had identified himself with the 
participants in the episode and the whole setting had become alive 
for him. 


You need not even read the Geetha or the Upanishaths. You 
will hear a Geetha specially designed for you if you call upon the 
Lord in your own heart. He is there, installed as your own 
charioteer. Ask Him and He will answer. Have the Form of the Lord 
before you when you sit quietly in a place for meditation and have 
His Name, that is, any Name when you dojapam (repetition of holy 
Name). If you do japam, without that Picture or Form before you, 
who is to give the answer? You cannot be talking all the time to 
yourself. The Ruupam (Form) will hear and the Ruupam will 
respond. 


All agitations must cease one day, is it not? The Dhyaana of 
the Form and the japam of the Name---that is the only means for 
this task. 


Stick to the Name and Form you like the most 


The secret is: you should 'be', but not be as in sleep, when 
you are aware deep down within you, that you are. Only, sleep is 
enveloped in Maayaa (Delusion). Awake from that delusion, but 
immerse yourself in this sleep that is real Samaadhi (Super- 
conscious state of Bliss). Japam and Dhyaanam are means by which 
you can compel even the concretisa-tion of the Divine Grace, in the 
Form and with the Name you yearn for. The Lord has to assume the 
Form you choose, the Name you fancy; in fact, you shape Him so. 
Therefore, do not change these two, but stick to the ones that 
please you most, whatever the delay or the difficulty. 


Do not get discouraged that you are not able to concentrate 
for long from the very beginning. When you learn to ride a bicycle, 
you do not get the skill of keeping the balance immediately. You 
push the cycle along to an open maidan and hop and skip, leaning 
now to one side and now to the other and even fall with the cycle 
upon you on many an attempt before you are able to ride with skill 
and never again to worry about the balance. Automatically, you are 
able to make the necessary adjustments to correct the balance, is it 
not? After getting this skill, you can ride through the narrow streets 
and lanes and you do not need an open maidan; you can negotiate 


your vehicle through the most crowded thoroughfares. So too 
practice will equip you with a concentration that will sustain you in 
the densest of surroundings and the most difficult situations. 


The best saadhana for the beginners 


Do not be under the impression that I will be angry with you if 
you do not accept Me as the Dhyaana ruupam (Form for 
meditation)! I am not concerned at all; you have perfect freedom to 
select the Name and Form that give you necessary encouragement. 
When you meditate, the mind often runs after something else, it 
takes another road. You have then to plug that outlet by means of 
the Name and the Form and see that the even flow of your thoughts 
towards the Lord is not interrupted; if it happens again, use the 
Name and the Form again, quickly. Do not allow the mind to go 
beyond the twin bunds, this side Naama and that side Ruupam! 
Then it will not stray into a third place. 


First, when you sit for meditation, recite a few sh/okas on the 
glow of God, so that the thoughts that are scattered could be 
collected. Then gradually, while doing japam, draw before the 
mind's eye the Form which that Name represents. When your mind 
wanders away from the recital of the Name, take it on to the picture 
of the Form. When it wanders away from the picture, lead it on to 
the Name. Let it dwell either on that sweetness or this. Treated thus 
it can be easily tamed. The imaginary picture you have drawn will 
get transmuted into the Bhaava chithram (emotional picture), dear 
to the heart and fixed in the memory; gradually it will become the 
Saakshaathkaara_ chitram---when the Lord assumes that Form in 
order to fulfil your desire. 


Use the body as an instrument for spiritual practice 


This saadhana (spiritual practice) is called japa sahitha 
dhyaana (meditation on the Lord's Name and Form) and I advise 
you all to take it up, for it is the best for beginners. Within a few 
days, you will fall in line and you will taste the joy of concentration. 
After about ten or fifteen minutes in the initial stages and longer 
after some time of this Dhyaana, have some manana (inward 
contemplation) on the shaanthi and the sowkhya (peace and 


contentment) you had during the dhyaana; that is to say, bring back 
into your memory the joy you experienced. This will help your faith 
and earnestness. Then, do not get up suddenly and start moving 
about, resuming your avocations. Loosen the limbs slowly, 
deliberately and gradually, and then enter upon your usual duties. 
Taste the fruits of dhyaana and learn to relish them; that is what I 
mean by this process of manana (repeated reflection). 


Be careful about your physical health also. Satisfy the 
demands of nature; the car must be given the petrol which it needs. 
Otherwise, your head might reel and your eyes might get blurred 
through sheer exhaustion; how can thoughts of the Lord be 
stabilised in a weak frame? Only, do not forget the purpose of this 
body when you are tending it. A road-roller is fed with oil and coal 
and other types of fuel. But why is it kept in good trim? In order to 
mend the road, is it not? Similarly, remember that you have come 
embodied, so that you might realise the end of this cycle of birth 
and death. For that sake, use the body as an instrument. 


Flying hither and thither, higher and higher, the bird has at 
last to perch on a tree for rest. So too, even the richest and the 
most powerful man seeks rest, shaanthi. Peace can be got only in 
one shop, in inner reality. The senses will drag you along into a 
mire, which submerges you deeper and deeper in alternate joy and 
grief, that is to say, prolonged discontent. Only the contemplation of 
unity can remove fear, rivalry, envy, greed, desire---all the feelings 
that prompt discontent. Every other avenue can give only pseudo- 
contentment; a day will come when you will throw away all these 
play-things and toys and cry, "Lord! grant Me unruffled peace." The 
dacoit Vaalmeeki prayed so; the confirmed atheist too has one day 
to pray for peace and rest. 


Engage yourself in good thoughts and deeds 


People hug brass pots and take them to be gold, but they 
have to polish them so that they may appear bright. One day, they 
will get disgusted with this constant polishing and scrubbing; they 
will pray, "Release me from this scrubbing, this birth, this suffering 
and this agony." Life is short; time is fleeting: your saadhana is 
creeping at tortoise speed. When will you decide to proceed a little 


faster? Your saadhana is like the answers you write at the 
examination. If you get only 5 or 6 marks, then the examiner will 
strike out even that, saying, "What is the use of these few marks: it 
will take him neither here nor there." If you get somewhere near 
the passing marks, then Grace will give you just a little more so that 
you may pass, provided you have been a diligent well behaved 
student. 


Engage yourselves in good deeds, good company and good 
thoughts. Fix your attention on the goal. You have not realised yet 
the secret of this Advent. You are indeed lucky, more fortunate than 
many others. It is - only when Yasodha found every length of rope a 
little 


short to go round His belly that she discovered He was the 
Lord. So to, you will realise every description of My Mahima (Divine 
Glory) a little too short of the actuality; and then you will get 
convinced. Meanwhile if you study the Shaasthras and know the 
characteristics of the Avathaar of the Lord, you might get a glimpse 
of the Truth regarding Me. 


You will know the truth when you experience 


There is no use arguing and quarrelling among yourselves; 
examine, experience; then you will Know the truth. Do not proclaim 
before you are convinced; be silent while you are still undecided or 
engaged in evaluating. Of course, you must discard all evil in you 
before you can attempt to evaluate the mystery. And, when faith 
dawns, fence it around with discipline and self-control, so that the 
tender shoot might be guarded against the goats and cattle, the 
motley crowd of cynics and unbelievers. When your faith grows into 
a big tree, those very cattle can lie down in the shade that it will 
spread. 


Chithravathi River Bed, Puttaparthi, 23-2-1958 


6. An attitude of challenge 


WE heard the address of thanks which the sixth form boys 
gave to the teachers of the school and the advice they gave to the 
students of the lower forms. Their words were very sweet, full of 
gratitude to the teachers and full of encouragement to the students 
who continue to be under the care of those teachers. They also 
expressed their grief that they had to leave a fine school and a fine 
set of instructors and a fine company of fellow-students. But though 
the words were fine, I doubt whether the feelings were also such, 
for after all they knew they have to leave the school for higher 
studies. All these years, they knew that this day will come. Of 
course it is good to see that boys express gratefulness for the 
benefits they derived. They promised also to serve their country to 
the best of their ability. For they are the guardians of this land in 
the days to come. I am specially happy in the company of students, 
for they are like the buds in the garden; they are the young heroes 
who have to take up the difficult task of national and international 
reconstruction. 


The present situation in the world is like a typhoon, causing 
unrest and confusion. No one has mental quiet; fear and anxiety 
stalk everywhere; panic reigns even while the conquest of space 
and the mapping of new planets is being hailed. Even in this 
country, it is a time of crisis and no time should be lost to set 
matters right so that men may enjoy shaanthi (peace) more than 
anything else; for, without Shaanthi, life is a nightmare. 


Tolerate all kinds of persons and opinions 


While studying other things, you should learn the secret of 
Shaanthi also. This opportunity should not be missed, for that is the 
wisdom that will save you. The present system of education aims at 
making you bread-winners and citizens, but it does not give you the 
secret of a happy life; namely, discrimination between the unreal 
and the real--,which is the genuine training you need. Of course, it 
is not your fault, but of those who direct these affairs. They will 
have to do it, sooner rather than later. The cultivation of viveka (dis- 
crimination) is the chief aim of education; the promotion of virtuous 
habits, the strengthening of Dharma, these are to be attended to; 


not the acquisition of polish or gentlemanliness, or collection of 
general information and the practice of common skills. 


First, be fixed in the consciousness that yourself is the 
immortal Aathma, which is indestructible, which is holy, pure and 
divine. That will give you unshakable courage and strength. Then, 
you must:develop mutual love and respect. Tolerate all kinds of 


persons and opinions, all attitudes and peculiarities. The school, the 
home and the society are all training grounds for tolerance. At 
school, the teachers and the pupils must be aware of their duties 
and rights. The relationship must be based on love, not fear. Only 
the atmosphere of love can guarantee happy co-operation and 
concord. Above all, be good, honest and well-behaved. That will 
make the university degrees more desirable and valuable. 


Do not attach undue value to the passing of examinations, for, 
if you do so, you are apt to get terribly depressed when you fail; we 
hear of too many young people committing suicide when the results 
of the examinations are announced. Dear children, do not do any 
such foolish thing. Take failure, if it comes, as a spur to further 
effort; analyse why you failed and profit by the experience. If you 
ruin yourself by such foolish actions, it will pain Me, remember. 


Refuse to become scapegoats of politicians 


Learn when you are students how to succeed in the turmoil of 
life, how to live without causing pain to others and suffering pain 
yourself. Do not waste time taking part in electioneering and 
quarrelling over the factions and fancies of elders; they are setting 
you very bad examples and you must avoid imitating their low 
behaviour. Politics is a variety of 'ticks' which infest some individuals 
and worry their lives out. Do not catch that infection from them. Be 
clean and content. You are too young to understand the 
complications and confusions of politics and you can only be the 
tools and instruments of people who want to use you for their own 
purposes. Be bold; refuse to become the scapegoats of such men. 
Tell them you have better work to do. 


Proceed only as far as your own talents and experience can 
take you. Examine everything and believe only what appeals to you 
as correct. Do not simply say, Sai Baaba spoke well, or Sai Baaba 
writes well; respect Sai Baaba only if He does as well as He speaks 
and writes. 


Devotion and Activity---these two should go together. Shri B. 
Gopaala Reddi had come to inaugurate the Hospital at Puttaparthi 
and he said, "If only Government had planned this Hospital, even 
the basement would not have come up now." So also, this school 
has risen to this fame and height due to the care and love of the 
founders and supporters. All should co-operate in tending such 
institutions; difference of opinion must be like the two eyes, each 
giving a different picture of the same object; both of which, when 
co-ordinated, give a complete rounded picture. The donors of this 
school have done a very good thing: they have done it in a spirit of 
worship and humanity. Be grateful for their sacrifice and make the 
best use of the chance they have provided. 


India is blessed with many saints and sages 


The District Judge in his opening remarks said that Bhaarath 
has been blessed with many saints and sages and with many 
manifestations of Divinity in Human Form. A doubt may arise why 
such appearances take place in Bhaarath, more than in any other 
place, when the world is so big and we have humanity everywhere 
to be saved and guided. There is a reason for this, believe Me! Well, 
why should, in all India, Kolaar alone have gold? Where there is a 
gold mine, there is the need for mining engineers and chemists who 
will extract it, separate it, purify it and distribute it to the various 
places where gold is in demand, is it not? 


So also, it is here in India that there is a mine of spiritual 
wisdom and _ spiritual treasure: the Dharshanas, Upanishaths 
(metaphysical sciences and revelatory scriptures), the Geetha and 
the Vedhas. This has to be distributed pure and unsullied, 
guaranteed in value and quality, to eager aspirants everywhere and 
so we have here a succession of sages and saints. On account of 
the teachings and the lives of these people, there is a vast field of 


spiritual virtue in this land, which needs only a little more care to 
yield a rich harvest. 


Attachment to Nature has limits 


People suffer because they have all kinds of unreasonable 
desires and they pine to fulfil them and they fail. They attach too 
much value to the objective world. It is only when attachment 
increases that you suffer pain and grief. If you look upon nature and 
all created objects with the insight derived from the Inner Vision, 
then attachment will slide away, though effort will remain; you will 
also see everything much clearer and with a glow suffused with 
Divinity and splendour. Close these eyes and open those inner eyes 
and what a grand picture of essential Unity you get! Attachment to 
nature has limits, but the attachment to the Lord that you develop 
when the inner eye opens has no limit. Enjoy that Reality, not this 
false picture. 


The Lord is the Immanent Power in everything; those who 
refuse to believe that the image in the mirror is a picture of 
themselves, how can they believe in the Lord, when He is reflected 
in every object around them? The moon is reflected in a pot, 
provided it has water; so too, the Lord can be clearly seen in your 
heart, provided you have the water of Prema (Love) in it. When the 
Lord is not reflected in your heart, you cannot say that there is no 
Lord; it only means that there is no prema in you. 


Students and even elders here have given up the study of 
Samskrith, dismissing it as a useless difficult language. They have 
neglected the ancient texts, bundling them up and taking them 
down only on festival days for worship! But Western aspirants who 
know their worth have taken them to their own lands and they have 
translated them into their own tongues and learnt their essence with 
devotion. 


Students must honour physical labour 


Reading is not enough; you may master all the commentaries 
and you may be able to argue and discuss with great scholars about 
these texts; but without attempting to practise what they teach, it is 


a waste of' time. I never approve of book-learning; practice is what 
I evaluate. When you come out of the examination hall you know 
whether you will pass or not, is it not? For you can yourself judge 
whether you have answered well or not. So in saadhana (spiritual 
effort) or in conduct or in practice, each of you can judge and 
ascertain the success or failure that is in store. Saadhana is the 
essential thing even for you; for no age is too early for this. Just as 
you tend the body with food and drink at regular intervals, you must 
also tend to the needs of the inner Aathmic body by regular japam 
and dhyaanam and the cultivation of virtues. Sath-sanga, Sath- 
pravarthana and Sath-chinthana (holy company, good attitude and 
sacred thoughts) are all essential for the growth and the health of 
the inner personality. The body is the Bhavanam (mansion) of the 
Bhuvaneshwara (Lord of the world), His Bhuvanam. In so far as you 
are particular about coffee or tea at regular intervals, be also 
particular about Ghyaanam and japam at fixed times for the health 
and liveliness of the spirit. 


Students must have challenging attitude towards things; they 
must honour physical labour. They should be eager to be of service 
to those who need it on account of their disabilities. Honour also 
your elders and do not miss any chance of serving, honouring or 
pleasing them. Whatever gives you health, joy, welcome it; but do 
not lower yourself by indulging in vulgar pastimes. Do not wander 
aimlessly in the streets or frequent cinema-halls and mix with 
undesirable company, or cultivate bad habits just for sake of fun. 


This country has to be raised to great heights through you, 
not through its present leaders, remember. Note also that whereas 
in other countries, people co-operate gladly with some one who is 
courageous, intelligent and good, here the national trait is to be 
jealous of one another, to pull down those who are rising high, and 
to refuse co-operation and help. You boys must say to yourselves, 
"These elders do such things though they know them to be wrong. 
What a pity! But we shall grow up differently. We shall not belie our 
words in our actions. We will act together in harmony and love." If 
you develop such virtues, the nation will prosper; if not, it will be 
ruined. Have this warning always ringing in your ears. 


I bless all of you: citizens, parents, teachers and students. 
This school, which was established by the generosity of the people, 


will certainly grow into higher status and shine as a great institution. 
I have no doubt of that. 


Kannan High School, Chitthoor, 2-2-1958 


7. Courage 


Tins talk was not previously planned, but it is a case of the 
prayer of devotees being fulfilled. I am not giving you any new 
advice today; it is the same advice that I have given to students in 
many places. For, places may be different, but students are the 
same; and their nature, character, ideals and problems are the 
same in all places. 


The President of this meeting said just now that you are all 
busy preparing for the examinations, and that many of you have 
taken up your books only now. This has become quite usual now-a- 
days; nine months of the year you read all kinds of trash and in the 
two or three months left you pore over the really essential ones. 
This is not correct! It is very harmful to stuff the brain with all kinds 
of unwanted and paltry things. When you have some free time, read 
and assimilate such books as will promote an intelligent appreciation 
of the world and its mystery. To live a happy, peaceful and 
contended life, good education is necessary; education which is 
based on Dharma (righteousness). 


Do not develop a dread of examinations; there, in a fixed 
time, you have to write answers to a certain number of questions. 
Well, some students start answering the very first question and go 
on serially with the rest; but it is always better to pause a little and 
read the entire question paper and select the ones that you can 
tackle with confidence, and write the answers for these in the 
beginning. This will give you a good fillip to exercise your brains 
better for answering the more difficult questions later. 


Cultivation of virtues is very important 


Never lose courage in the examination hall or outside. 
Courage is the fertilizer which will make the plant of scholarship 
grow. The field may be good, but manuring is also necessary. 


You must all become heroes, adventurous and bold; prepare 
for that role from now on. Man has inside him a whole set of 
animals: the dog, the fox, the ass, the wolf. But he must suppress 
the tendencies of all these animals and encourage the human 


qualities of love and friendship to shine forth. Friendship that is 
cultivated from childhood onwards is more lasting and so try to 
cultivate real friends now. Above all, begin the cultivation of virtues; 
that is more important and beneficial than mere book-learning. That 
gives real Aanandha; that is the essence of all knowledge, the 
culmination of all learning. 


Treat every one as your own people and even if you cannot do 
them any good, desist from causing them any injury. Burn the lamp 
of love inside the niche of your heart and then the nocturnal birds of 
greed and envy will fly away, unable to bear the light. Prema makes 
you humble; it makes you bend and bow when you see greatness 
and glory. An unbending person is infected with egoism of the worst 
type; remember man is the only animal that can recognise and 
revere the great and the glorious. Use that capacity and derive the 
best advantage out of it. 


Just as there are two wires, the positive and the negative, 
which are brought together to produce illumination, similarly, the 
Paramaathma (Supreme Self) and the saadhaka (spiritual aspirant) 
have to come together in Yoga, to grant illumination. So, go to the 
holy men and holy places and keep company with pious men. A 
magnet attracts only iron; so a student attracts towards him only 
those who will help his study, only such things as will give him 
aanandha and dhairya (joy and daring). 


The easiest habit is speaking the truth 


Have faith that Truth will save you in the long run; stick to it, 
regardless of what might befall. For if you are true, the sense of 
guilt will not gnaw your insides and cause pain. It is cowardice that 
makes you hide the truth; it is hatred that sharpens the edge of 
falsehood. Be bold and there is no need for a lie. Be full of love and 
there is no need for subterfuge. The easiest habit is speaking the 
truth, honesty; for, if you start telling lies, you will have to keep 
count of them and remember how many you have told to whom and 
be always alert not to contradict one lie with another! Love a person 
and you need no longer deceive him with a lie; you will feel that he 
deserves the truth and nothing less than the truth. Love saves a 
good deal of bother. 


Do not be led away by all this present-day talk of equality, 
either of men and women, or of all men. Each has a certain fund of 
intelligence and a peculiar bundle of instincts and impulses and 
vaasanas (past impressions). To the extent that you develop them 
or divert them or diminish their strength, to that extent there is 
bound to be difference in your equipment and achievement. Use all 
chances you get to develop your skills and your health and your 
character. That is your present duty. Make lasting friendships. Do 
not by any action of yours cause pain to another; nor suffer pain 
yourself, by foolishness or sheer bravado. 


In your school, I find there are some girls too; treat them with 
great respect and do not speak slightingly of them. They are your 
sisters and by honouring them, you bring honour to yourselves and 
your sisters. Respect for women is a sign of real culture. 


So, I call upon you to read good books; revere your teachers 
and to love all. Do not dishonour your elders; cultivate the spirit of 
service and learn how to serve the sick and the needy and seize 
every chance to help others. Or at least, desist from causing sorrow 
to others. 


B. Z. High School, Chitthoor, 3-3-1958 


In your daily affairs, do not create factions, or revel in hatred. 
See the good in others and the faults in yourselves. Revere others 
as having God installed in them; revere yourself also as the seat of 
God. Make your heart pure so He can reside therein. 


Shri Sathya Sai 


8. Many roads 


I HAVE not come to you to ‘lecture’ for I do not believe in the 
value of mere words, however scholarly or pompous or profuse. I 
have come only to share with you My Prema and partake in turn of 
your prema. It is that which I value most. That is the real gain. 


Today, the typhoon of hatred and falsehood is scattering the 
clouds of Dharma, Nyaaya and Sathya (Virtue, Justice and Truth) to 
the far corners of the sky and people feel that Sanaathana Dharma 
(Eternal Universal Religion) itself is in danger of extinction. But that 
can happen only if the Lord wills, and the Lord who has laid down 
the Dharma will not allow it to be destroyed. 


Wherever sathya, dharma, shaanthi and prema are 
emphasised, in whatever religion or language, by whichever teacher 
wherever he may be, there we have Sanaathana Dharma. So long 
as man is capable of prema, dharma will exist, do not doubt it. 
When that prema is fixed on the Lord, your mental make-up will 
slowly and steadily undergo a revolutionary change; then, man will 
share in the sorrows and joys of his fellow-beings; thereafter, he 
contacts the very source of the bliss that is beyond the temporary 
gains and losses of this world. Prema (Divine Love) directed to the 
Lord is called bhakthi (devotion) and it is the easiest of all the paths 
to realise the goal. 


For treading the path of devotion, one needs only Love 


Bhakthi can be spoken of as having several stages. 
Mukhyabhakthi is the stage where the seva (service) of the Lord 
alone matters and it is its own reward; the devotee does not seek 
anything more than just the service of the highest, done to the 
utmost of capacity. This gradually becomes Paraabhakthi, where 
nothing except the Name and Form of the Beloved is cognised. 
Again, there is what is called Gounabhakthi, which is coloured by 
the three Gunas (inner qualities): the attitude of the aartha (the 
afflicted), the arthaarthi (the seeker of worldly comfort), the jijinaasu 
(the sincere inquirer) and the Jnaani (the wise man) who is silent 
and content with the realisation that all is He. 


For treading the Bhakthi maarga (path of devotion), one 
needs no scholarship, nor wealth nor riches, nor ascetic rigours. Tell 
Me what was the lineage of Vaalmeeki, the wealth of Kuchela, the 
scholarship of Sabari, the age of Prahlaadha, the status of 
Gajaraaja, the attainments of Vidhura? Prema---that was all they 
had and that was all they needed. The Grace of the Lord is as the 
Ocean: vast, limitless. By your saadhana, your japam, dhyaanam 
and systematic cultivation of virtue, this Grace is converted into 
clouds of truth; and they rain on humanity as prema showers, which 
collect and flow as the flood of aanandha, back again into the 
Ocean---the Ocean of the Lord's Grace. When prema embraces 
humanity, we call it dhaya (compassion), the quality not of pity but 
of sympathy; sympathy which makes one happy when others are 
happy, and miserable when others are unhappy. 


You have seen beggars singing in the streets, is it not? They 
have each of them a pair of cymbals in one hand by which they 
mark time, and a single-stringed instrument in the other, to the 
twang of which they tune their singing, The song will be harsh if it is 
out of tune and it will be confusing medley if the timing is not kept 
up. The song of life has also to be similar; keep up the daily tasks 
and sing away in joy to the tune of prema.. Then only is the music 
worthwhile. 


Two main principles to follow in life 


It is the mind which makes or mars man. If it is immersed in 
things of the world, it leads to bondage; if it treats the world as but 
temporary, then by that vairaagya (detachment) it becomes free 
and light. Train the mind not to feel attached to things that change 
for better or for worse. Do not hold before it the tinsels of worldly 
fame and riches; attract it towards lasting joys derived from springs 
inside you. That will bring big rewards. The mind itself will then 
become the Guru, for it leads you on and on, once it has tasted the 
sweets of Shravana, Manana and WNidhidhyaasana (listening, 
recapitulating and repeated steady meditation). It is the mind that 
fills the image made by the potter with the Divinity which the 
devotee sees in it; it is the mind which fills the shrine-room with the 
fragrance of holiness. 


It is the practice, one reads, that imparts strength, as food 
does when digested and as exercise does to promote health. Saint 
Thyaagaraaja sang that the Lord is the inner motive force within the 
ant as well as the Universe; but though you may intellectually agree, 
when an ant bites, you do not feel that you have come in contact 
with the Lord in that form, do you? Do not proclaim great truths 
aloud; show by your conduct that you attach value to them and that 
you are guided by them. Be careful of at least this; do not yourself 
commit those faults of which you accuse others. Do not ask others 
to reach a standard which you are loathe to climb up to! If you live 
according to these two principles, then even if you do not fall before 
an image or attend the temple ritual or worship as per schedule, 
you can secure the Lord's Grace. 


It is possible to see the Lord dwell in every being 


There are many roads through which you can reach Madras; 
so also there are many roads to Godhead; prema, sathya, seva, 
dhaya and Naamasmarana (Love, truth, service, compassion and 
remembrance of the Lord's Name). There is also the Adhwaithin 
who discovers himself as the basic substance of all creation, as 
Brahman itself. All paths are right; only some are easier, some more 
circuitous, some hard. The easiest way of grasping the basic reality 
is to see the Lord in every creature, the Lord sporting in all this 
multiplicity, as the underlying reality of all, the Sarvabhuutha 
antharaathma (Indweller in all Beings). You might wonder and even 
doubt how it is possible for the Lord to dwell in every being. But 
have you not seen one single mango seed grow into a tree which 
gives thousands of fruits, in each of which there is to be found a 
seed identical to the one which was first planted? So too, the one 
Lord can be found in every being created by His Will. 


"Ask only for devotion & spiritual wisdom from Me" 


Remember your real nature is the same as the other man's; 
he is yourself known by another name. When you do a good deed, 
you are doing it to yourself; when you do a bad turn to some one, 
remember, you are injuring yourself; so, avoid doing evil to others. I 
am reminded of what Hussain, the son of Rabbia Malik of Persia, 


used to do. He rose early and went to the mosque for prayers with 
great diligence and devotion. When he came back, he found the 
servants of the house still sleeping on their mats and he grew wild 
at them; he swore and cursed them for neglect of religious duties. 
Then his father chastised him. He said; "Son, why do you get angry 
with those poor souls who are too tired to wake up early. Do not 
wipe off the good results of your adherence to the rule of God by 
falling foul of these innocent slaves. I wish you would much rather 
rise late and abstain from the mosque, for now you have grown 
proud that you are more religious than these others and you dare 
blame them for faults for which they are not themselves 
responsible." 


You must pay attention to these small details also, for bhakthi 
is not just a pose; it is a series of little acts, directed by the attitude 
of reverence for the divinity in all beings. Watch for the lie that lurks 
on the tongue, the violence that lurks behind the fist, the ego that 
lurks behind the deed. Restrain them before they grow into habits 
and settle down as character to warp your destiny. 


Raamaswaami Reddy said that I work many miracles and that 
you are all lucky to have had this opportunity of hearing Me. Well, I 
am like a shop-keeper whose shop is stocked with all things man 
needs. But like the man behind the counter, I give you only what 
you ask for; if the customer asks for a towel, how can I give him a 
dhothi? But these material things are not important at all. Ask for 
bhakthi (devotion) and for jnaana (spiritual wisdom) and I shall be 
happy. Many do not crave for such things now; it is their misfortune. 
They are merely wasting their precious chance. 


Perhaps, the elders are to be blamed for this situation. For it is 
the duty of the elders to show the rising generation by their lives 
that spiritual saadhana and study have made them more joyful and 
courageous in the adventure of life. Youths always imitate the 
elders; they quarrel if they find the elders deriving joy from 
quarrels; they cavil at holiness if the elders do not honour holy men 
and institutions. So, I will not blame the young men as much as I 
blame the elders. 


Piety is not weakness but strength 


Faith in God and in spiritual discipline has declined due to 
want of enthusiasm among the elders in these matters. It is the 
responsibility of all pious men to demonstrate in and through their 
lives that piety is not weakness but strength; that it opens up a vast 
spring of power and that a person with faith in God can overcome 
obstacles much more easily than one who has not. 


I do not insist that a person should have faith in God. I refuse 
to call any person a naasthika (an atheist). Beings exist as a result 
of His Will, in accordance with His Plan; so no one is beyond His 
Grace. Besides, every one has Love towards some one thing or 
other, and that Love is a spark of the Divine; every one has 
ultimately to base his life on some one Truth; that Truth is God. No 
life can be lived out in complete defiance of Truth; one has to pay 
heed to truth and speak the truth to some one in order to make life 
worth living. Now, that moment is God's moment and at that 
moment when he utters the truth or loves, or serves or bends, he is 
a theist. 


So, it is not even bhakthi that is essential. It is Love, truth, 
virtue, the eagerness to progress, to serve, to expand one's heart, 
to take in the whole of humanity in one's Love, to see all as Forms 
of the Divine Consciousness. 


YM. I. A., Mylapore, Madras, 24-3-1958 


There is no living being without the spark of love; even a mad 
man loves something or somebody intensely. But, you must 
recognise this love as but a reflection of the Premaswaruupa (the 
embodiment of Love), that is your reality, of the God who is residing 
in your heart. Without that spring of Love that bubbles in your 
heart, you will not be prompted to love at all. Recognise that spring, 
rely on it more and more, develop its possibilities, try to irrigate the 
whole world with it, discard all touch of self from it, do not seek 
anything in return for it from those to whom you extend it. 


Shri Sathya Sai 


9. Examine, experience 


I HAVE come to comfort your life, not to describe Mine! So I 
did not like Raamanatha Reddy and Kas-thuri speaking about Me 
and the incidents of My life! Your lives are more important for Me, 
for My purpose is to see that you live more happily and with greater 
contentment. All beings have to do karma (sanctified activity); it is a 
universal inescapable obligation. Some feel that only punya and 
paapa---meritorious and sinful or virtuous and vicious deeds---are 
entitled to be called karma. But your very breathing is karma. There 
are certain karmas the fruits of which you cannot give up! There are 
physical, mental and spiritual Karas and doing each one of these 
for the good of the Self is called dedication. 


Mention was made of Puttaparthi and you were advised to go 
there and draw inspiration from the bhajans there. Please do not 
incur the expense; for wherever you are, whenever you call on Me, 
your room can become Prashaanthi Nilayam, your village can be 
made Puttaparthi. I am ever alert to respond, ever ready to listen 
and reply. 


I want you to be active, fully engaged. For, if you have no 
activities, time will hang heavily on your hands. Do not waste a 
single moment of the allotted span of life, for time is the body of 
God. He is known as Kaalaswaruupa (of the Form of Time). It is a 
crime to misuse time or to waste it in idleness. So too, the physical 
and mental talents given to you by the Lord as capital for the 
business of living should not be frittered away. 


Social service must be done gladly and reverentially 


Like the force of gravitation which drags everything down, the 
thamoshakthi (the pull of sloth) will drag you relentlessly down; so 
you must be ever on the watch, be ever active. Like the brass vessel 
which has to be scrubbed to a nice shine, the mind of man has also 
to be scrubbed by means of saadhana (spiritual discipline), that is to 
say, activity /ike japam or dhyaana. Karma which is natural and 
automatic like breathing becomes vikarma (an impious act) when it 
is done consciously, with a definite result in view. 


A Hindhu and his British friend once happened to come to the 
bank of the Godhaavari. The Hindhu said, "I will bathe in this sacred 
water." He recited the name "Hari" as he plunged in and came out 
refreshed in mind as well as body. He felt great happiness that he 
got the rare chance of a bath in the holy river. The Britisher laughed 
and said, "This is mere H20: how can you get unspeakable joy by 
dipping into it? It is all superstition. But the Hindhu replied, "Leave 
me to my superstition; you can stick to your superstition." The cynic 
got only physical cleanliness but the believer got mental purity also. 


When you prostrate before elders, the mind too must be 
humble; it is not the body alone that should bend. Now, there are 
many social workers in Madras who visit hospitals and do service to 
the patients there. Most of the work they do is mechanical, like 
fanning the patients, writing letters for them and singing bhajans, 
without paying heed to the actual requirements of the patients. 
Many do this work because it is the current mode of social service. 
But it must be karma, done with the full co-operation of the mind, 
gladly, intelligently, reverentially. The patient should not feel 
disgusted at the fussiness of the social worker; he should be looking 
forward to the arrival of the person, of some one who is very near 
and dear. If you do not like that type of work, you need not engage 
yourselves in it. Do not burden your mind by the unpleasantness of 
the task. Work done mechanically is like the flame of an oil-less 
wick; the oil is mental enthusiasm; pour it, and the lamp will burn 
clear and long. 


Karma should not be done anticipating any result 


In fact Karma becomes Yoga when it is done without any 
attachment; a sanyaas/ (monk) should not even remember whatever 
he does, he should not do any karma anticipating any result. That is 
the Mishkaama (desireless action) ideal at its highest. The best 
karma is that which is done at the call of duty; because it has to be 
done, not because it is advantageous to do it. The sanyaas/ should 
have no anger, anxiety, envy or greed; but your experience must be 
telling you that sanyaasis who are free from these are very rare 
today. 


Do not even cast your glance at a sanyaas/ who is so false to 
his vow that he craves for name and fame or indulges in calumny or 
competition. Do not be led away by such persons into disbelieving 
the Shaasthras and the Vedhas. He who is firmly fixed in the faith 
that this world is a mirage of the mind, he alone is the swaami; the 
others are mere Raamaswaamys or Krishnaswaamys entitled to 
have the epithet Swaami at the end of the name not at the 
beginning. 


Prakrithi (Nature) is puraathana---a very ancient entity. The 
jeevi too is puraathana, having had many previous entries and exits. 
But now it has come in with a new dress; it is nuuthana (modern), 
come like a pilgrim to a holy place for going the rounds. The jeev/ 
must have a guide who will show the sacred spots and help fulfil the 
pilgrimage. That Guide is the Lord Himself: the Guide books are 
Vedhas, the Upanishaths and the Shaasthras. The essence of the 
Scriptures lies in this one rule: Repeat the name of the Lord, 
keeping His Glow always before the mind. 


Earn the right to approach God without fear 


The Lord is as the Ka/patharu (the Divine wish-fulfill-ing Tree) 
that gives whatever is asked. But you have to go near the tree and 
wish for the thing you want. The atheist is the person who keeps far 
away from the tree; the theist is the one who has come near; that is 
the difference. The tree does not make any distinction; it grants 
boons to all. The Lord will not punish or take revenge if you do not 
recognise Him or revere Him. He has no special type of worship 
which alone can please him. 


If you have the ear, you can hear ‘Om’ announcing the Lord's 
Presence in every sound. All the five elements produce this sound, 
‘Om.’ The bell in the temple is intended to convey the Om as the 
symbol of the Omnipresent God. When the bell sounds Om, the 
Godhead within you will awaken and you will be aware of His 
Presence. That is the meaning of the bell which is rung in front of 
the inner shrine in the temple. 


Earn the right to approach the Lord without fear and the right 
to ask for your heritage. You must become so free that praise will 


not emanate from you when you approach the Lord. Praise is a sign 
of distance and fear. You must have heard the Kaalidhaasa story. 
He said that he would get liberation "as soon as I go," that is to say, 
as soon as the ego disappears, for then he shines in his native 
splendour, as Brahman (as the indestructible Aathma). The T when 
crossed out becomes the symbol of cross; so, what is crucified is the 
ego, remember. Then, the Divine nature manifests _ itself 
unhampered. 


Do saadhana in an atmosphere of joy 


The ego is most easily destroyed by bhakthi, by dwelling on 
the magnificence of the Lord and by rendering service to others as 
children of the Lord. You can call on the Lord by any name, for all 
names are His; select the Name and Form that appeals to you most. 
That is why Sahasranaamas are composed for the various forms of 
God; you have the freedom and the right to select any one of the 
thousand. The Guru will give you the Name and Form suited to your 
temperament and samskaaras (meritorious acts). If the Guru 
commands you under a threat and orders you to adopt a line of 
saadhana declaring "This is my aajna (command)," then you can tell 
him that the main thing is your satisfaction, not his. You have to do 
the saadhana in an atmosphere of joy and contentment. 


The Guru should not force the disciple to grow with a bent in 
the direction that he prefers; the disciple has the right to develop on 
his own lines, according to his samskaaras and bent of mind. The 
old relationship of Guru and sishyas has today become topsy-turvy; 
rich and influential s/shyas now rule the Guru and dictate how he 
should behave; and the Gurus also, keen on accumulating fame and 
wealth, stoop to the tactics recommended by the sishyas and thus 
lower their status. So, examine the Guru and his credentials, his 
ideals and practice before accepting him. 


Even in My case, do not be attracted simply by stories of what 
I "create" by a wave of the hand. Do not jump to conclusions with 
closed eyes; watch, study and weigh. Never yield to any one unless 
you feel the inner satisfaction that you are on the right path. Above 
all, do not talk ill of great men and sages. That is a sign of gross 
egoism and the childish impertinence born of that conceit. 


My suggestion to you today is this: just as you attend to the 
needs of the body, feeding it three times a day, in order to keep it 
in good running condition, so too, spend some time regularly 
everyday to keep your Inner Consciousness also in good trim. Spend 
one hour in the morning, another at night and a third in the early 
hours of dawn, the Brahmamuhurtha as it is called, for japam and 
meditation on the Lord. You will find great peace descending on you 
and great new sources of strength welling up within you as you 
progress in this saadhana. After some time, the mind will dwell on 
the Name whatever you are and wherever you are engaged in; and 
then, peace and joy will be your inseparable companions. 


Gokhale Hall, Madras, 25-3-1958 


10. Viveka and vairaagya 


YOU are all standing in the open, on the road and some are 
even perched on trees; it is really cruel for Me to speak to you for 
long. But inspite of all this inconvenience, I find you yearn to hear 
My words and so I shall satisfy you. Well, Man is Divine, take it from 
Me; he is really here on a holy mission, for a divine purpose. To 
consider him as mean or weak or sinful is a great mistake. That is 
itself a great sin. Man must earn his birthright, namely, shaanthi 
(peace). Ashaanthi (restlessness) is for him an un-natural state. His 
real nature is shaanthi. To recover his heritage of shaanthi, man 
tries various methods: acculumation of riches, maintenance of 
health, mastery of knowledge, cultivation of the arts. But these are 
not fundamental. Three basic wants still remain after all these 
methods have been tried: the need for reality, for light and for 
immortality. It is only when Sath, Jyothi and Amritham (Existence, 
Divine Light and Divine Nectar) are won that Shaanthi will be 
stabilised. 


It is no use indulging in arguments and disputations; he who 
clamours aloud has not grasped the truth, believe Me. Silence is the 
only language of the realised. Practise moderation in speech. That 
will help you in many ways. It will develop Prema, for most 
misunderstandings and factions arise out of carelessly spoken 
words. When the foot slips, the wound can be healed; but when the 
tongue slips, the wound it causes in the heart of another will fester 
for life. The tongue is liable to four big errors; uttering falsehood, 
scandalising, finding fault with others and excessive articulation. 
These have to be avoided if there has to be shaanthi for the 
individual as well as for society. The bond of brotherhood will be 
tightened if people speak less and speak sweet. That is why 
mounam (silence) was prescribed as a vow for saadhakas by the 
Shaasthras. You are all saadhakas (spiritual aspirants) at various 
stages of the road and so this discipline is valuable for you also. 


Prema must transform all relationships 


Prema (Love) is what the individual and the nation must 
cultivate now for progress. Hindhusthan became great on account of 
the flood of Prema which swept over the land for centuries. Prema 


must again transform all relationship: social, economic, educational, 
professional, family, religious, legal and others. The father must love 
the child a little more intensely and intelligently; the mother must 
spread love to all who come within her influence; children must love 
the servants. The sense of equality that every one is the repository 
of the Divine Essence must transmute social and_ individual 
behaviour. 


Vairaagya saves you from too much attachment 


You can call Me Premaswaruupa (Embodiment of Divine 
Love)! You will not be wrong! Prema is the wealth I have and which 
I scatter among the miserable and afflicted. I have no other riches. 
The Grace of the Lord is always flowing like the electric current 
through the wire. Fix a bulb, and the current, to the extent of the 
wattage, will illumine your home. The bulb is the saadhana you 
perform; the home is your heart. Come to Me gladly; dive into the 
sea and discover its depth; there is no use dipping near the shore 
and swearing that the sea is shallow and has no pearls. Dive deep 
and you will secure your desire. 


Remember, the sword of Prema has to be kept in the sheath 
of viveka (wisdom). The /ndhriyas (senses) have to be rigorously 
controlled by viveka and vairaagya (discrimination and detachment), 
the twin talents given exclusively to man. Viveka instructs you how 
to choose your avocations and your associates. It tells you the 
relative importance of objects and ideals. Vairaagya saves you from 
too much of attachment and injects a sense of relief, at times of 
elation or despair. They are the two wings that lift the bird into the 
air. They hold before you the impermanence of the world and 
permanence of the Bliss of Reality. They prompt you to direct your 
lives towards spiritual saadhana and the never failing contemplation 
of the glory of the Lord. 


Guudur, 22- 7-1958 


11. Nara and Naaraayana 


Everything in its own good time, they say; the fruit has to 
grow and ripen before the sourness is turned to sweetness. I have 
been coming to this town since ten years but it is only this evening 
that you, in this vast multitudinous gathering, have been able to 
derive this bliss of hearing Me discoursing! I am happy to meet all of 
you in one auspicious hour collected all in one place. All that I can 
tell you about the spiritual disciplines have been told often before; 
man's capacity, his nature, his talents are all ancient possessions 
and so the advice regarding how to use them is also very ancient. 


The only new thing is man's perverse behaviour---the 
directions in which he has been wasting his talents, misusing his 
capacity and playing false to his own nature. He has been forgetting 
the path prescribed in the scriptures for the cultivation of his nature, 
and hence all this suffering; hence also My advent. 


Man is essentially a discriminating animal, endowed with 
viveka. He is not content with the satisfaction of mere animal needs; 
he feels some void, some deep discontent, some unslaked thirst, for 
he is a child of Immortality and he feels that death is not and should 
not be the end. This viveka urges man to discover answers to the 
problems that haunt him: "Where did I come from, whither am I 
journeying, which is the journey's end?" So, buddhi (intellect) has to 
be kept sharp and clear. 


There are three types of buddhi, according to the 
predominance of one or other of the three gunas.: the thamas, 
which confuses sathyam (truth) as the asathyam (untruth) and 
takes the asathyam as the sathyam; the rajas which like a 
pendulum swings from one to the other, hovering between the two, 
unable to distinguish between them; and the sathwa, which knows 
which is sathyam and which is asathyam. 


Poised state is essential to reach the goal 


The world today is suffering from Rajobuddhi (passionate 
intellect) rather than thamas (inertia); people have violent likes and 
dislikes; they have become fanatical and factious. They are carried 


away by pomp and noise, show and propaganda; that is why dis- 
crimination has become necessary. To reach the goal, Sathwabuddhi 
(equanimous intellect) is essential; it will seek the Truth calmly and 
stick to it whatever the consequence. 


I have come to help all to acquire this Saathwik (serene) 
nature. You might have heard people talk about the miracles; of My 
‘making’ this and ‘giving’ that, of my fulfilling all your wants, of My 
curing your illness. But they are not so important as the 
Saathwaguna (poised state) I appreciate, promote and instil. Of 
course, I confer on you these boons of health and prosperity but 
only so that you might, with greater enthusiasm and with less 
interruption, proceed with spiritual saadhana. 


Eat well, so that your physical faculties might grow and the 
good physique will in turn develop your intelligence more fully. 
Bhakthi (devotion) leads to shakthi (power) and Shakthi will grant 
yukthi (skill). The yukth/ will help you to fix your rakth/ (attachment) 
on the proper objects and your bhakth/ thus promoted finally results 
in mukthi (liberation). 


A certain amount of attention has to be paid to the body and 
its care, as well as to escape the overpowering handicaps of 
poverty; but you must ever be cautious that you are not caught in 
the coils and forget the transitoriness of all this. Bring your thoughts 
constantly back to the Aathma, which is the substance of all the 
objective world, the basic reality behind all this appearance. 


Finding fault with others comes out of egoism 


The first step in Aathma vichaara (enquiring about the Self) is 
the practice of the truth that whatever gives you pain gives pain to 
others and whatever gives you joy, gives joy to others. So do unto 
others as you would like them to do unto you; desist from any act in 
relation to others which if done by them will give you pain. Thus, a 
kind of reciprocal relationship will grow between you and others and 
gradually you reach the stage when your heart thrills with joy when 
others are joyful and shudders in pain when others are sad. This is 
not the kind of affection towards those who are dear to you or those 
who are your kith and kin. That is a sign of delusion; but this 


sharing of joy and grief is automatic, immediate, universal. It is a 
sign of great spiritual advance; then the wave knows that it is part 
of the ocean and that all waves are but temporary manifestations of 
the self-same sea having the same taste as the ocean itself. 


The others are part of yourself; you need not worry about 
them; worry about yourself; that is enough; when you become all 
right, they too will be all right, for you will no longer be aware of 
them as separate from you. Criticising others, finding fault with 
them, all this comes out of egoism. Search for your own faults 
instead; the faults you see in others are your own faults instead; the 
faults you see in others are but reflections of your own personality 
traits; pay no heed to little worries; attach your mind to the Lord. 
Then you will be led on to the company of good men and your 
talents will be transmuted. 


When you love, you will have no fear 


Be a bee, drinking the nectar of every flower; not the 
mosquito drinking blood and distributing disease in return. First, 
consider all as children of the Lord, as your own brothers and 
sisters; develop the quality of love, seek always the welfare of 
humanity. Love and you will be loved in return, hate will never be 
your lot if you promote love and look upon all with love. That is the 
one lesson I teach always; that is my secret too. If you want to 
attain Me, cultivate Love, give up hatred, envy, anger, cynicism and 
falsehood. I do not ask that you should be a scholar or a recluse or 
an ascetic skilled in japa (recitation of holy Name) and dhyaana 
(meditation). "Is your heart full of prema (love)?" that is all I 
examine. 


Believe that Love is God, Truth is God. Love is Truth, Truth is 
Love; for it is only when you love that you have no fear, for fear is 
the mother of falsehood. If you have no fear, you will adhere to 
truth. The mirror of Prema reflects the Aathma in you and reveals to 
you that the Aathma is universal, immanent in every being. 


Parents have to be respected and worshipped 


I shall not tell you very complex matters; I shall give only 
simple remedies for the ills you are suffering from. I find here a 
large number of students. Well, what are they studying for? What is 
the goal? How are we to judge that they have studied well? By the 
salary they are able to get, or the cadre they are able to secure? No. 
Education must result in the development of viveka (wisdom) and 
vinaya (humility). The educated man must be able to distinguish 
between the momentary and the momentous, the lasting and the 
effervescent. He must not run after glitter and glamour but he must 
seek instead the good and golden. 


He must know how to keep the body in good trim, the senses 
under strict control, the mind well within check, the intellect sharp 
and clear, unhampered by prejudices and hatreds, and the feelings 
untouched by egoism. He must know the Aathma too, for that is his 
very care; that is the effulgence which illumines his inner and outer 
selves. This knowledge will ensure joy and peace and courage for 
him throughout life. Students also must cultivate vinaya (the art of 
avoiding the infliction of pain on others). 


I must also tell the students that they must be grateful to the 
parents who give them all the facilities they now enjoy at great 
sacrifice. In fact, the parents have to be worshipped as visible 
representatives of the God-head; they are responsible for your very 
existence and for all this joy and adventure in the physical and 
spiritual spheres. For this reason they have to be tended and 
respected and worshipped. 


There was a boy who was begging in the streets for food so 
that he could keep his bedridden mother and two little sisters alive. 
One night when he clamoured in front of a rich man's house, the 
master got enraged at his piteous cries. The boy was very unlucky 
that day and he had collected only a few morsels; the hour was 
nearing nine. So he cried most pathetically and it aroused the ire of 
the rich man inside the mansion. He came out and kicked the boy 
into the gutter; he was already very weak, for he was starving 
himself to feed his mother and sisters; so when he fell, he breathed 
his last, wailing, "Mother! Here is a little food for you." His hand 
held the bowl firm, even when it had become lifeless! 


Parents must set good examples to children 


Such is the devotion that the mother invokes and which she 
deserves, for all the pain she endured and all the sacrifice she bore 
in order that the son might be healthy, happy and good. Show that 
gratitude, boys, to the parents; remember them and pay them the 
tribute of at least a tear on the anniversary of their passing away. 
Do it with shraddha (faith), that is why it is called shraardha 
(religious ceremonial offering to the dead); not that the offerings 
you make reach them or that they are waiting for them in some 
other world; it is a tribute that you should offer in gratitude for the 
great chance they gave you for this sojourn in this world with all the 
wonderful opportunities it offers for self-realisation. 


Parents too must encourage children when they evince any 
interest in spiritual advance and study; they must also set them 
good examples. Among the children who are before Me here, there 
may be many a Vivekaanandha and many a Thyaagaraaja. Children 
must be given every facility to develop the divine talents that are in 
them. Parents must feel that they are servants appointed by the 
Lord to tend the little souls that are born in their households, as the 
gardener tends the trees in the garden of the Master. They must 
arouse the latent goodness in these tiny hearts by telling stories 
about the saints and sages of the past. They must see that children 
do not develop fear and become cowards afraid of walking straight. 


Give up the delusion you are this physical body 


You are all the indestructible Aathma, believe Me; nothing 
need discourage you. In dreams you suffer so much; loss of money, 
fire, food, insult, etc., but you are not affected at all. When these 
things happen during the waking stage, you feel afflicted; really, it is 
not the real 'you' that suffers all that. Give up the delusion that you 
are this physical entity and you become really free. 


And lastly, about Myself. No one can understand My Mystery. 
The best you can do is to get immersed in it. It is no use your 
arguing about pros and cons; dive and know the depth; eat and 
know the taste! Then you can discuss Me to your heart's content. 
Develop Sathya (Truth) and Prema (Love) and then you need not 
even pray to Me to grant you this and that. Everything will be added 


unto you, unasked. Vara (man) and Naaraayana (God) are the two 
wires, the positive and the negative, which combine to bring 
electricity through. Nara will co-operate with WNWaaraayana and 
become the vehicle of Divine Power, if he has acquired the two 
qualities, sathya and prema. 


Nellore, 25- 7-1958 


Individual reconstruction is much more important than the 
construction of temples. 


Multiply virtues, not buildings; practise what you preach, that 
Is the real pilgrimage; cleanse your minds of envy and malice, that 
Is the real bath in holy waters. 


Of what avail is the name of the Lord on the tongue, if the 
heart within is impure? Injustice and discontent are spreading 
everywhere due to this one fault in man: saying one thing and doing 
the opposite, the tongue and the hand going in different directions. 


Man has to set himself right and correct his food, his 
recreation, his method of spending his leisure as well as habits of 
thought. 


Shri Sathya Sai 


12. Tolerance 


I HAD no idea of speaking to you this evening, but of course, I 
need no 'preparation.' My Sankalpa (resolve) and its fulfilment are 
instantaneous. Shri Subbaraamaiah spoke just now of some 
important guiding principles of life, like the cultivation of virtues, the 
development of character, the control of hatred, etc. Advice such as 
this is being given from a hundred platforms every day, and people 
listen and depart; they do not practise what they have heard; and 
so things remain where they are. This is because those who give 
advice do not follow what they preach; they must themselves be the 
examples of the value of what they teach. Like the blind men who 
described the elephant, they describe the advantages of acquiring 
virtues and the benefits of controlling hatred, more out of hearsay 
than out of experience. 


There is deep-rooted unrest today in every individual, because 
there is no harmony within. The Varnaashrama rules that have 
come down from ages prescribe one type of conduct; the books that 
one reads recommend another type; experience gives conflicting 
advice. But peace depends on the mind and its awareness of the 
secret of poise. The body is the caravanserai, the jeev/ (individual) 
is the pilgrim and the mind is the watchman. The mind seeks sukha 
(happiness); it feels that happiness can be got in this world from 
fame, riches, land and property, from other individuals or relatives; 
further, it builds up pictures of heaven where there is more intense 
happiness for a longer time; at last, it discovers that eternal 
undiminished happiness can be got only by dwelling on the Reality 
of one's own Self, which is Bliss Itself. 


Yielding to despair worsens the problem 


The jeevathathwa (the life principle) is like the grain covered 
up in the husk of maayaa (delusion), as the rice is enveloped in the 
paddy. The maayaa has to be removed; thejeevathathwa has to be 
boiled and made soft and assimilated so that it might add to health 
and strength. The softened rice can be compared to Paramaathma 
(Supreme Soul). The mind has to be used for this process. It has to 
be fixed in the Sathyam (Truth) and the MWithyam (Everlasting). To 


remove the husk of delusion, viveka (discrimination) is an 
instrument. 


Develop the power of discrimination and find out which is 
permanent and which is not, which is beneficial and which is not. 
Even in selecting a Guru, you should use your viveka. Not all clouds 
are rain-bearing. A real teacher will be able to attract seekers from 
afar merely by his personality. He need not be talked about in 
glowing terms; his presence will be felt and aspirants will hurry 
towards him, like bees towards a lotus in full bloom. 


Seek the light always; be full of confidence and zest. Do not 
yield to despair, for it can never produce results. It only worsens the 
problem, for it darkens the intellect and plunges you in doubt. You 
must take up the path of saadhana (spiritual practice), very 
enthusiastically. Half-hearted halting steps will not yield fruit. It is 
like cleaning a slushy area by a stream of water. If the current of 
the stream is slow, the slush cannot be cleared. The stream must 
flow full and fast, driving everything before it, so that the slush 
might be scoured clean. 


Liberation can be achieved by subtle means 


I shall talk to you of these first steps only, for they are the 
most important for the saadhakas (spiritual aspirants); and you are 
all saadhakas or are bound to be saadhakas. "Moksha lies in the 
suukshma" they say---"Liberation can be achieved by subtle means." 
Treat the others in the same way as you would like them to treat 
you. Never brood over the past; when grief over-powers you, do not 
recollect similar incidents in your past experience and add to the 
sum of your grief; recollect, rather, incidents when grief did not 
knock at your door, but you were happy instead. Draw consolation 
and strength from such memories and raise yourself above the 
surging waters of sorrow. Women are called "weak" because they 
yield to anger and sorrow much more easily than men; so I would 
ask them to take extra pains to overcome these two. 
Naamasmarana is the best antidote for this and if only men and 
women take up to it, the Lord will come to their rescue. That will 
instil the faith that everything is God's Will and teach that you have 
no right to exult or despair. 


When you go to a doctor, you must take the medicine that he 
prescribes and follow his advice and instructions. There is no use 
blaming him if you default. How can he cure you if you do not drink 
the mixture or stick to the restrictions he has imposed or regulate 
your diet according to his advice? Do as I say, follow My advice and 
then watch the result. 


It is a sign of foolishness to brood over mishaps and mistakes 
once committed and punish oneself for them by refusing to take 
food. It is a very childish way of correction. What is the good of ill- 
treating the body for the sake of correcting the mind? 


Even if you cannot love others, do not hate them or feel envy 
towards them. Do not misunderstand them motives and scandalise 
them; if you only knew, their motives might be as noble as yours or 
their action might be due to ignorance, rather than wickedness or 
mischief. Pardon the other man's faults but deal harshly with your 
own. 


The holy culture of this ancient land has been spoilt by just 
one impurity; intolerance of another's success, prosperity or 
progress. If you cannot help another, at least avoid doing him harm 
or causing him pain. That itself is a great service. What right have 
you to find fault with another or to talk evil of him? When you say 
that nothing can ever happen on earth without His Will, why get 
annoyed or angry? Your duty is to cleanse yourself and engage in 
your own inner purification. That endeavour will bring you the co- 
operation of all good men and you will find strength and joy welling 
up within you. 


Venkatagiri, 2-8-1958 


13. Aanandha through dedication 


TODAY is indeed a day of joy, since we have met here to 
share prema; the joy is marred to some extent by the want of 
accommodation in this Hall and the suffering all of you are put to. I 
too feel that it is not proper to keep you long in this physical 
torment while I am having comparative comfort on this less 
crowded platform. That explains partly why you are restless and 
agitated, an attitude quite different from what you should have on 
such occasions. The same group of people, you will have observed, 
differs in its reactions and behaviour when it is in a marriage 
pandhal, a cinema hall, an exhibition enclosure, a temple or seeing 
a football match. They are moved by totally different impulses in 
these various places. In a gathering devoted to the needs of the 
spirit, what is expected is eager attention, quiet calm and 
reverential, prayer-ful silence. Here, obviously, only the eye and the 
ear need function; the tongue has no business to wag. I have come 
to share with you the gift of prema (love) that I have brought, but 
you seem to be satisfied with the confusion that you already live in! 


The unhealthy are to be nursed back to health 


Now, that is very much better. It is the silence that is wanted 
in all gatherings where deeper spiritual disciplines are talked about. 
Of course, everywhere and every time, it is best you curb your 
tongue; that is the very first exercise that I prescribe for spiritual 
progress. What I have to say now is not for those who are endowed 
with bhakthi (devotion), for they know the path and they are 
already marching on: nor for those who have no spring of bhakthi in 
them, for, speaking to them is sheer waste of time. It is for the 
wavering, the unsteady, the hesistant, who are conscious of the 
Higher Power and are feebly desirous of contacting it, for they are 
either ignorant of the technique or afraid of the consequences; it is 
for such half-apathetic bhakthas (devotees) that I talk. Medicine is 
useless for the dead as well as the sturdy. The unhealthy, hovering 
between death and survival, these are to be nursed back to 
strength. 


I would like you first to learn the art of so living in the midst of 
people that you do not grieve nor make others grieve. Learn to 


make the best of life, this chance offered to you to sublimate your 
instincts, impulses and vaasanas (impressions left on the mind by 
past actions) and rise higher and higher in the moral and spiritual 
plane. Make the best out of opportunities like this and derive 
Aanandha from every hour, garnering all the profit you can. This 
town is holy and so, there are many Aadhyaathmik (metaphysical) 
Institutions; many pious men visit it and give valuable advice. I am 
glad the Malayalaswaami of Yerpedu is now here for the 
Chaathurmaasya (four months of ascetic observance); it is a good 
chance for you to learn from him the teachings of the sages of 
ancient times. I am sure he will spread good thoughts and good 
impulses promoting your spiritual advance. 


Become conscious of your kinship with God 


This is not bhakthi, this holding a garland in the hand and 
indulging in paltry conversation in holy places. I do not want nor do 
I appreciate any one bringing flowers and fruits into My presence. 
Bring Me the fragrant flower of a pure heart and the fruit of a 
saadhana-mellowed mind; that is what I like most, not these things 
available outside yourselves for so much of cash, without any effort 
that elevates the mind. To get a taste for that kind of effort, you 
must keep the company of great and good men and take delight in 
good thoughts. By whatever means available, increase the stock of 
your aanandha (bliss) and improve the quality of viveka 
(discrimination) and try to store as much of these two as possible, 
so that you can draw upon the stock whenever the need arises. 


The chief source of aanandha is dedication to God; nothing 
else can give that genuine and lasting joy. Become conscious of 
your kinship with the Lord. That kinship is not a mere fancy or a 
faked theory. It has come down since ages, from the beginning of 
Time itself. It will persist till the very end of Time, or, in other 
words, till the end of Time so far as you are concerned. The 
Godhaavari is carrying all the waters of all the tributary streams 
relentlessly to the sea. 


The rain falls on the mountains; as streams it flows in the 
plains and the full Godhaavari rushes through the delta. So too, the 
jeeva (individual) is born in Dharma maarga (path of righteousness), 


it journeys through Karma maarga (path of action), and it rushes 
through Saadhu maarga (path of sages) to reach Brahma maarga 
(path of Supreme Reality). The Karma maarga and the Saadhu 
maarga are discovered by the jnaanendhriyas (organs of 
perception). Keep them uncontaminated by Asuric (demonic) 
qualities and watch vigilantly lest they slip back. The Karmendhriyas 
(sensory organs) drag you into the tangle of Prakrith/ (Nature) itself. 
The cow eats grass and drinks gruel, but out of these it creates 
sweet sustaining milk; so too, let the experiences which are 
gathered by your senses help in the production of the sweetness of 
kindness, the purity of devotion and the sustenance of Shaanthi. 


Do not worry about others and their faults 


There is in every one a spark of truth; no one can live without 
that spark. There is in every one a flame of love; life becomes a 
dark void without it. That spark, that flame is God, for He is the 
source of all Truth and all Love. Man seeks truth; he seeks to know 
the reality because his very nature is derived from God who is 
Truth. He seeks Love, to give it and share it, for his nature is of God 
and God is Love. 


Like the paddy-seed which contains rice, the husk is the 
Maayaa which covers the seed within; the rice is the Jeeva and the 
essence of the rice, the sustaining element, the anna (food), that is 
Paramaathma. So, develop the Inner Vision, do not worry about 
others and their faults. Do a little Aathma vichaara (examination of 
the Self), study the Upanishaths and the Shaasthras; they might 
help you a little. Remember, only a little help. They are but maps 
and signposts. You must put them into practice; act and experience. 


Meditate on the truth and you will find that you are but a 
sparkling bubble upon the waters; born on water, living for a brief 
moment on water and dying upon its breast, merging in it. You owe 
your birth to God: you subsist on God and you merge in God. Every 
living thing has to reach that consummation; why, every non-living 
thing too. So do it now; take the first step, purify the heart, sharpen 
the intellect or at least begin the recital of the name of the Lord. 
That will give you all the rest in due time. When a man plants a 
mango seed, he is not sure whether he will live to eat the fruit; but 


that is beside the point. To plant, to nourish, to guard, to grow, that 
is the duty; the rest is His look out. That is the real karmaphala 
thyaaga (renunciation of the fruits of action). 


Holy things can be cognised only by holy seekers 


Above all, cultivate prema (love), towards all. That will destroy 
envy, anger and hatred. Raama (God) and kaama (desire) cannot 
co-exist in the same heart. Trust begets trust, love begets love. 
When I am talking to you with so much prema, you cannot develop 
any dwesha (hatred) towards Me! Prema makes the whole world 
kin. It is the greatest instrument of concord. The ryot plants the 
seedling and watches over it with great care; he removes the 
weeds, he destroys the pests, he lets in water as and when 
necessary, he spreads manure and awaits the day when he can reap 
the harvest and fill his granary. So too, you must nourish prema and 
pluck out the weeds of hatred and envy. 


Wear the red glasses and all things appear red. Wear the 
glasses of prema and all will appear loveable and good. Reference 
was made here to Dharidhra-naaraayana-seva (Service of the poor); 
the eye of prema will see all as Naaraayana; not only the poor, but 
rich, also. The rich too have to be sympathised with. You must pity 
the rich, for they have so few chances of developing the attitude of 
renunciation! See all as Naaraayanaswaruupa (embodiments of Lord 
Naaraayana) and worship all with the flower of prema. 


Even My nature can be understood by you only when you 
wear the glasses of holiness; holy things can be cognised only by 
the holy seeker. You get what you search for; you see what your 
eyes crave for. The doctor is found where patients gather; the 
surgeon stays in the operation ward. So too, the Lord is ever with 
the suffering and the struggling. Whenever people cry out in agony: 
"Oh God," there, God will be. 


To supplement saadhana, lead a regulated life 


The credentials of one doctor can be examined and judged 
only by another doctor; the patient has to believe and carry out his 
instructions if he desires to improve. He can give his judgement on 


the doctor only after the course of treatment is finished. Unless he 
obeyed the orders of the doctor strictly and to the very letter, he 
has no authority to pronounce judgement. So what can you now 
speak about Me? Follow My prescription! Naturally, it will be a 
different one for every one of you; it will depend upon the nature, 
the age, the virulence of the disease and upon the treatment you 
have already undergone to alleviate it. Adhere also to the dietary 
and other regulations that the doctor recommends. That is to say, it 
is not merely saadhana like japam (repetition of holy Name or 
formula), dhyaanam (meditation), Naamasmarana (Remembering 
the Name of God), etc., that will have to be done, but in order to 
supplement the effect of these, you have to lead a regulated life, a 
life conducive to good thoughts, with Saathwik (virtuous) food and 
Saathwik (noble) pursuits. Until you try out My prescription fully and 
sincerely, it is best you keep quiet. You do not know even a pebble; 
how can you evaluate a peak? 


You may be ‘unafraid,’ you may not fear anything else, but 
you have to fear Truth. There is nothing so awe-inspiring as Truth; 
your Truth, for example, for your Truth is the Truth of the Universe. 


This day, you may feel you have no need of the Lord, but 
when the pangs of hunger gnaw, you start pining for food. 
Therefore, wash your hearts with tears of joy so that the Lord might 
install Himself therein. A zamindar may own all of the fields up to 
the very horizon on all sides, but he will design to sit only on a 
patch that is clean! In the same way, when the Lord chooses the 
heart of a bhaktha (devotee), it does not mean that all other hearts 
are not His. They are not clean, that is all He means. He is 
everywhere, everything is His, His gaze is on all. If God was not all 
this how could they shine, or exist even as much as they do now? 


Therefore, have full faith in God and in yourselves, engage 
always in good deeds, beneficial activities; speak the truth, do not 
inflict pain by word or deed or even thought. That is the way to gain 
shaanthi; that is the highest gain which you can earn in this life. 


Rajahmunary, 1-9-1958 


14. The wise ryot 


Today, I am really full of joy for I have before Me people who 
are engaged in hardy toil and who sacrifice their personal comforts 
in order to make others happy. What the world needs is work done 
in that spirit. Every man has divinity embedded in him, as well as 
Truth and sweetness. Only, he does not know how to manifest that 
Divinity, how to realise that Truth, how to taste that sweetness. So, 
he carries the twin burdens of joy and grief tied to the ends of a 
single pole slung across his shoulders. Courage is the tonic for 
getting both physical as well as mental health and strength. Give up 
doubt, hesitation and fear. Do not give any chance for these to 
strike root in your mind. Man, by means of the inner divine strength 
with which he is equipped, can achieve anything; he can even 
become Maadhava (God). 


To help you to give up fear and doubt, keep the Name of the 
Lord always on your tongue and in your mind. Dwell on the endless 
forms of the Lord, His limitless Glow, while you repeat the Name. 
Attach yourself to Him; then your attachment for these temporary 
objects will fall off; or at least, you will start seeing them in their 
proper proportion as having only relative reality. When the tiny little 
ego assumes enormous importance, it causes all this bother! That is 
the root of all the travail. 


Raama Naama endows you with spiritual power 


In your heart, there is the Aathmaaraama, the Raama that 
confers eternal joy. So repeat the name Raama, the Sun which can 
make the lotus in the heart bloom. Raama is not the son of Emperor 
'‘Dhasharatha’ but of the ruler of the dhasha indhriyas (the ten 
senses). The recital of the Raamanaama must become as automatic 
as breathing, as frequent and as essential. Raama has in it the 
beeja-akshara (seed letters) of both the Shiva manthra as well as 
the Naaraayana manthra, for it is composed of the second letters of 
both; Naa-raa-yanaaya and WNa-mah-Shivaaya. This name _ is 
acceptable, therefore, to all sects; it also endows you with power 
and all the spiritual capital you need. 


Real Aanandha (Bliss) can be won only by means of the 
transformation of the impulses which agitate the mind. It is not to 
be found in wealth. You think that the rich man is happy; ask Me, 
and I shall reveal to you that they are full of grief, for they come to 
Me in large numbers for relief. They have no shaanthi (peace) at all. 
A strong physique does not by itself give shaanthi; nor does 
scholarship, or asceticism or rituals. Only constant dwelling with the 
Name of the Lord gives that unshakeable Peace, unaffected by the 
ups and downs of life. It makes man a dheera (a hero). 


Sai Baaba was till today a formless Name to you, but now it 
has come with Form and you can keep the ruupa (form) in your 
mind. So too, the Name 'Raama' has a form and you should picture 
the form also when you repeat the Name; then the name becomes 
concrete and japam is easier. Live always in the presence of that 
Form-filled Naamam. Then life becomes one continuous worship of 
the Lord. Really speaking, you agriculturists are holy souls, for you 
bend under the weight of the service you do and with hands raised 
in prayer, you toil night and day converting dust and dirt into the 
nourishing harvest of grain for all men to feed upon. 


Do your tasks as dedicated to the Lord 


This task is holy and the product of your efforts is also sacred. 
Why cannot this task be made more fruitful by the cultivation of 
virtues also? That is the real harvest which pleases the Lord and 
sustains the world. 


Worry and grief there will always be, of one type or other, in 
the past, present and future; while walking, dreaming and sleeping. 
But place faith in the Lord and do your tasks as dedicated to Him 
and they both will vanish. Naaradha one day boasted before Vishnu 
that no devotee could excel him; but this boast was against the very 
first qualification of a bhaktha---freedom from egoism. So, Vishnu 
spoke of a ryot who was tilling his little plot of land as a greater 
devotee and recommended that Naaradha should visit him and learn 
‘the art of devotion’ from him] 


Naaradha felt badly humiliated; but he proceeded to the 
village indicated, in great chagrin. He found the ryot engrossed in 


his round of duties on the field, in the cattle shed and at home; and 
in spite of the most vigilant watch, he could not hear him speak the 
name of the Lord more than thrice a day; once when he woke up 
from bed, another time when he took his midday meal and the last, 
when he retired for the night. Naaradha was naturally incensed that 
he was deemed inferior to this poor, pale specimen of a bhaktha. He 
was always singing melodiously the /ee/as (divine sport) of the Lord 
and spreading everywhere the message of Naama sankeerthana 
(devotional singing of the Lord's name) and here was a horny- 
handed son of the soil who remembered the Lord only three times a 
day, whom Vishnu judged superior to him. 


Do your duties with God's Name on your lips 


Naaradha hurried to heaven, his face flushed with anger and 
ignominy; but Vishnu only laughed at his plight. He gave him a pot 
full to the brim with water and asked him to carry it on his head and 
go round a certain course without spilling even a drop. Naaradha did 
so, but when asked how often he had remembered the Name of the 
Lord, he admitted that in his anxiety to walk without shaking the pot 
and spilling the water, he had forgotten the Name completely! Then 
Vishnu told him that the ryot who was carrying on his head more 
precious and more spillable burdens than a pot of water and who 
had to be careful not to take any false step, must perforce be 
admired for remembering the Lord at least three times a day! 


Therefore, it will be a great gain if you remember the Lord 
with thankfulness at least thrice or even twice a day; that will give 
you great peace. Do not give up your worldly duties, but do them 
with the name of God on your lips, inviting the Grace of God on 
your heads. Do not involve yourselves in the affairs of your 
neighbours or others to the extent that you get so entangled you 
cannot extricate yourselves. 


Spend your time in the contemplation of the beauties of 
nature that are spread out before you in earth and sky; green 
expanses of the crops you have raised, cool breezes that waft 
contentment and joy, the panorama of coloured clouds, the music of 
the birds. Sing the glories of God as you walk along the bunds of 
the fields and the banks of the canals. Do not talk hatefully in the 


midst of all this evidence of love; do not get angry, in these placid 
Surroundings; do not disturb the sky with your shouts and curses. 
Do not pollute the air with vengeful boasts. 


Purify your conduct, cleanse your behaviour 


The seedling wants water and manure, to grow and yield rich 
harvest. The tiny sapling of spiritual yearning for liberation from 
bondage also needs these two. That is the real krish/ (cultivation) 
you must undertake. That is the mark of the wise farmer.. 


More than all, set right your habits, purify your conduct, 
cleanse your behaviour. One bad habit that has taken deep root in 
this area is the smoking of tobacco, an evil that is fast becoming 
universal. It destroys aarogyam, aanandham, uthsaaham (health, 
happiness, energy) and even andham (charm). Smoke will not 
quench your thirst or fill the hungry stomach. It disfigures your face 
and denigrates your lungs. It debilitates you and makes you 
diseased. Control yourself and do not yield to the snares of friends 
or society or, what is miscalled social convention, and become a 
prey to this and other bad habits. 


The body is the temple of the Lord; keep it in good and strong 
condition. It is damaged by food and drink of the Raajasik behaviour 
and TJhaamasik types and also by Raajasik (like anger, hatred, 
greed, etc.), and Thaamasik behaviour (like sloth, sleep and 
inactivity). When you get violent and angry with any one, quietly 
repeat the name of the Lord to overcome it or drink a glass of cold 
water or spread your bed and lie down until the fit of fury passes. 
While angry, you abuse another and he does the same; and 
tempers rise, heat is generated and lasting injury is done. Five 
minutes of anger damages the relationship for five generations, 
remember. 


This Asthipanjaram (skeletal cage or body) is the 
Hasthinapuram, where we have the blind king, Dhritharaashtra, the 
symbol of ignorance as well as Yudhishthira, the symbol of Wisdom. 
Let the forces of Yudhishthira win, with the help of Shri Krishna; let 
the tongue, accustomed to the bitterness of the margosa fruit of 
worldly triumphs and disasters, taste the sweet honey of 


Naamasmarana (remembering of Lord's Name). Experiment this for 
a time and you will be surprised at the result. You can feel the vast 
improvement in peace and stability, in you and around you. Learn 
this easy lesson, get immersed in joy and let others also share that 
joy with you. This is Message I leave with you. 


Mirthipadu, 2-9-1958 


Remember always that it is easy to do what is pleasant; but it 
Is difficult to be engaged in what is beneficial. Not all that Is 
pleasant is profitable. Success comes to those who give up the path 
strewn with roses, and brave the hammer-blows and sword-thrusts 
of the path fraught with danger. 


Shri Sathya Sai 


15. Be heroes, not zeros 


I am happy that I could converse now with so many of you at 
the same time. Yesterday and the day before, I had the same happy 
experience and thousands partook the joy from the words that were 
spoken. Now the whole world is very agitated; it is full of discontent 
and anxiety, fear and petty faction and hatred. In order to calm and 
quieten it and remove the discontent and anxiety, you must have 
enthusiasm and courage. When defeat and disappointment stare 
you in the face, you must not give way to weakness or despon- 
dency. Never condemn yourselves as inferior or useless; analyse the 
defeat and find out the reasons in order to avoid it the next time. 


You should have muscles of iron and nerves of steel. Then 
your resolution will itself generate the necessary confidence; and 
that will win over opposition. For the crop of life, courage and 
confidence are the best manure; they are also the best insecticides. 
Be like lions in the spiritual field, rule over the forest of the senses 
and roam fearlessly with full faith in victory. Be heroes, not zeros; 
for Maanava (man) is of the nature of Maadhava (God); he is the 
imperishable eternal Aathma/ Just as rain falling in various parts of 
the world flows through a thousand channels and reaches the ocean 
at last, so too, creeds, rituals, religions and theologies, all derived 
from man's yearning for the vast inscrutable beyond, flow in a 
thousand different forms, fertilising many fields, cooling many 
communities, refreshing tired people in many ways and at last reach 
the Ocean of Bliss. 


Proper atmosphere is essential for saadhana 


The Lord is all Love; so he can be seen only through Love; the 
moon has to be seen only through its own light, no other light can 
illumine the moon. In the night of Vyaamoha (utter delusion), the 
Lord can be seen only by the light that He himself is, namely, the 
light of pure prema (love). He is Sathyam and Nithyam (Truth and 
Eternal) and so He is beyond the categories of mithya or jagath 
(falsity and change). 


Drop the delusion that you have become old or diseased, or 
that you have become weak and debilitated. Some people begin to 


count the years and grieve over advancing age and shudder like 
cowards afraid of Death. But remember, elation is Heaven, 
despondency is Hell. Have always some work to do and do it so well 
that you get joy. 


Vyaamoha is the dust that settles upon the glass of the 
chimney of the lantern and dims the light. The attachment to 
sensual objects and to the pleasure they give is the soot that sticks 
to the inside of the chimney; that too dims the light. Clean the 
chimney by naamasmarana every day and the flame will shine for 
you and others. Also, have good activities and good companionship. 
That will help very much in spiritual saadhana; proper atmosphere is 
very essential for the aspirant. That is why saadhakas (spiritual 
seekers) used to move out and dwell in the aashrams (hermitages) 
maintained by sages in the past. 


In the aashrams, the saadhakas had the unique chance of 
being immersed in good thoughts, good activities and good 
company. It is like keeping a pot of water immersed in water; the 
water in the pot will then not be lost through evaporation. But if the 
pot of water is kept in the open so that the wind plays upon it and 
the sun shines on it, very soon the pot becomes empty. Be careful, 
therefore, that the success you have won in the promotion of virtue, 
in the conquest of baneful habits and in the assumption of regular 
disciplines, are not frittered away by trite company, loose talk, 
cynical criticism or lackadaisical effort. 


Draw upon God's Grace for all your needs 


The Goddess of Victory smiles only on the heroic, those who 
make lions of themselves, hardy, brave and adventurous warriors. If 
you secure the Grace of Maadhava, you are reinforced with so much 
strength that you can carry out even the most difficult tasks. So get 
the Lord on your side and draw upon His Grace for all your needs. 


The treasure that is unmistakably precious is the quality of 
shaantham, equanimity, unruffledness. Practise this and make it 
your natural reaction. Why be put out when you see wrong? Why be 
attracted when you see evil? Remember evil has in it the potentiality 
to become good; good has in it the liability to turn evil. There is no 


fire without a wisp of smoke; there is no smoke without a spark of 
fire. No one is fully wicked, or fully infallible. Take the world as it is, 
never expect it to conform to your needs or standards. 


Maayaa (illusory quality) envelops the good with the blemish 
of the bad; it makes the evil glitter with the shine of the good. 
Discriminate to the best of your capacity, and develop your capacity 
to discriminate. Struggle to win, that is the best that you can do; 
few can say, 'I have won’. Your conscience knows the real source of 
joy; it will prod you towards the right path; your business is to take 
it as ‘guide’ and not disobey it every time it contradicts your whim or 
fancy. 


India has a rich mine of spirituality 


There were two parrots on a tree, twins to be more precise. A 
hunter trapped them and sold them, one to a low, cruel butcher and 
the other to a sage who was running an aashram to teach the 
Vedhas (revealed eternal truths). After a few years, he was 
surprised to find that one bird swore very foully, while the other 
recited the /ee/as (Divine plays) of the Lord in a sweet musical tone 
which captivated the listeners. Such is the effect of the 
environment; so, seek and secure sathsang (good company). 


If truth is given up and man slides down the path of 
falsehood, then, as Appa Rao said just now, kshaama (starvation 
and disease) will descend on the earth instead of kshema (well- 
being), famine will stalk the land instead of the plenty that 
characterised it formerly. Appa Rao said that in Hindhusthan, there 
have been may manifestations of the Lord. That is true; for teachers 
have to be present where schools are and where children eager to 
learn are found. You cannot have the teachers in one place, the 
school in another; the black board in one place and the bell in 
another. 


There are mica mines near Gudur; you cannot ask why they 
are not found near Peddhapuram. It is so, that is all. So too, in 
India, there is a rich mine of spirituality and so engineers have to 
come here to operate it, extract it and prepare it for use. That is the 
reason why more manifestations of the Lord appear here. The 


atmosphere here is also conducive for the practical application of 
new modes and methods of extraction and use for the benefit of all 
humanity. 


"Iam you and you are all I" 


Bhaa-ratha means the land of those who have rathi 
(attachment) towards bha or Bhagavaan, that is to say, the Lord. 
The Lord too has to come in haman form and move about among 
men, so that He could be listened to, contacted, loved, revered and 
obeyed. He has to speak the language of men and behave like 
human beings, as a member of the species. Otherwise, He would be 
either negated and neglected or feared and avoided. 


The Avathaar (Divine Advent) has to lift humanity and put it 
into the crucible in order to remove the slag and inferior metals that 
have destroyed its sterling worth. When little boys turn the tap 
without knowing its mechanism, water badly drenches them by 
scattering on them circular showers, so is man drenched in grief 
because he does not know how to turn and get an even flow. 


If the naayaka (hero) is good, the naataka (drama) will be 
grand; if the hero is a flop, the drama will be a disaster. The leaders 
of the people must have faith in their own Aathma and the 
confidence born of that; then they can lead others; then they will 
not lead them astray, for they will feel kinship with the basic 
Aathma in all. Appa Rao spoke of Me. My Mystery can be known 
only by traversing My paththat I have here laid down. Understand 
yourself and that will reveal Me to you, for Iam you and you are all 
I. 


There is no need to retire into a forest or a cave to know your 
inner Truth and to conquer your lower nature. As a matter of fact, 
you have no chance to exercise your anger there and so the victory 
achieved there may not be lasting or genuine. Win the battle of life; 
be in the world but yet be away from its tentacles. That is the 
victory for which you deserve congratulations. 


Peddhaapuram, 3-9-1958 


Spread joy at all times. Do not pour into others' ears your 
tales of woe and worry; carry a smile on your face so that every one 
who sees you can catch that exhilaration. When you tell others of 
your success, your purpose Is to create envy in them. You must not 
only love others, but you must be so good that others too may love 
you. Try to console, encourage, strengthen, and enlighten those 
who are miserable, downhearted, weak or ill-informed. Get 
yourselves equipped for this role. 


Shri Sathya Sai 


16. Shikshana 


UNTIL about an hour ago, the organisers of this function were 
nervous that I may not come. They had reconciled themselves to 
the disappointment in store and they were feverishly engaged in 
making alternate arrangements, for they had heard that the 
Godhaavari was in high floods and that I was at Rajahmundhry. So 
they feared that I may not be able to cross the floods and come 
south in time for this engagement. From the fact that I had 
permitted them to announce My arrival for the function, they could 
well have inferred that the floods would subside and that I would be 
in their midst, for, once My word goes forth, it must happen 
accordingly. Do not doubt it. The furious waves calmed before 
Raama; the floods went down in time for Me. 


We left Chebrole last night at 11 p.m., and reached Nuzvid at 
about dawn. From there we motored throughout the day, without as 
much as a halt on the way, not slowing down even when the 
Kumaararaaja and others accosted Me near the bridge on the 
outskirts of this town, for I was determined to be here at 5 p.m., as 
promised. Let me reveal to you that the organisers were caught a 
little unawares; they were confused by rumour that I was held up 
and that I could not be reached by post or telegram or telephone. 
They asked Me for some time, about two hours they said, for 
hastening with the arrangements! Believe Me, nothing can hamper 
Me; My will must prevail. Those who spread stories that I was held 
up by the floods were ignorant of my Reality. 


Reason for naming persons with God's Names 


Nothing can hold Me up or agitate Me or cast a shadow on Me 
come in this Human Form; be certain of that. Not even a hair can be 
touched by forces of calumny or distrust or ignorance. My sanka/pa 
(resolve) must prevail; My task must be accomplished. My mission 
will succeed. I have come to illumine the human heart with the Light 
Divine and to rid man of the delusion that drags him away from the 
path of shaanthi (peace), the perfect equanimity born of Realisation. 


This School is associated with the late brother of the Raaja 
Saheb, a person who dwelt on My name even in the last moments 


of his life, and that was why I agreed to inaugurate it. I find that his 
name which is a long compound of a number of fine appellations of 
God, each redolent with the Divine Glow, has been shortened into a 
string of single letters, which has no fragrance, flavour or 
significance. This is not proper. Why deprive a name of its halo, by 
amputating it or wiping out all its aura? This distorted list of letters 
that you have now substituted for his full name, probably for the 
sake of greater convenience, seems to Me even more complicated 
than the original name, which though long, reminded one of the 
magnificence and splendour of the Lord. That is the reason why 
such names were recommended for men in the Shaasthras (spiritual 
scriptures), so that whenever they are mentioned, some one picture 
of the Lord, sweet and splendid, might appear before the mind's 
eye. 


It is indeed good that the girls of this town have now a High 
School; I appreciate the efforts of all of you to start it and I see that 
the building and the equipment are quite satisfactory. I bless that 
the girls studying here as well as everywhere else (for all schools 
are Mine, whether I inaugurate them personally or not) may 
cultivate faith in Dharma (righteousness) and have sympathy 
towards all. 


Students must be trained in ancient disciplines also 


Bhaarath has to take up once again the role of the teacher for 
the whole of humanity and so every boy and girl of the land must 
attain unblemished character and lead a life of strict moral 
discipline. Bhaarath is a word derived from Bhagavaan and Rathah 
(the constant attachment to the Lord), and the word connotes a 
people who are dedicated to the service and uplift of the Divine in 
each. So, along with the schooling that you get under present 
conditions in such institutions, a schooling which helps some of you 
to earn a living and which gives all of you a certain ‘polish’ and 
‘glitter,’ you must also undergo training in the ancient discipline 
which tames the instincts, controls the impulses and assures 
steadiness of character. But these things are necessary for your own 
sake, not to speak of the role Bhaaratha has to play. 


Shikshana (training)is a process in which the teacher and the 
taught co-operate and it must be a pleasant experience for both, a 
useful and heartening endeavour. Kshana means "a second" and I 
want that you must learn a good lesson every second of your school 
life. For example, when the teacher enters the classroom, children 
should salute him; that is a lesson in humility, in respecting age and 
scholarship, in gratitude for service rendered. The teacher too 
should decide to deserve the salutation of the children entrusted to 
his care by sincere work and selfless service. The student should not 
respect the teacher through fear, but be moved more by love. The 
teacher should avoid all methods that frighten or terrorise. 
Education is a slow process like the unfolding of a flower, the 
fragrance becoming deeper and more perceptible with the silent 
blossoming, petal by petal, of the entire flower. 


Example, not precept, is the best teaching aid 


The unfolding will be helped if the teacher is a fine example of 
viveka, vinaya and vichakshana (discrimination, humility and clear- 
sightedness), rather than a person engaged in the task of mere 
repetitive teaching and coaching for examinations. Example, not 
precept, is the best teaching aid. 


The value of character has to be emphasised here, for this is a 
School for Girls and traits like modesty and devotion to God are the 
real jewels for womankind. Women preserve the traditional values 
of our culture and keep the nation on an even keel. If they fail, it 
would be famine, not prosperity, believe Me. So base all educational 
efforts on building up the character of the students and then you 
can confidently think of raising on it the super-structure of curricula, 
etc. 


Pupils must know the secret of a happy life and of happy co- 
operation with other members of the community. There are duties 
to oneself, one's family and one's society which must be carried out 
intelligently and joyfully. Then only can life be harmonious and 
fruitful. I declare that this task of renovating and recasting 
education is a part of My Mission and before long you will find Me 
engaged in it and chastising those who simply talk loud and long, of 
reconstruction and the preservation of spiritual values. 


Girls are the makers of the homes of this land and so this 
school is a very basic institution, essential for this town. Woman is 
honoured in this land as the Lakshmi of the Home, as the 
Dharmapathni or companion in the pilgrimage towards God and self- 
realisation, and as the Mistress of the House. 


Girls should dread of sliding into moral error 


If the women of a country are happy, healthy and holy, the 
men of that country will be hardy, honest and happy. Thyaagaraaja 
has sung that even the strongest of heroes are Kaanthadhaasas 
(swayed by the wishes of women) and hence, every woman has a 
very crucial role to play in individual and social uplift. Therefore, I 
will not burden girls with the study of the geographical minutiae of 
America. Australia or Germany. I would rather they knew the 
technique of mental calm and social harmony and service and 
economic contented-ness. Let them develop a dread of falsehood, of 
sliding into moral error; that is more important than even the 
development of the dread of God. 


Let the girls also know something of the joy that service to 
those in distress can give, service without a thought of the benefits 
that may follow from the sympathy shown. Let them learn to lay 
aside the egoism that poisons the Seva of even veterans in the field, 
who go about extolling themselves as founders and promoters, for 
the service of the poor and the maimed, of this institution and that. 
The joy of the seva is the act itself. The fruit of the seva is the 
removal of egoism, not its multiplication. 


Attitudes to be developed by children 


The students of this school will take up later the most glorious 
and the most responsible role of Motherhood and so the teachers in 
schools for girls have a great big task before them, the shaping of 
the future history of this country. The mother is the pillar of the 
Home, of Society, of the Nation and so of Humanity itself. Mothers 
should know the secret of mental peace, of inner silence, of spiritual 
courage, of contentment which is the greatest wealth, and of 
aadhyaathmic (spiritual) discipline which gives lasting joy. 


The mother should teach the children the value of 
Naamasmarana (remembering God), and of mental and physical 
cleanliness. She should be like the mother in the story told by 
Vivekaanandha, who advised her son to call upon Krishna in the 
woods, while going to school alone and helpless. 


The father and the mother must supplement at home the 
training given by the teacher at school. They must acquaint 
themselves with the lesson the child receives at the school and see 
that their conduct and advice do not conflict with what the child 
learns from the teacher whom he adores. 


Teachers and parents must see that children learn certain 
good habits and attitudes during these formative years. What is 
read from books must be contemplated upon, thought over in 
quietness, reflected upon in silence. This is a very good exercise in 
intellectual development and in the acquisition of mental peace. The 
instinct to quarrel and fight over all misunderstandings must be 
regulated and sublimated. 


Children should not enjoy the infliction of pain or be allowed 
to suffer physical pain or mental anguish. They must have a sense 
of responsibility at least for the safe custody and proper upkeep of 
their books. They must not take delight in showing off their dress or 
ornaments or status or wealth before less fortunate children of the 
school. They have to be taught sensible habits of personal 
cleanliness and more important than all, the habit of prayer at 
regular hours. 


Importance of prayer at home and school 


They may be encouraged to go to bed regularly every day at 9 
p.m. and wake up at 5 a.m. and after washing the face and cleaning 
the eyes and teeth, they may be induced to pray or even to 
meditate. Do not think that there is a time enough for prayer later 
on in life, during old age perhaps. The time to lay the foundation for 
the habit is now. At school too, the day's work should start with 
prayer for five minutes which should be taken seriously by one and 
all, and not reduced to the mere formality or farce that it has 
become in most schools. The slightest sign of neglect shown by the 


school while arranging the prayer sessions will react on the minds of 
the children and they will see through the humbug quickly. So treat 
the prayer as the very foundation of the entire edifice of schooling. 


When the last bell of the day is rung, make the pupils stand 
up in the class quietly and let them observe silence for a minute or 
two and then disperse. There is nothing like silence to still the 
waves of your heart. The teachers must tell the children inspiring 
tales of our saints and heroes and plant the love for spiritual 
literature. If this school grows up along these lines, then the money 
sO generously offered and so gladly devoted to the establishment of 
the school, is well spent; and I am sure this school will develop into 
a very useful institution in a short time. 


Venkatagiri Town, 9-9-1958 


Man can be happy with much less equipment than he seems 
to think essential. 


When some article is with you for some little time, you feel it 
Is indispensable and you do not know how to live without it. Like the 
silkworm, you weave a cocoon for yourself, out of your fancy. 


Do not allow costly habits to grow, costly from the monetary 
as well as the spiritual point of the view. 


Watch your likes and dislikes with vigilant eye and discard 
anything that threatens to encumber your path. 


Shri Sathya Sai 


17. Gunas and Money 


I FIND that you have simply mentioned that Sathya Sai Baaba 
will be present at the Conference; you have not assigned Me any 
speech and so I can as well be silent. But so far as I am concerned, 
there is no need for formality or announcement. I am yours; you are 
mine. I do not await even an invitation; our relationship is not 
external; it goes deeper into the realms of the spirit. I am with you 
and in you; so I need no welcome nor previous request. 


The Divine Life Society endeavours to remind man of the 
Divine that is his basic reality; Divinity is inherent, immanent in 
every jeev/ and the process of reminding man of that fact began 
with the very dawn of human history. What has to be done to lead 
the Divine Life is just the removal of the fog which hides the Truth 
and makes man imagine he is something else; something inferior, 
evanescent, material, momentary. All are holy, pure, part of 
eternity. But these things shine in each in proportion to the 
saadhana, just as bulbs spread illumination according to the 
wattage. There is no body which is not sustained by the Absolute; 
there is no name that does not indicate the Universal. All objects are 
suffused by that Principle; all names are attributes of its Glory. 


Turn to the path of inner content and joy 


Every one must join this sangha (association) which harps on 
this fundamental fact and feeds the craving for immortality deep- 
seated in man. We were told by the Secretary who read the Report 
that the membership of the organisation is open to all who pay "four 
annas" (former Indian coin equal to a quarter of a rupee) a month. I 
would suggest that membership should be thrown open to all who 
can contribute not four annas, but four gunas, instead! Those who 
have Sathya, Dharma, Shaanthi and Prema (Truth, Righteousness, 
Peace and Love) are eminently fitted for membership. Insist on 
gunas (qualities) and do not look for annas (money). 


Man always seeks happiness by trying to satisfy his desires 
and if a desire is fulfilled, he feels joy and when it is not, he feels 
grief. But the trouble is, desire is a bonfire that burns with greater 
fury, asking for more fuel. One desire leads to ten; and man 


exhausts himself in trying to exhaust the demands of desire. He has 
to be turned back from this path of never-ending desire to the path 
of inner content and joy. That is the task of the Divine Life Society. 


Man grieves because he has developed attachment towards 
the unreal. He cultivates an unreasonable affection for wealth; but 
he is prepared to sacrifice the riches in order to save the lives of his 
children, for attachment to children is stronger than to the wealth 
he has earned! He stoops so low as to neglect his children when the 
choice is between his survival and the children's welfare! But the 
Bliss that one gets when he dwells on the Aathma, the source and 
spring of all joy, is unbounded and imperishable. That is the real 
joy. 


The orange has a rind which is not very tasty, but it protects 
the fruit and preserves it. To get the sweetness of the orange, you 
must peel and throw off the rind. Such is the fruit of the tree of life; 
it is protected by a bitter rind, of course, but the wise man does not 
try to eat the rind; he gives it the consideration due to it and 
proceeds to throw it off; he then tastes the sweetness. 


Every Indian has to live the life taught by sages 


In order that this wisdom may dawn on persons most in need 
of it, the elders must set an example of viveka and vairaagya 
(discrimination and detachment). If they run after sensory pleasures 
with feverish excitement, how can the younger generation be 
blamed for their selfishness and greed? The elders must practise 
what they preach, show how Divine life can confer joy, mental 
poise, contentment and real happiness. They must spend at least 
some time every day in the recital of the Lord's Name or in 
meditation on the Lord and then the children too will imbibe that 
atmosphere and acquire the sure means of gaining shaanthi for 
themselves. 


You say that there is nothing as sweet as the name of the 
Lord but you do not repeat it at all. You have spoilt the road by 
neglect and wanton destruction, but you advise the children to walk 
along it. They will discover the hoax; they will ask you to travel on 


the road yourself and give them the lead. So the responsibility of 
the members of the Divine Life Society here is very great. 


As a matter of fact, the responsibility of any person who holds 
forth an ideal is great, for he has to attempt to reach it himself while 
advising others to adopt it. That is why the responsibility of an 
Indian is so great, for in this land have been born saints and sages 
who have taught the world the highest truths of spiritual uplift; and 
any one claiming to be an Indian has to live the life taught by them, 
in order to deserve that ancestry and the admiration of aspirants all 
over the world. 


Physical hunger must first be appeased 


Divine Life is based on Sathwa guna (quality of calm serenity), 
which must be cultivated. This Guna can be built only upon 
Saathwik (natural) food, which promotes health, strength, lightness 
of spirit and earnestness of endeavour. There is no use distributing 
Adhyaathma rasa (juice of spirituality) to underfed and weak 
people; give Anna rasa (rice juice) first; make them strong enough 
to entertain strong beliefs and contain strong ideals; physical hunger 
must first be appeased by simple Saathwik food. 


Then, try to repeat the name of the Lord, the name that 
appeals to you most. Do not treat the Name lightly; respect it even 
if you hear it from the lips of a beggar who uses it to procure aims. 
Though the person who utters it is bad or though his motive in 
uttering it is bad, do not illtreat the Name; for its purity can never 
be harmed. Thank them for reminding you of the Lord and go your 
way. Above all, do not laugh at and discourage those who call on 
the Lord. What right have you to substitute misery where there was 
joy and doubt where there was faith? 


Prema (love): practise that; develop that; spread that; and all 
the hatreds and jealousies of today will disappear. That is the duty 
of the Divine Life Society, here as well as elsewhere. 


Arkonam, 14-12-1958 


No one can liberate you, for no one has bound you. You hold 
on to the nettle of worldly pleasure and you weep for pain. 


The kite is pursued by crows so long as it carries the fish in its 
beak; it twists and turns in the sky trying to dodge the crows who 
seek to snatch the fish; tired at last, it drops the fish. That moment 
it is free. 


So give up the attachment to the senses, then grief and worry 
can harass you no more. 


The kite sits on a tree, preening its wings, enjoying its 
happiness. You too can be so happy, provided you drop the fish you 
have in your beak. 


Shri Sathya Sai 


18. Education and Peace 


THE Governor, Dr. Raamakrishna Rao, spoke now so feelingly 
about the urgent need to cultivate spiritual values. When economic 
progress is made without modifying the spiritual background, then 
egoism, competition and greed bring the community to grief. Here 
in Thiruvananthapuram, there is no forgetting the spiritual 
background. The temple of Padhmanaabha dominates the town as 
well as the daily life of the people, not only of this place but of the 
entire State. Kerala is itself a holy land, and its holiness has 
increased by the advent of Shankaraachaarya and his teachings. 


The land is very beautiful, as I saw when I came from 
Coimbatore all the way to this capital city. The scenery formed by 
the backwaters and the coconut groves stretching from one end of 
the State to the other was like a vast painting by a great artist on a 
huge canvas. The Lord enjoys these things as a painter; He 
appreciates His own handiwork, standing before His own painting or 
sculpture. To see the Lord's own loveliness in the lovely scenery 
around you requires not the outer eye but the inward eye. If you 
develop that, walking over the land or voyaging over the waters is 
itself a pilgrimage through holy land, giving you glimpses of God in 
every speck of cloud or patch of green. But all this Sundharam 
(Divine Beauty) must lead man to Sathyam (Truth) and all this 
Sathyam to Mangalam (Goodness). That is the natural path. The 
beauty of the Lord's handiwork leads man on to the glow of the 
Lord; the picture makes you curious about the Painter. The Lord, 
when His Truth is grasped, confers Bliss which is auspiciousness 
itself. 


Kerala is ancient repository of spiritual wisdom 


I found also that the people here are very hardworking and 
industrious. From one end of the State to the other, people were 
busy on the roadside, in the shops and fields, in the gardens and 
the canals. Another thing that attracted the attention of all those 
who were with Me was the stream of children hastening to the 
schools, with cadjan leaves or slates or bags of books slung on their 
shoulders, boys as well as girls. The percentage of literacy here is, I 
know, the highest in India. Besides every family has a number of 


highly educated men and women. Thiruvananthapuram is the centre 
of many great educational and cultural institutions. 


In spite of all the ancient traditions of spiritual victory, all the 
granary of spiritual lore, all the activity and all the industry, all the 
passion to get educated and all the opportunities that are so gladly 
grasped, I find here a great deal of Ashaanthi (unrest). There is no 
‘inner peace’ prevalent here, where one would expect to find it in 
large measure. Of course, as the saying goes, "An aged tiger still 
has the stripes." Let Me tell you that the breath is still there but 
strength has gone from this ancient repository of spiritual wisdom, 
which once taught the secret of Equanimity and Shaanth/ to all. 


Gramophone records are all made of the same material. So 
too are all hearts, of the same Chaithanya (Supreme 
Consciousness). The grooves carved in them appear the same in all 
the plates. The grooves carved upon the hearts by grief and joy are 
also more or less the same. It is the needle which runs over the 
groove that produces through the sound box and the amplifier good 
music or bad. The needle is the manas (the mind), the mind that 
runs over the happiness and the misery and translates or 
exaggerates the response and makes you feel elated or dejected. If 
the needle is sharp, the music is a pleasure to the ear. If it is blunt 
or broken, then the sound becomes a screeching torture. 


The education man must first secure 


The mind is the wind that brings to us the smell, foul or 
fragrant, of the world. When the mind turns to the foul, it makes 
you disgusted; when it turns towards the fragrant, you are made 
happy. The wind gathers the clouds from the four quarters; similarly 
the mind brings into your consciousness the disappointments of 
many hopes. Again, it is the mind that, like the wind, scatters the 
clouds that darken it or make it feel lost in the night of doubt. 
Control the mind and you remain unruffled. That is the secret of 
Shaanthi; that is the education that man must first claim and 
secure. We find today that, the man who is most highly educated is 
the very person who is most discontented and unhappy. Then, what 
is the gain from all the study he has made of books and of men and 
things? 


To gain this equanimity, you have to do not reading, but 
systematic saadhana (spiritual effort). Then, you can be happy 
whether you are rich or poor, appreciated or rejected, prosperous or 
unlucky. That is an armour without which it is foolish to enter the 
arena of life. If the arena is entered just for getting sensory joy, you 
are in for all kinds of trouble. It is like sailing in a tiny boat on a 
storm-tossed sea, without a rudder. So, enter upon the path of 
spiritual discipline now itself. 


Meditation will teach the mind to be sharp 


You have each one of you a great deal of concentration; you 
know the art, for every task requires it and everyone benefits by it. 
The carpenter, the weaver, the clerk, the boatman, all have it in a 
greater or lesser degree. Use it for this task also; direct the mind 
towards its own working, examine it and train it to restrict itself to 
good company, good thoughts and good deeds. Practise meditation 
on any Form of the Lord and repeat, with the awareness of the 
sweetness, any Name of the Lord. That will teach the mind to be 
sharp and produce good music out of the joys as well as the griefs 
that are incidental to life. 


Like underground water, the Divine is there, in every one, 
remember. The Lord is Sarvabhuutha antharaathma (Indweller in all 
beings), Sarvavyaapi (All-pervading). He is the Aathma (Soul) of 
every being. He is in you as much as in every one else. He is not 
more in a rich being or bigger in a fat being; His spark illumines the 
cave of the heart of every one. The Sun shines equally on all; His 
Grace is falling equally on all. It is only you that erect obstacles that 
prevent the rays of His Grace from warming you. Do not blame the 
Lord for your ignorance or foolishness or perversity. Just as 
underground water wells up in a gushy spring when a bore is sunk 
down to that depth, by constant Raam Raam Raam Raam Raam, 
touch the spring of Divinity and one day it will gush out in cool 
plenty and bring unending joy. 


Nothing can give unmixed joy 


Life is a pilgrimage to God; the holy spot is there, afar! The 
road lies before you; but unless you take the first step forward and 


follow that step with others, how can you reach it? Start with 
courage, faith, joy and steadiness. You are bound to succeed. The 
mind and the intellect are two bullocks tied to a cart, "the inner 
man." The bullocks are not used to the road of Sathya, Dharma, 
Shaanthi and Prema and so they drag the cart along the road 
familiar to them, namely, falsehood, injustice, worry and hatred. 
You have to train them to take the better road so that they may not 
bring disaster to themselves, the cart they are yoked to and the 
men inside it. 


Your child gives you great joy by its play and prattle but when 
it interferes with your work or teases you when you are otherwise 
engaged, you get very angry with it. It is a source of joy as well as 
grief. There is nothing which can give unmixed joy; even if there is, 
when it is lost, it brings about sorrow. This is in the very nature of 
things; so try to correct the very source of joy and sorrow, the 
mind; control it and train it to see the real nature of the objective 
world, which attracts and repels you by turns. That is the real fruit 
of education. 


Thiruvananthapuram, 20-12-1958 


19. The Moon and the Mind 


THERE are manydifferent stories given in the Shaasthras to 
explain the origin of the Shivaraathri (The Night of the Emergence 
of Linga form of Shiva) Festival. Some of them were related now by 
the persons who spoke to you. Another stow is that this is the day 
on which Shiva danced the 7haandava (cosmic dance) in His 
Ecstasy, with all the Gods and Sages taking part in the Cosmic 
Event. When He consumed the Haalahaala (death-dealing) poison 
that emanated from the ocean of Milk, in response to the prayers of 
the Worlds, which it threatened to destroy, the heat of the fumes 
was well nigh unbearable, even for Him. So, it is said, Ganga was 
poured uninterruptedly on His matted locks---this is the explanation 
for the Ab-hisheka (ceremony of pouring consecrated water, oil, 
milk, etc., on the idol) which is offered in all Shiva temples for hours 
on end, and in some places, uninter-ruptedly---but Shiva was only 
partly relieved. So the cool Moon was placed on the head; that gave 
some relief. Then, Ganga was placed on the matted locks. That was 
of great help. After this, Shiva danced with all the Gods, the 
Thaandava dance. That is the story but all this did not happen on a 
particular day and so Shivaraathri cannot be said to commemorate 
that day. 


Some say that Shiva was born on this day, as if Shiva has 
birth and death like any mortal! The story that a hunter sat on a 
bilva tree on the look-out for animals to kill and without intending 
any worship, unknowingly, dropped the leaves of that tree, which 
happened to be a bilva, upon a Lingam beneath, and so attained 
salvation, explains only the importance of this day; it does not 
explain the origin! Besides we have not only Mahaashivaraathri. We 
have every month a Shivaraathri, dedicated to Shiva worship. Again, 
what is the significance of the Raathri (the Night)? 


The close affinity between mind and the Moon 


Well, the night is dominated by the Moon. The moon has 16 
kalas or fractions; and each day when it wanes a fraction is 
reduced, until it is annihilated on New Moon night. After that, each 
day a fraction is added, until it completes itself on Full Moon night. 
The Moon is the presiding deity of the Mind; Chandramaa manaso 


jaathah---"Out of the mind of the Purusha (Godhead), the Moon was 
born." There is a close affinity between the manas and the Moon; 
both are subject to decline and progress. The waning of the Moon is 
the symbol for the waning of the mind; for the mind has to be 
controlled, reduced and finally destroyed. All Saadhana is directed 
towards this end. Manohara---the mind has to be killed---so that 
Maayaa may be rent asunder and the reality revealed. 


Every day during the dark half of the month, the Moon, and 
symbolically its counterpart in man, the manas, wane, and a fraction 
is diminished; its power declines---and finally, on the fourteenth 
night, Chathurdashi, there is just a wee bit left, that is all. If a little 
extra effort is made that day by the Saadhaka, even that bit can be 
wiped off and Manonigraha (mastery of the mind) completed. The 
Chathurdhashi of the dark half is therefore called Shivaraathri, for 
that night should be spent in the japa and dhyaana of Shiva, 
without any other thought either of food or sleep. Then success is 
assured. And, once a year, on Mahaashivaraathri Night, a special 
spurt of spiritual activity is recommended, so that what is shavam 
(corpse) can become Shivam (God) by the removal of this dross 
called manas. 


Symbolic meaning of words used in scriptures 


This is the purpose of Sh/varaathri and so it is foolish and even 
harmful deceit to imagine that "keeping awake" is the essential 
thing in its observance. People try to escape sleep on this night by 
playing cards, attending non-stop cinema shows or watching plays 
or dramas. That is not the saadhana which should be intensified on 
Shivaraathri, That is a travesty of the vow of ‘sleeplessness.’ It 
vulgarises you and encourages evil and sloth, wickedness and 
hypocrisy. 


On Shivaraathri, the mind must become /aya (reduced into 
nothing). Lingam means that in which this Jagath attains /aya--- 
leeyathe; that into which this Jagath goes---gamyathe. Examine the 
Linga; the three gunas (primordial qualities) are represented by the 
three-tiered Peetha (platform); the Lingam above symbolises the 
goal of life. Lingam means "a symbol", the symbol of creation, the 
result of the activity of the three gunas and of the Brahman 


(Supreme Reality) which permeates and gives it meaning and value. 
When you worship the Lingam, you should do so with faith in this 
symbolic significance. 


Every word, every Form used in the Shaasthras has a symbolic 
meaning, which gives it value. The word "“prapancha" which you use 
so freely to indicate this "created world" means, "that which is 
composed of the panchabhuuthaas---the five elements of earth, fire, 
water, wind and ether." Take the word ‘Arudhayam’ used for "the 
heart". It means /Arudhi (in the heart) ayam (He). That is to say, it 
means not the organ that pumps blood to all parts or the body, but 
the seat of God, the altar where Shiva is installed, the niche where 
the lamp ofjnaana is lit. Again, Shiva does not ride on an animal 
called in human language, a "bull!" The bull is only a symbol of 
Dharma standing on the four legs of Sathya, Dharma, Shaanthi and 
Prema. 


Lingam is the symbolic form of the Godhead 


The three eyes of Shiva are the eyes which reveal the Past, 
Present and the Future. Shiva alone has all three. The elephant skin 
which forms His cloak is just a symbol for the elemental bestial 
primitive traits which His Grace destroys; He makes them powerless 
and harmless; in fact, he tears them to pieces, skins them so to say, 
and makes them ineffective. His four Faces symbolise Shaantham, 
Roudhram, Mangalam and Uthsaaham (Peace,  Fierceness, 
Auspiciousness, Determination). In this way, realise while 
worshipping the Lingam, the inner sense of the many attributes of 
Shiva. Meditate thus on Shiva this day, so that you may get rid of 
the last lingering vestiges of delusion. 


Just as Om is the verbal symbol of God, the Lingam is the 
symbolic form of the Godhead. It is just a form. Everything is 
maayaa (delusion) and to grasp it, you must deal with maayaa. 
Otherwise you cannot realise the Maayaa Shakthi (Deluding Power). 
God is as immanent in the Universe as life is immanent in the egg. 
The chicken is in every part of the egg; so too, God is in every part 
of the world. I prefer the description Sarvaantharyaami (inner ruler 
of all) to the description, Sarvabhuutha antharaathma (Inmost soul 
of all beings). All are in this Hall, each one has no Hall in him, is it 


not? In the same way, all are in Him; which is better than saying, 
He is in all. 


It is Maayaa which binds and limits man; all saadhana is to 
conquer maayaa. A bit of iron will sink in water but if beaten and 
made hollow, it will float. So beat the mind and make it hollow. 
Then it will float on the sea of samsaara (worldly life). Above all, 
have viveka and do not be led into taking any false step. 


Grow not only physically but also spiritually 


You need not waste time in trying to discover Me and My 
Nature. Understand what I teach, not 'who is the teacher, for I am 
beyond your intellect and your shakthi. You will understand Me only 
through My work. That is why sometimes in order to reveal who I 
am, I myself show you my ‘visiting card,’ something that you call a 
miracle. Know the marma (the mystery) and carry out the karma 
(the duty) I assign you. 


In the next fifteen years, a number of young people now 
growing up will shine as devoted aspirants in the spiritual field; they 
know that each of them is nithyam, sathyam and pavithram 
(eternal, truth and pure) and that they are amritha-puthraas 
(children of Immortality). They are growing in viveka and vairaagya 
and they are purifying themselves by Vaamasmarana. But the elders 
are laughing at such boys because they have taken to the godly 
path. Perhaps they will be happy if their children loiter in the streets 
in groups, smoking and swearing, and staring at posters. 


The elders should be elated that their children are on the royal 
road to real joy and contentment and that they will be serving 
themselves and the world much better. You do not know how to 
make an ornament out of gold; so you give it to a gold smith. Why 
worry if he melts it and beats it and pierces it and pulls it into wire 
and twists it and cuts it? Let Him who knows the art shape the child 
into an ornament of society; do not worry. 


You must grow day to day, not only physically but in the 
spiritual life also. How long are you staying on in the primary school, 
writing down the letters of the alphabet? Get up, demand an 
examination, pass, and move forward to the higher class! 


The Jeev/ must master the inner world first 


You are now sitting on the floor of the Hall; seek the means to 
see the top floors too. Progress! Come forward! Then Shivaraathri 
becomes a Mangala-raathri (auspicious night) for you. Otherwise it 
is just another raathri wasted. 


Many might discourage you and say that meditation and 
worship can be taken up after you reach a ripe old age, as if they 
are the prerogatives of or special punishments for the aged. Enjoy 
the world while you can and then think of the next---that seems to 
be their attitude. The child takes its first few steps in the 
comparative safety of the home: it toddles about inside, until its 
steps become firm, until its balance is perfected, and until it can run 
about unaccompanied and without fear. Then only does it venture 
out into the streets and the wide world beyond. 


So too, the Jeev/ (living being) must master the inner world 
first; become impervious to temptations, it should learn not to fall 
when the senses trip its steps; it should learn the balance of mind 
which will not make it lean more to one side than to the other; and 
then, after mastering this viveka (discriminatory wisdom), it can 
confidently move out into the outer world, without fear of accidents 
to its personality. That is why there is this insistence on 
‘sleeplessness’ or vigilance. 


You cannot claim to be educated or grown-up unless you have 
mastered the science of self-control and destroyed the root cause of 
delusion. It is not this night alone that you should spend in the 
thought of Shiva; your whole life should be lived in the constant 
presence of the Lord. 


Man's basic nature seeks inward contentment 


Do not tell me that you do not care for that Bliss, that you are 
satisfied with the delusion and are not willing to undergo the rigours 
of sleeplessness. Your basic nature, believe Me, abhors this dull, 
dreary routine of eating, drinking, and sleeping. It seeks something 
which it knows it has /ost---shaanthi (inward contentment). It seeks 
liberation from bondage to the trivial and the temporary. Every one 
craves for it in his heart of hearts. And it is available only in one 


shop---Contemplation of the Highest Self, the basis of all this 
appearance. 


However high a bird may soar, it has sooner or later to perch 
on a tree top, to enjoy quiet. So too, a day will come when even the 
most haughty, the most wilful, the most unbelieving and even those 
who assert that there is no joy or peace in the Contemplation of the 
Highest Self will have to pray, "God, grant me peace, grant me 
consolation, strength and joy." 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, Mahaashivaraathri, 7-2-1959 


The ills of the country are due to under-nourishment; not so 
much under-nourishment of the body, but under-nourishment of the 
spirit, want of spiritual exercise, neglect of spiritual regimen. 


Allowing the malady the fullest scope, people are engaged in 
reciting the names of the drugs in the pharmacopoeia! They do not 
make any attempt to take the drug in. 


The means of conveying into every home and village the life- 
giving waters of the spirit have all dried up or got choked up. 


That is the reason why under- nourishment, with all its 
attendant symptoms of debility, nervous disorder and mania Is so 
rampant today. 


Shri Sathya Sai 


20. Neither Scriptures nor Logic 


VAARANAASI Subrahmanya Shaasthry spoke for long on two 
types of inquirers at the present time and the conflict between the 
two, namely, the Shaasthravaadhins (expounders of scriptures) and 
Buddhivaadhins (expounders of intellectual reasoning). He said the 
former accepted the wisdom of the ancients as recorded in the 
Shaasthras, as authentic and authoritative, and the latter preferred 
to follow the path of reason, and take as authoritative only such 
things as will satisfy their logic. Of course, he showed the defects of 
the latter group of people by taking a number of examples and 
exposing the fallacies of the Buddhivaadhins. He quoted profusely 
from the scriptural texts and made his discourse abstruse and 
scholarly. I feel that most of what he said went above your heads 
and so you have missed the crux of what he wanted to 
communicate. 


Buddhi (intellect) revels in discussion and disputation; once 
you yield to the temptation of dialectics, it takes a long time for you 
to escape from its shackles and efface it and enjoy the bliss which 
comes from its nullification. You must all the while be aware of the 
limitation of reason. Logic must give way to Logos and Deduction 
must yield place to Devotion. Buddhi can help you only some 
distance along the Godward path; the rest is illuminated by intuition. 
Your feelings and emotions warp even your thought processes; and 
reason is made by them into an untamed bull. Very often, egoism 
tends to encourage and justify the wildness, for a person is led 
along the wrong path by his very reason, if that is the path he likes! 
You very often come to the conclusion you want to reach! 


Scriptures are only road maps or guide books 


Unless you are extra careful to examine the very process of 
reasoning, even while the process is going on, there is the danger 
that you may be following only the trail you yourself have laid down. 
Reason can be tamed only by discipline, by systematic application of 
the yoke, the nose-string, the whip, etc. That is to say, by means of 
dhaya, shaantham, kshama, sahana (compassion, calmness, 
forbearance, endurance), etc. Train it to walk quietly along small 
stretches of road at first and then, after you have become sure of its 


docility, you can take it along the tortuous road of the sixfold 
temptations: the road of lust, anger, greed, delusion, pride and 
jealousy. 


Bhasmaasura got vast power through the Grace of God, even 
the power to burn into ash any one on whose head he placed his 
hand; but his instincts had not been tamed, his reason had not been 
purified, and so, in his greed and egoism, he tried to reduce the 
very Giver of the Gift into ashes! 


The Shaasthras are only road maps; they are guide books at 
best, describing the road and giving the directions for the journey. It 
is the actual journey that will reveal the hardships, the delays, the 
landslips and the pot-holes, as well as the beauty of the scenery 
encountered and the magnificence of the final goal. No second-hand 
account can equal the first-hand experience. Moreover, the 
Shaasthras might speak about a thing in many different ways, just 
to elaborate it for better understanding; even the Vedhas extol a 
thing in ten different poetic forms, from different angles and 
standpoints; but some scholars try to treat each such statement as 
distinct and as having a different connotation; and so they add to 
the confusion, rather than reduce it. 


Both have good points as well as limitations 


The symbols on the map are interpreted differently by 
different scholars according to their pre-conceived notions, 
predilections and pet theories. So the Shaasthravaadhins too are not 
always right; they can be led astray by the desire to score a point 
over their adversary; they belong to certain schools of thought and 
this too acts as a brake on their freedom to seek and know the real 
meaning of the Shaasthras. 


I am neither a Shaasthravaadhin nor a Buddhivaadhin. 1 am a 
Premavaadhin (expounder of love). So, I have no conflict with either 
the scholar who adheres to texts or the devotee of reason. Both 
have their good points as well as their limitations. If you acquire 
prema, then you can dispense with the Shaasthras, for the purpose 
of all the Shaasthras is just that: to create the feeling of Sarvajana 
samaana prema (equal love for all); and to negate egoism which 


stands in the way. Reason too, if it comes in the way of this love, is 
to be discarded as 'perverted'. 


All the time and energy spent in pursuing the Shaasthras are a 
sheer waste, if study and reflection do not help you to recognise 
that the mind is worse than a drunken monkey. Pilgrimage too are 
for elevating the heart, sublimating the impulses and leading the 
lower self to higher levels of thought and action. Reason serves the 
same purpose, or at least, it ought to. Reason seeks to know the 
unity of the universe, the origin and goal of it all, the laws that 
govern the anu (microcosm) and bruhath (macrocosm); and it 
peeps behind the ever-receding curtain to get a glimpse of the 
Suuthradhaara (puppeteer), who pulls the strings. 


Do not run after devious desires 


Do not engage yourself in Ichchaa krishi (the cultivation of or 
the promotion of wants and desires). That is never-ending process 
of sowing and reaping; you will never reach contentment; one 
desire when satisfied will fan the thirst for ten more. This year is 
named Vikaari (crooked)! So, be warned! Do not run after devious 
desires or crooked satisfactions. All roads leading to the realm of the 
senses are tortuous and blind; only the road that leads to God is 
straight. Cultivate neethi (the path of straightforwardness) in 
everything. That will reveal the Aathma. Neethi will enable you to 
overcome the three gunas. The treatment you have to give these 
gunas is to grind them to a paste so that a new taste of Aanandha 
might emerge; just as you grind salt, chillies and tamarind together 
to get a tasty chutney for your meal. No single guna should 
dominate; all must be tamed and diverted to fill the lake of 
Aanandha. 


It is the internal aanandha that matters, not the external, the 
sensory, the objective, the worldly. If the inner poise or inner 
equilibrium is undisturbed by external ups and downs, that is real 
success. Every day is the same as another, the rising and the setting 
of the Sun, the waxing and waning of the Moon, the seasons, etc., 
but when 365 days are over, we Call it a New Year and give it a new 
number; but the Sun and the Moon are unaffected by it. Be like the 


Sun and Moon. Do not care whether they ring out the old year or 
ring in the new. 


Train the mind to disperse the clouds 


No one need do anything positive to discover the Aathma; 
when the 'cover' of illusion is denied and destroyed, it will reveal 
itself in all its glory. What is needed is the removal of the fog, the 
cloud, the miasma, and the casting off of all the clinging curtains 
that limit the self into the body and its adjuncts. How to remove the 
fog? How to clean the mirror so that the Aathma may be reflected 
clearly and without distortion? The mind that makes you believe in 
Shaasthras as the ultimate authority and Buddhi which makes you 
believe that reason is the supreme authority---both have to be 
scrubbed and polished; they get tarnished pretty quick! They 
require constant attention. Like a brass vessel that has to be 
scrubbed with tamarind and washed and dried so that it may shine 
like new, the mind too has to be treated ever with goodness and 
service, repetition of the Name of the Lord, execution of beneficial 
plans, taking up good deeds and contemplation of the welfare of all. 


The Sun is up here in the sky; it is the passing cloud that 
hides him from your vision. The sensory world is the cloud that 
hides the Aathma, ever shining in the firmament of your heart. The 
same mind that gathers the clouds can also disperse them in an 
instant; for it is as the wind which collects them from all the 
quarters and renders the sky dark; and the next moment, changing 
direction, sends them in a scurry to wherever they came from! Train 
the mind to disperse the clouds, not to gather them. Every aspirant 
has to do this by following a systematic discipline. 


You cannot reach the peak in one JumP; it is a hard job to 
negate the evidence of the senses; one has to overcome the 
tendencies that have grown through hundreds of births. The world 
is an illusion and all is Brahman only for one who has reached the 
ultimate goal; but until Realisation dawns, one has to wait patiently, 
hoping and preparing. The growing baby cannot be fed on adult 
food; you have to adjust the food to the needs and capabilities of 
the child. You should not overdo or avoid doing anything. Both lead 
to disease and ruin health. 


Develop Bliss through cultivation of Love 


I do not consider Shaasthra Vaadha (Intellectual Scholarship) 
as very essential for the spiritual aspirant. I advise you to develop 
Aanandha (Bliss), not through these difficult and even doubtful 
means, but through the cultivation of prema (love), which begins in 
the home and family and spreads to all creatures. Put down the 
sharp-edged weapon that seeks to analyse and chop the arguments 
of the opponent, to cut his point of view to pieces. Take up the 
laddu (sweet pudding) of love which spreads joy and wins over 
recalcitrant hearts. 


That is My path, the path of prema along which I shall take 
you. That is why I offer My visiting card to every one of you when 
you come to Me. I know your name, your degrees, your profession, 
your status and your history. But you do not know mine. I have no 
need to know all about you from a perusal of your cards; but I want 
you to know something of My Glory; and so I give you a glimpse of 
it, as a Mahima (Divine Miracle ). But I also give you enough of My 
prema so that you can mix a little of it with whatever you do or feel 
or think and make it sweet and palatable. 


Venkatagiri, Adhyaathmik Conference, 12-4-1959 


Each has his allotted task, according to the status, taste, 
tendenow and earned merit. Do it, with the fear of God and of sin, 
deep in your heart. 


Welcome pain and grief so that you take both success and 
failure as hammer strokes to shape you into a sturdy saadhaka 
Inner content is more important than outer prosperity. 


Shri Sathya Sai 


21. Jada and Chaithanya 


YOU have all tasted the sweetness of the Name of the Lord for 
twenty-four hours, as Akhanda bhajana. Akhanda means 
uninterrupted, without any gap. I am glad you sang without any gap 
and also that you selected the Naamaavails of the manifold Forms of 
God, instead of singing one particular Naamam throughout, as if 
God had only one facet of personality. The same man is father of his 
children, uncle to his nephews, brother to some, cousin to many 
others and son to his parents. So, God too has many aspects and 
when you conduct bhajana, you must try to satisfy all who take part 
by reminding them of the manifold manifestations of the Lord, not 
simply Raama or Krishna or Sairaam. 


Again, Akhanda bhajana means that it should not be just a 
twenty-four hour affair or even a seven-day affair; it must go on, 
from birth to death, this contemplation of the Source and Goal of 
things. The procession to the cremation ground starts immediately 
on birth and the beating of the heart is the drum-beat for the march 
towards that place. Some take a longer route, some reach quickly, 
but all are on the way. Therefore, bhajana has to start in childhood 
and has to continue. It must be the constant companion of man, his 
solace and strength. Do not postpone it to old age, for it is the 
essential food for the mind. 


There is no consistency in man's behaviour 


You have all been thrilled by this bhajana here and you are 
glad that you got the chance to join. But this is just a temporary 
feeling. You who shared in this glorification of the Lord will 
tomorrow as enthusiastically join in some other gathering where 
falsehood and injustice are honoured! There is no consistency in 
your behaviour. What you feel as correct and what you do are poles 
apart. That is not the mark of a bhaktha. If there is no shraddha 
(faith), how can you have shaanthi and santhosha (peace and 
happiness)? 


People seek frantically for peace and happiness in a thousand 
ways along a thousand roads. Dr. Bhagavantham was telling Me just 
prior to My coming here, at the Tata Institute of Science, that there 


is something beyond all this objective world, some mystery which 
becomes deeper and more mysterious with every advance of 
science. When one door is opened, ten doors which are closed 
reveal themselves to the surprised scientist. So real shaanthi is to be 
got only in the depths of the spirit, in the discipline of the mind, in 
faith in the One Base of all this seeming multiplicity. When that is 
secured, it is like having gold, you can have any variety of jewels 
made from it. 


It is all a matter of one's own experience. And the joy of that 
experience, the profound exhilaration which accompanies it cannot 
be communicated in words. All shravanam and keerthanam (hearing 
and singing God's Names) is to take you nearer that experience. 
Shravanam is the medicine that you take internally and keerthanam 
is the balm you apply externally. Both are needed. So also dharma 
(virtue) as well as karma (sanctified activity) are necessary; karma 
is the very foundation of bhakthi (devotion to God). It is the 
basement on which devotion is built. Dharma is the attitude in which 
action is done, the truth, prema and equanimity with which the 
mind is activated, when it seeks to do things. 


Do karma regardless of the fruits thereof 


Karma has to be done in and through dharma. Those 
dominated by thamas (ignorance) do karma solely for the sake of 
the fruits thereof and they resort to all subterfuges in order to gain 
from it; for them, the end justifies the means. Those dominated by 
rajas (passion) are proud and pompous and boast that they are the 
doers, the benefactors and the experiencers. Those dominated by 
Sathwa guna (quality of calm serenity) will do Karma, regardless of 
the fruits thereof, leaving the result to the Lord, not worrying 
whether it leads to success or failure, conscious of their duties and 
never of their rights. 


As a matter of fact, there is more joy in the actual doing than 
in the result that accrues. This must be your experience. All the 
elaborate arrangements that the master of the house makes for a 
wedding in the family; the reception, the feeding, the illumination, 
the music, these are thrilling while they are being planned and 
executed; but they do not give so much pleasure, once the thing is 


done. In the end, when the bills come, they might even cause 
disgust and grief! So it must be easy to discard the fruits of action, 
provided you spend some thought upon the process of Karma, and 
the worth of the fruit. 


Thejeevi (individual soul) has come to this birth in order to 
reveal the splendour of the spark of Godhead which It is. The body 
is the wick of the lamp, yearning for God, is the ghee which feeds 
the flame. But like the rat which, attracted by the strong smelling 
cheap stuff inside the trap, neglects all other articles of food in the 
granary and falls a prey to its foolishness, man too neglects his real 
sustenance and wastes his life in pursuits of mortal riches. 


Various types of Bhakthi 


You should see and wonder at the nithyam (eternal) in all this 
anithyam (temporary). This drama has only two actors jada and 
Chaithanya (the insentient and the Supreme Consciousness), who 
play a million roles. Just as Violinist Chowdiah here who played ten 
ragas (musical tunes) now and can play 400 ragas on the four 
strings, jada and Cha/thanya together play all these roles. Out of a 
mere 26 letters of the alphabet all the words in the dictionary are 
formed and millions of books get written, read and understood. But 
you should see through this drama and discover the Director who is 
none else than God. 


This can be done through bhakthi, based on nishkaama karma 
(desireless action). Bhakthi is of various types, according to the 
samskaara (purificatory acts) of the devotee and the state of his 
mind and the stage of his development. There is the shaantha 
bhakthi (peaceful devotion) of Bheeshma, the Vaathsalya bhakthi 
(parental devotion) of Yashodha, the Madhura bhakthi (sweet loving 
devotion) of Gouranga and Meera and the Anuraaga bhakthi (deep 
attachment) of the gopees. Of these, the dhaasya (devoted servant) 
attitude is the easiest and the best for the majority of aspirants at 
this time. It means Sharanaagathi or Prapatthi (total surrender). It 
grows out of Shaantha bhakthi. 


Bhakthi has to be developed by several means or indeed by all 
means. The mind and the intellect have to be trained and 


controlled, that is the aim. They can take you as far as the 
Visishtaadhwaitha (qualified dualism); later, adhwaithic (non- 
dualistic) experience depends upon His Grace; the Saayujyam 
(merging in the Absolute) is in His Hands. The chief means are 
sravanam, keerthanam, smaranam, paadha sevenam, vandhanam, 
dhaasyam, sneham and Aathma nivedhanam (hearing, singing and 
remembering Lord's Name, prostration, salutation, servitude, 
friendship and self-offering). Sneham (friendship) is placed just 
before Aathma nivedhanam (offering of the Self), because between 
friends, there is no fear, no doubt or disbelief or hesitation. 


Mission on which the Lord comes on this Earth 


It is to clear the path of spiritual progress of Man that the 
Avathaar (Divine Incarnation) has come. The _  ashaanthi 
(restlessness) in which man is immersed has to be curbed. That is 
what is meant by, parithraanaaya saadhoonam---"the saving of 
saadhus," the saving of all good jeevis (individual beings) from the 
tentacles of ashaanti (grief) caused by want of knowledge of the 
relative unimportance of worldly things. All jeevis must get shaanthi 
and santhosha; that is the mission on which the Lord comes again 
and again on this earth. He selects a place full of pavithrathwam 
(holiness) and Dhivyathwam (divinity) and takes on the human 
form, so that you may meet Him and talk, understand and 
appreciate, listen and follow, experience and benefit. 


The tragedy is that when Godhead is invisible, formless, you 
concretise it as you like and pray to it and get consolation and 
strength out of it; but when it is before you, concretised in human 
form, you doubt and discuss and deny! People fall before the stone 
Naaga (snake) and pour milk on it and wash it lovingly with sacred 
waters; when it materialises into an actual cobra, they flee in fear! 
But a true bhaktha has no fear or disbelief. 


Feel no shame in walking on the right path 


Prahlaadha was shivering at the Narasimha (Man-Lion) Form 
when it appeared from the pillar and when the Lord asked him why, 
he replied that it was due not to fear at the form of God, for as he 
said, all forms of His are lovely as they are Divine; it was due to fear 


that the Form might soon disappear and he might lose the splendid 
Vision of the Lord. The father was so full of rajoguna (quality of 
passion) that he saw the terrible Narasimha Form; but Prahlaadha 
did not see It so. To Him, the Lord appeared beautiful and full of 
grace, for he was saturated with bhakthi. 


You must dive deep into the sea to get the pearls. What good 
is it to dabble among the waves near the shore and swear that the 
sea has no pearls in it and that all tales of its existence are false. So 
also if you must realise the full fruit of this Avathaar, dive deep and 
get immersed in Sai Baaba. Half-heartedness, hesitation, doubt, 
cynicism, listening to tales, all are of no avail. Concentrated 
complete faith---that alone can bring victory. This is true to any 
worldly activity, is it not? How much more true must it be, therefore 
in the spiritual field? But if you have already attached yourselves to 
some one Name and Form, do not change it, do not choose another 
in place of the prema swaruupam (embodiment of Love). 


A hundred people might come to your house and even treat 
you with affection, but you do not address them as Pappa or Daddy. 
Have your mind fixed on One; do not now and then allow clouds of 
doubt, like "Is He Great?" "Is He God?" to dim your faith. Be bold. 
Acknowledge the glory that you have witnessed; proclaim the joy 
that you have experienced; confess to the Grace that you have 
earned. When people ask you whether you too are going to 
Puttaparthi, for example, and whether you too are doing bhajana, 
say "Yes" proudly, for there is no shame in walking on the right 
path! 


Shaanthi cannot be won by study of books 


There are some Gurus who insist on implicit obedience, who 
advise their disciples even to beat any one who cavil at their master! 
I have contempt for all such and I have come to give them proper 
advice. The Guru can never usurp the position of Shiva; it is better 
that you have Shiva Himself as your Guru, rather than have these 
power-mad and egoistic teachers, who revel in hatred and 
aggrandizement. Leave all those who cavil, severely alone, with 
their karma and their thamasic aanandha, not merely those who are 


ignorant of Me, but even those who deride all forms of God and the 
very idea of God. 


Develop faith in yourselves, so that you can stand like a rock 
braving the rushing waters of the flood of negation. That faith will 
make you forget the changing circumstances of the outer world. 
Raamadhaas, when he was put in jail, thanked Raama for the great 
blessing for he felt that he could now carry on his naamasmarana 
undisturbed by the world, which was mercifully shut off by the high 
prison walls! 


The first steps are the most hard in the pilgrimage 


It all depends on the point of view whether you are happy or 
unhappy, that colours all attitudes and options. Raamadhaas sang 
the exploits of Aanjaneya in Lanka and, while doing so, he 
mentioned the white lilies of the island. Aanjaneya heard him sing it 
and immediately took exception to the description. He said that he 
had never seen a single white flower there; the lilies of Lanka were 
red, he declared. Raamadhaas, however, insisted that they were 
white. Aanjaneya got annoyed at the impudence of poets who tried 
to pit their imagination against a first-hand expert witness and 
appealed to Raama for intercession. Raama agreed with 
Raamadhaas! He said that Aanjaneya saw them red because his 
eyes were affected by Raajasik anger at the entire Raakshasa 
(demonic brood)! 


So, if you have shaanthi, the world will appear a quite 
peaceful place; if you have ashaanthi (restlessness), the world will 
be full of ashaanthi. Shaanthi is to be won by saadhana, not by 
study of books. One judge reads huge big volumes and writes one 
judgement for a suit; another judge reads the same huge big books 
and writes quite an opposite judgement for the same suit! Books are 
just guides for some bit of the road. Afterwards, you have to find 
the way yourselves and it gets easier as you go. One naya paisa and 
another make two, four more make an anna and a hundred make a 
rupee. The first steps are the most hard; the pilgrimage to Kaashi is 
to begin with the first step. 


Keep the flame of vairaagya (detachment) with tiny sticks until 
it grows into a big bonfire; welcome all chances to develop viveka. 
If you are good for the world, then the Lord of worlds will shower 
Love on you. Become a blossom, exude the fragrance of seva 
(selfless service) and prema (love); then I shall gladly wear the 
garland composed of all of you. 


Take the name of the Lord and repeat it always. I was 
listening to the bhajana you did here yesterday and today. Your 
voices were low; they could scarce be heard outside this Hall. I 
know that in a certain institution where they decided to do akhanda 
bhajana, they had to hire a few persons at so much per hour so that 
their plan could succeed. Do bhajana with faith and enthusiasm. Let 
the whole city shake with devotion you put into every Name that 
you sing. The Name promotes comradeship and_ establishes 
concord; it stills all storms and grants peace. 


Bangalore, Akhanda Bhajana, 10- 7-1959 


All the joy you crave for, is in you; but, like a man who has 
vast riches in the iron chest, but, who has no idea where the key Is, 
you suffer. With proper directions, dwelling upon them in the silence 
of meditation, it is possible to secure the key, open the chest and be 
rich in joy. 


Shri Sathya Sai 


22. The screen within 


IT has become a convention to address such a gathering as 
"Brothers and Sisters" though no speaker is prepared to live up to 
the ideal that such a form of address implies. Many such empty 
formalities have entered into daily conduct. For example, it was 
mentioned now, that today is a ‘red letter day' in the history of 
Thirupathi. Red letter days or days which have to be recorded in 
letters of gold are becoming quite cheap nowadays. Only four days, 
remember, deserve that honour: the day on which Bhakthas 
(devotees) gather to sing the glow of God; the day when the hungry 
are fed; the day when one meets a great sage; and the day on 
which viveka dawns on the individual. This day certainly falls in the 
category and so the secretary's description is, for once, right. 


I like the work on which this Committee is engaged in; and so, 
I hurried to this place from Bangalore, where yesterday there was 
an Akhanda bhajana (uninterrupted singing of devotional songs) by 
many devotees. I like Saint Thyaagaraaja. My affection for him is 
not a matter of today. It is centuries old. And Thyaagaraaja and 
Thirupathi are also attached to each other. He prayed here that the 
screen hiding the Light that was inside him might be moved aside 
by the Lord's Grace. This Committee has been trying heroically to 
erect a place of worship for the Saint and a hall to celebrate the 
Thyaagaraaja Festival and to encourage the study and practice of 
his songs. I was sorry when I heard their report and listened to the 
journeys these people have made to distant places and the driblets 
of donations they have received so far. 


The means for collecting donations must be pure 


Though the report is evidence of their devotion and sacrifice, 
it reveals the false sense of values which people are developing 
nowadays. ‘Dabbu' (money) must also circulate like ‘blooddu' 
(blood)! Otherwise, that too will cause ill-health. There is no better 
method of using dabbu' than for promoting Bhakthi, for then the 
entire system, individual and social, will benefit by it. If money is 
stored and not circulated, it will cause social swellings and the 
swellings may become boils and burst. 


I learn that the Secretaries in their despair have thought of 
running a lottery for completing this structure. I am very much 
against this plan. A lottery attracts money from persons who are 
moved by greed; it holds out the attraction of quick riches and 
tempts men from a wrong angle. It will be tainted money to sell 
lottery tickets and distribute prizes and use the balance. Though it is 
for a good purpose, the means must be pure. Every one who gives 
even a paisa must give it out of real devotion and knowing that the 
paisa will be used for the building which he wants to get built. Do 
not receive money given half-heartedly or with some other motive 
than devotion. Then only will the building be worthy of 
Thyaagaraaja, who spurned the nidhi (wealth) offered by the Raajas 
of Tanjore and preferred the ‘Sannidhi’ (proximity) of the Lord to 
the favours bestowed by human donors. 


It is when diseases are rampant that doctors are needed 
more; and now, when the standard of moral conduct has fallen very 
much, people must turn to doctors like Thyaagaraaja who dispense 
the drug of Raamanaama in their own sweet palatable versions. All 
have equal right to share in the health-giving properties of that 
drug. In every linguistic group we have great vaidhyas (doctors) 
who treat this bhavaroga (disease of worldly existence) successfully: 
Suurdhas in Hindhi, Raamalingaswaamy in Thamil, and 
Purandharadhaasa in Kannada---to give just one example in each 
language. 


Thyaagaraaja's songs impart Aanandha 


Thyaagaraaja is in a class by himself, not because he sang in 
Thelugu, but because his songs are marked by the rare excellences 
of sincerity of devotion, poetical beauty and musical melody. The 
raaga (tune) suited to the emotional tempo of the idea elucidated in 
the song; the thaala (marking of time) quite appropriate to the 
movement of the meaning; the words which automatically dictate 
the thaa/a and guide the musician along the notes and the entire 
structure of the song helping the arousal of the yogic urge in the 
singer---such spontaneous mastery of the science and art of both 
music and saadhana is seldom found in the history of any language 
or country. He sang unaware, out of the fullness of his realisation, 


and so the songs have that strange communicative force imparting 
aanandha to the singer as well as the listener. 


Devaki gave birth to Krishna but the child was brought up by 
Yashodha in Brindhaavana. Yashodha had all the delight which the 
child could give. So too, the Thamil devotees of music have adopted 
Thyaagaraaja and have practised his songs more than the Thelugu 
speaking people. They are the Yashodha of Thyaagaraaja. The 
Thamils specialise in Raaga and Thaala and they sing with 
scrupulous adherence to these. However, since they do not grasp 
the full meaning of the text, distortions painful to the Thelugu ear 
often occur. More and more Thelugu devotees have to learn to sing 
Thyaagaraaja krithis so that the nuances of the Thelugu language in 
the songs may not be missed. After all, the raaga, thaala and the 
notations are to help in the more easy assimilation of the message 
contained in the song and in the transmission to the singer and the 
listener of the live emotion out of which the song arose in the first 
instance. This can happen only if the meaning is clear. 


Bhakthiis the reservoir for all the temples 


Music as a vehicle of peace is universally popular; men, 
women and children of all lands are amenable to its subtle 
influence. Even animals and plants are susceptible to music. The 
Lord has said: madbhakthaah yathra gaayanthe,  thathra 
thishthaami, Naaradha-- 


"Where My devotees sing, there I seat Myself." So, the songs 
of Thyaagaraaja sung well and with the full realisation of the 
context and the meaning are excellent media for the spread of 
Bhakthi. That is why I came today, to encourage and bless this 
Committee which is celebrating Thyaagaraaja Uthsavam (festival). 
Three things combined to bring Me here: /ccha, shraddha and 
anukoolam---their yearning, faith and conjunction of convenience! 


The Thirumalai Thirupathi Devasthaanam must foster the 
nurseries of Bhakthi wherever they are found. For, it is through 
Bhakthi that pilgrims flock to the Hill and pray _ before 
Venkateshwara; if the springs of Bhakthi dry up, with what are the 
minds of men to be watered? That is the reservoir for all the 


temples of this land. So, the Devasthaanam can well come to the 
rescue of this Committee. It is doing the work of the Devasthaanam, 
by promoting the krithis (musical compositions) of Thyaagaraaja, 
which develop the spirit of devotion. He was Vaalmeeki himself 
come to the south of India to sing the glow of Raama and spread 
the Raama thaaraka manthra. He had always the welfare of the 
individual as well as the world in view. He had the experience of the 
constant presence of the Lord, so that Raama had to give him 
dharshan (audience) and come to his help a number of times. His 
Bhakthi made him ever at peace and joyful. 


India is on the threshold of a new era 


Prayer and contrition are the two disciplines by which the 
mind can be cleansed of egoism and hatred; Thyaagaraaja is a fine 
example of how this can be done. He was ever engaged in the 
process of examining his words and deeds and evaluating them on 
the touchstone of Bhakthi. As the bee in search of honey wanders in 
search of the flowers, as the creeper clings fast and fondly to the 
tree lest it fall, as the rill runs to the river and the river rushes to the 
sea, Thyaagaraaja pined for Raama; his songs are pure fragrant 
blossoms of Bhakthi and therefore, immortal. 


Every man seeks rest, but the dust of sense-craving 
accumulates on the mind, producing rust and threatening to ‘burst’ 
it; so he has to test it, off and on, keep it in perfect trim. To remove 
that rust, the music of Thyaagaraaja's krithis will be useful. Lay 
aside your cynicism for a while and listen to the captivating tunes 
and imbibe the sense. The science of spiritual culture and of the 
control of the mind has been developed and practised in this 
country for thousands of years; and that is why Indian civilisation 
has stood the shock of ages and the fury of typhoons that swept 
whole peoples off their feet. India is still green and fresh, on the 
threshold of a new era, under the leadership of her own ancient 
ideals. 


The taste for good music has also gone nowadays with the 
coming of catchy lilts and croonings from the cinemas and the craze 
has spread for imitating them even in bhajanas! Sing the krithis of 
Thyaagaraaja in the classicial raagas and I am sure they will have 


great appeal. They are not mere paatal/u (songs), they are mootalu 
(bundles) of precious stones; they take you along the baatalu 
(roads) to God. If Thyaagaraaja gets neglected, this Holy Hill will 
lose height, for the Hill stands so high because it rests on the 
pedestal of Bhakthi. Neglect of Thyaagaraaja can happen only when 
the people of this land become desperately worldly, deaf to the 
whisper of the God within. 


Thirupathi, Thyaagabrahma Uthsava, 11- 7-1957 


23. The temple 


I ALWAYS take delight in going to villages and meeting 
villagers. The villager has a pure unsullied mind and the atmosphere 
of the village is sincere and untouched by artificiality. Today is a 
great day in the history of your village, because you are getting a 
Hospital and a Health Centre under the Community Development 
Scheme. I am glad you are aware of its importance. You have made 
arrangements to celebrate the event in a grand manner, all of you 
joining together joyfully to carry out the various tasks allotted by the 
organisers. It is this spirit of co-operation and this joyful 
comradeship which your village has shown that has brought Me 
here today. I am Prema and I want to see Prema progress in all 
places and affairs. 


Man suffers from two types of ills, physical and mental; the 
one caused by the dis-equilibrium of the three tempers of Vaatha, 
Pittha and Sleshma (wind, bile and phlegm) and the other caused by 
the dis-equilibrium of the three Gunas: Sathwa, Rajas and Thamas 
(qualities of serenity, passion and inertia). One peculiar fact about 
these two types of illnesses is that the cultivation of virtue cures 
both. Physical health is a pre-requisite for mental health and mental 
health ensures physical health! An attitude of generosity, of 
fortitude in the presence of sorrow and loss, a spirit of enthusiasm 
to do good, to be of service to the best of one's capacity--these 
build up the mind as well as the body. The very joy derived from 
service reacts on the body and makes you free from disease. The 
body and the mind are closely interrelated. 


Despair is a sin against God 


You are mostly agriculturists and so I need not tell you that 
hope is what you feed on, most months of the year. Hope sustains 
you, while you plough, sow, plant and manure the crops that you 
raise. That hope you must make a mental habit even in things 
distinct from agriculture. That will sustain you in all walks of life. Do 
not give any chance for that vile thing, despair, to eat into the vitals 
of activity and effort. Despair is a sin against God; when He is in 
you, why do you lose hope? That is why the Lord says when I am 
here, why do you fear? Be always joyful, optimistic and courageous. 


You said that river Chithravathi that flows near Puttaparthi 
flows by the side of your village too, and that it is a link between us 
both. But it is a very feeble link, if at all. For, it is full only for a few 
days in the year; the rest of the year it is a sandy waste! If the life- 
giving waters of courage flow in your heart of hearts, then that 
Chithravathi is more precious than this dry stream; it is a truer link 
between you and Me. 


The village is the backbone of the whole country. The child 
becomes man, the village grows into a town; only, we should see 
that the innocent, simple, sincere child does not grow into a cruel, 
hard-hearted man. Similarly, we have to see that the quiet, God- 
fearing simple village does not grow into a noisy negative town. 
Tomorrow's leaders are being bred in this and other villages all over 
the land. If you have virtue, the towns will have virtue tomorrow. If 
you have strength, towns will be strong. If you are quarrelsome, the 
towns will be affected by it. Learn to live and work in amity. Make 
the joyful experience of today a permanent feature of your life. 


Do not depend on government for all your wants 


Factions and parties in villages are the bane of our community 
life. All the profit of hard toil is wasted in litigation engendered by 
hatred arising from them. You grow the food and the material for 
clothing for the people. You set the example of industry to the 
indolent. You rise with the cock-crow and you go to bed when the 
fowls go to sleep. You sweat and toil and watch the sky prayerfully 
with hands folded in devotion; and you live humbly and thankfully. 
There is an intimate relationship between the ‘ithu' and the ‘rythu 
(the Season and the farmer). Your life runs on an even keel, 
following the regularity of the seasons. You do not hurry ahead of 
nature, as townsmen do. 


i 


I want you to be grateful to the persons who made this 
hospital possible and to the Government who are running it for you. 
The Government collects money from you and arranges these 
amenities. But you should not depend on the Government to satisfy 
all your wants. Even the officers are not all powerful. They are only 
servants, who have to obey others. The Government is the 
chauffeur of the car, which is the State. You own the car and you 


are the passengers too. Select proper chauffeurs and be vigilant to 
see that the driver at the wheel does not harm the passengers or 
the car. That is the duty of the owner, is it not? 


The greatest instrument by which success can be ensured for 
all your efforts is Bhakthi. That will give health, wealth and 
prosperity too, for it will eliminate hatred and faction and give more 
power to your elbow when you plough the land. A man with bhakthi 
will do every act as worship of the Lord and so the act will be done 
better and more efficiently, without any malingering or insincerity. It 
will also win the Grace of the Lord, and so, a bhaktha (devotee) will 
be able to raise more crops and enjoy greater health and mental 
happiness. 


Do some inner cultivation 


If all the thousand persons in a village sing the glow of the 
Lord together, that will produce greater harmony and _ social 
cohesion than the thousand clamouring and shouting one against 
the other. Prema will flood the village and fertilise all your efforts if 
you take the Lord's name and sing together. Do it for some time 
and you will yourself bear witness to the changed atmosphere. 


Sometimes, the cloud of envy and hatred comes to darken 
relationship. This is due primarily to fear, fear that causes anger. All 
that will disappear with the emergence of Bhakthi and the humility 
and wisdom which come in its wake. Anger wastes time, health and 
character. Do not allow it free play. Do some inner "cultivation" too, 
as you are now doing external cultivation in these fields. That has to 
be done in the field of ‘feelings, motives, desires and promptings.' 


I saw your temple while coming in procession on that bullock- 
cart. I found it dilapidated and not in a good clean condition. The 
heart of the village is the temple; the lamp burning there is the life 
of the entire village. Keep it burning bright and clear. Some one has 
placed a broken bandy cart on the narrow verandah of the temple; 
that is as bad as dishonouring the abode of the Lord. It will not 
inspire devotion in the people. Keep the temple, however simple 
and small it may be, clean and free from encumbrances. Do not 
treat it as some villagers do as a refuge for idlers, who loiter around 


and play cards or gamble. Get together a Bhajana group in this 
village. I know you have one; but it must be more active; it must 
attend the daily Puuja in this temple and make it a fountain of 
devotion. That will demonstrate that you have gratitude to the Lord 
for all the blessings He has showered on you. 


Develop the spirit of mutual help 


The doctor in charge of the Hospital now appealed to you for 
co-operation. He meant that you should not neglect the bodily ills 
and damage the tabernacle of God. It is an instrument which has to 
be well cared for. The doctor is an expert in that subject, having 
studied medicine for long and being moved by a spirit of service. 
Honour him for his skill; have faith in him and his medicines and do 
not, by neglect or resort to quacks, worsen the diseases you may 
have. 


I say this specially to you, people of Budi/// Develop the spirit 
of mutual help. Villagers have been ruined because one person 
cannot tolerate the prosperity of another. This is the bane of the 
Indian character. Every one is bent on pulling down his neighbour; 
whereas in the West, they encourage the slightest sign of superior 
intelligence and industry and show no rivalry. Jealousy is the cause 
of ruin. It is born of the undue importance attached to the body, the 
senses and the accumulation of objects that cater to the senses. 
See things in their proper perspective, give them their worth but no 
more. There are greater things that grant joy and peace. Try to get 
hold of them; every one of you has a right to possess them. None 
can keep them away from your grasp. 


Fix your attention on the eternal values 


You spoke of the Brahmeshwara Temple that was once here 
but that has since gone under the sands of the river. Let not the 
temple of the Lord that is in your innermost heart be similarly 
overwhelmed by the sands of kaama and krodha (lust and anger). 
You talked of many Rishis and Yogis who have done thapas 
(penance) here, according to tradition. Well, those Rishis and Yogis 
knew which is real and which is unreal. They controlled the vagaries 
of the mind and dwelt in shaanthi. Fix your attention on these 


eternal values; then you will not be swept off your feet by gusts of 
passion or fits of fury. Then this village, filled with love and mutual 
helpfulness, will become the ideal for miles around. 


Budili Village, 9-9-1959 


24. Bahumathi and ekamathi 
(Many-pointed vs. one-pointedness) 


THOUGH this area and this town are not new to Me, this is the 
first time that most of you are seeing Me. When a few more dishes 
are prepared, it become a festival day. So, when the District Athletic 
Competitions are held here, it is a festival for the boys and students 
as well as for parents and others interested in the welfare of the 
country. You have all put on a glad face forgetting the daily 
drudgery. You have witnessed the competitions and the games and 
enjoyed the keenness and enthusiasm of the participants. The 
students sitting before us are the instruments with which the India 
of tomorrow is to be shaped. Their teachers, who are also here, are 
indeed lucky; for destiny has allotted them the noble task, the 
golden chance, to serve the interests of the people in the pleasant 
manner, spending their time in the company of innocent fresh 
children. 


The father, the mother and teacher are the three primarily 
responsible for moulding the future of the country. Of these, the 
teacher plays the most important role for he is specially trained and 
selected for the job; he voluntarily takes it up and therefore must 
carry it out to the best of his ability without demur; he is implicitly 
trusted by the child, the parents and the public alike and the trust 
must be repaid by honest service. He is honoured and respected by 
the children and the public as the Guru, with all the hallowed 
associations of that word. He may be poor, uncared for by the men 
at the top, but the satisfaction he gets by his quiet creative work is 
enough compensation. 


Teacher should himself follow the advice he gives 


The teacher should never curse his pupils whatever the 
provocation; he must always bless them. If he swears like a boor he 
reduces himself to the level of a boor. He should watch his 
behaviour rigorously and find out whether there is some habit or 
trait which if imitated by the pupil will be harmful. He should himself 
follow the advice that he gives. Otherwise, he will be teaching 
hypocrisy to the little children and encouraging them to acquire the 


cleverness not to be found out. It is sheer mental weakness and 
cowardice that allows hypocrisy to develop. If you have the courage 
to face the consequences, you will never utter falsehood. The 
teacher should not try to rule through the easier means of fear, for 
that is full a dangerous consequences to the pupils. Try rather the 
path of Love. 


Teachers should themselves take to the discipline of japam 
and dhyaanam (repetition of the Lord's Name and meditation); this 
will give them the inner quiet they sorely need. They should create 
an atmosphere of plain living and high thinking, for pupils 
unconsciously accept them as heros and begin imitating them. They 
should hand over to the rising generation the riches that past 
generations have amassed, viz., the spiritual disciplines and the 
discoveries. Learn them yourselves and teach them to the pupils 
under your care. This will enable you to discharge the debt due from 
you to the rishis (sages) of old. I know that when you sow bitter 
seeds you cannot grow sweet grain. Yet, there are certain things 
possible even under the limitations of the present curricula and 
courses of study. 


Be grateful to the village where you were born 


The unmistakeable sign of rain is the wetness of the ground; 
so too, the sign of a person who has had some years of schooling is 
good manners; he must have humility and know that the field of 
knowledge is so vast that he has been unable even to touch its 
fringe; he must be aware of his kinship with all mankind and he 
must show a keenness to do service to others, at all times, gladly, 
and without desire for publicity. The educated boy must move with 
others in a free and friendly way. God is the moving force in every 
one. He is behind all good impulses and useful attitudes, you are all 
separate beads strung together on that one thread, God. So hatred 
is ugly, unnatural and inhuman; it is against the very core of love 
that is in every one. 


Always respect another's opinion and another's point of view. 
Do not start a quarrel at the slightest difference of opinion. He may 
be right and you may be wrong. Ponder over his argument; he 
might have had the advantage of knowing more about the subject 


or you may be prejudiced either for or against; or he may not know 
as much as you. All differences of opinion are not due to personal 
hatred, remember. 


Above all, I must tell you one thing. Honour your parents and 
the villagers among whom you grow up. Be grateful to the parents 
for all the care and sacrifice they undergo for your sake. Be grateful 
also to the village where you first saw the light. What good is it if 
after being born in one place and bred in the cradle of its love, you 
run away somewhere and make that new place better? Always turn 
your attention to your village and think of ways and means of 
bettering its lot. That is the gratitude you must show. 


Start the spiritual pilgrimage early in life 


By all means, master the subjects prescribed in your 
curriculum of studies; but along with them, study also the principles 
of Sanaathana Dharma (Eternal Universal Religion). Do not give it 
up as sanaathana (old), coming down from very ancient times. It 
has stood the test of centuries and is capable of giving you joy and 
peace even today. It is like a very loving grandmother, anxious and 
capable of feeding you with nice good dishes. You will not allow 
such a grandmother to die of neglect, will you? 


There was once a miser who lived in a leaky house; the rain- 
water poured into the house through the roof but he sat through it 
all. Neighbours laughed at him and warned him to get the roof 
repaired. But in the rainy season he replied, "Let the rains subside, 
how can I repair it now?" And when the rains stopped, he replied, 
"Why should I worry about leaks now the rains have stopped?" Do 
not suffer the leaks when the rains come, as they are sure to do; 
repair the roof now itself. That is to say, acquaint yourselves with 
the spiritual primers and text-books now itself; begin the first 
lessons of silence, prayer and chanting the Name of the Lord. It is 
never too soon in the spiritual pilgrimage. 


Now when you wear bush-coats and strut about in pants, 
causing envy among the little children who cannot afford these, you 
feel elated. But you can be legitimately proud only when you are 
able to control the vagaries of the mind and direct your emotions 


and desires along honourable healthy channels, braving even the 
ridicule of your so-called friends. That is real freedom, real success. 
If you reach thatstage, then you become a seasoned driver and can 
be trusted with the wheel on any road and with any cargo, however 
precious. Then you will not cause harm either to yourself or to 
others. Then you deserve to become a leader. 


Only men with ideals are remembered by posterity 


Be eager and earnest to know more and more about the art of 
joyful living, happy unperturbed living. One can advance only step 


by step and there is the danger of slipping down two steps when 
you climb one. What matters is the determination to climb, the 
resistance with which the sliding tendency is met, the yearning to 
rise to progress, to conquer the lower impulses and instincts. If you 
have that, the hidden spring of power will surge up within you; the 
Grace of the Lord will smooth your path. Keep the ideal before you; 
march on. The student of today becomes the teacher of tomorrow 
and Headmaster later. How? By study, by the development of a 
reliable character. Only those with ideals are respected and 
remembered in gratitude by posterity. Raama is honoured and 
worshipped while Raavana is execrated. Why? Because of the 
character they evinced. 


Have the progress of your country, your Sanaathana Dharma 
and your own Self always before your mind's eye. Let the hunger for 
serving these three grow more and more. Then your studies will 
serve a purpose and give you a sense of mission. Then you will 
acquire fear of sin, fear of the God within, fear of the mean, respect 
for elders and faith in your own self. 


One thing more: Do not do anything which brings tears into 
the eyes of your parents. Honour them and obey them. Do not 
condemn them as old-fashioned. "Old is Gold." They speak out of a 
longer experience of the world and its tricks. 


Winners must be thankful to the losers 


Well, I am asked to distribute Lahumathis (prizes) to you by 
Anjanappa and others. They meant that I should distribute the 


prizes, but “bahumathi" means "multi-mindedness". Now, I never 
give that type of mind! I always insist on ekaagratha (single- 
mindedness). Anjanappa wished that I give you Prasaadham 
(propitiatory offering); My prasaadham is always Aanandha 
prasaadham (Gift of Bliss)! It can be got through ekamathi (single- 
mindedness) only. I do not like this competition and strife, this 
cultivation of egoism through prizes and ranking. I am sure none of 
you here will be spoilt either by pride or by dejection. 


Take failure coolly and take victory also coolly. The second is a 
very difficult mental exercise. The winners must be thankful to the 
losers for their victory, for if only the losers had put in a little more 
effort, they would have carried away the prizes instead. The losers 
by running neck to neck with you also prompted you to run faster 
and thus encouraged you to win. They gave you the grit to put in 
that extra pace, which brought the prize into your hands. 


And the losers! I ask you not to lose self-confidence. Do not 
attach too much value to victory or too much importance to defeat. 
Even in examinations, when you fail, do not be overcome by despair 
and do silly things like attempting to take your own life. Life is much 
more precious that that. You are born for much greater things than 
the passing of examinations. Be brave and patient. All is not lost if 
you do not pass an examination which tests just one aspect of your 
intelligence! Your destiny does not depend upon examination marks; 
it depends more on character, will-power and the Grace of God. 


The Headmaster hoped that this School would become a 
Higher Secondary School. I bless that it may be raised to that status 
soon and become a source of light and culture for this part of the 
country. 


Madakasira, 25-11-1959 


Love is God, God is Love. Where there is Love, there God Is 
certainly evident. Love more and more people, love them more and 
more intensely; transform the love into service, transform the 
service into worship; that is the highest saadhana. 


Shri Sathya Sai 


25. Manushya and manas 


DR. Bhagavantham asked Me now to 'speak' to you but I do 
not make speeches. I only ‘converse’ with you. I do not make public 
speeches or address meetings, as so many of the persons who 
spoke now do. They made 'speeches' which were regular feasts to 
the ear; My conversation will be, on the other hand, ‘medicine for 
the mind.’ Theirs were lectures; Mine are mixtures. So, you must 
take my talk into your mind very attentively and without wasting or 
spilling even a word. 


Usually, when you are asked where God is, you point to the 
sky or some such distant place and say He is there, as if He is just a 
Person and has a definite place of Residence. But nara (man) 
himself is Naaraayana (God), each one of them; Maadhava is 
maanava, each one of the species. So the number of Gods is thirty- 
three crores, as given in the Shaasthras or, as can be calculated 
today, much more. It is delusion that has _ induced 
Naaraayanaswaruupa (embodiment of God) to imagine and behave 
as if he is just a nara (man). To remove that delusion, there are 
various means suited to the needs of each sufferer. But all the 
treatment and all the struggle is to achieve the experience of being 
Naaraayana and discard the limited, bound, relative entity, nara. 
That is the one harvest yielded by all the various processes. Until 
one understands oneself, the delusion and the resultant grief cannot 
be ended. 


India is the birth place of spiritual science 


Let me tell you that you cannot understand Me and My Secret 
without first understanding yourselves. For, if you are too weak to 
grasp your own Reality, how can you hope to fathom the much 
grander Reality of My advent? To grasp My meaning, you have to 
tear into tatters the doubts and theories you now have and cultivate 
Prema, for the embodiment of Prema can be understood only 
through Prema. The "miracles and wonders" which cannot be 
explained by the categories of science, are so natural to Me that I 
am amused when you label them as miracles. The Lord had 
announced that He would come down for the restoration of Dharma 
(righteousness) and that He would assume human Form so that all 


might gather round Him and feel the thrill of His companionship and 
conversation. And the Lord has come, as announced. 


For those who are drawn by the pulls of the mind, the intellect 
and the ego, things beyond the ken of these three are inscrutable; 
there is a limit beyond which the mind and the intellect cannot 
traverse. That is why the Mahaashakthi (Supreme Power) has to 
envelop Itself with Maayaa (delusion) and come down to the level of 
human comprehension. 


This Bhaarathavarsha (India) is the birth place of spiritual 
science. Here, every man, woman and child is a student of that 
science. Each one here is entitled to the study of that supreme 
subject. The ancient heritage must be handed down to each boy 
and girl in the land, not merely to the students of institutions like 
this. 


In this spiritual science, some one method or other has been 
emphasised during the various periods of history. It was manthra 
(mystic formula) once, yaaga (ceremonial sacrifice) another time, 
yoga (Divine communion) a little later and after the rise of 
Buddhism and its spread to all parts of India and even her 
neighbours, it has been Thanthra (magical and _ mystical 
formularies). Shankara gave great encouragement to 7hanthra and 
Poet Kaalidhaasa also considered it important. It flourished due to 
the encouragement which Shivaaji gave to the thaanthric scholars 
and it dominated the spiritual life of the country for many centuries. 


Thanthra, a spiritual science based on Shakthi 


Thanthra means only "that which saves well" and so there is 
no reason to feel apologetic about it. It is just a means to achieve 
the aim of the merging of the Jeeva with Brahman (individual soul 
with Supreme Soul). Sir John Woodroffe has shown in his books that 
Thanthra is a systematic discipline which employs symbolism and 
sublimation to purify the instincts and control the mind. He removed 
to a great extent the prejudice which had kept people away from 
Thanthra. It is spiritual science based on the Shakthi (Feminine 
aspect of Energy) that plays a central part in the spiritual progress 
of man. 


Examine, each of you, your own mental make-up and see 
whether you have used your viveka and vijnaana (discrimination 
and worldly knowledge) to clothe yourself in va/raagya 
(detachment), so that you do not suffer from attachment to things 
that will fade away. There is no dearth of books telling you how to 
be free from grief. The Geetha is available in all languages and at a 
very low cost, say, four annas a copy. The Bhaagavatha and the 
Raamayaana and all other books are sold at the rate of thousands 
of copies per day; but there is nothing to indicate that they have 
been read and assimilated. The breath of the mouth must give an 
inkling of the food partaken, is it not? But the habits, the conduct, 
the character of the readers of these books have not undergone any 
change for the better. Egoism and.greed are still rampant; hatred 
has not abated and envy eats into the vitals of society. 


Spiritual study must not develop egoism 


Similarly, do not treat My words too lightly; do not say, "We 
saw Sai Baaba and heard his talk and it was all very fine." Decide at 
least to carry out some one piece of advice for your spiritual 
advance. It is very wrong to tarnish the body making it perform a 
single bad deed or making it move in bad company. Sanctify the 
body, sanctify each activity by devoting it to a high purpose, I am 
not commanding you today on the basis of my authority; I am 
telling you out of the fullness of Prema, on the basis of the right I 
have to chastise you and direct you along the path. 


I know that the elders, while themselves neglecting the 
cultivation of higher virtues and themselves discarding the discipline 
of Japam and Dhyaanam, commit the additional crime of laughing at 
their children who feel the sweetness of the Name of the Lord and 
who frequent the places where they can get good company, noble 
thoughts and spiritual teaching. They call such young persons 
demented and try to cure them by their own special course of 
punishment. Their children's insanity is certainly preferable to the 
madness for luxury, for gambling, for drink and for loose morals that 
have become the only property the elders leave behind for their 
children. 


Your study here must develop your powers of discrimination, 
not your egoism. Do not argue for argument's sake, for it will lead 
only to dry scholarship and intellectual pride. Such craving for 
criticism is a disease of the intellect and it has to be nipped in the 
bud. Examine the thing which you do not like very closely and with 
great care. Do not jump to conclusions, favourable or unfavourable. 
That would be abdicating your precious status of'thinker' and your 
responsibility to yourself. Even the Sun which is millions of miles 
afar can set fire to some object if by means of a magnifying glass its 
rays are focussed at one point. So also, focus all your powers of 
observation and judgement on one topic and it will surely stand 
revealed. 


Man can and should be the Master of his mind 


The world itself is subject to constant agitation; how can your 
plan to lead a quiet contented peaceful life upon it succeed? It is 
like trying to float without any heaving or falling while being tossed 
about on the waves of the sea. Under such conditions, the best 
thing is to recognise the fact and not to worry about the 
unavoidable. 


Manushya, the word meaning "man", implies that man is the 
Master of his mind or manas. When people come to Me and 
complain that they cannot concentrate, I laugh at their weakness, 
for even the driver of a car is a master of the art of concentration. 
He does not pay heed to the chatter from the seat behind him or to 
the chatter of the person on his left. He is watching the road in front 
of him with single-pointed attention. 


Learn to listen with one-pointed attention 


If you have shraddha (faith), more than half the battle is won. 
That is why in the Geetha, Krishna asks Arjuna, "Have you listened 
to what I have said with one-pointed attention?" And Arjuna, good 
student that he is, says in reply that even in the midst of the 
opposing armies ranged on the battle-field, he has listened to the 
words of the Lord with keen concentration. Learn that concentration 
and your learning will stand you in good stead. 


I have been asked to inaugurate the Library of this College by 
the token act of giving over these books to the Principal to be 
placed on the shelves along with the books already there. Come and 
read the books in the Library and enjoy the teachings that are given 
by great saadhakas and siddhas (spiritual aspirants and divine 
seers). Let children too come and handle the books and turn over 
the pages; the library must be useful for all persons of this town 
from the age of 2 to 60 or 70. It is not like a hospital, which is 
unnecessary for some. It benefits all and so all must make the best 
use of it. The wisdom that these books contain should percolate to 
every home in Aukiripaili. 


Sanskrit learning has to advance by your efforts and your 
enthusiasm; the whole world will benefit if you keep it burning 
bright. Fulfil that responsibility of yours to the best of your ability 
and the Lord will shower His Grace on you. Do not mistake the 
technique for the goal; do not lose your way in the tangle of 
scholarship. Scholarship and learning are only the means for the 
mastery of the Mind. Turn from the Creation to the Creator. 


Maarkandeya Sanskrit College, Aukiripalli, 22-1-1960 


If only men knew the path to permanent joy and peace, they 
will not wander distracted among the bye-lanes of sensual pleasure. 


Just:as the joy felt in dreams disappears when you wake, the 
joy felt in the waking stage disappears when you wake into the 
higher awareness, called jnaana. 


Use the moment while it is available, for the best of uses, the 
awareness of the Divine in all. 


When you die, you must die not like a tree or a beast or a 
worm, but, like a Man who has realised that he is Maadhava (God). 
That is the consummation of all the years you spend in the human 
frame. 


Shri Sathya Sai 


26. The world, My mansion 


THIS gathering reminds Me of the sea, for here we have in 
this Hall streams of people coming from various directions towards 
God; people who follow various paths to attain shaanthi and 
santhosha (peace and happiness). My Mission is to give you 
Aanandha and I am ever ready to do so. My language may give 
some of you a little trouble for you may not follow Thelugu, but in 
this gathering there will be some who will not be able to follow 
whatever language I speak in; so I shall speak in Thelugu itself. 


There are four things in which every man must interest 
himself.’ "Who am I? Wherefrom have I come? Whither am I going? 
How long shall I be here?" The four Vedhas give the answers to 
these four questions. All spiritual inquiry begins with these questions 
and attempts to find out the answers. Suppose there is a letter put 
into the post box without the address to which it should go or the 
address from which it has come. It will not reach anywhere. It is a 
waste to have written it. So too, it is a waste to have come into this 
world, if it is not known wherefrom you came and whereto you go. 
The letter will go to the dead letter office! The jeev/ (individual soul) 
will be caught in the cycle of birth and death and can never find 
itself. For this, Aathma vichaara (enquiry about the Self) and for the 
successful arrival at the correct answers, sa@adhana (spiritual 
discipline) is essential. The answers must become part of your 
experience. 


Have tolerance and patience in every act 


Saadhana must be done in a disciplined, systematic manner, 
in an atmosphere of virtue. Just as we have fans here in this Hall to 
cool the atmosphere and make it possible for such a large gathering 
to sit packed in this Hall, so too the fans of Sathya, Dharma, 
Shaanthi and Prema are necessary to reduce the sweltering heat of 
ajnaana, asathya, anyaaya and akrama (ignorance, falsehood, 
injustice and indiscipline). In a world where Dharma is being 
insulted and denied at every turn, peace and tolerance are the 
roads through which man can save himself. 


This is the sum and substance of what I have to tell you and 
what you have to cultivate. In every act, have tolerance, patience, 
mutual help. In the family, cultivate patience and mutual respect; in 
the community, have dharma and justice; in the community of 
peoples, have the ideal of peace. The body is said to be the 
tabernacle of God; the world is the body of God. A pinprick on the 
toe is immediately recognised as an injury to the self because the 
toe is part of the self-same body. So too, suffering in one corner of 
the world is as much the concern of the Lord as suffering in any 
other. When the Andhra State was formed some one told Me that I 
had been taken out of the Madras State and made an Andhra! I told 
him that the whole world was My Mansion and that Madras and 
Andhra were rooms in that Mansion! The world is a temple, the 
temple of the Lord, His body where He resides. 


When I was coming by car to this place I passed through 
several streets and I found several pandhals and halls decorated, 
because they were having religious discourses there and readings 
and expositions of sacred texts and scriptures. Crowds of listeners 
had gathered in each place; there was no lack of enthusiasm for 
sabhas and bhajans (associations and group singing). Yet, atheism 
is rampant and the number of people who deny God and decry 
Godward-bound aspirants is increasing. Why? Because eating the 
food does not by itself guarantee digestion. Practice of even a 
thousandth part of what one has read or heard can alone help in 
giving peace and joy. 


You are here for fulfilling God's purpose 


What is wanted now is uthsaaha, dhairya and vishwaasa 
(effort, courage and faith). In effort, you must follow a regulated 
routine learnt from some adept in the field. For courage, you must 
feel your own importance for your uplift; never call yourself a sinner 
born in sin, bred in sin and engaged in sin. No; that kind of self- 
condemnation ill becomes a child of God, an Amrithaputhra. 


In every one of you, God is the moving spirit, the very Soul; 
how then can you be evil, when you are here for fulfilling God's 
purpose, according to his Will, His plan, His law? He has endowed 
you with many faculties so that you may seek Him and reach Him. 


You are not therefore a helpless neglected individual undergoing a 
sentence of death. You are Aanandhaswaruupa (embodiment of 
Bliss), born to a rich heritage, which is yours for the asking. Only 
you do not ask. Have faith in your destiny and work gladly and 
steadily to attain it. 


Bhakthi (devotion) is simply the rakth/ (attachment) towards 
Bhagavaan (God), affection towards the Supreme; one need not fly 
away from hearth and home to cultivate it. If the seed is planted far 
away from the parent tree, does it become any different? Boil it and 
then of course it will not grow again and burden the world. 
Similarly, boil your instincts and impulses and scorch the sensory 
cravings that enslave you. That brings you nearer to God, wherever 
you may be. 


Both good and bad emanate from the same mind 


From the Ocean of milk when it was churned by the dhevas 
and asuras (celestial beings and demons), there emanated the 
Kaamadhenu (Cow of Plenty), Ka/patharu (the Tree that grants all 
wishes), the Goddess of Wealth, the four-tusked elephant of Indhra 
and also Haalahaala (the deadliest of poisons). Similarly, the mind 
of man is churned by the forces of good and evil every day and 
there emanates from the same mind both good and bad. The bad 
comes because the mind flows towards sensory pleasures and is lost 
in the swamps of greed and envy, of lust and pride. 


When the lion awakes from sleep and roars, all the tiny 
animals that held sway till then, take to their heels. So too, when 
you awake and repeat the Pranavamanthra (Om), all the paltry 
animal instincts that strutted about in the darkness will flee. In your 
own heart you have the entity which is beyond time and space; and 
if you go on contacting it by the Pranava or by any other symbol, 
the wild thoughts and impulses will not dare to approach you. 


If you have the Grace of God, no graha (planet) can harm 
you; maleficent influences even from the most powerful combination 
of planets with which the astrologers terrify you will disappear in a 
trice. In order to get that Grace, there are two prescriptions: privam 
vadha (speak lovingly) so far as the world is concerned; and 


sathyam vadha (speak the truth) so far as the next world is 
concerned. Prema (Love) is the weapon: vichaara (enquiry) is the 
wheel which must be revolved perpetually to get the light of prema. 
Until prema emerges, you have to be in the darkness of hatred, 
where even the slightest movement creates fear and suspicion. 


Charge the battery of your saadhana continuously 


Never yield to indolence or despair. Suffer loss and grief 
gladly; they help to toughen your personality. The diamond is found 
amidst rocks; you will have to blast through the vein to get gold. 
Follow the strict regimen that the doctor enforces in order to make 
the medicine yield the best result. The battery of your "car" is 
charged when you come to Puttaparthi or when you go to some 
other holy place. Or at least that should be the aim of pilgrimage. 
Charge the battery of your Saadhana (spiritual effort) and then, 
after you return home, do not keep the car idle. If you do, the 
battery will run down; take the car around and keep it going; then 
the battery will charge itself. So also, if you do not continue the 
sathsanga (holy company), the sathpravarthana (good attitude) and 
bhajana (devotional singing) and Naamasmarana (Remembering 
God's Name), then all this charging becomes a waste. 


I have not come for propaganda or publicity or gaining 
disciples or devotees. I am yours and you are Mine. Where then is 
the need for publicity? I give not lectures but mixtures for your 
mental health and moral re-invigoration. So take My words as 
medicine necessary for your health. 


Gokhale Hall, Madras, 25-6-1960 


Man did not come here to sleep and eat; he has come to 
manifest, by disciplined processes, the divine in him. That is why he 
Is called vyakthi (individual), he who makes vyaktha (clear) the 
Shakthi (power) that is in him---the Divine energy that motivates 
him. 


For this purpose he has come endowed with this body and the 
intelligence needed to control it and divert it to useful channels of 
activity. You must achieve this by Dharma-nishtha and Karma- 
nishtha---steady pursuit of morality and good deeds. 


Shri Sathya Sai 


27. The underlying truths 


Tins life which begins with a wail must end with a smile. When 
you were a little baby, all round you smiled though you kept on 
wailing. But when you die all around you must weep at the loss and 
you should smile in peace and quiet resignation. The 
‘bhogaanandham' (pleasures from sensual enjoyment) must finally 
be converted into 'yogaanandham' (happiness from divine union); 
the pleasures of the senses must gradually be left behind and you 
must develop a taste for the higher and more lasting pleasure 
derivable from the springs of your own personality. For Yoga (divine 
union), Bhakthi (devotion to God) is the main thing, the head and 
the crown; shaanthi and santhosham (peace and happiness) are the 
other essentials. 


The fire of sorrow and joy burns when the fuel of vaasanas 
(impressions left on the mind by actions of past lives) is fed into the 
furnace of the mind. Take away the fuel and the fire dies out. Take 
away the vaasanas, the force of the impulses, promptings and urges 
and you become your own master. This is done in Yoga by various 
physiological and psychological exercises. But Bhakthi is the easier 
means for this end. Naamasmarana (remembering God's Name) is 
enough; it is said that the name Seetharaama sufficed in the 
Threthayuga, the name _ Raadheshyaama_ sufficed in the 
Dhwaaparayuga, and in the present Kaliyuga, I tell you, all divine 
Names have that capacity. 


De-individualisafion is Moksha 


When you recite Radheshyaama, you should dwell on the 
significance of the Name; the deeper mysteries of the word must be 
present before the mind's eye: then, Naamasmarana will yield 
quicker results. Raadha is not an individual. It symbolises Dha-raa 
meaning Earth or Prakrithi, the Jada (creation). Krishna or Shyaama 
is the Creator, the Active Principle: the Ch/th (awareness), the 
Purusha (Supreme Being). Shakthi (Supreme Energy) is 
Paramaathma; the Vyakthi (individual) is the Jeevaathma (individual 
soul); the Ocean is Shakthi and the Wave is the Jeeva. All the taste 
and all the forces and roar of the Wave are derived from the Ocean 
and they disappear into the Ocean itself. The disappearance of the 


wave form and the wave-name is called Moksha (Liberation): that is, 
merging of the wave in the ocean from which it seemed to differ. 
De-individualisation is in other words, Moksha. 


When you do Bhajana (group singing) and sing the Names of 
God, you should contemplate on such underlying truths. The 
Naamaavali, 'Hare Raama, Hare Raama, Raama Raama Hare Hare; 
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna Krishna Hare Hare,’ has sixteen 
words and each of the sixteen signifies a virtue which has to be 
cultivated along with that Bhajana. (Here Baaba recited a Thelugu 
song compused by Him on the spot which indicated the sixteen 
qualities to be developed by a spiritual person). 


Sixteen qualities to be developed 


He must be a (1) Bhaktha, (2) a Thapoyuktha, (3) a Samsaara 
Muktha, (4) a Paadasaktha of the Lord, (5) a Vihitha, (6) a 
Dhaanasahitha, (7) Yaso-mahitha, (8) a Kalmasha rahitha, (9) a 
Poorna, (10) a Gunagana, (11) an Uththeerana, (12) a Vidhyaa- 
vikeerna, (13) a Jnaana vistheerana (14) Swaantha, (15) a 
Saclhguna kraantha, (16) a Vinaya vishraantha, and finally, a 
Paadhaswaantha of the Lord or afteast he must pray, with verbal 
repetition of each word, for the growth in him of each of these 
attainments which will take him nearer the goal. 


Baaba meant that a spiritual seeker should be (1) full of 
devotion, (2) prepared to enjoy suffering, (3) free from the 
attachment to the transitory, (4) eager to serve the Lord, (5) of 
correct conduct, (6) charitable, (7) having an unsullied reputation, 
(8) with no blemish on his character, (9) fully content, (10) 
endowed with good qualities, (11) equipped with all the virtues, 
(12) equipped with the fruits of learning, (13) ripe in wisdom, (14) 
self-controlled, (15) adorned with commendable social traits, (16) 
full of humility and fully surrendered to God. If he has these virtues, 
(here Baaba quoted the last line of the song he had just composed, 
"vaade nenoudhu, nene vaadoudu"---"He is I, I am He". 


Yes, you must struggle. You cannot go to the top without an 
effort. Have faith in ultimate victory, gather courage and faith from 
wherever you can get them; do not have contact with persons who 


sow the seeds of fear or doubt. Treasure all the confidence that you 
get here, foster it and guard it carefully. Do not let it slip from your 
grasp the moment you get beyond this gate. The seedlings should 
be well cared for, watered, manured and protected from insect 
pests. Can you pass an examination without studying the texts? But 
that is what you hope to do! You must liberate yourself from 
attachment to fleeting things and grow strong and be above 
temptation. 


Never discuss spiritual standards of others 


The fish are happy because they are immersed in water; when 
thrown out of the water, they struggle and suffer mortal pain. So 
too, man is happy when he is immersed in Prema, Shaanthi and 
Sathyam (Love, Peace and Truth); those are the components of the 
water that gives him life; when he is thrown out of the water, he 
also suffers and feels terribly miserable. Life is 'being' thrown out of 
the water; Saadhana (spiritual discipline) is the struggle to leap back 
into the life-giving element. For success in this struggle, do not 
depend upon another; depend upon yourself and on the Grace of 
God. Remember that Raama (Divinity) and Kaama (worldly desire) 
cannot be together; where Raama is, kKaama cannot thrive; where 
kaama is, how can Raama enter? Every person must have, as a 
single dhaara (stream), Aaraadh (worship) as the Aa-dhaara (basis); 
that is the easiest means of winning Shyaama. 


When you carry on such effort unbroken, the Lord Himself will 
come as your Guide. When Madhurakavi was doing thapas 
(penance), he saw a big pillar of Light in front of him reaching up to 
the sky and he saw Dakshinaamurthy in that Light. Then the pillar 
moved on and on so that he could follow it and at last, the Light led 
him on to Nammaalwaar who agreed to be his Guru (spiritual 
preceptor)! The Guru later made him realise the Reality. 


Vemana and Thyaagaraaja reached the heights of spiritual 
experience through the Grace of the Lord and the encouragement 
they derived from His Appearance. Pray to Him and He reveals 
Himself. He is the yarn in the cloth, the gold in this seeming variety 
of jewellery; he is the mud in all this pottery; he is that water that 
sustains all these waves. Once you have realised this, you will be 


filled with love and respect for all, for all are the same Form as the 
Lord Himself. 


Do not cynically talk about the Saadhakas. What do you know 
of the mood of the Bhaktha that you so easily pass judgement 
thereon and label him as insane or out of his mind? Never discuss 
the spiritual standards reached by others; persevere in your own 
path. "Be moderate in talk, in sleep, in food"---"Yukthaahaara 
Vihaarasya." 


Smarana is the best antidote for all ills 


Never be ashamed to sing the name of God or to do Bhajana. 
Be proud that you get the chance, be glad that your tongue is put to 
the best use. When the artist sees a stone, he sees immediately the 
form of beauty hidden in that stone imprisoned in it; and he will not 
get peace of mind until he releases that form from the clutches of 
the stone. Do not see the stone as stone, see the God in it, the 
basic reality underlying it. 


Vemana did not visit any temple for years; for years he was 
laughing at those who considered that the image was a symbol of 
Divinity. But when his daughter died, he was one day holding her 
picture in his hand weeping over the loss. Then the idea suddenly 
struck him that if the picture could cause sorrow in him and bring 
tears, the image too can evoke joy and bring tears to those who 
know the beauty and the glory of the Lord. The image was just a 
reminder of the Presence of the Lord everywhere and in everything. 


The Lord is the Sun and when His rays fall upon your heart, 
unimpeded by the clouds of egoism, the lotus bud blooms and the 
petals unfold. Remember, only the buds that are ready will bloom; 
the rest have to wait, patiently. Meanwhile, carry on with the 
companionship of the Name of the Lord; Smarana (remembering) is 
the best antidote for all ills. 


Akhanda Bhajana, Bangalore 10-7-1959 


In order to promote harmony, the first rule you must follow is 
control of the tongue. Do not give all your thoughts immediate 
expression,’ select, ponder, and then, speak out. Speak softly, 
sweetly, without malice in your heart; speak as if you are 


addressing the Sai who resides in every one. Use the tongue to 
recite the Name of the Lord; use the feet to go on pure and holy 
errands; use the heart to contain pure thoughts and feelings. 


Shri Sathya Sai 


28. The best tonic 


The greatest disease (or absence of ease) is the absence of 
Shaanthi; when the mind gets peace, the body also will have health. 
So, every one who craves for good health must pay attention to the 
emotions, feelings and motives that animate the individual. Just as 
you give clothes for a wash, you have to wash the mind free from 
dirt again and again; otherwise, if dirt accumulates and you form a 
‘habit’, it is difficult for the dhobi as well as harmful to the clothes. It 
should be a daily process; you should see that no dirt settles upon 
the mind; that is to say, you should move about in such company 
that dirt is avoided. Falsehood, injustice, indiscipline, cruelty, hate--- 
these form the dirt; Sathya, Dharma, Shaanthi, Prema (Truth, 
Righteousness, Peace, Love)---these form the clean elements. If you 
inhale the pure air of these latter, your mind will be free from evil 
bacilli and you will be mentally sturdy and physically strong. As 
Vivekaanandha used to say, you should have nerves of steel and 
muscles of iron. That is to say, you should have hope and joy and 
elation as an unshakeable resolution, not despair and dejection. 


What is studied is not put into practice 


Your heart should be like glass, with the spiritual light inside 
illuminating the world outside; the world outside reacting on the 
inner urges and making them lean towards service, sympathy and 
mutual help. Now, people read and study all kinds of unintelligible 
Vedhaanthic texts and struggle with commentaries and notes and 
translations to grasp their sense. It is being poured down their 
throats; but the portion does not get down to soften the heart. It is 
not translated into practice. The truths of the Vedhaantha are put 
on for public exhibition, as in a drama, where appropriate dresses 
are worn on the stage but taken off when the actor moves off the 
stage. They do not adhere to them all the time to derive the 
Aathmaanandha (Bliss of the Soul) which they can give. 


It is chiefly a matter of careful well-timed regulated discipline; 
it cannot be got by spurts and skips; it has to be climbed step by 
step, each step being used as a foot-hold for the next. There is no 
systematic living according to any known principle, now; this is true 
of the student, the householder, the mistress or the master of the 


house. The virtues have to be cultivated in the home; each member 
sharing in the joy with the rest, each one seeking for opportunities 
for helping others. This attitude has to be stuck to, so that it may 
stay as character. How can a vessel kept with the mouth 
downwards get filled with water? It has to open up and receive the 
good impulses. You have to learn each lesson by systematic study; 
application and effort alone will give success. 


Have faith in the Lord and His Grace 


In all effort, if you trust in a Higher Power which is ready to 
come to your help, work is made easy. This comes out of Bhakthi, 
reliance on the Lord, the source of all Power. When you travel by 
train, you have only to purchase the ticket, enter the proper train 
and take a seat, leaving the rest to the engine. Why should you 
carry the bed and trunk on your head? So too, put your trust in the 
Lord and carry on to the best of your ability. Have faith in the Lord 
and his Grace. Try to earn it by using the intelligence and the 
conscience with which He has endowed you. 


You have all gathered here to celebrate the completion of four 
years in the life of this Sathya Sai Hospital. So I want to tell you that 
the best and the wisest thing is to see that you do not fall ill. The 
doctor read out in the report that this year the number of our- 
patients as well as the number of operations was greater than last 
year, as if that is a sign of progress! But I do not think that speaks 
well of the people around and their sense of values. The Hospital 
should radiate preventive measures also and try to educate the 
villagers in methods of avoiding illness. Develop self-reliance; that is 
the best tonic. You have been born because you did not pass in 
certain subjects; there is some balance of experience which you 
must acquire to complete the course. If you get convinced that your 
true nature is the Aathma, then you have finished, the course and 
"passed. 


Cultivate Prema towards all beings 


For reaching that stage, you should start with the cultivation 
of the "feeling of kinship with all beings”, ---Sarvasamaanabhaava--- 
as it is called. It is very difficult to get it; but that is the only way to 


see the Aathma that is in all. For example, a person with that 
bhaava (sincerity of feeling) will not be happy at the killing of 
animals for food or even hunting them. Why should you go seeking 
the animal to its den, lie in wait for it and lay traps for it, so that 
you may derive pleasure by killing it? Prema should be cultivated 
towards all beings, in order that you may see the Sarvabhootha 
antharaathma (Inmost Self in all beings). The Aathma is 
Omnipresent; do not think it is found only in persons belonging to 
certain castes or colours or creeds; or that it is of a big size in fat 
people or of a brilliant nature in rich people. It is consistently Sath, 
Chith and Aanandha (Being, Awareness, Bliss Absolute) in every 
being. Saadhana has to go a long way to win this outlook. 


But you can begin with little things; you can avoid causing 
annoyance to others, is it not? Even if you are unable or unwilling to 
do service to others, at least, if you desist from causing harm, that 
is meritorious service indeed! For example, take your vaak---the 
words you speak. I always say Vaak shuddhi (purification of words) 
leads to Mano Shuddhi (cleansing of the mind). That is why I insist 
on quiet talk, sweet talk and little talk; the saathwik talk; no anger, 
no heat, no hate. Such talk will cause no quarrel, no blood-pressure 
and no factions. It will promote mutual respect and love. Then 
again, do not cynically laugh at the good that others do or at the 
Saadhana of others. Inquire; but do not insult. Respect the sincerity 
of the other man; respect also elders and men with more experience 
than you. In company, behave in a well-mannered way, showering 
brotherhood and joy on all around you. 


Moderation in food is always to be welcomed 


Strive for the happiness of the community and of the human 
race. Pray that all men everywhere may have peace and plenty. Be 
eager to do good and be good. Being a function connected with the 
Hospital, I must tell you about certain other things also. By 
regulating your diet and avoiding certain bad habits, you can 
preserve health. Moderate food, and food of the Saathwik type, will 
promote mental poise and also physical happiness. M/tha-ahaara 
(moderation in food) is always to be welcomed. Many people 
consume more than the necessary quantity of rich food and such 
have to practise moderation. So too, if you do not smoke, you 


escape a number of illnesses that follow that Raajasik (passionate) 
practice. Any intoxicant or stimulant, because it disturbs nature's 
even trend, is harmful. Moderation in food, moderation in talk, and 
in desires and pursuits; contentment with what little can be got by 
honest labour, eagerness to serve others and to impart joy to all--- 
these are the most powerful of all the tonics and health-preserves 
known to the science of health, the Sanaathana Aayur-Vedha, the 
Vedha of the full life. 


Sathya Sai Hospital, Prashaanthi Nilayam, 21-9-1960 


29. Sathya Sai Geetha (i) 


IN the Sathya Sai Geetha, which Thirumalachar read and 
explained just now, he has given My name to the ‘Sathya’ that he 
has experienced. Persons who have seen Me are many, but those 
who have understood My significance are few; so too, those who 
have 'seen' the Geetha, that is to say, read it and learned it by rote, 
are legion; but those who have grasped the sense are few. Geetha 
must be "thaagi" (which is the reverse form of Geetha), that is to 
say, in Thelugu, "drunk" or imbibed! Then, you become a "thaagi", 
full of vairaagyam---free from senseless attachment to the sensory 
world. Giving up raaga---that is, things that please and bind, that 
ensnare and enslave---that is what is meant by Vairaagyam 
(dispassion). 


Another thing about the Geetha is that it does not speak of 
grihastha (the householder) stage of Life. It deals with the 
fundamentals of living; not living in this compartment or that, but 
living as such, and the deepest problems of life. It was repeated by 
one householder to another and so it does not prescribe the 
recluse's 'escape’. That is the lesson, both in that Geetha and this. 


Many read the Geetha but few benefit 


Geetha means 'song'; Krishna sings at Brindhaavan with the 
Flute. He sings on the battlefield too; in both places the call is for 
the Particular to merge with the Infinite, the Universal. For Him, the 
Rudhrabhuumi (place of cremation) as well as the Bhadhrabhuumi 
(sanctified ground) are the same; they are equally placed for 
imparting Upadhesh (spiritual instruction) in the form in which the 
Bhaktha most likes it, namely, Song. And imagine with what 
concentration Arjuna heard it? His concentration was steady as that 
of the Gopees (Cowherd girls) who listened to the Message of the 
Flute in Brindhaavan. He forgot the opposing armies, his own 
hatreds and enthusiasm for war and he became immersed in the 
teaching he secured. If you develop that ekaagratha (one- 
pointedness) in the Kurukshethra of your own _ particular 
‘battlefields’, you can assuredly also listen to the Geetha---the 
Bhagavathgeetha or the Sai Geetha or the Sathya Sai Geetha, 
intended for you. 


The Geetha was spoken to remove the ajnaana sammoha (the 
delusion caused by ignorance), and it succeeded in removing it so 
far as Arjuna was concerned; others like Sanjaya and 
Dhritharaashtra who also heard it did not benefit, because they 
were still bound by their own particular brand of ajnaana. 


Dhritharaashtra was all the while worried that the battle had 
not started yet and that his sons' enemies had not been destroyed! 
So he was not benefitted. Therefore, many read the Geetha but few 
benefit. You must have Arjuna's Vairaagyam and Arjuna's 
Ekaagratha to derive profit from the Geetha. MWirmala hridhaya (pure 
heart) and Mischala bhaava (firm disposition of mind) are essential. 


Feeling of ‘T'and 'mine' should go 


The sammoha (confusion) of Arjuna was the feeling of'I' and 
‘Mine.’ All of a sudden he began to feel that he was the killer, that 
he would be responsible and that they were his teachers and elders 
and relations. This Mamakaara (feeling of mine) has to go, the 'T' 
has to be crossed and all words, deeds and thoughts have to be 
dedicated to the Lord. The baby weeps as soon as it is born because 
the Jeev/ (individual being) has no desire to get entangled in 
Prakrithi (objective world) once again. It is unwilling to come into 
Maayaa (veil of delusion). Science describes it as the process of 
breathing for the first time and the clearing of the air passage; but 
why should it weep? The process can be started some other way, 
say, snaking or shivering, is it not? 


The weeping child must later leave this world laughing, the 
worth of life is to be judged by the end. Prema is the seed, Bhakthi 
is the seedling, the sapling. Faith is the manure, Sathsanga (holy 
company) is the rain, Aathma-arpana (offering of the Self) is the 
flower and A/kyam (merging together) the fruit. With that, one must 
throw off this coil and become free. 


The Geetha advises Karmasanyaasa (renunciation of action), 
that is to say, Karma without attachment to the fruit thereof. There 
are karmas which have to be done as duties, related to the status in 
Samsaara (worldly life), and if these are done in the proper spirit, 
they will not bind at all. Do all karma as actors in a play, keeping 


your identity separate and not attaching yourself too much to your 
role. Remember that the whole thing is just a play and the Lord has 
assigned to you a part; act well your part, there all your duty ends. 
He has designed the play and He enjoys it. 


Take refuge in the innermost recesses of the heart 


Aathma is the ocean, Prakrithi (Nature) is just a wave of that 
vast ageless, boundless ocean and the deew/ is just a drop of that 
wave. You cannot give up the wave or the sea. You can only merge 
the name and form of the drop. Once you enter the depths of the 
sea, it is all calm, it is all peace; agitation, noise, confusion---all are 
only on the outer layers. So also in the innermost recesses of the 
heart, there is a reservoir of Shaanthi where you must take refuge. 


There are three types of people: The 7haamasik who are like 
iron balls, impervious to any softening influence; the Raajasik who 
are like cotton, absorbent but not changing their own nature; and 
the Saathwik, who melt as butter melts at the joy or grief of others 
or at the mention of the /ee/as (divine plays) of the Lord. They dive 
deep into the source and spring of sympathy. Anger, envy, greed 
and intolerance are all so many holes in the pot; the waters of 
shaanthi, soukhya and san-thosha (peace, contentment, happiness) 
leak through the holes and the pot becomes empty. The pot has to 
be repaired and all leaks stopped so that it may be useful. 


It is when you are in a desperate situation that you call upon 
the Lord, forgetting your pride and your egoism. The Paandavas 
were so full of misery in a worldly sense that they always had an 
attitude of prayer. If I had given you all the comforts and 
opportunities, you would not have come to Puttaparthi. Trouble is 
the bait with which the fish is hauled out of the water. Kunthi asked 
that Krishna should continue giving her and her sons all kinds of 
misery so that He may grant them His Grace continuously. 


Offer your egoism at the Lord's feet 


Thirumalaachar called this attitude Aathma-arpana (offering of 
the Self), but the Aathma is He Himself; and so, what do you mean 
by offering Him to Himself?. What you would offer at His Feet is 


your egoism, your aham-kaara! Offer all the pride, all the 
separateness, all the delusion, all the attachment that the egoism 
has proliferated into! That is the worship you have to do. Bring to 
Me all the evil in you, and leaving it here take from Me what I have, 
viz., Prema; learn Sarva sama bhaavana---the capacity to see all as 
‘moved and motivated by the One Paramaathma (Supreme Reality 
or Self)’. 


Examine every day what you do and with what motive; then 
you can yourself pronounce judgement on your progress. Select 
only pure motives, pure deeds. You forgot that you are the Aathma 
and now you remember that you are the Aathma/ That is all the 
progress you have to achieve; it all looks so easy, but it is one of 
the hardest of assignments. The ear is so near to the eye; but it can 
never see it direct! 


There was a clown in a palace who always asked questions 
and was therefore held to be a big nuisance. The King had to put up 
a board. "No questions" just to escape him] But when the King was 
on his death bed, he called him near and whispered, "I am going." 
The clown asked him hurriedly, "Shall I order the royal chariot? The 
elephant with the howdah? The royal horse full caparisoned? The 
palanquin? How far are you going? Which is the exact place? How 
long will you camp there?" The clown was very wise. He knew the 
questions, though he did not know the answers, nor did the King 
know. But you can pass examinations only if you know the answers! 


The Geetha helps to control agitations of the mind 


The Geetha prompts you to seek the answers and directs you 
to experience them. It helps you to control the chiththa (thoughts) 
and the agitations of the mind; it destroys delusion; it develops true 
knowledge; it makes you glimpse the splendour of the Lord and 
confirms your faith. You say one moment, "Baaba does everything, I 
am but the instrument" and the next moment the same tongue 
talks, "I did this; I did that. Swaami did not do this for me." If you 
never slip into wrong, you can be ever certain of His Grace. 


All hearts are His Property, it is all His Domain. But just as the 
Zamindhaar sits only on a clean spot though the entire area may be 


his, the Lord will install Himself only if the heart is cleansed. The 
Lord has said that, “madh bakthaah yathra gaayanthe thathra 
thishthaami, Naaradha"---'Where my devotees sing of Me, there I 
install Myself, Naaradha." I must tell you that you are luckier than 
men of previous generations. The accumulated merit of many 
previous births must have granted you this luck. You have got Me 
and it is your duty now to develop this relationship that you have 
achieved by sheer good fortune. 


In four or five years time, you will see Yogis and Maharishis 
and Munis (ascetics and sages) crowding here and you may not 
have such chances of asking Me questions and getting the answers, 
of approaching Me and directly speaking to Me. So do not be like 
frogs around the lotus; be like the bees. Plantains and mangoes are 
kept, while yet green, in straw or dried grass or in a closed room so 
that the heat may make them ripe and tasty. The meditation on God 
gives you too the right temperature to ripen yourselves and become 
sweet and tasty. 


Seven things to be fostered for world welfare 


There are seven things that have to be fostered for the 
welfare of the world: the cow, the Brahman-ward or spiritual 
aspirant or the Brahmana, the Vedhas, chastity, truth, non- 
attachment and Dharma (righteousness). All these are now fast 
declining and I have come to restore them to their pristine purity 
and strength. Do not think that this Sathya Sai Geetha was 
composed by some Bhaktha (devotee) and that he reads it and 
explains it here. As he said, I am the inspirer and it is for your 
benefit that he has summarised My Teachings in this way. It is said 
"Ekam Sathyam, vimalam, achalam'"---"the One Truth is pure and 
unshakable." Thirumalaachar has collected it in his vessel and he is 
giving it to you. 


Of course, no one can unravel the Mystery of the Lord. Even 
Vishwaamithra who came to Dhasaratha asking for the two boys, 
extolling them as Divine Incarnations, later forgot that fact and he 
dared teach them Manthras (sacred formulas), as if they were just 
ordinary disciples!) He was even proud that the Lord who 
transformed Ahalya and released her from the curse was his 


disciple. Pride is one of the worst sins in the spiritual field. If you 
feel conceited that you are a Bhaktha of Hari, He will “hari” 
(destroy, in Thelugu) you remember. Sharanaagathi (absolute 
surrender) should be like the attitude of Lakshmana. Raama said, 
"Take Seetha and leave her in the forest." Implicit obedience! There 
is no why! That is Lakshmana. That is Sharanaagathi; the rest are 
deserving only of Sharagathi (the arrow of Raama). 


That is the genuine Geetha, this lesson of Sharanaagathi. 
Increase faith, walk in the path of a Dharma, get rid of Vvaamoha 
and Ajnaana (delusion and ignorance), cleanse the chiththa vrithhi 
(agitations of the mind), and know that He is the Aathma and that 
you too are the Aathma. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 27- 9-1960 


Have a time-table for spiritual sustenance, just as you have 
now for physical sustenance. 


A breakfast of pious repetition of Lord's name (japa) and 
meditation (dhyaana), a /unch hour of ritual worship of the Lord 
(puuja), tea and snacks' of reading scriptures or sacred books 
(pravachana) in the afternoon and a light dinner of devotional music 
(bhajana) /n the early hours of the night. 


If you follow this regimen, you can sleep soundly and wake up 
refreshed. 


Shri Sathya Sai 


30. Sathya Sai Geetha (ii) 


IF you take Krishna to be a Gopaala (cowherd), a man of the 
world like others, then for you he will be just a cowherd! You too 
climb only up to that stage. You have to take it in the yogic sense 
that "Go" in Gopaala means Jeevi" (living being) and therefore, 
Gopaala means "He who protects, guides, feeds and fosters the 
jeevis"; that is to say, "He who is the protector and preserver of 
beings." You will have noticed that Uddhava, who looked upon 
Krishna as his Guru, benefitted more than Arjuna who looked upon 
Him as a sakha’' (a friend). If you have faith that He is God, He will 
be God to you; if you dismiss Him as mere man, He takes on that 
role and becomes useless for you. Search for Him with the heart, 
not with the eye for externals. The superpower has to be sought in 
the super-state itself, not in the lower states. Then, if you have the 
eyes that are fit to see and the wisdom to understand, you will find 
Him. 


Various people have various methods of worship as well as 
objects of worship. Vishnu, Shambhu, Shaaradha, Allah are all 
different degrees of human understanding of the One Unsolved 
Mystery, the Fathomless Infinite and Absolute. You should not seek 
variety, seek unity. Do not enter into quarrels about higher and 
lower; when the same person is honoured by different titles, why 
should you quarrel over the superiority or inferiority of the title. 
They all fall short of His Total Glow. 


Karma is needed to realise the Truth 


Your attempt should be to attain and become the Wthyam and 
Sathyam (Eternal and Truth). Sathyam is that which is the same in 
the past, present and future; the same in the waking, dreaming and 
deep sleep stages: and which is unaffected by T7hamoguna, 
Rajoguna and Sathwaguna (qualities of sloth, passion and serenity). 
Again, the Name is greater than even the Named, for the Named 
may disappear, but the Name will continue and will evoke the Form 
of the Named. 


There is no need to exhaust yourselves in the search for the 
Lord; He is there like butter in milk, like the chicken in the egg, 


immanent in every atom of creation. He does not come from 
somewhere or go somewhere else. He is there, here, everywhere. 
From the anu (atom) to the ghana (great), from the microcosm to 
the macrocosm, He is everything. 


To realise this grand Truth, saadhana or karma is needed. 
That is Karmayoga, karma performed with this end: ‘karmasu 
kousalam,'"the karma done in an intelligent manner." A millionaire 
may have various vehicles: cars, coaches, etc., in plenty; but for his 
health's sake the doctor advises him to walk a few miles every 
morning. Otherwise he will fall ill, the doctor says. So also, for 
removal of Ajnaana (the disease of ignorance), one has to do 
karma, Dharma-directed karma (virtuous action). The oil in the lamp 
is the fat derived from the actions of previous ‘lives'. The stronger 
the flame, the brighter the light and sooner the oil is used up. Do 
vigorous karma and exhaust the effects of the past and be free from 
the weight hanging round your neck. There is more joy in the doing 
of karma than in the fruit it may give; the pilgrimage is often more 
pleasurable than the actual experience of the temple to which the 
pilgrim went. 


Make spiritual effort as natural as breathing 


It was mentioned in the Geetha that you should not care for 
the fruit of your action; but I say now that you may value the result 
of your actions to a limited extent. That advice was given according 
to the conditions prevalent then and the delusion Arjuna suffered. 
Since it will increase your Aanandha (Bliss) and give greater 
strength to your Saadhana, I say now that so far as saadhana is 
concerned, you can do it with a keen eye on the Aanandha that you 
will ultimately derive. 


It was mentioned now by the Principal of the Maarkandeya 
Sanskrit College that I was born like Janaka, as the result of some 
Karmasesha! T have no sesha (balance) of karma to work out! I am 
unaffected by Karma, as already mentioned in the Geetha. The 
Mahaa_ Shakthi (Supreme Power) puts on the cloak of 
Maayaashakthi (deluding power) in order to fulfil the purpose of 
contacting and protecting mankind. I have no desire and so, no 
binding karma. It is only you have the desire, aim and wish that 


drag you along various paths. For Me, your Aanandha is My Food, 
your elation is the swing on which I sit, your activity is My 
Playground. 


There are three kinds of Karma: the Sahajakarma (natural 
action) like breathing which has to be done; the Vikarma (action 
done with intent) like the combination of wick and oil in the burning 
lamp; and the Akarma (action done without intention to gain the 
fruit of consequences), where there is neither oil nor wick and so no 
burning at all. Praanaayaama (breath control) and Yoga (Divine 
communion) must become as natural as breathing and so 
automatic; that is the summum bonum of spiritual discipline, the 
state of Sahaja-Saadhana. 


"I make people mad about God" 


Learn from childhood the recitation of the Name and prayer 
and the practice of silence. Let children contemplate the beauties 
and the magnificence of God's handiwork and be filled with mystery 
and awe. Do not count and calculate what the Puttaparthi Sai Baaba 
gives. I do not give in order to attract you to Me; I give only to fill 
you with Aanandha. Showering Aanandha, that is My task. I do not 
want you to extol Me; I shall be satisfied if you rely on Me. The 
mysterious indescribable Super-power has come within reach. It will 
never engage Itself in any task without fruit. 


I bring tears and I wipe tears, some one has sung. Yes, I 
bring tears of joy into your eyes and I wipe the tears of grief. I am 
said to make people mad and also to cure madness. Yes, I make 
them mad about God and about the ‘Saadhana needed for that. I 
cure the madness which makes people run frantically after fleeting 
pleasures and fall into fits of joy and grief. 


Some persons have said in their ignorance that I am divine 
sometimes and that I become human after that! They say I 
alternate between Dhaivathwam and Maanavathwam (Divinity and 
human). Do not believe this. I am always of one thwam (reality) 
only. The Lord will never undergo a fundamental change; only the 
external form may change, the essence will be the same. There will 
not be any decline in value, like becoming human for some time, 


etc. The Lord will be characterised by unbounded Prema (Love) and 
unsullied sweetness. 


There are two duties to be done by man; the one along the 
Dharmamaarga (path of righteousness) for this world and the one 
along the Brahmamaarga (path of Supreme Reality) for eternal 
liberation. The Dharmamaarga is the left hand, and so it can be left. 
Why, it will leave of itself after the fruit becomes ripe. That is why it 
is called ‘left'! Leave it and do not grieve over it. But hold on to the 
right, the Brahmamaarga; for it is 'right' that you should do so. 


Never hate others or wish evil to them 


Finally, you must know how to use the chance that you have 
got in this life to come in contact with the Lord. The lamp sheds 
illumination but it can be used for various purposes, good and bad; 
the Ganga is holy but its waters are used for good as well as bad 
purposes. How you use this chance depends upon your destiny and 
luck and the amount of Grace that you are able to win. Develop 
faith; strengthen devotion; and everything will follow. Raama was 
the representative of Sathyam, Krishna of Prema, Buddha of 
Dharma. Now it is, of all the four, Sathya, Dharma, Shaanthi and 
Prema. Sathya is the Dharma, Prema gives Shaanthi. I command 
you: never hate others, or wish evil to them or talk ill of them. Then 
only can you attain the Shaanthaswaruupam (natural form of 
peace). 


The Lord alone is aware of the Plan, for His is the Plan! You 
see only a part of the play on the stage and so it is all very 
confused. When the entire stow is unfolded, then you will appreciate 
His Plan, not until then; for that, you have to get behind the screen 
of Maayaa (deluding power) and contact the Director Himself. While 
you are an actor on the stage reciting your role, you cannot grasp 
the inner meaning of the entire play which has the 'world' as the 
stage and ‘ages’ as the duration. 


If by acting your role well you develop Love towards fellow- 
actors, that is more important than getting devotion for God. If you 
acquire Shaanthi (Peace), that is a more valuable success than 
acquiring jnaana (spiritual wisdom). For Bhakthi is the seed of 


Prema and Jnaana is the seed of Shaanthi. At least, bhakthas 
(devotees) should behave as if they are all of one family. Take hold 
of the chance so luckily available for mutual co-operation in worship 
and saadhana. 


"All the powers I have are for you" 


You are My treasure, even if you deny Me. I am your treasure, 
even if you say No. I shall be affectionate to you and attach Myself 
to you; I shall take all the trouble to keep My property safe in My 
custody! That is to say, in the custody of the Lord, by whichever 
name you may be calling upon Him. All the powers I have are for 
you: I am just the store, keeping them ready to be given to you, 
whenever you ask for them. I shall give Prema even if you do not 
ask, for it is your right to share in it. 


Some complain that I did not give them this or that, but that 
is because their vision is limited to the immediate future or the 
present; whereas I know what is in store and so I have to safeguard 
them from greater grief. They even blame Me and heap abuses but 
I will not give them up. I am not influenced by anybody, remember. 
There is no one who can change My course or affect My conduct to 
the slightest extent. Iam the Master over all. 


But let Me tell you this. I speak harsh words and 'punish' some 
persons because I have Prema towards them and I am eager to 
correct them and make them better instruments. If they were not 
Mine, I would have given them up and not cared to take any notice 
of their lapses. I have a right to chastise those who I feel are Mine. 
I also know that they still value My Word and that they will feel sad 
at My being displeased with them. It is due to your wayward mind 
that you are easily wafted away from Me by some silly persons' 
irresponsible words. 


Peace can be won only the hard way 


I sometimes act as if I keep you at a distance; that is done to 
reform you quicker. When a stretch of road is being repaired, I go 
by another detour and I do not use that bit of road for some time. 
The purpose is to let the repair works proceed more quickly so that 
I may use that road again. 


I have come to set the world right and so I have to collect all 
those who are ill and treat them in My "Hospital" and restore them 
to sanity, strength and wisdom and send them back to their stations 
in life. I must intensify your bhakthi, reinforce your faith and rebuild 
the foundations of your moral nature, so that you can counter 
temptations with greater confidence. I have come across people 
who recite a prayer and believe that they are bringing the world 
nearer to Peace with every occasion on which they pray. But peace 
can be won only the hard way, by eliminating violence and greed 
from the hearts of individuals. 


There are cases when the villager in Puttaparthi on getting 
fever tries all kinds of quackery till it becomes too serious; and then 
he runs madly for doctors and drugs to Bukkapatnam and 
Ananthapur and Chikkaballpur and Veilore---until he is forced to sell 
his land to pay off the loan! If only he had taken resort first to a 
qualified doctor all this could have been avoided. So too, do not run 
after Gurus who are themselves suffering from faulty vision and 
householder's troubles: do not beg from people who are themselves 
beggars. Avoid all pride and competition between one another in the 
spiritual life. Let each one march at his own pace; only the direction 
and the road have to be God-wards. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 29-9-1960 


The sages of ancient times divided karma into vikarma (that is 
intentionally done) and akarma (that is done without any intention 
to gain the consequence). Follow the latter and you will save 
yourselves front suffering. All other activities like the earning of 
wealth, of reputation, of fame and publicity result in suffering.. 


Shri Sathya Sai 


31. Sathya Sai Geetha (iii) 


VIDHURA once asked Krishna, "How did you take part in the 
killing of lakhs of soldiers in the Kurukshethra battle? You could 
have avoided all that massacre and saved yourselves a lot of bother 
by simply changing the mental attitudes of the chief participants on 
the Kaurava side, Dhuryodhana, Dhus-sasana, Shakuni and Karna." 
Krishna answered: "My dear man, I have given every one a sum of 
qualities and powers. I have also awarded each a certain amount of 
freedom to utilise them as they feel best. It is by functioning in this 
manner that each one can learn better. By toddling a few steps the 
child's step becomes more certain and firm. Experience is the best, 
though the hardest, school. However much you may say that fire 
burns, unless you actually burn your fingers, you will not believe or 
know what a burn is." 


Prema that thrills and fills the mind with joy and hope. 
Pothana, Nandhanaar, Jayadheva, Gouranga, Thukaaraam, Meera, 
Purandharadhaasa, Thyaaga-raaja and others were thrilled so much 
at the very thought of the Lord, because they had the Prema in such 
a pure and overpowering form. 


Some people may laugh at all this Bhajana and call it mere 
show and exhibition and recommend instead quiet meditation in the 
silent recess of the shrine room. But coming out in company and 
doing Bhajana like this helps in removing egoism; one is not afraid 
of jeering nor ashamed to call out the Name of the Lord. One gets 
inspired by the devotion of others; the company of men with 
kindred sentiments helps to foster the tiny seedling from being 
scorched by the heat of derision. A person will sweep the floor of his 
room with a broom when nobody is looking on; but to do the same 
act, considered /nfra dig, when people are looking on, requires some 
mastery over the ego. 


Do acts which are full of Prema towards all 


Prema is filial piety when directed towards the parents, 
companionship when it flows towards friends, love when it is felt 
towards the partner, respect when it moves one towards elders and 
affection when you are drawn towards children. Bhakthi affects your 


acts in three forms: you do some acts consciously in order to 
demonstrate your love or give vent to the Prema that animates you; 
you do acts as dedicated offerings to enhance the glory of the Lord, 
in a spirit of worshipful humility, as if you are laying at His feet all 
that you are and all that you are capable of, and you do acts which 
are full of Prema towards all as part of your mere existence, 
automatically, without any tinge of self or whiff of violence upsetting 
the perfume of the act. The dedicated act leads on to all activity 
being dedication; the Aanandha makes you feel that your effort has 
been worthwhile. That is the end, the aim, the inspiration. 


How do you give Me Aanandha? By taking to heart what I say 
and putting it into daily practice. Deciding to move high but 
attracted by the low, you betray yourself. Improve your character 
and conduct; when your feelings become cleansed and your 
impulses pure, then you can see My Form in its Reality. I shall tell 
you the thing in a nutshell: Make the intelligence that has to 
understand Me free from crookedness; let it become straight and 
sharp. 


Our relationship is Aathmic, not secular 


I have now fallen into your grasp, the very Treasure that you 
have been searching for, because our relationship is Aathmic, not 
secular or trained. In all other places, your are fleeced; for the 
relationship is based on the purse. In some places, it is based on 
caste or scholarship or some other incidental trait; here, it is the 
attachment that the Naaraayana has for Nara, the Ocean for the 
stream, the Universal for the Particular. Here, every one must 
become unlimited, escaping from bonds that limit him. 


All can become He; no one is outside the Love of the Lord. 
The eighteen-year old boy is asked by the mother to go into the 
kitchen and place a plate before himself, serve himself rice and 
curry and eat. The mother is not callous or unkind; she knows the 
capacity of the boy and treats him as he ought to be treated. 
Another son she accompanies to the kitchen and she sits by his side 
and serves food to him. A third son she seats on her lap and feeds 
with many a song in order to make the process pleasant for the 
child. Do not think that the mother is partial; no, she is only making 


use of her knowledge of the capacity of her children to make them 
progress. That is the nature of maternal love. 


There are some gurus who have so much love, even towards 
their sishyas. When aspirants go to them asking for guidance, they 
praise them to the skies, exaggerate their attainments and grant 
them titles(!) which are paraded by the unfortunate victims. In this 
way, the disciples are burdened by additional handicaps to spiritual 
advance. The Gurus want money for various purposes and so they 
always have an eye on the purses of the disciples. They try to draw 
out the money by the grant of titles or by public praise or by 
promise of public recognition---all worldly baits which are 
derogatory to the principle of non-attachment that they teach and 
stand for. 


Some Gui/ts hunt for moneyed disciples 


Let the Gurus condemn the accumulation of wealth and blame 
them for the misuse they are making of it; let them be unsparing in 
their condemnation; that is the sign of the Guru who knows his 
mission. On the other hand such Gurus ignore and tolerate evil in 
the would-be donors, because they are afraid any condemnation will 
dry up their source of income. Thus, they ruin the disciples by 
desisting from giving them the drastic drug they need, urgently, for 
their spiritual health. It has become a tragi-comedy this hunt for 
moneyed disciples who can be fleeced. It has been developed by 
some sanyaasis (ascetics) into a fine art. The time has come to 
expose and punish such saadhus (noble souls) and that will be one 
task in the Dharmasthaapana (establishment of righteousness) for 
which I have come. The brokers that these Gurus have scattered 
over the country have also to be broken. 


Books, pamphlets, meetings, speeches, talks---all these are no 
good; every one desirous to know Me has to be asked to approach 
Me and experience Me. In order to get an idea of a mountain it is 
not enough if you show a stone and say, "The mountain is a million 
times the size of this." You will have to see an actual mountain, at 
least from a distance. The "beyond" is very incomprehensible. 


Science is like the letter C, always with a gap in the middle, 
with a gap that is unfilled. Religion alone has filled that gap, for it 
knows the Reality that persists in the three stages, in the three 
tenses and in the three worlds. So, religion is the three O'sh a full 
circle, which may enlarge as you know more and more of the glory 
of the Lord, but which is ever Full and complete. At the end of it all, 
we are at the beginning again. 


The miracle is but the natural behaviour of the miraculous. 
That is why I favour you with the experience now and then, so that 
you may get a glimpse of the Glow. I will be in this mortal human 
form for 59 years more and I shall certainly achieve the purpose of 
this avathaar; do not doubt it. I will take My own time to carry out 
My Plan so far as you are concerned. I cannot hurry because you 
are hurrying. 


I may sometimes wait until I can achieve ten things at one 
stroke; just as an engine is not used to haul one coach, but awaits 
until sufficient haulage in proportion to its capacity is ready. But My 
Word will never fail; it must happen as I will. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam., 29-9-1960 


32. Sathya Sai Geetha (iv) 


TODAY, Thirumalaachar read and explained the section on 
JInaanayoga (divine communion through spiritual knowledge) in the 
Sathya Sai Geetha he has composed. No one can say what the real 
nature of creation is, or of Brahman for that matter. Faced with a 
Universe which is fundamentally mysterious, which he feels must be 
endless and beginningless, which he feels must be infinite and the 
scientist has to accept it, though he cannot form a real picture of 
that kind of Universe. He too works on faith, that is to say, believing 
in something which he cannot fully grasp or clearly infer or really 
calculate. That Reality can be demar-cated only by the criterion of 
"Not this." Brahman is posited and described by a process of 
negation or elimination, ‘nethi, nethi' (‘not this, not this'). In this 
artificial world, all is an artificial mixture of name and form, which 
are both artificial too. To get the conviction that this created world 
is mithya (a mixture of truth and falsehood) is very difficult indeed. 
When your head knocks against a wall, it is difficult to believe that 
the wall is half false, that its name and form are a fiction of the 
deluded imagination and that its real truth is the basic Brahma! 


Seven chief characteristics of Bhagavaan 


But this Jnaana (spiritual wisdom) every one has to achieve 
some day or the other. It can be got through Bhakthi or Karma or 
Raajayoga. These three are only different names for the process of 
churning the milk for getting the butter which is immanent in it. 
Once the 


butter has been got and rolled into a ball, it can be kept 
separate and un-impaired in the liquid where it was all the time. 
Similarly, the Jnaan/ (liberated person) can continue in the world 
free from attachment, once he has realised that he is of the same 
substance as the Immanent Brahman. When that Brahman is seen 
through Maayaa, it appears as Saguna (endowed with qualities) and 
is referred to as Lord or Bhagavaan. 


Bhagavaan has seven chief characteristics: A/shvarya, Keerthi, 
Jnaana, Vairaagya, Srishti, Sthithi and Laya (prosperity, glow, 
wisdom, non-attachment, creation, preservation and dissolution). 


Whoever has these seven, you can consider as having Divinity in 
Him. These seven are the unfailing characteristics of Avathaars, of 
the Mahaashakthi (Supreme Power) which persists fully when it has 
apparently modified itself with Maayaashakthi (deluding power). 
Wherever these are found, you can identify Godhead. 


You are also of the same nature as the Aathma with 
Mahaashakthi, but like the Prince who has fallen into a den of 
robbers and is growing up there, the Aathma has not recognised its 
true identity, that is all. Though he does not know, he is 
nevertheless a Prince, whether he is in the palace or in a forest or in 
the robber's cave. Very often, the Prince will have got intimations of 
his real status, a craving for the Aanandha that was his heritage, a 
call from his inner consciousness to escape and become himself. 
That is the hunger of the soul; the thirst for lasting joy. You are all 
like the man who has forgotten his name. The hunger of the mind 
can be appeased only by the acquisition of Jnaana. 


Give your mind strength-giving ideas and courage 


The mind is like a Gurkha watchman; it has to be kept fully 
under control by the master. Besides, the Gurkha will let into the 
mansion only those who are friendly to the master, is it not? So, 
only such thoughts and feelings as are conducive to the welfare of 
the master should be tolerated by the mind. Manas (mind) is the 
chief thing for ‘manush' (man) but its role has to be slowly reduced 
and it should not be allowed to take full charge. Feed the mind, not 
on wicked desires and unworthy plans; but give it strength---giving 
ideas and courage. When the mind is eliminated, then Jnaana 
shines forth in its full glow. 


After the experience of Sarvam Brahmaath-makam, that is to 
say, after the realisation that everything is basically and completely 
Brahman, life cannot be sustained for more than 21 days. Such a 
person is no longer in Mithyaloka (this deluding world); so he 
cannot have any desire or activity. Even food and drink become 
meaningless. How can Brahman need Brahman and Brahman 
recognise Brahman as food and Brahman as drink? All the nuts and 
bolts will fall away; the heart will dry up and the body will collapse. 
Saadhana is just holding the mirror before the self; the mirror, if it is 


clean and polished, reveals the Self and that is Aathma 
saakshaatkaara (Realisation of the Self). All have Aathmic 
uniformity, the truth of every one is the same. 


The company of good men leads you on to the Lord while the 
company of evil men leads you on to the mire of Prakrithi (objective 
world). How to judge good men from bad? Those engaged in 
Japam, Dhyaanam, Yoga and Archana (penance, meditation, 
communion and worship) are Sajjanas (good persons); those who 
do not like these are to be avoided by aspirants who seek Jnaana 
and want joy that comes when the small becomes the big, when the 
momentary joy becomes momentously important, when the 
destitute person inherits vast riches. The good man is soft; he bends 
easily before elders, sages, and Saadhakas. ‘Va ma' (not mine) is 
the attitude of ‘namaskaara' (prostration); it is_ really 
namamaakaara, the declaration that "all that I am and have is due 
to your Grace." 


Eliminate all limiting factors by systematic process 


Spend your time in such Sathsanga (company of good 
people). Brush up your brains by the brush of Viveka. I will not ask 
you to give up your critical faculty; evaluate, discriminate, 
experience and analyse your experience; and then, if convinced, 
accept. Bhakthi, Yoga, Jnaana---these are three doors to the same 
Hall; some come this way, some that way, but all enter the same 
Hall. The Jnaani sees everything as the Divine substance, the 
Bhaktha sees everything as the Lee/a of God, the Karmayogi sees 
everything as the service of the Lord. It is all a question of aptitude 
and taste and the stage of development of reason and emotion. 


As a result of Jnaana, Thirumalaachaar said, Maayaa goes, but 
Maayaa does not 'come' and Maayaa does not 'go.' When a light is 
brought into this hall, you say that light has come and darkness has 
gone, but where has it gone? Put out the light, it is dark! The 
darkness does not come from where it had gone, suddenly, through 
the doors and fill the hall. It is there all the time. It did not go. Only 
the hall was lit and light prevailed. So also, when the Grace of the 
Lord is won, Jnaana will prevail and the delusion of separateness is 
powerless. 


How can that Jnaana be earned? By a slow, systematic 
process, eliminating all limiting factors: greed, lust, pride, envy, hate 
and all the snaky brood of possessive instincts and impulses; by the 
educative influence of Dharma, the body of rules laid down by the 
experience of generations for the regulation of living; by study, 
rumination and practice; by analysis of the experiences of the 
waking, dreaming and sleeping stages; by learning to be a witness 
of all this passing show without getting involved in its tangles; by 
overcoming all trends that divide and differentiate. 


Vision of Oneness is the highest reward 


Prahlaadha never called upon his father or mother, as children 
do, when he was tortured; he did not appeal to the torturers to save 
him; he saw in those cruel henchmen the Naaraayana he adored. 
Everything, everybody, was Naaraayana for him. How then could he 
feel pain or suffer injury? Adhwaitha (non-dualism) in practice, the 
culmination of Bhakthi, Sampuurna Jnaana (fully realised spiritual 
knowledge), liberated him. The vision of this Ekathwa (oneness) is 
the highest reward the Adhwaithin (the non-dualist) seeks. 


All this is a dream and you are all actors. Once in Puttaparthi, 
in a village play, the role of Vaali was assigned to a rich man's son 
and that of Sugreeva to a poor man's son. Then Vaali protested that 
he would not die in the fight with the poor man's son and insisted 
that Raama should befriend and kill Sugreeva instead! The stow 
cannot be changed to suit your whims. When the play says Vaali 
should die and when he has been given that role, he should die 
correctly just as He has decided. Who knows whether praise and 
blame are not part of the play? 


The faults you find in others are in you 


Ignorance of this truth is a serious fault, which has to be 
attended to in the early stages alone. The doctor who cures that 
bhavaroga (worldly disease) prescribed remedies which have to be 
strictly taken; not the entire quantity in one gulp, nor neglect for 
months or years; but the drug as well as the regimen. Some people 
say they have come to Puttaparthi ten or even fifteen times, as if 
walking up to the hospital a dozen times is enough to cure them. 


Every time they may also get a bottle of the necessary mixture, but 
if they do not drink it as directed, what improvement can they 
register? 


The jnaani will not look upon Me as wearing this dress, yellow 
gown today or pink gown tomorrow; he will penetrate to the 
Thathwa (real nature) behind this Form and know that this Body is 
but a dress worn for a purpose. The coming Avathaar of this 
Thathwa will have another dress. You get full Jnaana by the analysis 
of the knowledge of the Sell Unless you know yourself, you cannot 
know Me. 


What you are now doing here is Karmamaarga (path of 
action); what you are uttering is Bhakthimaarga (path of devotion) 
and what you are revolving in your mind is Jnaanamaarga (path of 
spiritual knowledge). What you are experiencing at this particular 
moment is Heaven. For you are now immersed in the joy of listening 
to My words. You have no thought now of the several reasons which 
have brought you here. If I finish My talk and go, you slide into the 
Marthya loka---the world of passing things and fleeting desires, 
vacillating minds and doubting brains. 


Above all, examine your own conduct and faith. See whether it 
is sincere and steady. When you sit in the moving train, you find 
that the trees are moving fast ,along the line; do not worry about 
the trees; see yourself, examine yourself and then you will find that 
it is you that is moving fast. So also, do not blame others and point 
out their faults. The faults you will find are in you, and when you 
correct yourself, the world too becomes correct! Jnaana is the 
discrimination between what promotes one's progress and what 
retards. Be your own Guru, your own teacher; you have the lamp 
with you, light it and march on without fear. 


God's Grace can destroy effects of past Karma 


To reach the stage when even "“Sarvam Brahma Mayam" (All is 
Brahmam) is realised as an understatement (because that 
statement postulates two entities: Sarvam and Brahman, and the 
experience of Brahman alone, IS), you have got to go a long way. 
But do not be down-hearted; the entire encyclopaedia is composed 


of the twenty-six letters of the alphabet and all scholarship begins 
with the mastery of A and B and C and D. I am here ready to help 
you from the first lesson to the last. Do not be weighed down by 
sorrow that your Praarabdha karma is against your progress. The 
accumulation of the effects of your past karma is Sanchitha and out 
of that store what you have selected for present consumption is 
Praarabdha; if wisely used and cooked, the Praarabdha can be 
made sweet, palatable and health-giving. Moreover, God's Grace 
can destroy the effects of past karma or modify its rigour. Never 
doubt that. 


If the law of Karma is so unbreakable, then why recommend 
Saadhana, good living and cultivation of virtue? Praarabdha will melt 
like mist before the Sun if you win the Grace of the Lord! The Grace 
of the Lord is needed for the dawn of Jnaana also. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 30-9-1960 


The consequence of karma can be wiped out only through 
karma, as a thorn can be removed only by means of another. Do 
good karma to assuage the pain of the bad karma which you have 
done and from which you suffer now. 


The best and the simplest karma is the repetition of the Name 
of the Lord; be ever engaged in it. It will keep out evil tendencies 
and wicked thoughts. It will help you radiate love all round you. 


Shri Sathya Sai 


33. Foundation for vidhya 


INTO this tiny hamlet ringed round by '‘pigmy hillocks,' there 
has come from the far-off Himaalayan region, the Governor of Uttar 
Pradesh, Dr. Burgula Raamakrishna Rao, to lay the Foundation- 
stone of your School Building! Really, this should make at least one 
thing clear to you that if sincere Saadhana is done, even the most 
difficult thing can be accomplished. I find the whole village of Put- 
taparthi and even the surrounding villages are immersed in joy 
today. I too am very happy, for it is not simply a building which will 
rise up on this spot. It is a new era of prosperity and of progress. 
He lays the foundation not merely for a Vidhyaalaya (educational 
institution) but for vidhya (education) as well. He has not only 
sacrificed much for the freedom of his country and earned the 
respect and affection of the leaders of the land, but he is also a 
great scholar in many languages and he is an ardent believer in 
Sanaathana Dharma (eternal religion). To have the village school 
begun by him is indeed a very auspicious event. 


You can be proud that Puttaparthi is a village that has become 
famous from the Himaalayas to Kanyaakumari, as the Governor said 
now; but as he himself added, it is a great responsibility as well. 
This function is, I consider, the crown and glow of this year's 
Birthday Festival, for I see the faces of the ryots before Me beaming 
with a new hope and a new joy. The elders of this village have at 
last realised what they have missed all these years due to their own 
defects. 


Puttaparthi is revered with gratitude by millions 


To secure pearls, one has to go far out into the sea and dive 
deep; simply wading in the shallows and declaring that the pearl- 
stow is a myth is a sign of foolishness. So too, the elders here 
wondered so long at all stories of My Mahimaas (miracle powers) 
and could not make use of the splendid chances that lay at their 
very doors. They saw only the Light, but did not feel the warmth. 
That itself proves that though they were physically so near, they 
were very distant for all practical purposes. They could see the 
Splendour, the Glory, the Effulgence but they did not come near and 
share the Warmth of my Heart. 


Entangled in the false and the fleeting, men lose the golden 
chance of grasping the true and the lasting. They refuse to 
recognise the fruits that grow on the branches of the tree in their 
own garden; they pluck it before it becomes ripe and they go about 
decrying it as sour. Such is the fate of man; he has always ignored 
God and pursued the paltry joys of pride and greed. 


As a matter of fact, Puttaparthi is a name revered and 
remembered with gratitude by millions today and it will be treasured 
in history as an immortal name. No other village has such fortune, 
but you have been slow to recognise this. For twenty years now, 
efforts have been made to calm the waves of faction in this village, 
years during which many other villages sought and won My Grace 
and Blessings. There have been many occasions on which bhakthas 
(devotees) have pleaded with Me to move out of this miasma and 
settle down in Bangalore or Madras or some such town, or if I 
preferred, some other quiet rural spot. But let Me tell you here and 
now; this tree has to grow at the very spot where it sprouted; it will 
not be transplanted; I shall not give up this place, no, not I. This 
place will be transformed into Thirupathi and those who are little 
boys and girls today will surely see it in all its magnificence. 


Three requisites essential for all advancement 


It is not only this village but every village is sick with 
animosities and petty quarrels and vendettas. As the Governor said, 
many attempts have been made during the last fifteen years to 
better the lot of the ryot but the result has been far below 
expectations and expense. For there is an absence of three 
requisites essential for all advancement: Dhairyam, Uthsaaham and 
Aanandham (courage, enthusiasm and joy). The very Nature around 
is enough to instill awe and wonder, to impart courage, to inspire 
enthusiasm and to fill you with joy! It is a type of false vairaagyam 
(non-attachment) to close the eye to all the beauty, all the plenty, 
all the mercy that you receive from Mother Nature, and to mope in 
sorrow, bewailing your lot. 


You should be thankful to the Lord for the chance given to you 
to serve others and yourselves, to observe His Glory and His Grace 
and you should look upon all as brothers and sisters. If instead, you 


poison your hearts with hate and revel in quarrels; well, what is the 
great profit you have earned thereby? Have you at least derived 
peace and content, following that course? You have reaped only 
further hate and further waste. 


The villages surrounding this place have gainfully made use of 
the help given by Government and advanced in some ways; but 
here, you need not stretch your hands before Government; you 
have a Kalpavriksha (wish-fulfilling tree) ready to give you all that 
you want! You have the Lord, who protects and promotes all. The 
virtues of the people are the treasures of the State; the smarana 
(remembering) of the Name of the Lord is the root of all virtues. 


The royal road to ensure joy and peace 


Naaradha, who was afflicted with conceit that there was no 
other who had dedicated his very breath to the recital of the Name, 
was once humiliated to find that a ryot, who managed to repeat the 
Name three times(!) in the course of his over-whelming multitude of 
distressing preoccupations from cock-crow to dusk, was judged a 
greater devotee! Joy is your birthright; Peace is your inmost nature. 
The Lord is your staff and support. Do not discard It; do not be led 
away from the path of faith by stories invented by malice and circu- 
lated by spite. 


Take up the Name of God, any of his innumerable ones, any 
that appeals to you most and the Form appropriate to that Name 
and start repeating it from now on; that is the royal road to ensure 
Joy and Peace. 


That will train you in the feeling of brotherhood and remove 
enmity towards fellowmen. 


Many seeds are sown in the field by you; some are eaten 
away by ants; some are washed off by rains; some are picked by 
the birds; some are destroyed by pests; but some sprout strong and 
sturdy. This little school will grow into a sturdy High School, believe 
Me. You, on your part, must do everything to uphold the honour 
and reputation of this village. 


When I went to Nainital, right in the midst of the Himaalayas, 
thousands of miles from here, they welcomed Me with an Address 
written and printed in Hindhi and therein they mentioned this village 
of Puttaparthi which they called a Punyakshethra (Sacred Piano)! 
Well, when people actually come here from the various quarters of 
the world, let them see a virtuous community of God-fearing men 
and women, living in peace and content. 


Puttaparthi, 23-11-1960 


The journey of every man is towards the cemetery; every day 
brings you nearer to the moment of death. So, do not delay the 
duty you must carry out for your own lasting good. Recognise that 
you are Shiva (God), before you become a shava (corpse); that will 
save you from further deaths. 


Shri Sathya Sai 


34. The click of the camera 


WHAT Kuppa Bairaagi Shaasthri told you now about Brahma 
Jijnaasa (desire of getting knowledge of the Supreme Soul) and 
Aathma (soul) was very learned and very useful, especially for 
Saadhakas who have reached a certain stage of discipline and 
study, but I know that most of it was beyond you. My task is to give 
you the stuff that you need now, in a form that is both sweet and 
digestible. It is difficult to grasp the idea of the Aathma, about 
which Kuppa Bairaagi Shasthri spoke, in spite of all the quotations 
he gave from all the commentaries on the Upanishaths. 


It is just the gold in all the jewels, the base and the 
substance, however many forms and whatever shapes the jewels 
may have. To become a particular jewel is to lose the Universal 
nature or rather to limit it. To lose the name and form of gold and 
become a jewel is to feel separate, to forget the One. The Aathma 
does not change, no one can transform it. Its nature is hidden by 
various veils of ignorance, such as those which Thyaagaraaja prayed 
Lord Venkatesha to pull apart, in the famous song---"7Thera 
theeyaga raadha." 


The veils are known as mind, intellect, etc. The jewel must 
know it is not, it was not, it will not be oval or square or fiat or 
round, or anklet or necklace or ring or bangle. It must yearn to 
know its real nature and become aware of the basic truth, apart 
from the unreal appearance. When it becomes gold again or rather 
when it ceases to think of itself as anything but gold, it can be said 
to have attained Bliss. 


Love has to begin with a great yearning for Light 


Because you have taken residence in this body, you cannot 
call the body, 'T'. When you sit here in this Hall, you do not call the 
Hall "I"; you know you are separate and that you are here only 
temporarily. When you move about in a tonga (horse-cart), you do 
not say that the tonga is you, do you? You do not take the tonga 
inside when you step down from it on reaching home. So also, you 
have to drop this body when you reach "home". 


The 'T' in you is Paramaathma (Supreme Being) Himself. 'T' is 
the tiny wavelet that plays with the wind for a moment, over the 
deep waters of the sea. The wave gives you the impression that it is 
separate from the azure and timeless ocean below. But it is just an 
appearance, a creation of the two ideas---Name and Form. Get rid 
of the two ideas and the wave disappears in the sea; its reality 
flashes upon you and you know. 


Paramaathma reveals Its Glory as Prema (Love) in man; 
Prema appears in various forms: attaching itself to riches or parents 
or children or one's a life-mate or friends. All these are sparks of the 
same flame and the Love of the Universal is its highest expression. 
This Prema cannot be cultivated by reading guide-books and made- 
easies and learning the steps by rote. It has to begin with a great 
yearning for the Light, an unbearable agony to escape from the 
Darkness and see Light, as in the prayer, "7hamaso maa jyothir 
gamaya." The yearning itself will draw down the Light. The Love will 
grow of itself and by its slow and inevitable alchemy turn you into 
Gold. Prahlaadha was a Raakshasa (demon) but Prema (Love) 
liberated him nevertheless; Jataayu was a bird, Dhruva but a 
toddler, the cowherds of Brindhaavan were unlettered folk; yet, 
through that alchemy, they all shone in the splendour of Prema and 
knew the Source. 


Samskaara will have its say at the time of death 


Once you take on the Name of the Lord which is sweetness 
itself, it will awaken all the sweetness latent in you; when you have 
tasted the joy, you can never for a moment exist without that 
sustenance. It becomes as essential as air for the lungs. You may 
say, listening to some Puraanic (mythological) tales, that it is quite 
enough if the name of the Lord is remembered, however casually, at 
the very last moment of life! But it is a hard task to recall that 
name, if you have not practised it for years. In the surge of 
emotions and thoughts that will invade you at the last moment, the 
Name of God will be submerged unless you learn from now on to 
bring that Name to the top of the consciousness, whenever you 
want it. 


There was a shop-keeper once who was inspired by that tale 
of Ajaamila. He decided to remember the Name with his last breath, 
by a short cut; he named his sons after the various Avathaars 
(divine incarnations), for he knew that he has bound to call them 
when he was about to die. The moment came at last and as 
expected, he called on all his sons by name, one by one. There were 
six of them and so he called the Lord by proxy six times in all. The 
boys came and stood round his cot and as he surveyed the group, 
the thought that came to the dying man's mind, just when he was 
about to die was, "Alas! they have all come away; who will look 
after the shop now?" You see, his shop was his very breath all 
through life and he could not switch it on to God at short notice. 
The Samskara (merit of actions) will have its say, whatever you may 
wish. 


Without faith, no progress is possible 


It is no mean achievement to get the Name of the Lord on 
one's tongue at the last moment. It needs the practice of many 
years, based on a deep-seated Faith. It needs a strong character, 
without hatred or malice; for the thought of God cannot survive in a 
climate of pride and greed. And how do you know which moment is 
the last? Yama, the God of Death, does not give notice of his arrival 
to take hold of you. He is like the man with the camera taking 
Snapshots; he does not warn, "Ready? I am clicking." If you wish 
your portrait to hang on the walls of Heaven, it must be attractive; 
your stance, your pose, your smile must all be nice, is it not? So it is 
best to be ready for the click, night and day, with the name ever 
tripping on the tongue and the glory always radiant in the mind. 
Then, whenever shot, your photo will be fine. 


What is most needed is the cultivation of virtue, and fear of 
sin and the fear of wrong. How do you decide that an act or a 
thought is sinful or wrong? It has to be done on the basis of the 
Shaasthras and of the Voice within. Without faith, no progress is 
possible, even in the material world. Science considers the 
prathyaksha (the seen), as the final proof; but how far can you trust 
the prathyaksha? You respect a person not on the basis of his dress 
or hairstyle which are prathyaksha, but on the basis of his character 
and attainments, which are paroksha (invisible). 


You suffer now because all your attachment is towards 
Prakrithi (Nature), and all your Va/raagya (non-attachment) is 
towards Purusha or God! This has to be reversed! You must 
cultivate non-attachment towards Nature and attachment to the 
Lord. 


All joy is derived from the form-full aspect of God 


I am reminded now of the story of Shankara Bhatta. He was a 
great saadhaka intent on japa and dhyaana to such an extent that 
he was reduced to skin and bone. He worshipped Goddess 
Saraswathi (Goddess of Learning) which is the key to open the 
doors of Mukthi (Liberation). Goddess Lakshmi (Goddess of Wealth) 
saw his sad plight and was moved with great pity. She chided 
Saraswathi for denying Her votary even the common joys of life and 
Herself hid in his leaky hut to pour on him Her Grace. She offered 
him plenty and prosperity, fame and fortune. She derided 
Saraswathi for neglecting to award comfort and joy on Her hapless 
servant. But Shankara Bhatta turned a deaf ear to Her allurements; 
he said, politely but firmly, "No, Saraswathi has blessed me with the 
most precious wealth, the gift of knowledge that liberates me. I do 
not crave Your Grace. Please remove yourself from my presence." 


There is nothing so grand and so sublime as the Lord in whom 
you find refuge. Call on Him by any Name or speak of Him as the 
Nameless one. It is both Sa-aakaara and Mir-aakaara (with Form 
and Formless). The ocean takes the form of the vessel which 
contains a part of it. When that is done, the Formless takes Form; 
the Absolute is reduced to the Particular. You will find out, however, 
that all the joy is derived from the Form-full aspect of God; the 
Formless causes no joy or grief; it is beyond all duality. 


Jewels give joy, not gold. You can experience the Name, you 
can imbibe the Form; you can take them to heart and dwell upon 
them and fill yourself with the joy that they evoke. That is why 
Jayadheva, Gouranga, Raamakrishna and others wished to remain 
ants, tasting Sugar rather than becoming Sugar itself. The Name is 
like the seed, implanted in your heart; when the shower of His 
Grace falls upon it, it sprouts into a lovely tree. All trees that sprout 
from the Names of the Lord are equally lovely and shady. If you 


have Krishna-naama, the vision that you win and the form that you 
evoke is that of Krishna; if you have Raama-naama, it is the Raama- 
form that sprouts. 


Do not allow your mind to waver due to doubts 


Leelaashukha had the Name of Krishna embedded in the well- 
ploughed field of his heart and so, the Lord appeared before him 
with a peacock feather, a flute and a charming mischievous smile! 
He fulfills your innermost aspiration in a flash, if it is compelling 
enough. Only you should not allow your mind to waver due to doubt 
or disappointment. Leave all to Him and be at ease; it is the man 
with no faith that is tossed about on the sea, like a ship caught in a 
storm with neither rudder nor anchor. The Bhaktha bears the ups 
and downs of life, keeping the balance of his mind even. 


You sometimes talk as if the devotee leads a life beset with 
hardships and sorrows and that the man who does not bend before 
a Higher Power is care-free and prosperous; but this is a totally 
wrong idea. The Bhaktha sails on an even keel; he has inner peace, 
a spring of joy which sustains him and keeps him together. 


Bairaagi Shaasthri said that this is an auspicous day for you 
because this is My Birthday; but let Me tell you, I have many 
Birthdays like this. The Auspicious Day for you is the day on which 
your mind is cleansed and not the day on which I took this human 
form. I am ever new and ever ancient, ever noothana (modern) and 
ever sanaathana (ancient). I come always for the sake of reviving 
Dharma, for tending the virtuous and ensuring them conditions 
congenial for progress. Some doubters might ask, "Can 
Paramaathma assume human form?" Well, man can derive 
aanandha only through the human form; we can receive instruction, 
inspiration, illumination only through human language and human 
communication. 


God bows to your will and carries your burden 


I will never force you to take up a particular Name or Form of 
the Lord as your /shtam (wish). The Lord has a million Names and a 
million Forms, and He wants that faith and attachment should be 


evoked in you by any one of them, as you recite the Names or 
contemplate the Forms. That is why they have a string of 1008 
Names for use to worship; the devotee might be drawn closer to the 
Lord while any one Name is being repeated, however distracted or 
inattentive he might be during the rest of the list. Like the coldness 
of the atmosphere which freezes the water, the compelling agony of 
the Bhaktha’s heart solidifies the Mraakaar (Formless Absolute) into 
the shape and the attitude that are yearned for. “Yadh bhaavare, 
thath bhavathi"---"as felt, so fashioned." He bows to your will, He 
carries your burden, provided you trust Him with it. 


Therefore, so act and feel and speak that you get “/ha 
soukhyam, para soukhyam and kaivalya soukhyam" ("joy here, joy 
hereafter, joy everlasting" all three). I bless you all that you get 
more success in the struggle. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, Birthday Festival, 23-11-1960 


You must tread the spiritual path with an uncontrollable urge 
to reach the Goal; you must cultivate the yearning for liberation 
from all this encumberance. 


Remember that you have to dwell in a house built on four 
stout pillars: dharma, artha, kaama and moksha (righteousness, 
wealth, desire and liberation); Dharma supporting artha, and 
moksha being the only kaama or desire. 


However much you may earn either wealth or strength, unless 
you tap the springs of aanandha (bliss) you cannot have peace and 
lasting content. 


Shri Sathya Sai 


35. The dangers of doubt 


Kasthuri now spoke to you about the Puraanic stow of the 
Amrithamanthana (churning of the ocean for gaining the nectar of 
immortality). He said that when the Dhevas (demi-Gods) were 
overcome by conceit, delusion and 7hamas (ignorance), the sages 
cursed them with age, greyness and senility; they became easy 
victims for the Raakshasas (demons); and so, to restore to them the 
lost splendour, the Lord suggested the churning of the Ocean and 
the winning of Amritha (nectar of immortality). 


You have to take this story in its symbolic sense. The 
Puraanas (mythological stories) always deal in parables. Each tale 
has a deeper meaning, something that is more valuable and useful 
than what appears on the surface. This meaning is to be practised 
in daily life; they are not stories told to while away the time. 


Indhra insulted Dhurvaasa because he was blinded by the 
power of office; the curse of the sage forced him to re-think about 
his Reality, to discover his innate status. Then, he found that he was 
Amritham, of the same nature as Parabrahman (Supreme Reality). 
Itself. In fact, he came to know that he was Parabrahman, moving 
about in the delusion that he was Indhra! The churning is the 
symbol of the Saadhana needed to remove the veil of delusion, 
more specifically, the Raajayoga Saadhana (royal path of integral 
Spirituality). 


When the Dhaivi Shakthi (Power of Divinity) declines and evil 
impulses predominate, even the Dhevas fall; they lose their special 
privileges and rights. Once anritha (falsehood) enters into the 
character, you lose contact with Amritha. He dies many deaths, he 
who is false, afraid of truth, blind to his own glorious heritage of 
immortality. 


In their inner impulse, men are sub-human 


Sathya (Truth) is that which is MWthya (eternal). Falsehood is 
poison; truth is nectar. Truth alone confers splendour or 
Dhivyathawarn (divinity). So, when the Dhevas fell a prey to pride 
and attachment to unreality, they had to churn their thoughts and 


impulses, their feelings and emotions, their instincts and inspirations 
and bring out the cream of Truth. The two groups who pulled the 
churning rope are the "forward leading influences and the backward 
pulling influences,"---the Dha/vi and the Asuri (divine and demonic) 
urges. 


As I said, Indhra insulted Dhuurvasa and invited upon himself 
the anger of that sage because of the ignorance of his fundamental 
reality, his ajnaana ignorance), which plunged him in pride. What 
should be done to restore him to sanity is to re-teach him the 
Aathmic (universal spiritual) basis of all the pomp and pageantry of 
office, the evanescence that is immanent in all created things. 


Today, though in outward appearance people are human, in 
inner impulse they are sub-human or Raakshasa; he who has no 
dhaana (charity or sacrifice) in him is called a Dhaanava. Dheva and 
Dhaanava are mixed in the human make-up and now the Dhaanava 
rules the roost. Therefore, man has lost his glow and his power and 
his splendour; he must win them again by Saadhana. So, make 
yourselves pure by incessant striving. 


Man is but a flame of the Eternal Fire 


The partaking of the Amritha created by Me is only the first 
step in this process for you: it does not mean much if you do not 
take the second step and the third and march on towards self- 
realisation. You must have faith in the discipline laid down in 
Sanaathana Dharma and in the ultimate Divine basis of all creation. 
Get convinced that the world can give you only fleeting joy and grief 
is but the obverse of joy. Strive now, from this very moment; for 
time is rushing like a swift torrent. Develop the joy that will not 
decline, the joy that will ever be full. Be true to yourself. Be bold, be 
sincere. The only reality is the twin-bird on the tree, the Jeevaathma 
(individual soul) that tastes the fruits and suffers and the 
Paramaathma (Supreme Soul) that sits unmoved and merely looks 
on. 


Mention was made now of the Mohini-ruupa (form of 
fascinating woman) and the way in which the Asuras were misled by 
the enticing charm of outward form. Now, all this talk of the 


Consorts of the Lord, of Lakshmi, Saraswathi and Paarvathi being 
the wives of the Trinity, are absolutely silly. They reveal only the 
samsaaric (worldly living) glasses that you wear, the projection of 
your worldly fancies on the ‘Heavenly families,’ the weaving of 
stories on the human model for the satisfaction of human cravings. 
These names are only convenient expressions for the Shakthi 
(Divine Power) that is immanent in Godhead. For example, Lakshmi 
is the personification of Dhaya or the Grace of Vishnu; that is why 
she is said to dwell on His breast! So too, Paarvathi is half the body 
of Shiva, inseparably incorporated in Him! The powers of Creation, 
Conservation and Dissolution are co-existent and continuous in 
Godhead. You may ask how the three can co-exist. Well, look at 
electricity! The current can create, conserve as well as dissolve, all 
at the same time, and to the same extent. These Shakthis (divine 
energies) are similarly pictured as inseparably associated with the 
three aspects of the Absolute. Man's duty is to achieve unity with 
the Shiva-Shakthi for he is but a spark that has emanated from it; 
he is but a flame of the Eternal Fire. 


Bakthi must confer patience and fortitude 


Enter upon that task of Saadhana from now on; that is the 
lesson you must learn here. Otherwise, yaathra (pilgrimage) leads 
only to the accumulation of paathra (vessel)---you buy vessels from 
wherever you go: from Raameshwaram, Thirupathi, Kaashi, 
Haridhwar, Madhura, Kumbhakonam. That is the merit you get from 
pilgrimage, a store-room full of vessels. You come from long 
distances, incur heavy expenses, suffer in the cold, in the open or lie 
in the shade of trees and wait for days expecting the longed for 
interview with Me; but in the end, you return and dissipate the 
shaanthi and the santhosha (peace and happiness) you derive from 
this place. 


Bhakthi is something sweet, soothing, refreshing and 
restoring. It must confer patience and fortitude. The Bhaktha will 
not be perturbed if another gets the interview first or if another is 
given greater consideration. He is humble and bides his time: he 
knows that there is a higher power that knows more and that it is 
just and impartial. In the light of that knowledge, the Bhaktha will 
communicate his troubles and problems only to his Lord; he will not 


humiliate himself by talking about them to all and sundry, for what 
can a man, who is as helpless as himself, do to relieve him? It is 
only those who have that implicit faith in God, who will deign to 
communicate only with the Lord and none else, who deserve 
Amritha (nectar of immortality). 


Make Naamasmarana as part of yourself 


The sthula dheha (gross body) should be ever immersed in 
Sathsanga; (holy company) the Suukshrna dheha (subtle body), that 
is, the thoughts and feelings, should be ever immersed in the 
contemplation of the Glory of the Lord. That is the sign of the 
bhaktha. He who shouts and swears and advertises his worries to 
every one he meets and craves for sympathy, such a one can never 
be a bhaktha. Such men are miscalled bhakthas. They make earnest 
men lose faith in Godly ways; earnest men feel they are superior to 
these pseudo-devotees. And this is a fact. It is a great responsibility 
to tread the Godward path. There is no sliding back, no halfway 
stop, no tardy pace, no side lane on such a pilgrimage. It is always 
up and up, right to the crest of the mountain. 


Though your responsibility is greater, take it from Me, you are 
luckier than others. Do not deny with the tongue what you have 
relished in the heart; do not bear false witness to your own felt 
experience. Do not carp and talk cynically of the very thing you 
have revered and adored when the company into which you fall 
start retailing such raillery. It is said that the bhaktha can get the 
Lord everywhere easily but the Lord cannot get a bhaktha so easily. 
Yes, it is difficult to secure a bhaktha who has that unshaken faith, 
that attitude of complete self-surrender. Such an attitude can come 
only by Naamasmarana (remembering God's Name), constant, 
sincere and continuous, as continuous as the act of breathing and 
felt to be as essential for life. That is the japam, the thapas and the 
dhyaanam (silent recital of Lord's name, penance & meditation) you 
all. Naamasmarana \ike this will immerse you ever in Amritha, not 
just a drop on your tongue. 


Saadhana has to be followed from a tender age 


Do you know how much I feel when I find that in spite of My 
arrival and Bodha and Upadhesam (teaching and _ spiritual 
instruction), you have not yet started this Saadhana? You simply 
praise Me and strew compliments; that I am the Treasure-house of 
Grace, the Ocean of Aanandha, etc. Take up the Name and dwell 
upon Its sweetness; imbibe It and roll It on your tongue, taste Its 
essence, contemplate on Its magnificence and make it a part of 
yourself and grow strong in spiritual joy. That is what pleases Me. 


Do not wait until you are past middle age to practise this 
Saadhana; I know of some parents who drag away their sons who 
come to Me when still young; they tell them that they can take up 
religious practices in their old age. These parents do not know the 
extent of the loss. By some stroke of good luck, their children get 
the chance of knowing about the right path for shaanthi and 
santhosha (peace and contentment), but the parents are angry that 
the sons do not find pleasure in the articles that gave them 
pleasure! They feel there must be something wrong in the make-up 
of their sons; they tempt them to drink, to gamble, to exploit, to 
hate---to imitate them, in short--and take them along with them to 
perdition. But a straight plant means a straight tree; a bent plant 
can never grow into a straight tree. Rotten, over-ripe, worm-eaten 
fruits are not fit to be offered to God. Years of sin would have 
warped the character of a person beyond repair. So the saadhana 
has to be followed from a tender age. 


Doubt is a component of the demonic nature 


Faith can grow only by long cultivation and careful attention. 
The old are haunted by the demon of doubt. I know there are many 
here who are afflicted by doubt. They think that I have hidden a 
vessel of Amritha in a spot in the sands previously fixed and known 
to Me only. That is why I now asked some from among those 
people themselves, to decide where we sit on these sands. 


Kastuuri suggested this morning that since the thousands who 
have come to see the Amrithodhbhava (materialisation of nectar) 


cannot get a close view on this flat riverbed, a mound of sand be 
raised, whereon I can sit. 


I did not agree because I knew these doubters would 
immediately infer that the Amritha was hidden previously under the 
mound that was heaped up on purpose! This doubt is truly a 
component of the Raakshasa (demonic) nature, for it eats into the 
vitals of Bhakthi. It clips the wings of joy, it dampens enthusiasm, it 
tarnishes hope. Such men cannot attain the goal even at the end of 
a thousand births. 


When doubt assails you, welcome the chance to see and 
experience and clear the doubt. But do not later deny the very truth 
of which you were once convinced and listen again to the voice of 
hate or foolishness. Do not put faith in the words of men into whose 
hands you will not entrust your purse; as a matter of fact, it is the 
words of such men that are now leading many astray. Really, this is 
a pitiable state of things, is it not? 


Come to Me, eager to learn, to progress, to see Yourself in 
Me, and I shall certainly welcome you and show you the way. You 
will indeed be blessed. All scriptures, all texts, the Geetha which is 
the milk of all the Upanishadhic Cows, are intended to instill this 
thirst into you. 


Do not vacillate and change Name and Form 


The thirst has to be like that of the creeper for the tree-trunk, 
of the magnet for the iron, of the bee for the flower, of the waters 
for a fall, of the river for the sea. The pangs of separation must 
gnaw the heart; the entire being must yearn for union. Do not 
vacillate or change or try a series of Naama and Ruupa (Name and 
Form). That will only fritter away time and energy. Ceaseless 
contemplation of the Lord will give ceaseless taste of Amritha to 
you. 


If you do not follow this path, you are doubly to blame; for 
you have contacted Me. The Form usually creates doubts, for when 
only the Name is there, you can build around it all your fancies, all 
that you want, to complete the picture. Do not be misled by such 


doubts when the Form has come before you; make the moment 
useful, the life worthwhile. 


(Finding that the vast gathering would not be able to see the 
materialisation of the Amritha if He did it while seated on the sands, 
Baaba first created a Shankha (conch), the vessel from which the 
Amritha will now emanate," as He announced. Then He stood up in 
the centre of the crowd and "poured" from that empty Sankha into 
a silver vessel a sparkling stream of sweet and fragrant Amritha, 
which he later distributed to every person who had comet,) 


Chitravathi River Bed, Vaikuntha Ekaadhashi, 
28-12-1960 


What you have heard and seen must be spoken out, without 
exaggeration or abridgement; that is Sathya (truth-speaking). Of 
course, When the mind is controlled, the intelligence is sharpened 
and purified; you see only the One everywhere, in everything, at all 
times; then that One becomes the only truth, which you see, hear 
and speak of---for, there is nothing else to see or hear. 


Sathya Sai Baaba 


Glossary 


Meanings of Sanskrit words used in discussing religious and 
philosophical topics, more particularly used in the discourses by Shri 
Sathya Sai Baaba, reproduced in this volume, are given in this 
glossary. While the English equivalents for the Sanskrit words have 
been given in the text with reference to the context, this glossary 
attempts to provide comprehensive meanings and detailed explana- 
tions of the more important Sanskrit words, for the benefit of lay 
readers who are interested in Hindhu religion and philosophy. 


Aakaasa - Space; ether; the subtlest form of matter. 
Aanandha - Divine bliss. The Self is unalloyed, eternal bliss. 
Pleasures are but its faint and impermament shadows. 
Aaraadhana - Divine service; propitiation. 


Aashrama Dharma - The life of a Hindhu cosists of four stages 
as aashramas. Aashrama Dharma is the code of disciplines laid 
down for the blossoming of spiritual consciousness during the four 
stages---Brahmachaari (the student  celibrate), | Grihastha 
(householder), Vaana-Prastha (the recluse in the forest), and the 
sanyaasin (the ascetic or the monk). 


Aasthika - One who believes in God, scriptures and the Guru. 
Aathma - Self; Soul. Self, with limitations, is jeeva (the individual 
soul). Self, with no limitations, is Brahman (the Supreme Reality). 


Aathma jnaana - Knowledge of the Self which is held out as 
the Supreme goal of human endeavour. 


Aathmaswaruupam - Self embodied; of the nature of Self. The 
real man in us is the Self which is pure consciousness! 


Aathma thathwa - Principle of the Self; the truth or the 
essential nature of the Self. 


Abhayaswaruupam- Fearlessness embodied; of the nature of 
fearlessness. Brahman is fearless. 


Adhwaitha - Non-dualism. The philosophy of absolute oneness 
of God, soul and Universe. 


Aham Brahmaasmi - "I am Brahman". This is one of the great 
Vedhic dicta (Mahaa Vaakyas). 


Ahamkaara - Egotism resulting from the identification of one's 
self with the body. It causes the sense of "I do" and "I experience". 


Ajnaana - Ignorance (which prevents perception of the 
Reality) 


Annamaya kosha - Material or gross sheath of the soul; the 
physical body. 


Antharyaamin. Inner Motivator or Controller. (God is described 
thus because He resides in all beings and controls them from 
within). 


Archana - Ritual worship of a deity, making offerings with 
recitation of manthras and holy names. 


Avathaar - Incarnation of God. Whenever there is a decline of 
Dharma, God comes down to the world assuming bodily form to 
protect the good, punish the wicked and re-establish Dharma, An 
Avathaar is born and lives free and is ever conscious of His mission. 
By His precept and example, He opens up new paths in spirituality, 
shedding His grace on all. 


Bhaagavatham - A sacred book composed by Sage Vyaasa 
dealing with Vishnu and His incarnations, especially Shri Krishna. 
Bhaagavath-thathwam - The truth or essential nature of the Lord. 


Bhajana - Congregational chant group worship by devotees 
with devotional music in which repetition of holy names 
predominates. 


Bhaktha - Principle of God head. A devotee who has intense 
selfless love for God. 


Bhakthi - Devotion to God; intense selfless love for God. 


Bhavasaagaram - Ocean of worldly life. The worldly life of a 
being is considered to be the ocean which he has to cross and reach 
the other side for liberation from the cycle of birth and death. 


Bhoga - Enjoyment; experience; the antithesis of yoga. Bodha 
Perception; knowledge; consciousness. Buddhi - _ Intellect; 
intelligence; faculty of discrimination. Brahma - The Creator; the 
First of the Hindhu Trinity. Brahmaandam - The Cosmic egg, the 
Universe. 


Brahmachaari - A celibate student who lives with and learns 
from his spiritual guide. 


Brahman - The Supreme Being; the Absolute Reality; 
Impersonal God with no form or attributes. The uncaused cause of 
the Universe; Existence - Consciousness-Bliss Absolute (Sath-chith- 
aanandha); The Eternal Changeless Reality, not conditioned by time, 
space and causation. 


Dhama - Self-control; restraining the sense organs which run 
after sense objects seeking pleasure. This is an important discipline 
for an aspirant practising yoga. 


Dharma - Righteousness; religion; code of duties; duty; 
essential nature of a being or thing. It holds together the entire 
Universe. Man is exhorted to practise Dharma to achieve material 
and spiritual welfare. The Vedhas contain the roots of Dharma. God 
is naturally interested in the reign of Dharma. 


Dhyaana - Meditation; an unbroken flow of thought towards 
the object of concentration. It steadies and stills the mind and 
makes it fit for realisation in course of time. 


Dhwaitha - Dualism; the doctrine that the individual and the 
Supreme Soul are two distinct principles. 


Gaayathri manthra - The very sacred Vedhic prayer for self- 
enlightenment repeated piously at dawn, noon and _ twilight 
devotions. 


Guna - Quality, property, trait; one of the three constituents of 
Nature (Saathwa, Rajas and Thamas). They bind the .soul to the 


body. Man's supreme goal in life is to transcend the gunas and 
attain liberation from the cycle of birth and death. 


Guru - Spiritual guide; a knower of Brahman, who is calm, 
desire-less, merciful and ever ready to help and guide the spiritual 
aspirants who approach him. 


Hridhayaakasha - Space in the (spiritual) heart in which the 
Self is imagined in meditation and prayer. 


Ishta Devathu- The chosen deity through which a devotee 
contemplates on God. 


Ishwara - The Supreme Ruler; the Personal God; He is 
Brahman associated with Maayaa but has it under His control unlike 
the jeeva who is Maayaa'’s slave. He has a lovely form, auspicious 
attributes and infinite power to create, sustain and destroy. He 
dwells in the heart of every being, controlling it from within. He 
responds positively to true devotion and sincere prayer. 


Japam - Pious repetition of holy name or sacred manthra, 
practised as a spiritual discipline. 


Jeeva/Jeevaathma - The individual soul in a state of non- 
realisation of its identity with Brahman. It is the self-deluded, bound 
spirit unaware of its own true nature. It is subjected to sensations of 
pain and pleasure, birth and death, etc. 


Jnaana - Sacred knowledge; knowledge of the spirit, pursued 
as a means to Self-realisation. It is direct experience of God, as the 
Soul of the souls. Jnaanam makes a man omniscient, free, fearless 
and immortal. 


Jnaani - A sage possessing Jnaanam (unitive — spiritual 
knowledge and experience). 


Kaarana sareeram - Causal body which carries the impressions 
and tendencies in seed state. It is the sheath of bliss; the innermost 
of the five sheaths of the soul. 


Karma - Action; deed; work; religious rite; the totality of 
innate tendencies formed as a consequence of acts done in previous 
lives. Every Karma produces a lasting impression on the mind of the 


doer, apart from affecting others. Repetition of apar-ticular Karma 
produces a tendency (vaasana) in the mind. Karma is of three kinds: 
(i) Praarabdha: which isbeing exhausted in the present life: 
(ii)Aagami : which is being accumulated in the present life, and (/i/) 
Samchitha, which is stored to be experienced in future lives. Akarma 
is action that is done without any intention to gain the 
consequences; Vikar-ma is action that is intentionally done. 


Koshas - The five sheaths enclosing the soul---sheaths of bliss, 
intelligence, mind, vital energy and physical matter. 


Kshathriya - A member of the warrior caste, one of the four 
social groups (varnas) of the Hindu community. 


Kshethra - Field; the body in which the jeeva reaps the 
harvest of his karma. 


Kshethragna - The Knower of the field; the Spirit; the 
individual knowing Self. 


Leela - Sport; play; the Universe is viewed as Divine sport or 
play. 


Lingam- Sign; symbol. 


Linga sareeram - The subtle body with its vital principles, 
subtle organs, mind, intellect and ego. When the gross body dies, 
the self departs, clothed in the subtle body. 


Loka - Any of the 14 worlds (visible and invisible) inhabited by 
living beings. 


Maayaa - The mysterious, creative and delusive power of 
Brahman through which God projects the appearance of the 
Universe. 


Maayaa is the material cause and Brahman is the efficient 
cause of the Universe. Brahman and Maayaa are inextricably as- 
sociated with each other like fire and its power to heat. Maayaa 
deludes the Jeevas in egoism, making them forget their true 
spiritual nature. 


Mahaabhaaratha - The Hindhu epic composed by Sage Vyaasa 
which deals with the deeds and fortunes of the cousins (the 
Kauravas and Paandavaas) of the Lunar race, with Lord Krishna 
playing a significant and decisive role in shaping the events. The 
Bhagavadhgeetha and Vishnu Sahasranaama occur in this great 
epic. It is considered to be the Fifth Vedha by the devout Hindus. Of 
this great epic, it is claimed that "what is not in it is nowhere". 


Manas - Mind, the inner organ which has four aspects: (i) 
Manas (Mind) which deliberates, desires and feels; (ii)Buddhi, 
(intellect) that understands, reasons and decides; (iii)Ahamkaara, 
(‘I' sense) and (iv) Chitha - (memory). The Mind with all its desires 
and their broods, conceals the divinity within man. Purification of 
the mind is essential for realisation of the Self. 


Maanava - Man, descendent of Manu, the law-giver. 


Manomaya-kosha - Mental sheath. One of the five sheaths 
enclosing the soul. It consists of the mind and the five subtle 
sensory organs. It is endowed with the power of will. 


Manthra - A sacred formula, mystic syllable or word symbol 
uttered during the performance of the rituals or meditation. They 
represent the spiritual truths directly revealed to the Rishis (seers). 
The section of the Vedha which contains these hymns (manthras) is 
called the Samhitha. 


Moksha/Mukthi- Liberation from all kinds of bondage, 
especially the one to the cycle of birth and death. It is a state of 
absolute freedom, peace and bliss, attained through Self-realisation. 
This is the supreme goal of human endeavour, the other three 
being, dharma (righteousness), artha (wealth and power) and 
kaama (sense-pleasure). 


Naamasmarana - Remembering God through His Name; one 
of the important steps of spiritual discipline (saadhana) to obtain 
God's grace and to make progress in the spiritual journey. 


Nididhyaasana - Concentration on the truth about the Self 
after hearing it (sravana) from the guru and reflecting on it 
(manana). It is thus the third step on the Path of Knowledge 
(Jnaana- Yoga). 


Nivrithi Maarga - The path of renunciation that demands 
giving up desires and concentrating on God. The Upanishadhs which 
form the Jnaana-kaanda (the section dealing with unitive spiritual 
knowledge) of the Vedhas, deal with this path. This path is opposed 
to the pravrithi maarga (the path of desire) which worldly men 
pursue, seeking the good things here and hereafter. 


Praanamaya kosha - Sheath of vital energy. It consists of five 
vital principles and five subtle organs of action. It is endowed with 
the: power of action. 


Prakrithi - Nature; the Divine Power of Becoming; also known 
as Maayaa, Avidhya and Shakthi; the world of matter and mind as 
opposed to the Spirit. Prakrithi has three dispositions o|: gunas 
(sathwa, rajas, and thamas) that go into the make-up of all living 
and non-living beings in the Universe, in varying proportions leading 
to the appearance of infinite multiplicity in form, nature and 
behaviour. 


Pranava - Om; the sacred seed-sound and symbol of 
Brahman; "the most exalted syllable in Vedhas ". It is used in 
meditation on God. It is uttered first before a Vedhic manthra is 
chanted. 


Prema -Ecstatic love of God; (divine love of the most intense 
kind). 


Puuja - Ritual worship in which a deity is invoked in an idol or 
picture and propitiated as a Royal Guest with offerings of flowers, 
fruits and other eatables along with recitation of appropriate 
manthras and show of relevant signs. 


Puraanas - The Hindhu Shaasthras (scriptures) in which 
Vedhia truths are illustrated through tales of divine incarnations and 
heroes. Sage Vyaasa is believed to have written them. Of the 18 
Puraanas, Srimad Bhaagavatha is the best known. 


Raamaayana - This sacred Hindhu epic composed by Sage 
Valmeeki deals with the incarnation of Vishnu as Shri Raama who 
strove all his life to reestablish the reign of Dharma in the world. 
The Raamaayana has played a very important role in influencing 
and shaping the Hindu ethos over the centuries. 


Rajas/Rajo Guna - One of the three gunas (qualities or dis- 
positions) of Maayaa or Prakrithi. Rajas is the quality of passion, 
energy, restlessness, attachment and extroversion. It results in pain. 


Thaapam - Pain, misery; distress caused by the three types of 
agencies (thaapathrayam). The agencies are aadhyaadmika 
(diseases and disturbances of body and mind); aadhi bhowthika 
(other beings); and aadhi deivikam (supernatural agencies like 
storm, floods, earthquakes, planets, etc). 


Thamas - One of the gunas (qualities and dispositions) of 
Maayaa or Prakrithi It is the quality of dullness, inertia, darkness 
and tendency to evil. It results in ignorance. 


Saadhana - Spiritual discipline or effort aimed at God 
realisation. The saadhaka (aspirant) uses the spiritual discipline to 
attain the goal of realisation. 


Samaadhi - It is the super-conscious state transcending the 
body, mind and intellect, attained through rigorous and protracted 
Saadhana. In that state of consciousness, the objective world and 
the ego vanish and the Reality is perceived or communed with, in 
utter peace and bliss. When in this state, the aspirant realises his 
oneness with God, it is calledNirvikalpa Samaadhi 


Samsaara -Wordly \ife; life of the jeeva through repeated 
births and deaths. Liberation means getting freed from this cycle. 


Sanaathana Dharma - Eternal religion. A descriptive term for 
what has come to be called Hindhuism. It has no single founder or 
text of its own. It is more a commonwealth of religious faiths and a 
way of life. 


Saamanya Dharma - Code of conduct common to all persons 
in any one social group. 


Shaasthras - The Hindhu scriptures containing the teachings of 
the rishis. The Vedhas, the Upanishadhs, the Ithihasas (epics), the 
Puraanas and the Smrithis (codes of conduct), etc., form the 
Shaasthras of the Hindhus. They teach us how to live wisely and 
well with all the tenderness and concern of the Mother. 


Sathwa - One of the three gunas (qualities and dispositions) of 
Maayaa or Prakrithi It is the quality of purity, brightness, peace and 
harmony. It leads to knowledge. Man is exhorted to overcome 
thamas by rajas, and rajas by sathwa and finally to go beyond 
sathwea itself to attain liberation. 


Sthitha prajna - A man of realisation with a steady, tranquil 
and cheerful mind ever dwelling on God. He is a man of self-control, 
even-minded in all circumstances and totally free from all selfish 
desires. After death he attains freedom from Samsaara. 


Swadharma - One's dharma or duty that accords with one's 
nature. This is an important concept in the Geetha. 


Upaasana - Worship or contemplation of God. 


Upanishadh - The very sacred portions of the Vedhas that deal 
with God, man and universe, their nature and interrelationships. 
Spiritual Knowledge (jnaana) is their content. So they form the 
Jnaana Kaanda of the Vedhas. 


Vairaagya - Detachment; desire and ability to give up all 
transitory enjoyments. 


Varna dharma - The Hindhu community is divided into four 
varnas (social groups), based on gunas and vocations. Braahmana 
(the Custodian of spiritual and moral role), Kshathriya (the warrior 
gray which rules and defends the land), Vaishya (the group dealing 
with commerce, business and trade) Shuudhra (the group devoted 
to labour and service to the community). Each varna has its own 
dharma (varna dharma) restrictions and regulations that strive to 
canalise his impulses and instinct into fields that are special to his 
place in society, controls pertaining to the duties cast upon 


Vedhas - The oldest and the holiest of the Hindhu scriptures, 
the primary source of authority in Hindhu religion and philosophy. 
They are four in number --- the Rig Vedha, Saama Vedha, Yajur 
Vedha and Atharva Vedha. 


Vedhaantha - Means "the end of the Vedhas". It is the 
essence of the Vedhas enshrined in the Upanishadhs. The 


philosophy of non-dualism, or qualified non-dualism, or dualism 
based on the Upanishadhic teachings, is denotedby this term. 


Vishesha Dharma - Code of conduct to be observed in special 
situations; obligations to be discharged on special occasions, or 
when faced with special situations. 


Viinaanamaya kosha - One of the five koshas (sheaths) of the 
soul. It consists of intellect and the five subtle sense organs. It is 
endowed with the power to know. The "I" or subject of experience 
or action is seated here. 


Viveka - Discrimination; the reasoning by which one realises 
what is real and permanent and what is non-real and impermanent. 


Vriththi Dharma - The moral code that regulates and enriches 
a person's profession. 


Yagna - A Vedhic rite or sacrifice. Any self-denying act of 
service in the name of God. 


Yoga - Means union with God, as also the path by which this 
union of the soul with God is achieved. The four important paths of 
Yoga are those of knowledge, action, meditation and devotion. 


