Publisher's Note 


"SATHYA SAI SPEAKS" Series is, according to late Prof. N. Kasturi, the original translator and 
compiler, "a fragrant bouquet of flowers that never fade or falter". These discourses were 
delivered by Swaami out of profound compassion towards seekers of Truth during the last few 
decades. 


The need for revised and enlarged editions of the Series was strongly felt and expressed by 
devotees, especially by foreigners. An attempt has therefore been made in these volumes to meet 
their needs. The discourses have been presented year-wise so that there is no overlapping of the 
discourses delivered in a year, in more than one volume pertaining to the same calendar year. 
This rearrangement has resulted in an increase in the number of volumes, from the previous 
twelve to the present fifteen volumes, covering the years 1953 to 1982. Further new volumes will 
also be added in due course, to cover the discourses delivered after 1982. 


The retention of Sanskrit words on page after page, in the previous volumes, without their 
English equivalents in most cases, was causing great confusion to readers, especially foreigners, 
who were not familiar with Sanskrit. In the present revised volumes, an attempt has been made to 
aid easy reading by replacing Sanskrit words with English equivalents wherever they do not 
affect Baaba's original expression. Sanskrit words have been retained wherever it was felt 
necessary to preserve the essence of the original expression of Baaba and where the English 
equivalents may not do full justice to the text in the particular context. However, in all such 
places the English equivalents have been given along with the Sanskrit words. Some very 
commonly understood Sanskrit words or Sanskrit words which are repeated too often are 
retained without English equivalents to retain the original flavour of Baaba's discourses. Further, 
in this revised volume, phonetic spellings have been adopted for all Sanskrit words uniformly to 
enable readers who are new to these words to pronounce them correctly and to remove any 
vagueness in the pronunciation of these words. 


A Glossary has been added in these revised editions to provide comprehensive and detailed 
explanation of the more important Sanskrit words for the benefit of lay readers who may be 
interested in Vedhic religion and philosophy. It is hoped that this will be of great help to devotees 
to understand more clearly the topics of Baaba's discourses covering a wide spectrum of Vedhic 
philosophy. 


The revised series of volumes are being brought out in a larger format, Demy Octavo size, so 
that they can be companion books with other publications in private libraries. Computerised 
typesetting using a larger size of type, a more readable type face and better line spacing have 
been adopted for more comfortable reading of the books, especially by elderly readers. Very long 
paragraphs have been split into shorter paragraphs and suitable sub-headings have been added in 
every page, to relieve the monotony on the eye and make reading a pleasure. 


Better quality paper, improved binding, dust cover with new design and foil printing and plastic 
cover have been adopted for the revised volumes for better preservation and durable shelf-life of 
the volumes. 


With these changes, it is hoped that the revised and enlarged volumes of "Sathya Sai Speaks" 
Series, will be of great benefit to earnest seekers in spiritual realm. 


Sathya Sai Speaks 


"I've come," He Says, "to wake you all, 

Who sleep the sleep of ages--- 

While one be on the pages 

Of account book of paltry deeds and thoughts, 
Accumulate in defiling piles...and keep you from 
The happy land, 

Above, beyond the sleep, the dream, 

Above beyond the waking stage--- 

The Realm of Restful Peace." 


"I've come," He Says, "to save you all 
Who stray away in silly pride, 

Hunting fantasies in bush and briar, 
With bandaged eyes, in pitch-dark gloom 
And fall into birth-and-death, 

Failure, fracture, faction, fanatic fire." 
"I've come," He Says, "to cure you all 
From petty selfish inanities! 

Trivial tinsel temporalities! 

"Your tweedledums and tweedledees, 
The little loves and hates, 

Peevish paisa rivalries, 

Across dividing line of 'mine' and ‘thine’! 
Brother gouging brother's eye, 

Sister crushing sister's babe--- 


For the sin of wall between!" 


"I've come," He Says, "to show you all 
The Path; a Form, a Name; a Way of life, 
That cools and calms the fevered Mind, 


That stills the waves, 


That fills, fulfils; 
That leads you into He (whom you forgot) 


That follows you into It, from which you came.' 


Here you find on every page 

The Words He spoke for You. 

A few...which I dared translate 

Into uncouth English tongue .... 

The few I gathered from His Lips 

As I sat at the Feet, to catch His voice 


So Sweet, so charged with Grace! 


The solar rays, they open wide 

The buds of Lotus, Waiting for the Warmth! 
May Baaba's Words, their warming touch 
Unfurl the petals of your Lotus heart! 

N. Kasthuri 


1. Climb the right tree 


I KNOW that your hunger has not been fully appeased, even after listening to two excellent 
discourses, radiating Aanandha (bliss), given by these Pandiths (scholars). Both of them said that 
they had no claims to scholarship and that all that they were able to see and speak about was due 
to My Grace. Well, that is but a way they have cultivated, to curb conceit. Hanumaan was not 
aware of his vast strength; he had cultivated that much of self-effacement. Some one had to 
remind him of his skill and prowess and then, Hanumaan would rise to the occasion, with his 
powers fully awake. 


It was also pleaded on your behalf that I should speak to you today, for it is a long time since I 
spoke to you at this place. I feel I must satisfy, that desire of yours. You eau yourselves bhakthas 
(devotees); so, I shall talk to you about the dharma of persons who seek to acquire bhakthi. No 
one can become a bhaktha by naming himself so, nor, by others calling him so. 


Bhakthi involves dedication, with nothing held back; not even a wisp of ego should remain. His 
command alone counts; His Will prevails. Like a drunkard, the bhaktha has no sense of honour 
or decency, pride or conceit. He is a mattha, an unmattha (a mad person), unconcerned with all 
that is unrelated to his ideal. He is deaf to the call of hunger and thirst; he misses steps in logic 
and he calculates wrongly while dealing in the market place. Naaradha says that those full of the 
liquor of ignorance stumble after the shadows of the world, while those drunk with nectar of 
wisdom never move away from the Highest, which they have discovered as themselves. 


Bhakthi must soften the mind 


You saw this in the case of this Shaasthry a few days ago when he came and sat in this Hall for 
the first time, after 30 years of intense study of the Srimath Bhaagavatha. He felt that he had won 
the fruit of years of study and worshipful exposition. He lost all awareness and some of you 
thought he had an attack of epilepsy or something akin to it. I knew that he was in the realm of 
Aanandha. That is why I did not encourage you to take him to the hospital. Even today, you 
noticed how when he started to describe the depth of Divine Grace he was overcome with joy. 


The Lord broke His own plighted word in order to give the Bhaktha the credit for making Him 
do so, Bheeshma had said that he would force Krishna to wield a weapon on the battlefield, 
contrary to His declared intention. Bheeshma would accept defeat only from the Lord! And, so 
Krishna strode towards Bheeshma, brandishing the Chakra (discus) in order to win. The 
Shaasthry was describing this, when he broke down. Bhakthi must soften the mind and keep it 
receptive to the higher emotions, the purifying impulses. 


Every being is a pilgrim to reach God 


Bheeshma was a bhaktha and by winning the Lord's grace, he was clothed with more majesty 
and splendour than any earthly emperor. What majesty have these petty sceptre-holders? They 
cannot claim to have inner peace, inner joy; they know not the joy of sharing love with all. 
Bheeshma surrendered to the Lord, when He challenged him with the Su-dharshana; that is to 
say, when He offers Su (good) dharshana (vision), one must be wise enough to surrender, give 
up all; that is what Bheeshma did. 


Like the kitten calling the mother to where it sits, by mere mewing, the bhaktha has only to 
yearn, to mew with the pain of separation. The growing crop in the fields thirsts for rain; it sees 
the heavy rain-clouds sail across the sky; it cannot rise up to that altitude and drink the life- 


giving rain; nor can it bring the clouds down to the ground. Humanity too sizzles in the hot Sun, 
the unbearable heat of ego and greed. It needs the rain of Grace; it knows it can flourish only 
then in peace and joy. 


As the clouds form droplets and fall upon the fields which they choose to foster, the Formless 
Absolute individualises Itself, assumes Form and comes down in the midst of humanity to save 
and sustain, That is the secret of God Maadhava coming down as maanava (man), the cloud 
taking pity on the crop, parching in the Sun. Once the rains come, the Sun has its uses! So too, 
when the grace of the Lord is gained, then ego and greed can be put to profit by being made to 
flow; into useful channels. 


In past ages, Avathaars (divine incarnations) rid the world of evil, by destroying the few fanatics 
and ogres who wrought it. But, now fanaticism and felony reign in every heart. The number of 
asuras (evil men) is legion; no one is free from that taint; all are wicked to some extent or other. 
Therefore, every one needs correction; every one has to be educated and guided into the right 
path. Every being is a pilgrim destined to reach Maadhava and merge in Him; but most people 
have forgotten the road; they wander like lost children, wasting precious time in by-paths. 


You can win Lord's Grace only by dharma 


Maanava (man) has to become Maadhava (God); that is his destiny, the plan and purpose of his 
being armed, as no other animal is, with the sword of viveka (discrimination) and the shield of 
vairaagya (renunciation). Man is the only animal that can picture a previous existence and 
existences in a series, with impressions accumulating from one to the other. What you see and 
feel in a dream has some basis on what you have seen and felt in the waking state; so too, what 
you see and feel in the present life has, as its basis, what you have seen and felt in other lives, 
previous lives. 


You can win the Grace of the Lord only by dharma. Dharma induces the spirit of self-surrender 
and develops it. Without the training that the practice of dharma gives to your senses, your 
feelings and emotions, you cannot have steady faith and steady detachment. The Lord is Dharma 
conceived as a personality. Raama is known as Vigrahavaan Dharmah (Righteousness 
personified). If you step across the bounds of Dharma and play foul, you cannot win the game of 
life. 


Pursue your task with one-pointed effort 


When Hanumaan was speeding along the sky like an arrow from Raama's bow, many 
temptations attempted to halt him. He did not delay or turn back. He sped on, intent only on the 
task his Lord has set for him. When the Mynaaka mountain rose up to offer him a little rest, he 
trampled it down into the depths of the sea. The mountain rose again and pleaded for the chance 
of serving him for a while. It had decked itself with green orchards and fragrant flower gardens 
for his recreation and recoupment, for when Indhra slashed off the wings of all the mountains in 
past ages, Mynaaka had fled with the help of Vaayu, the father of Hanumaan, and he wanted to 
express his gratitude by granting hospitality to the son; but, Hanumaan pleaded that his master's 
task brooked no delay. A few moments later, Hanumaan was confronted by a terrible monstress, 
Surasa by name. Hanumaan overcame her by skilful tactics and avoided further delay. You 
should pursue your path to liberation with one-pointed effort. 


The Shaasthry said that the Lord wishes that His bhaktha should shine over non-believers; that 
he should be happier, more contented, more courageous than the rest: Bhakthi ought to make a 


man so, But the bhaktha does not cultivate these traits deep enough. He lets the chance go to 
waste. If Shaasthry gives his sons a hundred acres each, one son may tend it well and reap golden 
harvests from it: another may allow it to lie fallow and himself sink into misery. The equipment 
each has brought from previous lives may be different: you cannot blame thee father for this state 
of affairs. Even the blood of one son may be fatal when transfused into another son. Spiritual 
strength will be less in one, more in another, in proportion to the efforts of each, now and in the 
past. 


Let the light within shine 


The pity is that man is not eating the most relishing, the most nourishing fruit, from this Garden 
of Nature. He is climbing the wrong tree and seeking to pluck the wrong fruits: so, his appetite is 
ruined, his taste is vulgarised, his health is destroyed. Only the Glory of the Lord can satisfy the 
hunger of man, for he is part of that Glory. 


Only experience can reveal the sweetness, the sublimity, the purpose of that Glory. 
Parashuraama came across Raama and challenged him when he was returning to Ayodhya after 
his marriage. He had won Seetha by bending and breaking the bow of Shiva: and thereby 
humbled the pride of all the crowned heads that had come seeking Seetha's hand. But, 
Parashuraama was intoxicated with his own achievement, in defeating the Kshathriya rulers in 
twenty-one campaigns. That pride lowered the Divine status of Parashuraama and so, he could be 
felled in a moment by Raama who was to all appearance just a stripling! 


The Lord, it was said, punishes some and favours others. Let Me tell you- the Lord does neither. 
He is like the current in this electric wire. It rotates the fan and makes one's life cooled; it 
operates the electric chair and makes one's life shorter. It has no wish to allay the warmth of the 
atmosphere; it has no eagerness to kill. The Lord's Grace is like the wind that blows. Roll up 
your sails and the boat lies limp and lame; unfurl them, it moves faster and faster. It is like light; 
one person does good using the illumination; another executes an evil plan, with its help. Have 
an "inner day," though an "outer night." Let the light within, shine. When you are unaware of the 
world, though in it, heedless of its call for participation, you are having an outer night and an 
inner day. The Vedhas teach you this Truth and impart the discipline needed to attain this 
fortune. 


The Lord is the Father of all in the world 


The Shaasthry spoke of the value of the Vedhic discipline. The Vedhas declare that if a karma 
(act) is done in a definite way, a definite result will accrue. They give you a pen filled with ink, 
they teach you how to write and what to write. They are so kind. Vedhamaatha is so full of 
maternal love (vaathsalya as they call it). She repeats an injunction, over and over again, just as I 
go on reminding you of the disciplinary rules of the Nilayam, on every possible occasion. So, do 
not set aside the commands of the Vedhas: they are the authentic Voice of the Lord Himself as 
heard and recorded by purified intellects. 


A father gives his wealth to the son, who respects his wishes and obeys his orders, not to the 
rebel son who flouts him. The Lord is Loka-pitha (the Father of All). If you are an Aasthika (a 
person who accepts that there is God and shapes his life accordingly), then you will get the 
Aasthi (wealth or property), if a person is an idiot, ignorant of his true interests, unaware of his 
own downfall, then he is not entrusted with his own Aasthi, a guardian has to take care of his 
affairs until he proves himself able to manage it with care. 


Dwell always on the Glory of God 


It may take many lives for a man to prove that he knows what is best for him, that he is able to 
chalk out his own future without harming himself or others, that he is aware of the pitfalls on the 
way. So, it is best to trust to the experience of sages, who were filled with compassion and who 
were moved by that compassion to illumine the path of liberation. This experience is enshrined 
in the Vedhas. Faith in the Vedhas irrigates the heart and makes it yield the harvest of Universal 
Love. 


The Shaasthras warn you of false steps; they console you in times of stress; they strengthen you 
in distress; they give correct interpretations of moral dilemmas. They prescribe the dress, the 
food, the manner of speech, the methods of social conduct, the mode of mutual behaviour, the 
lines of onward march. They are the conscience of society. 


In this Prashaanthi Nilayam, too, there are certain limits laid down, certain modes of spending 
time usefully, recommended by Me. All who come here, whether longtime residents or new 
arrivals, have to observe them. You have seen Me, and stayed here, and heard these discourses. 
Let Me ask what is the gain? Are you going back, unchanged, unaffected? Dogs do not chew 
sugar cane; they seek a bone, instead, m-fated mortals recoil, when the talk is about God, 
goodness, saadhana (spiritual effort) and Saakshaathkaara (vision of the divine) But, you must 
pull yourselves up into the purer air of aadhyaathmik (spiritual) life, draw yourselves away from 
slums and bylanes and travel on the highway to God. Dwell always on the glory of God; then, 
you will shine in that glory. Adhere to Truth, that is the surest means of removing fear from your 
heart. Prema can grow only in the heart watered by Truth. 


What is Bhakthi and who are Bhakthas? 


Naagayya, even while he plays the role of Thyaagayya, is always conscious that he is Naagayya. 
"Thyaagayya is the role I am playing," he would say. Now, go one step further. When asked who 
you are, say that you are Naaraayana-swaruupa, playing the role of Pullayya or Thimmayya or 
Mallayya, or whatever your name is. So too, every other person is a role played by Naaraayana. 
Naaraayana washed clothes as the dhobi, shapes wood as the carpenter, forges iron as the 
blacksmith, prepares pots at the wheel as a potter. He is all this---and more. His glory is 
inexhaustible. The Avathaar (divine incarnate) is another role He takes up for another purpose. 


The Lord comes as Avathaar when He is anxiously awaited by saints and sages. Saadhus (the 
pious) prayed---and I have come. My tasks are three, or rather two, since Dharmarakshana 
(protection of virtue) and Vedharakshana (protection of vedhic culture) are both practically the 
same. The two are, therefore: Vedharakshana and Bhaktharakshana---fostering of the Vedhas 
and fostering of Bhakthas (devotees). Now, what is Bhakthi (devotion)? Who are Bhakthas? It is 
faith, steadiness, virtue, fearlessness, surrender, absence of egoism. Puuja done however 
elaborately and pompously, is sheer waste of time and energy. Why pluck flowers and hasten 
their death? Some of you go round this Nilayam and satisfy yourselves that you have done so 
many pradakshinas (circum-ambulations), but, they can be called so, only when your mind 
circles this place along with your feet. 


Talk less, talk low if you must 


I notice that while your feet are taking you round by force of habit, your tongues blabber about 
the faults of others, or the price of vegetables, or the dishes you propose to cook for lunch. 
Before you start on your rounds, which you call pra-dakshina, give your mind as dakshina 


(thanksgiving offering) to the Resident of the temple, the Lord. That is the first thing to do, and 
perhaps, the only thing to do. Pradakshina is not to be taken as prescribed, for loosening the 
limbs or giving them some exercise. 


This Nilayam should not be treated with scant reverence. Make the best use of your stay here. Do 
not treat this chance lightly. You come spending much money, and put yourselves to much 
trouble to reach here; but, you do not bloom as fragrant offerings at the Lord's feet by learning 
the saadhana path. The senses have to be curbed into obedient servants of the spirit, For 
example, I insist on silence. Talk less, talk low when you must talk. 


Do not thrust your sorrows, your needs, your problems into the ears of those who have come 
here with their own bundle of such things. They are not interested in adding to their troubles. I 
am here to listen to you, to console you. Do not by loudness of voice disturb those who are 
meditating or reading or writing the name of God. 


All ills are traceable to faulty living 


Meditate if possible, yourselves, alone; read spiritual books if you can; write the name of the 
Lord in the quiet of your comer; if you cannot do these, at least do not disturb others who are 
doing these. Encourage one another to march along the path to God. 


Become entitled to the honoured title of Bhaktha. My glory is spread daily through those who 
call themselves My bhakthas. Your virtue, your self-control, your detachment, your faith, your 
steadfastness---these are the signs by which people read of My glory. Not that I want any such 
prop. 

But, it just happens so, in this world, where men estimate others indirectly, rather than directly. 
Let Me tell you, such bhakthas are very rare. That is the reason why I do not address your 
gathering as, “Bhakthulaaral" You can lay claim to that name only when you have placed 
yourself in My hands, fully, completely, with no trace of ego kept back to cater to your vanity. 


All ills are traceable to faulty living. And what is that traceable to? To ignorance of one's real 
Nature, ignorance so deeprooted that it affects thoughts, words and deeds. The drug that can cure 
it is patented under different names: jnaana, karma, upaasana (contemplation), bhakthi. They are 
all the same in potency, and curative power. The difference lies only in the method of 
administration either as mixture or as tablet or injection. 


Be confident that you will be liberated; Know that you are saved. Go and tell all that you had 
gone to Puttaparthi and that you got there the secret of liberation. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 25-1-1963 


The mind must become the servant of the intellect, not the slave of 
the senses. It must discriminate and detach itself from the body. 
Like the ripe tamarind fruit, which becomes loose inside the shell, 
it must be unattached to this shell, this casement called body. 


Strike a green tamarind fruit with a stone and you cause harm to 
the pulp inside, but, strike the ripe fruit and see what happens. It is 
the dry rind that falls off; nothing affects the pulp or the seed. 


The ripe aspirant does not feel the blows of fate or fortune, it is the 
unripe man who is wounded by every blow. 


Sathya Sai Baaba 


2. Revealing you to yourself 


DEEKSHITH just said that this is a sacred day, not only for the 35 boys who were initiated into 
Brahmacharya (religious studentship) but for Sanaathana Dharma (universal religion) itself, 
since the Upanayanams (investiture ceremony of sacred thread) here are an important step in the 
restoration of Varnashraama dharma (code of conduct prescribed for the four social groups of 
Hindu Society) itself. The study of the Vedhas is the highest type of learning, since it leads to the 
conquest of Death. All other studies deal with the means of living or the surroundings within 
which you have to live; they deal with earning and spending, deriving a little pleasure by this 
trick, escaping a little grief by that other trick. The Vedhas show the path to the Realm of Eternal 
Bliss, where there is no birth or death. 


People learn details about China, Russia and America; they know about the volcanoes of the 
Pacific or the islands of the Arctic regions, but, they do not know an iota about the features of 
their own inner realms. 


Jnaana must grow from within 


There are five such Realms in them; but, they are aware only of the outermost realm, the 
Annamaya kosha (the material casement), in which they are housed; even this is just an 
awareness, not full knowledge. There are deeper layers of which they are ignorant---the 
Praanamaya (sheath of vital energy), the Manomaya (mental sheath), the Vijnaanamaya (sheath 
of intelligence) and the Aanandhamaya (sheath of Divine Bliss). Those who are conscious only 
of the Annamaya kosha, can claim to be only just Kaarnaswaruupa, not Raamaswaruupa 
(embodiment of desire but not of Raama). That is to say, they will be swayed by every gust of 
kaama (desire); they will scarce be able to control desire and rise to the demands made on nobler 
virtues by the Divinity latent in them. They will get proper inspiration and instruction to explore 
and exploit the inner realms only from the Vedhas, and the Shaasthras that expound the Vedhic 
truths. 


The Karma Kaanda is the biggest part of the Vedhas, because Karma (sanctified activity) is the 
means by which the tree blossoms and the fruit matures and grows; the Upaasana Kaanda (the 
contemplative portion) deals with the Upaasana---method by which the fruit ripens; the Jnaana 
Kaanda describes jnaana (spiritual knowledge), the process by which the fruit fills itself with 
sweetness. The first stage takes the longest time; so, it comprises the largest portion; the second 
and the third are quicker by comparison. So, they are shorter. 


The third stage can be accomplished even apart from the tree by keeping the fruit in a warm 
place amidst straw or in a hot room. Man can acquire the sweetness of jnaana by keeping himself 
in sathsang (holy company) or even by remaining in a solitary place, all by himself in dhyaana 
(meditation), for example. But by whatever means, the sweetness (the jnaana) cannot be injected 
from outside; it must grow from within. It is a transformation of the inner nature, won by a 
struggle with inner foes. 


Get rid of grief in this life itself 


Just think of this for a while. You are in this body, in this receptacle, in order to realise the God 
you really are. This body is the cocoon you have spun round yourselves, by means of your 
impulses and desires. Use it while it lasts, to grow wings so that you can escape from it! You 
came into this world crying, announcing your grief at being thrust into it, grief for having lost 


hold on God. Having come with grief, decide not to go with it, from here. Get rid of it in this life 
itself. 


You were told now that the Raamaayana was welling with shoka rasa; the main mood of that 
epic was, it was said, agony, Well, the first step to prayer is a touch of agony. Agony is more 
potent than awe, in leading you Godwards. Grieve for lost chances, lost time; move on, 
everyday, forward to the Goal. Amidst all these absurd loves and hates, the meaningless game of 
having and hoarding, losing and lamenting, building and demolishing castles in the air, you have 
no moment of real calm. 


Everything in the Universe is Divine 


Peace of mind will not descend on you because your room is air-conditioned or your sofa, soft- 
cushioned. It does not depend on your bank-balance; or on the diplomas you have collected. It 
can come only when, you deny the dhaanava (demon) in you all chances of moving you, when 
you encourage the Divine in you to manifest Himself. The dhaanava is the prompter of the 
Asuric traits mentioned in the Geetha. Everything in the universe is Divine; it is; it shines; it is 
lovable. It is asthi, bhaathi and priya; it is Sath, Chith and Aanandha. For, it is the same as the 
Universal, Eternal, Absolute, which is also Sath-Chith-Aanandha (Being, awareness, bliss). 


This is the Upadhesha (spiritual instruction) that these boys got today through the manthra that 
was taught them. Upanayana means, "near-leading," leading near, leading the boy to the teacher, 
taking him to the teacher, the Gum, for this Upadhesha, this initiation. The Guru who can give 
this Upadhesha must himself have transcended name and form, the relative regions of worldly 
ambitions and achievements; he must have experienced the Oneness of all this variety. Such men 
do not put up boards to announce their greatness or compete with others for status or reward. 


These boys are specially lucky: good fortune, of which even they are not aware, has brought 
them here for this ceremony, which will transform them. They have done consciously, in 
previous births, meritorious deeds, the fruits of which they are now tasting, unawares. The Guru 
does not teach anything new; he reveals you to yourself. He trains you to cleanse the mirror of 
your heart, so that you may be reflected in it, without warp or twist. The brahmachaari (celibate 
or spiritual disciple) must obey the commands of the Guru, without flinching and to the full. 


Use your fullest powers to grasp the truth 


While Aanjaneya was bringing the Sanjeevini Mountain, he had to take a course that made the 
citizens of Nandhigraama see him in the sky; Bharatha, who saw the strange sight of a monkey 
carrying a hill, brought him down with an arrow and when he learnt that the hill had the drug 
which could cure Lakshmana who was stricken in battle, Bharatha offered to send the hill 
quicker to where Raama was, by shooting an arrow which could lift it and carry it fast. But, 
Anjaneya said, he could fly quicker than any arrow from the bow of the fastest marksman! Use 
your fullest powers to grasp the truth. Rely on your own skills, your own force; then, they too 
will develop to the utmost demand you make of them. That will give you the greatest joy. 


Many of these boys are today joining the Vedhashaasthra Paatashaala (School of Vedhic 
Studies) here or have already joined it. They will be enthused by each other in their study and 
saadhana. When ten friends gather around you and shout, "Come, come, we shall go," you feel 
like joining them and you gladly go on the adventure. Teachers at the paatashaala, who are 
experienced men, will foster virtues and encourage at every step. I am planting the sapling in 
your heart; they will water it and manure it. I shall also water the sapling, off and on, especially, 


when they are not with you. In order that the lotus may not go dry, the lake has to be full of 
water. Prema is the water that must fill the heart: hatred will make it a parched waste. Have faith 
in your own Aathma (true Self or Being); that is the medicine. Act always in the spirit of service 
and kinship with all; that is the regimen. 


Surrender must be complete without reservations 


To all of you I say, "Let mountains fall; let the sea overwhelm the land; but, do not give up your 
saadhana. And, remember, saadhana is a waste, unless you grow at the. same time in virtue and 
uprightness." If you give up all and surrender to the Lord, He will guard you and guide you. 
When you complain, "Oh! He has not guarded me," I reply, "You have not surrendered." The 
Lord has come just for this very task. He is declaring that He will do so, that is the very task that 
has brought Him! 


Of course, you only talk of Sharanam (surrender), of placing all at the Feet; but you withhold a 
great deal. Your minds are wayward like monkeys that skip and jump from bough to branch. 
Give them to Me; I can make them steady and harmless. When I say, sit, they will sit; when I 
say, stand, they Stand. That is what Shankaraacharya offered to do, he told Shiva that he will 
hand over the monkey that was his mind to Him so that it might be tamed and used for His 
delight. But, it must be a complete handing over; no reservations. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, Upanayanam Day, 3-2-1963 


3. Ask for Me 


TODAY, you had the nectar of Raamaayana from these two Pandiths. They spoke with genuine 
joy when they dilated on the incidents of the Raamaayana. One of them selected today the 
hospitality shown to Bharatha and his retinue by the sage Bharadhwaaja and how Bharatha 
reacted to it. The other Shaasthry who generally talks on other topics, was persuaded this 
evening to select Naaradha's description of the qualities of Raama to Vaalmeeki as the theme of 
his talk. Raamanaama is so sweet that I could see all of you relishing these talks. If a man talks 
about Raama, without himself being inspired by the glory of the Lord it sounds hollow; it is of 
no benefit; it is like the image of a table heavy with edible dishes seen inside a mirror; the dishes 
in the mirror will fill no hungry stomach. No language can picture the actual bliss that the Name 
can confer; words can at best delineate only an atom of that joy. 


Man comes into the world burdened with maaya and its instrument, the mind. The mind 
expresses itself through attraction and repulsion, raaga and dhwesha (affection and hatred), 
towards the external world. Raaga is raajasik (passionate) in its effect; it can be used for one's 
uplift, as Naaradha used it to fix attention on the Lord. Dhwesha is Thaamasik (negativistic), as 
Dhurvaasa expressed it in his dealings with Ambareesha and others. Without Raaga and 
Dhwesha, the mind cannot function at all. If these two are removed, there can be no mind and no 
maaya, and you get fixed in jnaana. Let raaga and dhwesha go and let Raama enter; then there 
will be no manas or maayaa (mind or illusion). 


Have aversion towards evil, pride and egoism 


The Thaitthireeya Upanishath analyses the mind and its behaviour very well. It gives directions 
to merge the mind in God; the weapons with which you can foil the tactics of raaga and 
dhwesha. Use them for positive purposes, as Naaradha and Dhurvaasa did. Have attachment to 
the Lord and aversion towards evil, pride, egoism. Water and fire are incompatible; fire is put out 
by water. But, by means of fire, you can convert water into steam and use it to haul long lines of 
heavy wagons. 


How to overcome raaga and dhwesha? By discrimination, by inquiry, by reasoning. Arrive at 
the truth by this means. Dhuryodhana, though he stuck to falsehood, greed and envy had, 
according to the Mahaabhaaratha, a swell time, flags flying, 


festoons swinging, banquets everyday; but, Yudhishthira, tile eldest of the Paandavas, had, as 
reward for his high morality, exile, poverty and privation. This does not mean that Vyaasa who 
wrote all this is a cheat or a fool. 


Dharma (righteousness) stood firm in spite of hardships; shraddha (faith)was steadied and 
strengthened. In the case of Dhuryodhana, prosperity did not induce caution, humility or 
discrimination. So you revere Yudhishthira and execrate Dhuryodhana today, centuries after they 
died. Vaalmeeki also pictured Raama as wandering forlorn in the forests; but, He never for a 
moment wavered in the path of Dharma. So, He is revered even today as the embodiment of 
Dharma. 


Ask to be examined and your progress recorded 


The Guru-sishya (teacher-disciple) relationship which has been established between these boys 
and those who initiated them into the Gaayathri has also a special. Dharma (spiritual quality} 
which directs the sishya to learn with gratitude and the Guru to teach with love. There are cases 


when the sishya was made to forget all that he had learnt when the Guru was displeased with his 
behaviour. 


India has been Yogabhuumi, Thyaagabhuumi, Vedhabhuumi---the land of Divine Communion of 
renunciation, of spiritual intuition. It spoke of Samaa-dhee, the wisdom that sees all as equal 
repositories of Divinity. Samathwa is just a matter of origin and essence; water in lakes, pits, 
wells and rivers is rain water, though the taste, colour, name and form are different, based on 
where the rain has fallen and how pure is the container. Divine grace is like rain, pure, pellucid, 
falling on all. How it is received and used depends on the heart of man. 


The Lord does not test a man just for fun; He does not pile calamity on calamity because He 
enjoys it. Examinations are held, to measure achievement and award marks and honours. You 
must ask to be examined, so that your progress may be recorded. 


Dheekshith spoke of Bharadhwaaja setting up a Dhurbaar (regal audience) Hall, with a 
bejewelled throne and all other paraphernalia, for the reception of Bharatha. Bharatha mentally 
installed Raama therein and stood behind, framing his brother. Bharatha was applauded for this 
act of genuine detachment by the sage. He was glad the citizens came to know the real nature of 
Bharatha by this means. 


The Avathaar has no blemish, no trace of Guna 


Bharatha did not partake of the rich banquet that the sage had prepared; he was too grieved over 
the turn of events to think of food, drink and sleep. He did not even take a drop of water, before 
he could speak to Raama. The thought of Raama was so intense in him that people saw Raama in 
the form of Bharatha. Ceaseless contemplation had made him an exact replica. That is the depth 
of the bhakthi which is fruitful. But, you praise Me when all goes well and you call Me stony- 
hearted when grief assails you. Grief or joy, whatever the Lord hands out, you must welcome 
with equal calmness. 


It was declared that Raama was born of the paayasam which was brought by the deity from out 
of the sacrificial fire. No Avathaar is born flesh and blood, including this Avathaar. The body of 
the Avathaar is chith (awarenessful) substance; it is not jada (inert)like other materials. The 
embryo of ordinary mortals is jalodhakashaayi (enveloped in watery stuff ; the embryo of the 
Avathaar is encased in Ksheerodakashaayi (the pure white milk of holiness). That is why in the 
make-up of the Avathaar, there is no blemish, there is no trace of Guna. 


Raama's insistence on His vow of hermit-hood 


Dhasharatha wept, for he had no sons to offer ritual food when he moves out into the next world. 
When all are of the form of God and of the substance of God, who is son and who is father, who 
is to offer food to whom, when that high stage of wisdom is reached? Kshamaa (fortitude) is the 
father, Shaantham (peace) is the mother, Vairaagya (renunciation) is the wife, and the Lord is 
the son, the centre of affection. Dhasharatha desired the lower type of son, the male issue, to save 
him from perdition. This desire brought his 'spirit' again before Raama, when Seetha was about 
to enter the fire in Lanka. 


Raavana was killed and Raama asked Sugreeva and Lakshmana to crown Vibheeshana as 
Emperor of Lanka; he pleaded that Raama Himself should bless him on that auspicious occasion, 
but Raama insisted that His vow of hermit-hood prevented Him from entering an inhabited city. 
Then, Raama sent Hanumaan to Seetha and requested him to bring Seetha to the camp in a 
palanquin. Vibheeshana had not thought of that; he was too immersed in other affairs Hanumaan 


bowed before Seetha and got a vision of Lakshmi rising out of the waves of the ocean of milk. 
He felt that, that Vision was enough compensation for all the births he had to undergo. While the 
palanquin neared the camp, there spread everywhere a sublime splendour from it, which 
astonished the vaanara (sub-human or monkey) hordes. Raama sent word that Seetha may alight 
and walk the remaining distance, so that they may fill their eyes with her glory. This is not 
mentioned in the books. 


Two purposes of Seetha's fire ordeal 


When Seetha was about ten yards away, Raama, who is butter when He melts and steel when He 
hardens, said, "Stop, I can accept you only after you pass through Fire." Lakshmana swooned at 
this thunderbolt; the monkeys who had to bring the fuel for the Fire bent under the weight of 
even twigs. The Fire Ordeal served two purposes- to scorch the slanderous tongues, which haunt 
the tracks of Avathaars (Divine Incarnations) at an times; and, to retrieve from the Fire the real 
Seetha who had entered into it, prior to abduction by Raavana. 


Dhasharatha also came there, to assure Raama that Seetha was Purity itself; and also, to satisfy 
his parental craving to see his son. He appreciated the steadfastness of Raama in the respect he 
had for his father's wish; he also saw the vaanaras rise again from the battlefield and gather 
around Raama. The Raakshasas (demonic persons) had already attained liberation for they had 
the vision of God when they drew their last breaths. "The vaanaras came down to be My 
instruments and so they have no death, neither are they born, except at My Command," said 
Raama. 


Man too must become His instrument in order to escape death and birth. He has come, 
imprisoned in the ego, and he has to liberate himself. This can be done only by making him 
aware of the Universal (Aadhaara) basis, lake a man sunk in poverty, dwelling in a hut that is 
raised over a vast underground treasure, man is suffering, with a spring of joy inside him, of 
which he is unaware. I have come to give you the key of that treasure, to tell you how to tap that 
spring, for you have forgotten tile way to blessedness. If you waste this chance of saving 
yourselves, it is just your fate. 


Do not hunger for comfort or riches 


You have come, most of you, to get from Me tinsel and trash, petty little cures and promotions, 
joys and comforts; very few of you desire to get from Me the thing I have come to give, viz., 
Liberation itself; and even among these few, those who stick to the path of saadhana and 
succeed are a handful. 


Many are drawn away by the outer signs of sainthood, the long gown, the beard, the rosaries, the 
matted hair; they keep track of many such who move about in this land and follow them into the 
wilderness. It is very difficult to demarcate clearly the manifestation of the Lord and so, I am 
announcing Myself and Myself describing My mission, the task, the characteristics, the qualities 
which mark out the avathaar from the rest. Do not hunger for comfort or riches; hunger for 
Aanandha. 


If you have faith and if you keep the name of Raama as constant companion, you are in 
Vaikuntha or Kailaash or heaven, all the time. These are not distant regions that have to be 
reached by tortuous travel; they are springs of tranquillity that are in your own heart. You cannot 
have this chance of the nearness of the greatest of all sources of joy in any other place. Here it is 


SO near, so easy to attain, so full of grace. If you fall back, you will seldom get the chance again. 
Ask and get what will save you, not what will bind you. 


You ask from Me a thousand things of the world, but rarely do you ask for "Me" That is why I 
seldom address you as bhakthas (devotees); I usually address you as Divyaathma swaruupulaara 
(embodiments of the Divine), for that is your real swaruupa, this Divyathwam (Divinity). 
Though you do not know it, it is a fact. Therefore, I Call address you so with confidence. I can 
even call you Divya-divya swaruupulaara, but, as for bhakthi, since it is a quality that will make 
you desire the Lord and nothing else. I find you cannot lay claim to it. 


Methods to curb Raavana tendency 


Some of you claim to be Sat bhakthas or Raama bhakthas or Krishna bhakthas. No, unless you 
are perfect instruments in His hand, you do not deserve that name. For example, Bharatha can 
call himself a Raama bhaktha. He lived with Raama naama in every breath; he was with Raama 
in the forest and on the battlefield; he suffered as much as Raama; he was as much an anchorite 
as his brother; so, he too became Shyaama (dark skinned)like Raama. 


Shravan, manan, and nidhidhyasan (listening, Contemplating on what has been listened to and 
practising what is dictated by the mind so transfused), these are the methods by which 
Raavanathwa (the Raavana tendency) has to be curbed. What is that tendency? It is kKaama---lust, 
greed, inordinate desire for things of the sensory world, egoism, and the rest of the fatal brood. 


When the pot of milk on the hearth boils over, you pour cold water on it and it settles down in 
the vessel itself, is it not? Dhurvaasa is the example of the pot boiling over; and Naaradha, of the 
pot of milk that does not. Naaradha had the name of the Lord always on his tongue and so, the 
senses did not establish mastery. If you too keep your senses and your wishes in check, you will 
gain by listening to these talks and by this visit; and, I will be happy that you have taken to the 
path that will give you real strength and joy. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 4-2-1963 


No one can liberate you, for no one has bound you. You hold on to 
the nettie of worldly pleasure and you weep for pain. 


The kite is pursued by crows so long as it carries the fish in its 
beak; it twists and turns in the sky trying to dodge the crows who 
seek to snatch the fish; tired at last, it drops the fish. That moment 
it is free. 


So give up the attachment to the senses, then grief and worry can 
harass you no more. The kite sits on a tree, preening its wings, 
enjoying its happiness. 


You too can be so happy, provided you drop the fish you have in 
your beak. 


Sathya Sai Baaba 


4. The search for Seetha 


SINCE three days, the Pandiths who spoke here have been discoursing on the Raamaayana. This 
is understandable in the case of a specialist like Dheekshith but even the other vidhwaan has 
turned away from his usual topics; he too spoke on the Raamaayana. Of course, the Raamaayana 
is a limitless ocean, from which any number of canals can be dug and water drawn. I was 
wondering whether at least today some one will refer to Krishna thathwam! Not that one gets 
tired of Raama thathwam. The Thathwam (Reality) of the Lord is ever fresh. 


Every life is a new chance, a fresh opportunity for realising the Truth. Yesterday is gone; today 
is the fresh chance, the new opportunity is now; tomorrow, you cannot be sure of Every minute 
is to be welcomed as unique and as valuable, precious, in fact. Do not pine over the chunks of 
time you have wasted; seize the moment that has come within your grasp. 


Search for the Lord as Hanumaan searched for Seetha. He had not seen her; he had only heard 
her being described. He could also judge what she should be like, if Raama could aspire for her 
so deep. It was like the attachment of Purusha for Prakrithi, no less. Like Hanumaan, man too 
should seek the incomprehensible. Aadhishakthi (Primal Energy), among the multifarious 
counter-attractions and distractions of Lanka. 


Through dharma and karma man can attain salvation 


Since the entity is not known, one has to discover it by means of the characteristics it is supposed 
to have. The experience of sages is the only guide, the only map, or chart. That chart is supplied 
by the Bhaagavatha, the Raamaayana, the Puraanas. Have the Lokamaatha (Universal Mother), 
the Thripura-sundhari, in your heart, Her lineaments clear and pure; then proceed bravely into 
the land of raakshasas; and you will succeed. Saturate yourself in the search; establish yourself 
in the faith; then, you can fill yourself with the Bliss. 


Who can describe the signs of the Seetha you seek to find? Only Raama can, for He is the 
master. Take Him as the truest guide. The Vedhas are like that. Lakshmana. Sugreeva and the 
rest are as the Shaasthras, arguing by deduction, not from actual mastery. They did not describe 
Seetha; they could not, for they had not seen. 


When Raama went to the hermitages at Chitrakoota, the sages, saints and Vedhic scholars, all 
gathered round Him and their gratitude at getting His dharshan was as a garland of flowers on 
His breast, flowers of many hues but, all strung on a strand of deep devotion. They knew that 
Raama was both the Seen and the Unseen; that He had come to establish dharma and karma, for 
through dharma, and karma done along the lines of dharma, man is certain to attain peace and 
salvation. The avathaaras insist on dharma it is declared that the purpose of the avathaara is 
Dharma sthaapana (establishment of virtue); but, what is dharma for, if not for liberation from 
the bondage of ignorance? 


Every step of the Avathaara is pre-determined 


The aeroplane has to land at certain places in order to take in those who have won the right to 
fly, by the tickets they have purchased. So too, the Lord has to come down so that those who 
have won the right to be liberated may be saved incidently, others too will know of the Lord, of 
His grace and ways of winning it, of the joy of liberation. There are some who deny even today 
the possibility of air travel; they curse the contrivance; they cavil at it. Similarly, there are many 
who cavil at the Avathaara that has come to save. 


Dheekshith spoke of Kabandha who swore at Raama and wanted to eat Him up alive; but, Raama 
liberated him from his curse and restored him to previous glory. If you condemn the Brahmin 
and the Vedhas then, you drift afar from Me, if you desist then, you are drawn near 
Parashuraama, the inveterate foe of the Kshathriyas appeared before Raama, when He was 
returning to Ayodhya, after the marriage. He was blazing like fire, terrible to behold, for he had 
heard the twang of the bow of Shiva, when Raama broke it in twain. He challenged him to draw 
the bow of his father and to meet him in single combat. But, Raama said, "You are worthy of 
respect; you are a Brahmin and you are related to Vishwaamithra." 


Every step in the career of the avathaara is pre-determined. Raama knew that the coming of 
Suurpanakha was the prelude to the coming of Raavana; He had asked Seetha to enter the fire 
and remain in it as just as an outer manifestation. Even before the human manifestation, the Lord 
had decided that the Shakthi (Energy) must also accompany Him, because Raavana's thapas 
(penance) was so strong that only some major sin could make the blessings he had won from the 
gods null and void. The ordeal of fire through which Seetha was asked to prove herself was not 
an ordeal at all; it was got up only to recover Seetha from the fire in which she had taken shelter, 
in preparation for the Lanka episode. That is the way of the avathaara; it will not go about 
announcing its nature; it will announce itself by deeds. 


Do you yearn for the Lord's mercy and grace? 


Jataayu recognised the divinity of Raama; he said, "Raama! I am content; this body has realised 
the acme of joy; I have seen you, have been touched by you; I have spoken to you and imbibed 
your voice." Only Raama knows the significance of each step of His and the character of the next 
step; He carves His own career. 


You were told that Raama showed man how to bear suffering while Krishna taught him how to 
overcome it. No, Raama was all Aanandha inside, though he was lamenting outwardly for 
Seetha. Raama thathwa (Divine Reality) is known only to Raama. What can the rest know?. At 
best, they can have but a glimpse of Raama's grace. And, even that only if they are immersed in 
intense inner prayer for God. Think of Him, call out for Him; He melts. Whatever form He may 
be shining in, that intensity will make you recognise Him. He may be a cowherd boy, standing 
under a tree, with a flute at his lips. You will see him and adore Him and place Him in your 
heart. You extol the Lord as Love, Mercy, Grace; but do you yearn to earn them? Do you believe 
you can win them? Do you strive to treasure them? 


Have an idea of the place of your last journey 


Take the example of Suurpanakha, the sister of Raavana. She was mutilated by Lakshmana, she 
was rejected by Raama, she was ridiculed by Seetha, humiliated beyond cure. She fled in terror 
to her brother and, what did she ask him to do? She described the heavenly charm, the Divine 
grace of Raama and advised him to fill his heart with the sweetness that Raama exhaled all 
around Him! Raama came to feed the roots of Sathya and Dharma and so, Seetha joined Him 
through correct orthodox rites. There was no Seetha-apaharanam (abduction of Seetha). 


In the Krishna avathaara, the task was to foster Shaanthi and Prema Now, all four are in danger 
of being dried up. The dharma that has fled to the forests has to be led back into the villages and 
towns. The adharma that has ruined the villages and towns has to be driven to the jungle. You 
will have no rest until this is done. For it is your problem, the problem in which each of you is 
vitally involved. 


Now you are unaware of the problem, the problem of Liberation. There was a courtier once with 
a king; he was so idle and ease-loving that whenever the king ordered him to see someone, he 
raised flimsy objections like, "Perhaps, he is away," "If he does not greet me, what shall I do?" 
"What if he gets wild?" "I may not be able to return in time", etc., etc. SO, the king got the word, 
"Fool" embroidered on a broad tape and commanded him to wear it on his brow so that all may 
learn a lesson. The courtier became the laughing stock of the palace. Within a few months, the 
king was on his death-bed and the courtiers vied with one another in weeping over him. 


When the fool came near he told him with tears in his eyes, "I am leaving on my last journey, 
dear Fool." The fool said, "Wait, I shall bring the royal elephant;" but, the king shook his head 
and said, "Elephants will not take me there." The Fool pleaded that the king might use the 
chariot, but, when told that chariots too would be of no avail, he suggested the royal steed as the 
alternative. Even that was of no help, he was told. Then, the Fool innocently asked the king. 
"What is this strange place to which you are journeying?." The king replied. "I do not know." At 
this, the Fool untied the tape from his brow, and tied it on the brow of the dying king. "You 
deserve this more; you know you are going, but, you do not know whither! You know that 
elephants, horses, and chariots do not proceed there; but, you do not know where it is or how it 
looks!" he said. But, you can have some idea of that place if you evaluate your deeds and 
thoughts now in this life. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 5-2-1963 


5. Sweeten and lighten life 


PERHAPS, this Raamanaama Feast is cloying to some tastes; but, it is something that is ever 
fresh, that gives undying sweetness to the heart that is filled with the love of God. One single 
Name will yield fresh sweetness, fresh joy, every time it is rolled on the tongue. I have to tell you 
the things I have told you often before; for, until digestion is well established, medicine has to be 
taken. The face has to be washed day after day. One meal is not the end of the story; you have to 
eat, again and again. 


To get angry is but the effort of a moment but, to get peace, to become unaffected by the ups and 
downs of life, is the result of years of training in Vedhaantha. It can be well established only on 
the basis of the belief that all material things which fall 


within the range of sensuous experience are fundamentally non-existent. They are maaya, 
products of illusion, of the tendency to see many where only One exists. You see corpses 
proceeding one after the other to the graveyard; but you move about unconcerned. You feel you 
are eternal. 


In fact, you are. That is the real you, I mean. Just as the water you drink is eliminated as 
perspiration, the karma that you accumulate is eliminated through karma, gladly borne. So, bear 
both 'mirth and moan' with equal calm. Like the aakaasha (space) in the pot merging with the 
aakaasha outside the pot, silently, fully, with no trace of separation or distinctness, merge with 
the Universal. That is real sharanaagathi (surrender, salvation, liberation). 


Today is the fastest friend, hold fast to it 


Raama is extolled as the ideal son, who acted according to his father's wish, regardless of his 
own happiness. But, Bheeshma is a better example in this respect. He acceded to a whim Of his 
father and in so doing made even a greater sacrifice than Raama. Dhasaratha made Raama an 
exile in the forest for fourteen years to satisfy the claims of Truth while Shanthanu made his son 
give up the throne as: well as a wedded life to satisfy a sensual desire of his senile body. As a 
matter of fact, it is not the obedience to the father's whim ;that is important; it is the adherence to 
sathya and dharma, which is Raama's forte. 


Dheekshith said that kings, because they have to compromise with justice and truth sometime or 
other, usually go to the nether regions. His kingdom is, really speaking, his body. He must evince 
as much interest in the proper upkeep of the most distant part of his kingdom, as he does in the 
upkeep of his toe or scalp. Pain anywhere must be felt and remedied as quickly as pain in any 
part of his body. Such a king never goes to the nether regions. He is indeed thrice blessed. 
Janaka, for example, felt that all was His, not his. Though he had a body and all the 
commitments of kingship, he felt as if he was an A-shareeri (without a body) and A-samsaari 
(without a family). 


It requires all the strength one can collect to carry a load up-hill. The gear, the accelerator, have 
both to operate to haul a car up a steep. The Guru who taught you cannot do anything to haul it; 
he can only guide. The control of the senses, changing the mode of life, the habits of thought, 
have to be done by you. The senses say, "Why struggle? Eat, drink and be merry, while you can," 
but, the Guru says, "Death lands on you without notice; overcome its fear now, before he calls." 
"Now is the true friend; yesterday has deceived you and gone; tomorrow is a doubtful visitor. 
Today is the fastest friend; hold fast to it." 


Be tranquil amidst the storms 


Once when his eldest brother, Dharmaraaja, promised to a mendicant yogi some help for a yajna 
(ritual sacrifice) and asked him to call the next day, Bheema ordered all drums to beat and all 
flags to fly, for, "My brother is certain to live until tomorrow! At least, that is what he believes 
will happen." 


Death stalks your footsteps like a tiger in the bush. So without further waste of time, endeavour 
to give up sloth and anger; be tranquil amidst the storms; mix in tranquil company. Let the 
flagrant smoke of divine thoughts, full of love to all, rise around you; why try to scatter fragrance 
from scent-sticks available in the market? The flame of jnaana (experiential knowledge of 
Supreme Reality) can reduce to cinders the impulses inherited through many births and many 
experiences. In the heat of that crucible, dross is burnt and precious metal is isolated. 


The Lord is sweet in every one of His actions 


Saadhana (spiritual effort) requires regular habits and moderation in food, sleep, and exercise. 
Fasting weakens the intellect and reduces the strength of discrimination. The body, the mind and 
the spirit, all three must be equally looked after. Unless you have "muscles of iron and nerves of 
steel," you cannot contain in your head the tremendously transforming idea of Adhwaitha, of 
your being the Universal itself, the Eternal Reality itself! Lesser strength can only think in terms 
of servitude or subsidiary roles. To see the Truth as Truth, and the untruth as untruth, clarity of 
vision and courage of vision are both needed. 


The seven-walled fort---mamaakaara (feeling of mind and one's own) and the six evil 
tendencies, kaama (lust), krodha (anger), /obha (greed), moha (infatuation), madha (arrogance) 
and maathsarya (jealousy)---has a garden in the centre and a lake, where the hamsa (divine bird) 
plays. It is the image of your own true self; become aware of it and you are saved. You have 
come into this /okha (world) to enter the presence of the Lokesha (Lord of the world). So do not 
tarry in wayside inns, mistaking them to be the goal. The Lord too will be longing for the arrival 
of the lost. He is like a cow yearning for its calf. 


Once Krishna was in a fix; it was the birthday of Rukmini and it was also the anniversary of his 
marriage with Sathyabhama! Both queens were awaiting His arrival in their palaces, but, 
Krishna, to the great mortification of the proud Sathyabhaamaa, went to Rukmini and after 
sharing the feast with her, entered the palace of Sathyabhaama. She was in an inconsolable mood 
of resentment, but, though she did not offer anything to Krishna out of pique, Krishna Himself 
picked up a few jambu fruits from the garden and ate them, appreciating all the while the care 
with which the queen was looking after the garden and the extraordinarily fine taste of every fruit 
that grew in it! Sathyabhaama was thus encouraged to forget the sense of injury. The Lord is 
sweet in every one of His actions, movements, words, gestures. He is sweetness itself. 


This life is a dream you have taken to be true 


Take the instance of Raama. Bairaagi Shaasthry recited a poem about the lotus feet of Raama, 
treading the stony, thorny jungle regions. But Kaikeyi had not realised this, when she asked that 
Raama should go into exile. She learnt about it and was horrified at what she had done only 
when she saw Raama, Seetha and Lakshmana in the hermitage as she watched her son plead with 
Raama to return to His throne. Raama never felt the thorn or the stone for He had devised the 
jungle Himself, in order to infuse faith in the sages and nip their fears. . 


As a matter of fact; what other functions have those feet than warding off the hurdles on the path 
of bhakthas? The bearer alone knows the Weight of the load on his shoulder. The tiniest 
suffering in you causes the same suffering here also. There is an old woman from Salem here, 
since a week; her son, a young man of twenty-five years, is insane and cannot attend to his 
needs. She does not know how much I was affected, but, I was inquiring, "Did he take his 
morning coffee?" And telling her, "Carry food to him and feed him, he is hungry." Her anxiety 
was just one-sixtyfourth of Mine! You think that I pay attention only to those who sit in front, 
but, I see all and I am with all, wherever they may be. Only those who have been blessed will 
know, not the rest. 


No fuel, no fire. No saadhana, no sankalpa (sub-conciousness desire). Pour oil and light the 
wick. You are on a pilgrimage to the beyond, so, you cannot long dwell in this beneath. Some 
time or other, sooner or later, this birth or the next, you have to realise that this is but a dream 
you took to be true; you have to pack up and march. This is asath (non-Being); go towards the 
Sath (Being). This is thamas (darkness): this is the realm of death. Proceed towards the jyothi 
(effulgent Light); proceed towards the realm where immortality reigns. 


Let the desire to be saved sprout in you 


The tree might appear to be dry; but, it will bloom, it will bear fruit; do not despair. I shall make 
it sprout, provided the sap of repentance is still running. Come just one step forward, I shall take 
a hundred towards you. Shed just one tear, I shall wipe a hundred from your eyes. I bless only 
thus! May your Aanandha (Bliss) grow. 


When the night grows chill, you draw the rug tighter around you, is it not? So too when grief 
assails you, draw the warmth of the name of the Lord closer round your mind, Out of all the 
crores of Indians, you alone have gained this contact, through your good luck. Let at least the 
desire to be saved sprout in you; I shall see that it grows and gives fruit, provided you yearn and 
try. To pour the nectar of grace, the vessel must be cleansed. Clean it and demand the nectar; do 
not grieve later that you missed the chance, when it had come within reach. You will not know 
Me in a trice, or even in days. It is something that has to be realised by stages, in due course, 
through viveka, vairaagya and vichakshana (discrimination, non-attachment, clear-sightedness). 


You have been squatting for four hours and some of you might be squirming and feeling an ache 
in the back. But it is no ache. pray that you may get this feeling all through life, for you have 
been receiving the teaching that will sweeten and lighten life itself. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 6-2-1963 


Each has his allotted task, according to the status, taste, tendency 
and earned merit. Do it, with the fear of God and of sin, deep in 
your heart. Welcome pain and grief so that you take both success 
and failure as hammer strokes to shape you into a_ sturdy 
saadhaka. Inner content is more important than outer prosperity. 


Sathya Sai Baaba 


6. Griha or guha? 


THE Deekshith spoke about the glory of the Lord and the other Pandiths gave you detailed 
accounts of the experiences of ideal men who struggled to arrive at the Truth. Every one must be 
interested in knowing about these, for, all should have an ideal to strive for, a goal to be reached. 
Otherwise, life is reduced to aimless wandering. For saplings to grow, soil is essential; for ideals 
to get implanted, knowledge of the struggles and successes of saints and sages is essential. These 
experiences are not uniform; each saadhaka has a different story to tell, depending upon his 
equipment and enthusiasm. So, the vision and the glory are different, though all are divine. The 
mansion of India's glory is built of charming stones, each block being the hardy thapas of some 
sage or other. No one sage can be neglected, for if his attainment is ignored, the wall of the 
mansion would be so much the weaker. 


Take the case of Agasthya, for example. I mention him because some one gave out his name, 
while addressing you. He is called "potborn," but, remember, he and Vashishtha were both 
children of Mithra-Varuna and were both born from the same pot! He put an end to the evil 
deeds of the ferocious giants, Ilvala and Vaathaapi, by just three words, "Vaathaapi jeerno 
bhava." He made the high- peaked Vindhya bow his head and become low; that is why he is 
known by the name, Agasthya! That is to say, he taught humility to the proudest in the land. 


The home must resound to the name of God 


Agasthya is also reported to have drunk off the ocean all in one sip. That is to say, he dried up 
the ocean of samsaara, with its waves of grief and joy, prosperity and adversity, success and 
failure. It is not any sidhi, this feat; it is a parable explaining that though he was a grihastha (a 
married man) with a son who recited the Vedhas as soon as he saw light, he had conquered all 
attachments of the world. Be attached only to the ideal---that is the sign of the sage. 


Kabeer was weaving a peethaambara (yellow silk garment) for the Lord, for his Raama. He had 
to work the loom alone, by hand. He recited Raama Raama Raama and went on weaving 
ceaselessly. The cloth had become twenty yards long, but, Kabeer did not stop; his thapas 
continued unabated the peethaambara was becoming longer. The aanandha of the craft, 
devotion to his Lord, was enough food and drink for his sustenance. When he gave it to the 
temple priest for clothing the idol of Raama, the peethaambara was just the length and breadth, 
not a finger breadth more! Such men are the mainsprings of the joy that spiritual persons fill 
themselves with in India. 


The griha (home) must resound to the name of Govindha; otherwise, it is just a guha (a cave), 
where wild animals dwell. The body needs a house but, the body is itself a house; in that house 
too. the name of Govindha must be heard. Or else, it is a ghata (a mud pot), not a man's body. 


Offer God the fragrant leaf of bhakthi 


An insidious disease is now rampant among most people, namely, unbelief. It sets fire to the tiny 
shoots of faith and reduces life into cinders and ashes. You have no criterion to judge, yet you 
pretend to judge. Doubt, anger, poison and illness---all these have to be scotched before they 
grow. Repeat the Raamanaama, whether you have faith or not; that will itself induce faith; that 
will itself create the evidence on which faith can be built. 


There was a fisherman once, who spread his net over a lake and sat watching, for robbers might 
drag away his catch. He sat on a tree; and for getting clearer vision all round, he plucked leaves 


and pulled off branches It was a bilva tree! The day was Magha Krishna Chathurdhasi, 
Shivaraathri day. Mahaashivaraathri (Great Night of Emergence of Shiva's Radiant Form), in 
fact. And, right under the tree, where bilva leaves fell, there was a Shivalinga! For want of food, 
he starved the night and so, he got the merit of a vigil and of a fast! 


His wife too ardently waited for him in his hut; just when she was about to eat her supper a dog 
peeped in; she felt it was very hungry and so she followed it with the plate of food and fed it, ina 
spirit of puuja. She too kept vigil. In the morning, he went to the temple and prayed that he may 
merge in God; his wife prayed that he may be spared for her sake; but God had both of them 
merged in Him. 


You attach importance to quantity; but, the Lord considers only quality. He does not calculate 
how many measures of "sweet rice" you offered, but, how many sweet words you uttered, how 
much sweetness you added in your thoughts. Offer Him the fragrant leaf of bhakthi, the flowers 
of your emotions and impulses, freed from the pests of lust, anger, etc.; give him fruits grown in 
the orchard of your mind, sour or sweet, juicy or dry, bitter or sugary. 


Your homes must be immersed in highest shaanthi Once you decide that the orchard in your 
mind is His, all fruits will be sweet; that sharanaagathi (seeking refuge for protection) will 
render all fruits acceptable to the Lord and so, they cannot be bitter. And, for water, what can be 
purer and more precious than your tears, shed, not in grief mind you, but, in rapture at the chance 
to serve the Lord and to walk along the path that leads to Him! 


All who aspire to be bhakthas must eschew raaga and dhwesha (attachment and aversion). You 
need not be proud when you are able to sing better or if your puuja room is better decorated. 
There must be a steady improvement in your habits and attitudes; otherwise, saadhana is a vain 
pastime. 


This place as well as your homes when you return must be prashaantha---immersed in the 
highest shaanthi (peace)---undisturbed by any streak of hatred or malice, pride or envy. No 
puuja, thapas, no vratha can equal the efficacy of obedience, obedience to aajna (the command), 
given for your liberation. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 8-2-1963 


Individual reconstruction is much more important than the 
construction of temples. 


Multiply virtues, not buildings; practise what you preach, that is 
the real pilgrimage; cleanse your minds of envy and malice, that is 
the real bath in holy waters. Of what avail is the name of the Lord 
on the tongue, if the heart within is impure? 


Injustice and discontent are spreading everywhere due to this one 
fault in man: saying one thing and doing the opposite, the tongue 
and the hand going in different directions. 


Man has to set himself right and correct his food, his recreation, 
his method of spending his leisure as well as his habits of thought. 


Sathya Sai Baaba 


7. Bend before Prema and Sathya 


DO not grieve that the Lord is testing you and putting you to the ordeal of undergoing them For, 
it is only when you are tested that you can assure yourself of success or become aware of your 
limitations. You can then concentrate on the subjects in which you are deficient and pay more 
intensive? attention, so that you can pass in them too, when you are tested again, You should not 
study for the examination at the last moment; study well in advance and be ready with the 
needed knowledge and the courage and confidence born out of that knowledge and skill. What 
you have studied well in advance must be rolled over and Over in the mind, just previous to the 
examination; that is all that should be done, then. This is the pathway to victory. 


Many grieve : "It is said that darshanam (getting the audience) is paapanaashanam (destruction 
of sin); well, I have had darshan not once but many times, but, yet, my evil fate has not left me 
and I am suffering even more than formerly." True, they have come and have had darshan and 
they have sowed fresh seeds secured from this place, seeds of Prema (Love), Shraddha (Faith), 
Bhakthi (Devotion), Sathsanga (Good company), Sarveshwarachintha (Godly thoughts), 
Naamasmarana (Remembering God's Name), etc., and they have learnt the art of intensive 
cultivation and soil-preparation. They have now sown the seeds in the well-prepared fields of the 
cleansed hearts. Now, until the new harvest comes in, they have to consume the grain already 
stored in previous harvests. The troubles and anxieties are the crop collected in previous 
harvests- so do not grieve, and lose heart. 


2 OK OK OK Ok 


In this sacred land, people have forgotten the real source of sacredness, of holy life, of living in 
peace with oneself and others. Now, the time has come to remind them of it. With jewel in the 
neck, the wearer has been searching for it everywhere else. A person has to hold the mirror to the 
face. The Vedhic clarion call will soon ring in ears of humanity. The Person has come to remind 
man and to redirect him along the True path. 


2 OK OK OK OK 


If any one challenges you to show them one text where the principles of Sanaathana dharma 
(Eternal Religion) are succincity stated tell them about the Bhagavath Geetha. It is the essence of 
the Vedhas (Scriptures, of Eternal Truths) and the Shaasthras and the Puraanas. It is like a bottle 
of fruit-juice obtained from a basket of fruit. It will not get dry or rot like the fruits, for the juice 
has been well extracted and preserved. Its taste and excellence will persist until the end of this 
Yuga (Age) and then it will merge in the Vedhas. 


2 OK OR OK ok 


In the forest of samsaara (worldly life), the body is a tree and the thoughts, feelings and 
imaginations of man are the branches, twigs and leaves. Worry, anxiety and fear are the monkeys 
that frisk among the branches. Grief in its various forms represents the insect pests that destroy 
the blooms. The blossoms are smiles; the owls and crows that infest it are anger, hatred, sloth 
and spite! 


2 OK OK OK Ok Ok 


The Sun never rises or sets; it appears to rise and appears to set, on account of the revolution of 
the earth! What happens when the Sun rises is that the avyaktha (invisible) becomes vyaktha 


(visible), that is all. This series of udhaya (rising) and asthamana (setting) of Sun exist only for 
those who feel it and does not exist for those who deny it. The duality of appearance and non- 
appearance can be overcome by jnaana; so also, when the jnaana-bhaaskara (Sun of 
Knowledge) is known, it is experienced as shining always with undiminished lustre. 


2 OK OK Ok OK 


Lingam means simply "the sign," "the symbol"; it is just a mark, which indicates merging (laya); 
that is to say, the passing away of the mind and all mental agitations and all mental pictures, 
which means, this objective world. Shivaraathri is the day on which the Moon, the presiding 
deity of the mind, is as near /aya as possible and so, just a little extra effort that day leads to full 
success: the saadhaka can thereby achieve complete Manonaashana (destruction of the mind). 
The realisation is that everything is subsumed in the Lingam (the symbol of the Formless). 


2 OK OK OK Ok 


God is a huge fire, and the sparks that fly out from it are the jeevis (individual souls); the jeevis 
are infinitesimal fractions of the same effulgence, having the same splendrous essence as their 
base; but, the wind of vaasanas (impressions left on the mind by past actions) sweeps upon the 
sparks and puts out the light and destroys the heat. But, the same wind cannot put out the fire, it 
can only feed it further and cause its splendour to shine forth in even greater measure, for, the 
Sankalpa (will) of the Lord can only add to His Glory. 


eK OR OK ok 


Just as the dreams you see are shaped by the experiences, cravings and disappointments of the 
waking stage, the experiences of the waking stage are the results of your previous lives. While 
dreaming, you do not relate the incidents and emotions to the waking stage, do you? You feel 
they are un-related, unique, genuine experiences, is it not? So too, you do not realise that your 
joy and grief, your actions, and reactions .in the waking stage are all based on your past lives. 
But, they are so based. 


OK Ok OK ok 


A great painter once came to a Prince and offered to do a fresco on the palace wall; behind him 
came another, who declared that he would paint on the wall opposite, whatever painting the first 
one drew, even if a curtain hid it from view and even if he was not told the subject of the fresco! 
Both were commissioned to the tasks they had accepted. The second man finished his work at 
the very moment, the first one announced that he had completed the task! The Prince arrived in 
the hall, where a thick curtain partitioned off the two artists and their paintings. He saw the 
fresco and admired it very much. Then he ordered that the curtain be removed, and lo, on the 
wall facing the fresco, there was an exact duplicate of the picture that the first man had so 
laboriously painted! Exact...because, what he had done was, polishing the wall and making it a 
fine big mirror! Make your hearts too clean and pure and smooth, so that the Glory of the Lord 
might be reflected therein, so that the Lord might see His own Image thereon. 


2 OK OK OK OK 


The players do not derive as much joy as the onlookers; so develop the attitude of the onlooker, 
the witness (the dhrashta). The batsmen, bowlers and fieldsmen do not get a fraction of the 
pleasure that the 'fans' beyond the boundary, derive. They note each fault and excellence in 
stroke and defence; they appreciate the finer points of the game. So too, to get the maximum joy 


out of this game of living, one should cultivate the attitude of the onlooker, even when one has to 
get embroiled in the game. 


2 OK CK OK Ok 


I will not bend before any one for anything. I am therefore un-afraid. I bend for Prema, I bend 
before Truth, that is all. Do not worry about worldly comforts and ask Me about those things as 
if they are all-in-all. Do not waste your precious life-time in distracting doubts about the 
existence of the Lord in human form, here and now. Cultivate prema towards all; that is the 
greatest service you can do to your self for, all others are but you yourself. You too should bend, 
only before prema and sathya, not before hatred and cruelty and falsehood. 


Sparks from discourses during Shivaraathri, March 1963 


Man did not come here to sleep and eat; he has come to manifest, 
by disciplined processes, the divine in him. That is why he is called 
vyakthi (individual), he who makes vyaktha (clear) the Shakthi 
(power) that is in him---the Divine energy that motivates him. For 
this purpose he has come endowed with this body and the intel- 
ligence needed to control it and divert it to useful channels of 
activity. You must achieve this by Dharma-nishttha and Karma- 
nishttha--steady pursuit of morality and good deeds. 


Sathya Sai Baaba 


8. Devotion of the gopees 


THE meaning of the Krishna Avathaar is beyond your understanding; why, all the Avathaars 
(Divine Incarnations) are inexplicable, in the language of this world, in the vocabulary of 
common men. To attempt it is to encase the ocean in a canal by its side. You can understand it 
only when you become lost to the world and its attachments through the expansion of your 
sympathies and the purification of your motives. The One God-head was experienced by the 
gopees aS immanent in every being; they steadied their minds and installed Him therein. 
Veerabhadra Shaasthry said just now that the Lord will not stay in the heart unless it is 
maintained, fixed and unagitated. Of course, when you place a child in the cradle, it must be firm 
and unmoving; but, once the child is laid, the cradle can be swung, for it is only when it is swung 
to song that "I am glad and you are glad." Remember, the Lord too is a child, personified sath 
chith aanandha, devoid of gunas (qualities). 


When Uddhava came to Gokula, Shaasthry said the cows were fat and full, the gopees were 
happy and joyful and the place was full of fragrance and music." But, the facts were different. 
The place was forlorn and the men and women, disconsolate and helpless; the cattle too were 
overcome with grief. Uddhava brought them all a fresh lease of life. Krishna told him, "Their 
hearts are merged in Mine; their minds think only of Me; they have forsaken even bodily needs 
and they exist only because they hope to see Me again, some day." So how could the gopees be 
as happy and gay as Shaasthry described Uddhava himself was humbled at the sight of their 
complete surrender and the pangs of separation which consumed them. That is the very reason 
why He sent Uddhava to them. 


The simple gopees were wiser than yogis 


Every act of Krishna had a meaning and a purpose and a sweet aptness. The gopees were 
convinced that Krishna was the Lord. Many yogis and ascetics, many Raajas and Mahaaraajas 
among whom Krishna moved had not realised that truth. The unlearned simple cowherds and 
cowherdesses were wiser. When you too feel so, affected by those pangs, you can understand the 
gopees, not till then. For that pain, the message of Krishna is the antidote. "Your grief is caused 
by your limited artificial outlook; you take Me to be a limited bound entity and so you feel :I am 
far away, I am absent, I am by your side, etc. You are hugging a delusion, awake to the Truth 
and establish yourselves in joy." 


The One does not, of its own Free Will, desire to become many. It has no desire. It has no likes 
and dislikes. It is immanent and transcendent. It is all this and more. What then is the reason for 
this manifold appearance? The reason lies in the mind of bhaktha (devotee). You declare. "Baaba 
appeared before me in this Form; I saw Baaba in this Form." But, what happens is you desire that 
vision. I do not change into that Form. The Lord is sugar, sweetness. You may drop it into tea or 
coffee or milk or water. Into whatever thing you put it, it will make it sweet. That is My nature, 
sweetness; My signature. Once It has melted, what remains is neither water nor sugar, but a third 
thing, sherbeth (syrup). But, when your tongue is bitter through envy, hatred and pride, how can 
you taste the sugar? 


Seek God just as you seek food 


The Lord cares for the motive, not the object offered. The tiny leaf from the cooking vessel that 
Dhroupadhi gave Him satisfied His hunger and the hunger of the Universe, along with His---for, 


she saturated it with her bhakthi. The thulasi leaf placed by Rukmini in the scale was able to 
balance the weight of Him who has all the 14 worlds in His belly, for, her intent added so much 
weight to it. The handful of flattened rice that Kuchela took to Krishna was worth less than a 
paisa but, it was suffused so heavily with the devotion and faith of his wife that it brought great 
good fortune. It is possible to fill in an atom of deed, a world of Feeling and the Lord will value 
and appreciate that. 


Krishna is the causeless conditioning, you cannot discover the causes for His acts or deeds; it is 
sheer waste to search for them. If you go on searching for causes and then trying to tread the 
path, you may not get the chance at all. You have come as men in order to reach God, remember 
that. "Why do you go to Madhura-Brindaavan, to Thirupathi, to Puttaparthi?" people stop you on 
the way and ask. Nobody asks you "Why do you take food?" In fact, one has to seek God just as 
one seeks food. Both are necessary for happiness, man seeks happiness, for his originally and 
truly free; he is immortal and so he seeks to overcome death. 


Everyone must rise to the level of the gopees 


Do not blame the Lord for your failure in saadhana (spiritual practice); examine yourself. You 
set the alarm clock at 6 a.m. and go to bed; if it rings only at 10 a.m. you infer that something is 
wrong with its nuts, bolts, springs, wheels, etc. So too, when the expected results do not 
materialise, infer that something is wrong in you yourself, your habits of food, drink, sleep or 
conduct or behaviour or attitude to others. Everyone, be he a Brahmin or Pandith or Student or 
Artist, has to adhere to a strict code of discipline. Without that, victory is beyond reach. You 
must become master of the senses and attain the Mahaashthi (Supreme Energy)from this basic 
Maayashakthi (Deluding Power). In short you too must rise to the level of the gopees. 


The body is assigned to you as a boat to cross the ocean to samsaara (worldly life) but you use it 
for storing things which give worldly joy and do not launch it on the waters; misusing it like that, 
it comes in the way of, all activity that is really conducive to happiness; use it in the way of 
Dharma (righteousness) and success will be yours. Bheema asked Dharmaraaja whether, if 
Dhuryodhana invited him for another game of dice after the 12 years of forest and the one year 
of incognito were over, he would agree and he replied, "I can never deviate from the path of 
Dharma." Since that was his attitude, the Paandavas were helped by the continuous Grace of 
Krishna and the blessings of sages like Maarkandeya and Vedhavyaasa. The Kauravas, on the 
other hand, were debilitated by curse after curse from enraged sages and by one ill-omen after 
another. 


Gopees are best examples of yearning for the Lord 


Your saadhana involves not reading or writing so much as actual experiencing. Raavana was a 
postmaster in the four Vedhas and the six Shaasthras (spiritual sciences); his ten heads were full 
of them. But, of what avail? He had no shaanthi (peace), nor could he give shaanthi to his kith 
and kin. What is the profit if you simply repeat, "Delicious food, delicious food" a thousand 
times? You have to eat, digest and assimilate. You have no deposits on your account in the Bank 
of Bhagavaan's Grace and yet you dare issue cheques, expecting His Grace when in distress! 
Have the deposits or, at least have some property on hand (like service to others, prema (love) 
towards all, Ahimsa (non-violence), etc. so that you can mortgage it and get help. If you have 
neither, why blame the Bank? 


Through your daily avocations and activities you can realise the Lord, believe Me! The gopees 
are the best examples of this, the best proofs. Remember ever the Name of the Lord with agony 
of unfulfilled search and remember ever the beauteous Form with the agony of being forced to be 
away---and, you too can see Krishna in your midst. That yearning must be there: then, the result 
is certain. 


The Lord wants sincerity, not imitation 


Prahlaadha was immersed in that bhaava (thought); when he was thrown downhill, trampled by 
the elephant and tortured by the minions of his father, he paid no heed, for he heeded only his 
Lord; he needed only his Lord. The gopees too when they listened to the murali (flute) lost all 
attachment to the world and to the senses and to the manifold objective phenomenal things; they 
yearned for the sublimest spiritual merging with the Infinite that was always calling on the finite, 
to realise its finiteness. 


By the purification of impulses one gets into the higher stage, when the Mystery of the Divine is 
grasped--the Saalokya (realm of spirituality) stage. Then, by contemplation of the Divine, the 
Saameepya and the Saaruupya (proximity to the Divinity and likeness of the Form of Divinity) 
stages are won. Many great mystic poets attained this height. Jayadheva sang in that strain, but, if 
you sing that song in the same way, Krishna will not appear. He wants sincerity not imitation. 
The name uttered with sincere faith was the flower offering of the gopees; that was the bead of 
their rosary. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, March 1963 


9. A drama within a drama 


THE two Pandiths who spoke have given you substantial food, but, one feels full only after 
drinking a glassful of water in the end; I shall provide the water now. Of course, the water drawn 
from the Shaasthras is not just water, it is nectar. The Pandith referred to some episodes in the 
Raamaayana which cause confusion and doubt. He asked why Dhasharatha chose an occasion 
when Bharatha was absent, to raise the question of the coronation of Raama, why the Ahalya 
incident was allowed to reveal the Divinity of Raama, when all along Raama is depicted as only 
human, why Vaali had to be killed by such a virtuous hero as Raama from behind a tree, why 
Kaikeyi who loved Raama even more than she loved Bharatha suddenly got so concerned about 
Bharatha. The fact is, doubt grows wild in the absence of faith. Faith can be established only 
when one grasps the inner significance of each incident and remark. 


All must reach the goal some day or other 


Dhasharatha did not invite the king of the Kekayas for consultation along with the other leaders 
and princes who were called to give their opinion on the choice of Raama as the heir-apparent, 
for, in that case, subsequent events in furtherance of the Master Plan would have been rendered 
difficult. Why, Dhasharatha did not command Raama to go into exile in so many words; he only 
acknowledged to Kaikeyi that he had granted her two boons and that he was now helpless to 
back out of that grant. It was Kaikeyi who communicated the news to Raama. Silence was as 
good as approval and Raama had to accept silence as the command from His father. Kaikeyi had 
to intervene, so that the purpose of the Avathaar might be fulfilled. The sense of righteousness in 
Raama was so strong that when he heard of the dilemma in which Dhasharatha was caught, He 
helped him to come out of it unharmed; he insisted he would go into exile as his father had 
promised by implication. 


The Aathmaaraama (Divinity) in every one prompts him to stick to truth and to the moral code; 
you have only to listen and obey and get saved. Some hear even its whisperings; some listen only 
when it protests loudly; some are deaf; some are determined not to hear. But, all have to be 
guided by it, sooner or later. Some may ascend a plane, others may travel by car or board a bus, 
some may prefer a train journey, others may like to trudge along---but, all must reach the goal, 
some day or other. 


Sugreeva forgot his plighted word and indulged himself in the newly won revels of the court; he 
ignored the fact that the jagath (mundane world) is based not on dhana (wealth) but on dharma 
(virtue); so, Raama prodded the snake Anantha, to raise its angry hood and hiss furiously. That is 
to say, he reminded Lakshmana of the ingratitude of Sugreeva and made him furious. An 
ungrateful king is as worthless as an ungrateful subject. 


Line of Grace must be won by saadhana alone 


The Pandith spoke of the death of Vaali, which gave Sugreeva the throne. But, remember, it was 
not Vaali alone that died. His ajnaana (Primal ignorance) also died with him. He saw Raama 
with all His divine glory, as filling the entire Universe, which is but a fraction of His personality. 
The anger of Raama at Sugreeva's dilatoriness is a drama within a drama; for, Raama knew that 
Sugreeva will set about the task of searching for Seetha, as soon as He gives the prompting. 


The avathaars all play a drama, within the drama of this universe. You say that Raama 'wept' for 
Seetha; but, how can an ant judge the depth of the sea? Raama was the greatest hero in history; 


he killed the 14,000 raakshasas led by Khara, Dhushaasana and Thrisiras, all by Himself! Every 
raakshasa beheld in every neighbouring raakshasa a Raama; and, full of fury, he slew the 
Raama and was killed in turn by his neighbour. 


The avathaara behaves in a human way so that mankind can feel kinship, but, rises to super- 
human heights so that mankind can aspire to those heights. The nara thathwa (real nature of 
man) can be transformed into the Naaraayana thathwa (real nature of God), for both are 
basically the same. Only, you have to switch on to the particular wave-length. Know it, adjust 
correctly and the all-pervading will be grasped clearly with no distortion. 


You may read the Geetha many times; but the Geetha (‘line,' in Thelugu) of grace must be won 
by saadhana, The line of fortune that the palmists say will bring success is the result of grace 
alone. You may say that you are the master of the Geethashaasthra, that you have read and 
digested it, but when you belch, the taste and the flavour must be manifest! They are not evident 
at all. Trifles are sought after; temporary benefits pursued; joy and grief alternately tease and 
agitate. The sea of samsaara (worldly life) has to be crossed and all its Waves transcended, with 
the help of Raamanaama, If you seek to know the highest and secure the award of the Lord, 
there can be no place for doubt. The heart should be set on achieving the task of realising the 
Lord within you, as the motivator. The Lord comes in human form to show this. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 10-2-I 963 


Falsehood looks easy and profitable; but, it binds you and pushes 
you into perdition. 


Sathya Sai Baaba 


10. True nature of Raama 


DHARMA (virtue) is not a matter of time and space, to be modified and adjusted to the needs 
and pressures of the moment. It means a number of fundamental principles that should guide 
mankind, in its progress towards inner harmony and outer peace. When man strays away from 
Dharma, he meets with greater harm than even physical slavery. There is a dread now about 
invasion and bondage to the enemy if you are not alert enough and united enough. But the loss of 
Dharma is an even greater calamity, for what is life worth if man cannot live up to the talents he 
is endowed with? 


These principles are called Sanaathana (Eternal), because their origins are not dated, their author 
is not identifiable; they are the revelations made in the clarified intellects of impartial sages. 


They are basic and eternal. They do not represent temporary vagaries. India stood unshaken and 
undaunted against the onslaught of attitudes that were bred in other lands to suit the needs of 
limited societies, because she stuck to the Dharma that was laid down for all time and all men. 
Indian rulers also respected the rigours of Dharma and took the advice of the repositories of 
Dharma and the interpreters of Dharma, those who were purified in the crucible of thapas. They 
recognised the Ruler of Rulers, and sought His guidance by prayer and penance. They knew that 
their Prabhu (Master) was Sarvaantharyaamin (the Eternal Indweller or Onlooker). They were 
taught that He was in full sympathy, not only with the king but even with the lowliest of his 
subjects. Therefore, the rulers of this land were warned to care for the happiness and cure the 
misery of every single individual in the State. 


The Divine is an indivisible entity 


Dharma is the code of conduct which will promote the ideals of each stage of man---learner, 
householder, earner, master, servant, saadhaka, sanyaasi, etc. When the code is distorted and 
man undermines his earthly career, forgetting the high purpose for which he has come, the Lord 
incarnates and leads him along the correct path. That is to say, He comes as Man, to restore the 
principles and re-establish the practice of Dharma. This is what is referred to as 
Dharmasamsthaapana in the Geetha. Among these Forms assumed by the Lord, there is no 
higher or lower, though Pandiths may argue who is better or greater among, say, Raama or 
Krishna! That is but a type of intellectual gymnastics, which gives the Pandiths the keen joy of a 
pugilistic encounter! Veerabhadhra Shaasthry has posed a similar problem now. Let me tell you 
at the outset that the Divine is an indivisible entity, whatever Form it may assume, here or 
elsewhere. 


Raama never deviated from Dharma 


Raama appeared as Maayaa-maanusha-ruupa (illusory human form); He stuck to Dharma in 
daily practice, even from His infancy. He is the personification of Dharma. There is no trace of 
adharma (vice) in him. His Divine Nature is revealed in shaantha guna (calm temperament) and 
karunaa rasa (feeling of love and affection); meditate on Him and you are filled with Prema for 
all beings; dwell on His story and you find all the agitations of your minds quietening in perfect 
calm. When Thaataki, the female demon, had to be killed, He argued, hesitated and desisted, 
until Sage Vishwaamithra convinced Him that she had to be liberated from a curse by His own 
arrow. That is a sign of His Karuna Rasa. 


Raama never provoked another in order to create a convenient excuse to destroy him; on the 
other hand, He gave the adversary every chance to be saved, He carried the message of Dharma 
to the Vaanaraas and the Raakshasas, as well as [o sages like Jaabaali. He accepted the homage 
of Vibheeshana without demur and He announced that He was prepared to accept even Raavana, 
if only he repented his iniquity. “Sathvam vadha" (speak the truth), says the Shruthi; Raama 
stuck to truth, in spite of all temptations. “"Dharmam chara" (Practise virtue), says the Shruthi. 
He never deviated from the path. For example, He had, as you know, to live 14 years in the 
forest, to fulfil His father's behest. So during that period, He did not enter an inhabited town or 
village. He avoided Kishkindha and Lanka, even when the Coronations of Sugreeva and 
Vibheeshana took place. Vibheeshana pleaded with Him very plaintively, saying that only a few 
days remained out of the 14 years, but Raama sent Lakshmana instead. He did not waver or 
overstep. That was the strictness with which He kept the vow. 


Make Raama your Aathma Raama 


Raama is Dharmaswaruupam (Embodiment of Virtue}; Krishna is Premaswaruupam 
(Embodiment of Love). Raama was ever aware of the obligations of Dharma When Dhasharatha, 
running after His chariot in mortal anguish, cried out, "Stop, stop" and called on Sumanthra to 
stop, Raama told him not to. He said, "If he chides you, tell him you did not hear him." 
Sumanthra was in a fix. How could He say something not true? But, Raama explained, "This 
order to stop the chariot comes from a grief-stricken father, whereas the order to take Me to the 
forest came from the King, whose minister you are. You should not hear the ravings of a man 
who has lost his reason through sorrow; you must listen only to the commands of the King." 


Even before the advent of the Avathaar, the stage is set to the minutest detail; Kaikeyi is ready 
with her two indefinite boons, Dhasharatha is ready with the curse of the ascetic on his head, 
entailing upon him a death due to anguish at the separation of his son, the Vaanaras are ready to 
help the Divine Purpose. Seetha is ready risen from the earth, to provide the cause for the 
downfall of Evil. Just as a garland is made of flowers gathered from many plants, flowers of 
many hues and fragrances, so too the Garland of the Divine Story is made up of a variety of 
incidents, a boon, a blessing, a curse to provide the wonderful plot of His Story. 


There are some who say that Raama shows man how to suffer! Well, if a king arranges a play in 
the palace and takes delight in enacting the role of a beggar, and acts it very realistically, do you 
therefore declare that he is suffering the miseries of beggary? Raama is Aanandha (Bliss). 
Aanandha is Raama. If it is not sweet, how can it be sugar? If Raama is suffering, He cannot be 
Raama. A ball of iron cannot burn the skin; but, make it red-hot; it does. That is but an assumed 
role. When the heat subsides it is as cool as ever. 


Raama Naama (name) will save you, if you have at least the Pithru Bhakthi and Maathru 
Bhakthi (devotion to father and to mother)that Raama had. If not, Raama Naama is merely a 
movement of the lips. Meditate on the Raama swaruupa (Form of Raama) and the Raama 
swabhaava (the true nature of Raama), when you recite or write Raama Naama. That will give 
exercise to the mind and it will be made healthy and strong, in the spiritual sense. Make this 
Dharmaswaruupa your Aathmaa Raama, on this Janmadhina (birthday)of Raama. That is My 
advice anti My blessing. 


Rajahmundhry, 1-4-1963 


11. The Fifth Vedha 


GULLAPALLI Buuchiraamayya Shaasthry spoke about the Mahaabhaaratha so well and with so 
much scholarship, as he has been specialising in its exposition for years. The Mahaabhaaratha is 
considered by many as not so conducive to Bhakthi as the Bhaagavatha for instance, or as the 
Raamaayana; but, if once you know the taste, no one will give it up or consider it as of lower 
value. It is called the Fifth Vedha, not without reason. The Vedhas reveal things that are beyond 
the reach of the intellect. The truths declared by the Vedhas are made practicable and simple, 
interesting and instructive, by means of stories and homilies in the Mahaabhaaratha. 


The Puurva Meemaamsa (analysis of Vedhic statements concerning rituals) deals with the 
Pravritthi maarga (path of worldly desire) and the Utthara Meemaamsa with the Nivriththi 
maarga (path of renunciation). Puurva Meemaamsa deals with the kaarana (reason) and the 
Utthara Meemaamsa, with the kaaryam (duty), which is jnaanam. In the Mahaabhaaratha, both 
the paths are fully explained. So, it is called the Fifth Vedha. It is the Vedhasaara (essence of 
Vedha) itself. In Thelugu there is a proverb, "If it is a question of listening, listen to Bhaaratham; 
if it is a question of eating, eat gaarlu." That is because the Bhaaratham gives in sweet simple 
style all the inspiration that a man needs for this world and for the next. 


Where there is Dharma, victory is assured 


The Vedha saadhana has four pillars on which it stands---Sathya, Dharma, Shaanthi and Prema. 
They have to be practised, experienced and their combined result, namely, Aanandha has to be 
enjoyed. Krishna told the Paandavas that He did not know anything about the fateful dice game, 
which started the succession of calamities. "I was in Dwaaraka at the time," He said. Dwaaraka 
means the citadel with the nine gates or dwaaras, the Body itself. Krishna is the witness of 
everything; anything done without His approval or without being dedicated to Him will be a 
failure. 


The five Paandava brothers are the Five Praanas (vital energies), symbolised in story, and with 
the help of the Lord, they won the battle against the forces of evil. Where there is Dharma, 
victory is assured. The Mahaabhaaratha teaches that truth. The Pandavaas had many temptations 
placed before them to slide back into A-dharma; 


but, they held on to the difficult path of Dharma and won. The status of manhood has been won 
after aeons of arduous struggle and to waste it in vain pursuits forgetting the Dhivyathvam 
(Divinity) which has to be manifested is indeed pitiable. 


God weighs only the feelings behind prayer 


Dhroupadhi praying in distress from the Assembly Hall of the Kauravas is an instance in point. 
The Mahaabhaaratha proves times out of number that the Lord answers prayers that come out of 
faith and agony in yearning. There was a cowherd called Maaladhaasa who was determined to 
see the Lord, as He was described in the sacred texts he had heard expounded in the village 
temple by a Pandith. So he prayed and prayed to the "black Lord riding on the white bird" all the 
time his cows were pasturing in the fields. Eleven days passed; but, there was no sign of the 
"black Lord riding the white bird," He had forgotten to take food and drink during all those days 
and so, had become weak, too weak to walk or talk. At last, the Lord melted at his entreaties and 
presented Himself before him as an old Brahmin; but the Brahmin was not riding a white bird, 
nor was he black, beautifully black, as the Pandith had described. So, he asked the Brahmin to 


come the next day at seven in the morning, so that he may bring the Pandith and verify whether 
He was the Lord Himself. The Pandith laughed at the whole affair and refused to take part in it; 
but Maaladhaasa was so importunate that he agreed. 


The entire village turned out on the river bank the next day, long before seven o'clock. The 
Brahmin was there, exactly as he had promised and Maaladhaasa showed Him to all. But, they 
could not see him! They began to laugh at the cowherd's antics and threatened him with a severe 
beating for bringing them along as butts for his joke. Maaladhaasa could see the Brahmin clearly 
but no one else could. At last, he got so enraged that he walked up to the old Brahmin and gave 
him a whacking blow on the cheek, saying, "Why don't you show yourself to all?" 


That blow changed the entire scene. Krishna appeared in resplendent robes, smiling face, 
captivating form and the white bird. As the astounded villagers were recovering from the 
amazement, the Vimaana (heavenly chariot), floated down from the sky and Krishna asked 
Maaladhaasa to sit inside it. Then, with the Lord by his side Maaladhaasa rose up and soon was 
out of sight. 


Mahaabharaatha is an inspiration for all time 


The Lord always weighs only the feeling behind the prayer to satisfy and please; the Saguna 
form visible to the eye and cognisable by the senses, but something unapproachable by the 
senses (In-dhriya-atheetha), has to be offered. In this way, karma itself becomes Upaasana, by 
the addition to saturation point, of dedication. Rathi (attachment) is the seed; Bhaava (feeling) is 
the sapling; Prema (love) is the tree; Sath-Chith-Aanandha (Being, Awareness, Bliss)is the fruit. 
The Vedhas have Karma, Upaasana and Jnaana (action, devotion and knowledge) sections. The 
Mahaabhaaratha teaches all three and so, for the Vedhavriksha (Vedha tree), the Bhaaratha can 
be said to be the fruit. 


You have heard that the Lord comes down when Dharmaglaani (the decline of Dharma) 
happens; well, Vedhaglaani (the decline of the Vedhas) is equivalent to the decline of Dharma, 
for Vedha is the very root of Dharma. There are five treasures which the good always try to 
guard, and which you should endevaour to foster---the Cow, the Brahmin, the Vedhas, the 
Shaasthras, and Chastity. If these are lost, then, life is lost; everything that adds value to life is 
lost. 


You are your own foe and friend 


Where there is Dharma, there Krishna is; so, think for yourself, each one of you! How far have 
you deserved the Grace of the Lord? You draw Him near; you keep Him far. You entangle 
yourself, bind yourself, and get caught in the trap. No one is your foe except yourself. No one 
else is your friend; you are your only friend. The Guru shows you the road; you have to trudge 
alone, without fear or hesitation. 


The Mahaabhaaratha clearly explains the bunds which Sanaathana Dharma has constructed to 
direct the wild flocks of the senses and the emotions, into the sea, without harming the banks. 
Brahmacharya (student celibate), Grihastha (householder). Vaanaprastha (recluse in the forest), 
Sanyaasa (ascetic)---these stages of life with the restrictions and regulations prescribed for each 
are such bunds to guard the individual and society from the upsurge of the beast in man. Even 
today, the Mahaabhaaratha can be of great help; it is an inspiration for all lime, for all humanity. 
The battle between Dharmakshethra (the camp of virtue-bound noble Paandavas) and 


Kurukshethra (the camp of the egoistic wicked Kauravas) is ever on and however strong the 
Kurukshethra might appear to be, even if it has the 


Yaadhavas on its side, so long as the Lord is the charioteer, victory is certain for the champions 
of Dharma. Even now, when the Chinese are pressing on the frontier, the best armour for the 
country is Dharma, which will win the Grace of God. What is not possible for a people who have 
won that? 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 23-4-1963 


If only men knew the path to permanent joy and peace, they will 
not wander distracted among the bye-lanes of sensual pleasure. 


Just as the joy felt in dreams disappears when you wake, the joy 
felt in the waking stages disappears when you wake into the higher 
awareness, called jnaana. Use the moment while it is available, for 
the best of uses, the awareness of the Divine in all. 


When you die, you must die not like a tree or a beast or a worm, 
but, like a Man who has realised that he is Maadhava (God). That 
is the consummation of all the years you spend in the human 
frame. 


Sathya Sai Baaba 


12. Shankara's Adhwaitha 


THE Ari-shadvargas (the six enemies of Man), get a foothold in his mind, because it is filled 
with the darkness of Ajnaana. They are nocturnal birds like bats and owls that cannot tolerate 
light. Darkness will not flee if you throw stones at it; nor will it disappear if you lay about it with 
a sword, or shoot it with a gun. It will be destroyed only when a lamp is lit. Shankara taught this 
simple truth to many who were ignorant of this simple fact. The people of this country were lost 
in the pursuit of many goals, because their vision was blurred by darkness. Shankara taught them 
that the Vedhas, Upanishaths and Shaasthras had but One in view, the One-without-a-second, 
Adhwaitha. 


Shankara, when quite a young boy, was one day offering puuja to Dhevi, the household Deity, 
because his father was away and he had asked him to perform worship in his absence. He placed 
milk before the image and prayed pathetically that She should sip the milk, as he imagined She 
was wont to do, when his father did the Puuja. He wept so sincerely that Mother melted at his 
walling and drank the entire quantity) Shankara had seen his father distribute the milk that was 
offered to the Mother, a tiny spoonful, to every member of the family; but, since the cup was 
emptied in one quaff by Her, nothing remained; the boy feared that he would be blamed for 
drinking what was the share of the others. So, he wailed again. Dhevi felt great pity at the plight 
of Shankara, who had taken the Image to be alive, and who had compelled Her already to 
manifest Herself from it. But, she did not pour milk out of Her palm, as I do; she pressed Her 
Maternal Breasts and filled the cup. Shankara's Avedhana, his anguished yearning, had 
succeeded in matting Dhevi respond! 


Beginners only need image worship 


Similarly, the other day, Shri Raamamurthy, who is sitting among you here, shouted, "Swamee" 
in sincere faith and agony. His wife was writhing in pain, because her clothes had caught fire. 
She was too panic-stricken to call out My Name. But, this cry was heard by Me. I hurried to the 
spot, which is, as you say, 400 miles away; I crumpled the fire out, before it was too late. 


Shankara worshipped images in childhood and he knew the value of Saguna swaruupa (God as 
endowed with qualities). He advised Saguna Aaraadhana (worship of Form) to the large 
majority of people, even later in his life. Little children must be taught with the help of slates and 
boards, on which illustrations are drawn. Temples, images and pictures are the slates and boards 
for the children in spiritual progress. But, if you play with a toy elephant, you cannot derive the 
experience of contacting the real one. The Formless can be conceived only when you have 
transcended Form. 


Shankara's Adhwaitha is the Ultimate Truth 


When Shankara thought of renouncing the world (in order to get the authority to educate it), he 
felt that his mother's consent had to be taken for the step. So, while bathing in the Poorna river 
near his house, he cried out one day that a crocodile had caught his leg. It was true, for the 
crocodile was, as in the Gajendhramoksha story, only Samsaara (wordly life) called by that 
name, Sensual Desire, to put it in other words. When the mother came rushing to the bank of the 
river, he told her that the crocodile would let him off, only if he took Sanyaasa, became a monk! 
This was also true, for, renunciation, detachment, giving up worldly ties, is the means of saving 


oneself from bondage. The bewildered mother agreed and the boy left home to seek his Guru, 
and through him the secret of liberation. 


Shankara lived only for thirty-two years, but, during that time, he purified and consolidated the 
various schools of worship and brought them under the over-all care of one philosophical 
principle, Adhwaitha (non-dualism). 


The Mahaavaakyas (the great statements on Supreme Reality) of the Vedhas once again began 
ringing in the hearts of all, with their true meaning. Aham Brahmaasmi; Thath-thwam-asi; 
Prajnaanam Brahma (I am Brahman, Thou art That; consciousness is Brahman)--all were 
explained in simple, convincing logic, in sweet captivating poetry. Shankara's Adhwaitha is the 
ultimate Truth and so, it is only confirmed, not shaken, by the discoveries of science or the 
flights of intellect. It speaks of the unity of matter and energy; of time and space, of the Universe 
being but Brahman Seen through the veil of Maayaa, which too is but an activity of the 
Primordial. 


Shankara knew that Adhwaitha requires intense saadhana (spiritual effort) which will remove all 
trace of ego, all idea of duality, from the mind of man. So, as a preparatory discipline to the 
dawn of the awareness of one's real unity with the substance of the Universe, he taught the rules 
of yoga and bhakthi and karma; these, according to him, will brighten the intellect, cleanse the 
emotions and purify the heart. Adhwaitha is the awareness of the Divine, in everything, 
everywhere, in full measure. 


Shankara suggested sath-sanga (good company) as the very first step in saadhana; the company 
of the wise and the good will develop into detachment and love of silence and solitude. That will 
promote the disappearance of moha (delusion), which according to Arjuna, was the fruit of 
listening to the Geetha. When that happens, one is established steadily in the Thath-thwam, the 
reality of this and that, the identity of this with that. Well, the recognition of that identity is the 
attainment of Mukthi (liberation). 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, Shankara Jayanthi, 28-4-1963 


13. Shivam, not shavam 


GHANDIKOTA Subrahmanya Shaasthry read and offered what he called a Navarathna 
Haaram---a Garland of Nine Poetic Gems; but though I do not accept garlands, I certainly accept 
the devotion that gives fragrance to the garland. He said that the Vedhas are for the glorification 
of the Gods (Dhevaanaam sthuthyartham), that in the Kali Yuga, one is asked to rely more on 
Naamasmarana (repeated remembrance of God) for liberation. Why is it considered enough for 
the people of this Age? For, other Saadhanas are fraught with difficulties. They need rigorous 
discipline and much preliminary effort. Again, there is another advantage in Naamasmarana: as 
soon as the Name is uttered, the owner of the Name comes into view. When you think of the 
Form, the Name may not always accompany; you may not be able to identify. There may be 
more than one Name and you may be confused. But take the Name, and the Form automatically 
appears before the mental eye. 


In Bhaarath, the discipline, to remove that attachment to the senses and to curb the mind from 
running after fleeting pleasures, is clearly laid down since ages; and we have the experience of 
many saints, recorded in the sacred literature of this land. All the activities of thought, word and 
deed are sublimated to this higher purpose. Man is Shivam (auspicious), not shavam (corpse); he 
has three eyes, which are derived from the Sun and the Moon, and from Agni. 


Where the Lord's Name is sung, there He sits 


The Agni eye is the internal eye, which can be opened by the discipline of the Yoga. The three- 
eyed Shiva can see the past, the present and the future. A boy of ten whom you have seen, you 
can recall his picture as he was when you saw him; but you can't see him as he is now or as he 
will be ten years hence. But, if you earn the Thrinethra (three eyes), capable of seeing the past, 
present and future, you can see all three. You become master of time and space. 


The Name is enough to give you all the results of every type of saadhana (spiritual effort). This 
is accepted by all the Shaasthras and all the saadhakas (spiritual aspirants) who have left 
accounts of their struggle and success. Moreover, the Name is capable of being recited and 
meditated upon by all, equally. Of course, the Name is a limitation of the Universal; it identifies 
the un-identifiable, through one of its aspects. Take the Upaadhi (disguise) as a means of saving 
yourself; take it as a boat that will take you across the sea of birth and death. 


When you repeat the Name, all the sweetness of the Form and its associated glory must come to 
memory and just as your mouth waters when you remember some sweet dish you relish, your 
mind must "water" when you contemplate it. Choose the Name that captivates your heart. Why 
run after riches when all the pleasure and satisfaction that riches can offer and even a hundred- 
fold, can be got by dwelling on the Name? The Lord has said that where His Name is sung, 
"thathra thish-tthaami," ("there I sit"). He establishes Himself there! He will not move from the 
place. So, the tongue is enough to win Him, the tongue that speaks the language of the pure 
mind. 


The Lord is a Kalpavriksha (Wish-fulfilling Tree); you have to approach Him and develop 
attachment to Him. You must win His Grace and be ever near Him keeping back all the forces 
that draw you away from Him. Even if you commit some technical faults in singing about Him 
or in worshipping Him, it does not matter. Bhakthi (intense devotion) makes every error 


excusable. Nectar, though poured into a brass cup, will not lose its savour or taste. Poison, even 
if is poured into a cup of gold set with gems, will not lose its death-dealing property. 


The Name persuades the Form to bend and bless 


Bhakthi will force the Lord to give you Himself as the gift. The Coronation Ceremony of Sree 
Raamachandhra and the celebrations were all over; the presentation of gifts to all important 
people was over. Then, Seetha remembered that Maaruthi had been forgotten. There was no one 
in the hall except Raama. Seetha and Maaruthi. Raama wondered what to give him: He 
suggested to Seetha that the gemset ring that Janaka gave him on the occasion of the marriage 
would be the best gift, because as He said. "Your father gave this to me. on the day he gave you 
to me; this Maaruthi gave you to me. a second time. So. I shall give him this." Maaruthi did not 
seem quite happy when the ring was placed in his hand. Evidently he did not appreciate the gift 
because it was not given in full sight of all; when all were given, he was neglected! But Maaruthi 
placed it near his ear as if he sought to know what sound emanated from it: he bit it with his 
teeth; tried to peer into its structure. 


Raama asked him why, and Seetha was also anxious to know. Maaruthi said, "I am finding out 
whether it has the Raamanaama which I want to the exclusion of everything else." Then. Raama 
embraced him and said, "Maaruthi! what other gift can I give you? I shall give you Myself as the 
gift. Accept Me!" So, that is why he was neglected, at the time every, one else was awarded 
gifts! That is why wherever Maaruthi is. there Raama is bound to be-wherever Raama is, there 
Maaruthi is invariably present. The Name is so valuable for the Bhaktha (devotee). It persuades 
the Form to bend and bless. 


The Name that pleases you is best for you 


Just consider this- the form changes from age to age, from one appearance to another. Raama and 
Krishna were different in form; even their deeds were distinct. But still, people agree when you 
say that both are identical. Well; tell them that Raama held aloft the Govardhanagiri, they will 
not accept it. 


The Name has the association of all the special fragrance of the Lee/a (Divine play) and the 
Mahima (Power) and the Upadhesha (spiritual instruction). Each one has a special attachment to 
one Name out of many, suited to the temperament and the Samskaara, the inherited instincts and 
tendencies shaped in previous births. 


Meera loved the Name Giridhaari (mountain-holder). To her, that /Jeela appealed as the most 
significant, as the most symbolic of the' Lord's glory. The name that pleases you, that arouses the 
sweetest and the purest 10ve, is best for you. Raamayathi is Raama (the thing that pleases is 
Raama); Harathi is Hara (the thing that destroys Maayaa, is Hara or Hari). 


Keep the Name lit on the tongue 


Suurdhaas was overwhelmed with grief, when the lovely little body who held his stick and led 
him along the road to Brindhaavan suddenly left him with the announcement that his name was 
Krishna! He ran about with both hands extended to catch Him and keep Him in his embrace, but 
Krishna had disappeared; then, Suurdhaas shouted, "You may run away from my clasp; but I 
have you in my heart. You can never run away from there." Prahlaadha was also like that; he had 
no other thought; he saw nothing else; elephant, snake, poison, fire---all were for him 
Naaraayana-thathwa (divine principle) itself. How then could they harm him? 


The Naama is the Narasimha for the Hiranyaakshas of the mind; the Raajasik (passionate) and 
Thaamasik (ignorant) forces, besieging your heart are bent on your downfall. Just as they give 
Calcium and Vitamin tablets to cure anaemia, etc., take Naamam tablets to get rid of mental 
anaemia and other illnesses. There are some throat pastilles, which you have to carry to your 
mouth and whose taste you have to slowly swallow, in order to relieve cough; have the Naamam 
on your tongue and imbibe its taste slowly to get rid of the troublesome upsurge of passions and 
emotions. Keep the Name lit on the tongue; it will illumine your interior and also the exterior. It 
will cleanse your mind, as well as minds of those who hear the Name when you recite it. 
Keeping it on the tongue is like keeping a lamp lit on the door-step at the entrance to your house. 


Naamasmarana is the best saadhana; it is the most beneficial sath-pravarthana. That is the 
highest japam, the most profitable thapas. Kuchela won the Grace of the Lord through the same 
means. Fill the Name with your Love, whenever you repeat it; saturate it with devotion. That is 
the easiest path for all of you. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 29-4-1963 


A mere Five-minute inquiry will convince you that you are not the 
body, or the senses, the mind or the intelligence, the name or the 
form, but that you are the Aathma Itself, the same Aathma that 
appears as all this variety. 


Once you get a glimpse of this truth, hold on to it; do not allow it 
to slip. Make it your permanent possession. 


Sathya Sai Baaba 


14. Sathyam, Shivam, Sundharam 


TO EARN the Grace of God, you have to pray to the Personified Power with Name and Form; it 
is your yearning that decides in what form the Lord appears. You call and He answers. If you are 
not earnest, if you feel indifferent, and say, "Let Him come when He wills, in the Form He likes 
and with the Name He prefers," He will not come at all. Call on Him with anguish; He will 
respond. 


In Raajasthan, there was a priest who worshipped the image of Baalakrishna installed in the 
temple, attached to the palace of Udhaipur. His name was Dhevesha. His story may not be found 
anywhere but since he was intimately connected with Me, I know him very well. Every night he 
used to "put Baalakrishna to sleep," with appropriate ritual and close the door of the shrine; but, 
before he came out, he would take from the head of the image, the mallika (jasmine) garland he 
had placed there in the evening and wear it himself, before proceeding home. Of course, on those 
days on which the Mahaaraana visited the temple, the garland had to be given to him, for wear. 


One day, however, the Mahaaraana came immediately after he had worn it inside his tuft 'of hair; 
so, when the Ruler demanded the flower, he had to get inside the shrine and, slyly removing it 
from his tuft, hand it reverentially back to him. The Mahaarana was happy that he had not missed 
the gift; but, was shocked to find in it a strand of gray hair! Suspecting some tricks he shouted 
angrily. "What! has our Balakrishna grown old and grey?" The priest, to save his skin, said "Yes, 
Yes." The Mahaaraana replied, "Well, I shall not disturb now; but, early tomorrow, I shall come 
and see if His hair has really gone grey." 


Devesha had no food or sleep that night. He wept his eyes out in agony, for, he had in his fear, 
imposed old age and greyness on the ever-youthful Lord. Morning came and the Mahaaraana 
hurried to the temple to open the shrine. They both looked in and, Io, the hair was grey. The 
King suspected that the hair was false, planted by the priest. So he pulled and tugged at it, only to 
find drops of blood at the roots. God had responded to the anguished cry, the call of the agony. 
The Formless will assume any Form and undergo any transformation to satisfy the yearning of 
the devoted aspirant. The over-riding purpose is to make all karma-jeevis (action-oriented 
beings), Brahma-jeevis (God-filled beings). 


Man must crave for the vision of God, then only is he entitled to the status of human-ness. 
Maanava(the human) must reach Maadhava (the Divine). He must conquer the mind. Man is the 
ruler of Manas (the mind), not its slave. Who takes the role of educator from the beginning of 
your life? The Mother, is it not? Prakrithi (Nature) is the Mother, the Feminine principle, the 
Maayaa (illusory energy). She is the great teacher. If you do not learn the lessons well, Nature 
punishes you, boxes you in the ear, hits you on the head. She is a stern merciless instructress; 
but, if you learn well, she will lead you proudly to the Presence of Purushoththama (the Supreme 
Person). Obey Prakrithi and be well trained by her: then, you can inherit the Glory of 
Purushoththama. If you disregard Her teaching, the Mother gets disgusted with you and the 
Father too will disregard your entreaties. The commands of Prakrithi given for your good are 
called, dharma. Have that dharma as the witness of all your thoughts, words and deeds. Be 
guided every instant by the dictates of that Dharma, and success will be yours. 


Little children must be taught with the help of big letters scrawled on boards and slates. Temples, 
images and Saligrams (crystal stones) are the slates and boards, for children in spiritual progress, 
But, even if you play with a toy elephant you cannot get the experience of contacting a live 


elephant, can you? The Formless God-head can be understood by you only when you have 
rendered yourself Formless! When you are in the world of gunas (qualities), you have to attach 
yourself only to a Saguna Lord (God with attributes). 


Even a thief does not like being called "thief" He gets either ashamed or angry when he is called. 
Why? Truth is his real nature and his true nature revolts against the appellation. The Aathma is 
always Shivam (auspicious and holy). So it protests vehemently when the vehicle where it 
resides is called amangalam (inauspicious), Shayam (dead). The Aathma is also Sundharam 
(beauty). A U M is the Ahamkaaram {egoism) of Paramaathma, it has no vikaaraam (ugliness) 
in it. So it is always Sundharam (beautiful, charming, lovely). That is why when it is described 
as ugly, deformed, disgusting, etc., he lowers his head in shame, for something revolting to his 
true nature is being imputed. Sathyam, Shivam, Sundharam is yourself; you have not realised it 
because of delusion, ignorance and false inference. Get rid of these and merge in your real self. 


Excerpts from Discourses during May 1963 


Enter from now on into a discipline of Naamasmarana, the 
incessant remembrance of God through the Name of the Lord. It 
does not need any special time or extra allotment of time; it can be 
done always, in the waking stage, whether you are bathing or 
eating, walking or sitting. All the hours now spend in gossip, in 
watching sports or films, in hollow conversation, can best be used 
for silent contemplation of the Name and Form, and splendour of 
the Lord. 


Sathya Sai Baaba 


15. Shiva Shakthi 


(Baaba was brought down the winding stairs into the Private Room on the ground floor, 
because He insisted on giving Darshan to the thousands of devotees who had come on that 
auspicious day. He had an attack of cerebral thrombosis (or tubercular meningitis?) and was in 
bed for eight days from the morning of Saturday, 29th June to the evening of 6th July. His left 
hand, leg and eye were affected; His right hand had also slight palsy; the tongue was indistinct 
and the face was twitching. He was placed on the Silver Chair in the Prayer Hall and His hand 
and leg were adjusted in proper position. As soon as He was seated, He communicated the 
following message which was interpreted and announced). 


THIS is not Swaami's illness; this is an illness which Swaami has taken on, in order to save some 
one. Swaami has no illness, nor will He get ill at any time. You must all be happy; that alone will 
make Swaami happy. If you grieve, Swaami will not be happy. Your joy is Swaami's food. 


Then, Baaba signed to Kasturi to speak, and after his short speech was over, Baaba wanted the 
mike to be held before Him. He asked through it, "Vinipisthundhaa?" (Do you hear Me?) But, 
though He asked again and again, the voice was so indistinct that no one could make out what it 
meant. He then signed for water and when it was brought, He sprinkled a little with His shaking 
right hand on the stricken left hand and on His left leg. He stroked His left hand with the right. 
Immediately, He used both hands to stroke His left leg; that touch was enough to cure it. He 
doffed the disease in a thrice! He started to speak! It was the same musical voice.). 


God is the refuge for those who have no refuge Dhikkulenivaariki dhevude gathi---"For those 
who have no refuge, God is the refuge." That is exactly the reason why I had to take on the 
disease that one helpless Bhaktha was to get. He had to suffer this dire illness, as well as the four 
heart attacks that accompanied it; and he would not have survived it. So, according to My 
Dharma of Bhakthasamrakshana (protection of devotees), I had to rescue him. Of course, this is 
not the first time that I have taken on the illness of persons whom I wanted to save. Even in the 
previous sareeram at Shirdi, I had this responsibility The suffering that you saw was too much 
for this particular devotee and so, I had to save him, by Myself going through it. This is My 
Leela: My nature. It is part of the task for which I have Come: Sishyarakshana (protection Of 
disciples). 


Persons who were near Me during the last week were asking Me to give them the name of the 
person whom I had saved. I told them that it will make them angry against that person, for 
Swaami they would say, "had to undergo so much of pain in order to save that one person." 
Then, they replied, that they would honour the person, because of the extraordinary Bhakthi that 
persuaded Swaami to run to his rescue, on Saturday morning. 


Baaba's Identity, Mission and Advent revealed 


Some people even asked Me whether it was this person or that, giving names of those who had 
attacks of paralysis, especially on the left side! This is even more ludicrous, because when I save 
a person, I save him completely. I do not wait until he gets the disease and I do not leave in him a 
fraction of the disease, so that he may be identified later. It all looks so funny to Me, the guesses 
and surmises that you make. 


Even in Shirdi, Dhadha Saheb, Nandharaam, Balawanth, all were saved by these means. 
Balawanth was destined to get plague, but, the bubo was taken over and the boy saved. 


This is perhaps the longest period when I kept the devotees wondering and worried. That was 
because of the heart attacks which had to come later on the Bhaktha, from Which also he had to 
be saved. Then, there is another reason too, why the 8-day period had to be observed. Well, I 
shall tell you why. That means I must tell you about Myself, about something I have not 
disclosed so far, something which I was keeping within Myself, for the last 37 years. The time 
has come to announce it. This is a sacred day, and I shall tell you. 


You know I declared on the very day when I decided to disclose My Identity, My Mission and 
My Advent, that I belonged to the Aapasthamba Suuthra (Code of conduct) and the 
Bharadhwaaja Gothra (lineage). This Bharadhwaaja was a great sage, who studied the Vedhas 
for full one hundred years; but, finding that the Vedhas were anantha (endless) he did thapas for 
prolonging life, and from Indhra he got two extensions of a century each. Even then, the Vedhas 
could not be completed, so, he asked Indhra again for another hundred years. Indhra showed him 
3 huge mountain ranges and said, "What you have learned in 3 centuries form only 3 handfulls 
from out of the 3 ranges, which the Vedhas are. So, give up the attempt to exhaust the Vedhas. 
Do a Yaaga (ritual sacrifice), instead, which I shall teach you: that will give you the fruit of 
Vedhic study, full and complete." 


The yaaga performed by sage Bharadhwaaja 


Bharadhwaaja decided on performing the yaaga; Indhra taught him how to do it; all preparations 
were completed. The sage wanted that Shakthi must preside and bless the yaaga. So he went to 
Kailaasa but, the time was not opportune for presenting his petition. Shiva and Shakthi were 
engaged in a competitive dance, trying to find out who could dance longer. Eight days passed 
thus, before Shakthi noticed Bharadhwaaja standing in the cold. She just cast a smile at him and 
danced along as before! The sage mistook the smile as a cynical refusal to notice him; so he 
turned his back on Kailaasa and started to descend. To his dismay, he found his left leg, hand and 
eye put out of action by a stroke. Shiva saw him fall; He came up to him and consoled him; 
Bharadhwaaja was told that Shakthi had indeed blessed him and his yaaga. Then, Shiva revived 
him and cured him, sprinkling water from the Kamandalu. Both Shiva and Shakthi granted the 
Rishi (sage) boons: They would both attend the vaaga, they said. 


All past assurances accomplished by one incident 


After the yaaga was over, They were so pleased that They conferred even more boons on the 
sage. Shiva said that They would take human form and be born in the Bharadhwaaja Gothra 
(lineage) thrice: Shiva alone as Shirdi Sai Baaba, Shiva and Shakthi together at Puttaparthy as 
Sathya Sai Baaba and Shakthi alone as Prema Sai, later. Then Shiva remembered the illness that 
had suddenly come upon Bharadhwaaja at Kailaasa on the eighth day of the waiting in the cold 
on the ice. He gave another assurance. "As expiation for the neglect which Shakthi showed you 
at Kailaasa for 8 days, this Shakthi will suffer the stroke for 8 days, when We both take birth as 
Sathya Sai and, on the 8th day, I shall relieve her from all signs of the disease by sprinkling 
water, just as I did at Kailaasa to cure your illness." 


It was the working out of this assurance that you witnessed today, just now. This had to happen, 
this stroke and the cure. The assurance given in the Threthaa Yuga had to be honoured. I may tell 
you now that the poor forlorn bhaktha who had to get the stroke which I took over, was a 
convenient excuse, which was utilised. You see, a railway engine is not made available to haul 
just one bogey; they wait until a number of bogeys are to be taken along and then, they put the 
engine into action. So too, the disease had to be gone through, the Bhaktha had to be saved, the 


assurance to be carried out, the mystery had to be cleared, the Divinity had to be more clearly 
announced by the manifestation of this Grand Miracle. All these were accomplished by this one 
incident. 


Let Me tell you one more thing: Nothing can impede or halt the work of this Avathaara. When I 
was upstairs all these days, some people foolishly went about saying. "It is all over with Sai 
Baaba" and they turned back many who were coming to Puttaparthi! Some said I was in 
Samaadhi, as if 1 am a Saadhaka! Some feared I was the victim of black magic, as if anything 
can affect Me! The splendour of this Avathaara will go increasing, day by day. Formerly when 
the Govardhanagiri was raised aloft by the little boy, the gopees and gopaalas realised that 
Krishna was the Lord. Now, it is not one Govardhanagiri, a whole range will be lifted, you will 
see! Have patience, have faith. Tomorrow morning, I shall give every one of you the 
Namaskaaram blessing that you missed today. 


Gurupournami Day, 6-7-1963 


To discover one's reality and to dwell in that Divine peace, one 
need not give up the world and take to asceticism. 


Sathya Sai Baaba 


16. Protection of the devotees 


YESTERDAY, when I came into the Hall, I could see the agony you all felt. That was because 
you identified Me with this body, that was having the illness. If you had known My truth, you 
would not have been sad; in fact, if you had known your Truth, that would be enough. The 
illness came and went; I was its master, throughout. One day, when it reached its climax, I was 
watching its behaviour and directing it to finish its Dharma. For I had taken it on Myself and so, 
I must allow it to do its Dharma! All kinds of silly stories were circulated when I was ill! Some 
people feared that when I went to the South recently, some black magic was inflicted upon Me 
and that the stroke was the consequence. Let Me tell you that nothing evil can affect Me. 
Nothing can harm Me. I am the Master, the Shakthi (Power) that overpowers everything else. 


I knew that short explanation: some people were saying that I was in Mounam or Samaadhi 
(silence or a state of concentration in Yoga). Now why should I keep the vow of silence? If I am 
silent, how can I carry out My Task of reforming you and making you all realise the aim of life? 
And, why should I seek Samaadhi, I who am the Aanandhaswaruupa, the Premaswaruupa 
(Embodiment of Bliss and of Love) Myself. It is the wavering doubter, the ignorance dabbler, 
who will lend his ear to such talk. The true bhaktha will discard all such news. For the bhakthas 
here, the 8 days were days of intense thapas; they had no other thought than of Swaami. 


To think low or mean is also egoism 


Once, Krishna too pretended to be suffering from headache, intense, unbearable headache! He 
acted that role quite as realistically, as I did last week. He wound warm clothes around His head, 
rolled restlessly in bed. His eyes were red and He was in evident distress. The face too appeared 
swollen and pale. Rukmini, Sathyabhaama and the other queens rushed about with all kinds of 
remedies and palliatives. But they were ineffective. At last, they consulted Naaradha and he went 
into the sick room to consult Krishna Himself and find out which drug would cure Him. 


Krishna directed him to bring---What do you think the drug was?---the dust of the feet of a true 
Bhaktha! In a trice, Naaradha manifested himself in the presence of some celebrated bhakthas of 
the Lord; but, they were too humble to offer the dust of their feet to be used by their Lord as a 
drug! 


That Is also a kind of egoism. "I am low, mean, small, useless, poor, sinful, inferior"---such 
feelings also are egoistic; when the ego goes, you do not feel either superior or inferior. No one 
would give the dust wanted by the Lord; they were too worthless, they declared. Naaradha came 
back disappointed to the sickbed. Then, Krishna asked him, "Did you try Brindhaavana where 
the Gopees live?" The Queens laughed at the suggestion and even Naaradha asked in dismay, 
"What do they know of bhakthi (devotion)?" Still, the sage had to hurry thither. 


Do karma which is approved by higher wisdom 


When the gopees heard Krishna was ill and that the dust of their feet might cure Him, without a 
second thought they shook the dust off their feet and filled his hands with the same. By the time 
Naaradha reached Dhwaaraka, the head-ache had gone. It was just a five-day drama, to teach that 
self-condemnation is also egoism and that the Lord's command must be obeyed without demur, 
by all Bhakthas. 


When I said that I had taken on the illness that was destined for some one who could not have 
suffered it or survived it, many of you felt, "Why should Swami, for the sake of a single person, 


plunge so many of us in grief?." Well! Did not Raama proceed to the forest though all Ayodhya 
wept? My Dharma of Bhaktharakshana (protection of devotees) must be carried out; the 
Dharma of the disease must also be worked out. Krishna could have stopped the rains, however 
powerful Indhra was; but, Indhra had to do his Dharma and by lifting Govardhanagiri to protect 
the cows and cowherds, Krishna manifested His Divinity! 


In this case also, it is the same Leela (Divine sportive act). Using the chance to demonstrate to a 
doubting world the Divinity inherent in this Human Form. I told you yesterday that even this 
lucky bhaktha was just an instrument to work out the promise made in the past to the Sage 
Bharadhwaaja; it served to announce My real Nature to you all. You are indeed fortunate that 
you could witness on the sacred Guru Pournami Day this magnificent proof of My Divinity. 


Karma of a higher order leads to jnaana 


There is no Sathyam (Truth), without Shivam (Goodness); there is no Shivam, without 
Sundharam (Beauty). Truth alone can confer Mangalam (Auspiciousness) and Mangalam alone 
is the real beauty. Truth is beauty; Joy is beauty; falsehood and grief are ugly, because they are 
unnatural. Buddhi, chittham and hrudhayam (intellect, sub-conscious mind: !and heart)---these 
are the three centres in the individual where reside jnaana, karma and bhakthi). The effulgence 
of Sathyam will reveal Shivam; do karma (action) which is approved by the higher wisdom, not 
karma which is born of ignorance. Then, all karma will be Shivam (auspicious, beneficial, 
blessed). The experience of that Shivam is what is called Sundharam; for it confers real 
Aanandha. That is my Reality. That is why My Life is named "Sathyam Shivam Sundharam." 


Do karma based on jnaana, the jnaana that all is One. Let the karma be suffused with bhakthi; 
that is to say, humility, prema, karuna and ahimsa (love, compassion, non-violence). Let bhakthi 
be filled with jnaana; otherwise, it will be as light as a balloon, which drifts along any current of 
air, or gust of wind. Mere jnaana will make the heart dry; bhakthi makes it soft with sympathy 
and karma gives the hands something to do, something which will sanctify every one of the 
minutes that have fallen to your lot to live here. 


This is why bhakthi is referred to as upaasana, dwelling near, feeling the Presence, sharing the 
sweetness of Divinity. The yearning for upaasana prompts you to go on pilgrimages, to construct 
and renovate temples, to consecrate images. The sixteen items of Upachaara (honouring) with 
which the Lord is worshipped satisfy the mind which craves for personal contact with the 
Supreme. All this is karma of a high order; they lead to jnaana. First, you start with the idea, "I 
am in the Light;" then the feeling "the light is in me" becomes established. This leads to the 
conviction, "I am the Light." That is the supreme wisdom. 


See yourself in all; love all as yourself. A dog caught in a room whose walls are mirrors sees in 
all the myriad reflections, not itself but rivals, competitors, other dogs which must be barked at. 
So, it tires itself out by jumping on this reflection and that, and when the images also jump, it 
becomes mad with fury. The wise man, however, sees himself everywhere and is at peace: he is 
happy that there are so many reflections of himself all around him. That is the attitude you must 
learn to possess, that will save you from needles bother. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 7-7-.1963 


17, Lakshya puuja 


THOUGH there is no particular reason for this evening's gathering, Kompella Subbaraaya 
Shaasthry tried to discover one and he concluded his speech with a reference to the Varalakshmi 
Puuja that is generally done in Hindu homes today! This search for 'causes' is another of the 
delusions that pester man; he is out to seek the cause of every thing and in that confusion, he 
forgets to derive the full benefit of the result which is before him. 


Shaasthry quoted from the Soundharyalahari to explain the meaning of Shiva-Shakthi, probably 
moved by the incidents of the last Guru Pournami Day. Shiva-Shakthi is the conjunction of jada 
(insentient or inert) and chith (awareness), the conjunction of the wire with the current, which 
activates all the instruments---fan, stove, bulb and radio. Shiva-Shakthi is in all, not only in Me; 
there is only the difference in power and capacity to manifest. The fire-fly has some power of 
illumination; it also emits light. We have oil lamp, the electric bulb, the petromax lamp, the 
Moon, the Sun--all emanate light; that is the common quality. 


Like that, both good and evil have the right to exist. The evil has to be used for the purpose for 
which it is suited. The skin of the orange is not sweet; but it helps to protect the sweetness 
within. The bitter green skin of the unripe orange protects the fruits during the ripening period. 
The skin too gradually takes on some of the sweetness and flavour of the ripening orange; so too, 
evil has to be slowly transformed into good by the subtle influence of association. 


Purpose and rationale of Nature around us 


The indhriyas may be used for the purpose of increasing spiritual Aanandham (bliss). When 
fruit-juice is poured into a cup, the cup does not know its taste; if you hold it in the palm, you do 
not get the taste. You have to drink it with the straw, the senses; then buddhi (intellect); then the 
tongue experiences the sweetness. The fruit juice is prakrithi (the Nature) around us. Taste its 
sweetness, namely, the Divinity that is immanent in it; that is the purpose and rationale. Prakrithi 
is just the /eela of the Lord, set before you so that you may become aware of his Glory, His 
splendour. 


If the mind obeys the dictates of buddhi, then, the individual gains. If the orders from Delhi are 
obeyed by every State, then the country gains in strength and unity. But, if the mind becomes the 
slave of the senses, then woe be to the individual. When the mind thus follows the outwardbound 
senses and forgets the Reality, when the individual revels in the dream-world of false fantasy, 
this Shivathaayi (Divine mother) pats the child and wakes it. There is then no more need to tell 
them anything else. When awake, the truth will stand revealed. 


Your right is to realize Vishwaswaruupa (cosmic nature); so, don't play about forever in the 
dehabhaava (thought of the body), the consciousness that you are just this five-foot body; 
transcend the attachment to the family, the home, the village, the community, the district, the 
state, the nation. You must acquire not the independence denoted by the political fact of 
Swaraajya, but the freedom of the spirit called Swaraajya (dominion over oneself). 


All different conceptions of God are valid 


The cry of equality now being used as a slogan is a vain and meaningless cry; for, how can men, 
inheriting a multiplicity of impulses, skills, quail-ties, tendencies, attitudes, and even diseases 
from their ancestors and from their past be all of the same stamp? And in spite of all this 
advertisement for the supposed equality, you find more misunderstandings and factions now than 


at any previous period of history. Those who promote inequality are those who most loudly 
proclaim this modem doctrine of equality. 


Each person has a different conception of God and of goodness, according to his upbringing and 
the state of purification of his impulses. All such conceptions are valid; when water is let into the 
fields, you will find sheets of different shapes---circular, rectangular, oval, square, according to 
the shape of the fields. The fertility or the quantity of the crops harvested do not vary according 
to the geometrical correctness of the shapes. How far, how fast you have established attachment 
to the Lord, that is the test. The rest does not matter. 


Bhagavath prema (steady Love of the Lord) is like a mosquito curtain; it will keep out the 
disease-carrying moha and madha (delusion and pride), kaama and krodha (lust and anger), 
lobha and maathsarya (greed and jealousy). Develop faith, so that you may love without doubt. 
The "illness" that ended on Guru Pournami first shook the faith of many, but, later, confirmed 
the shaken faith. That is not as good as keeping faith unshaken, whatever may happen. How can 
the nose that falls down when you merely cough, be firm when you sneeze? 


Shankara harmonised the various schools and sects I had to do My Dharma (divine duty), and 
every act of Mine has its significance, which you cannot understand. You are in the dark and so, 
you fear more. You cannot notice the heaps of earth and the pits on the road. You cannot even 
know that the road is smooth and fine. There is no fault or partiality in creation-be confirmed in 
that. Then you will no more waver in your faith. If God's Creation itself was faulty, all would 
have suffered equally! Now, each person has a different version to give, if you ask him whether 
he is happy and why. The same person speaks differently at different times about the acts of the 
Lord. So, the fault lies in you, the excellence that you praise is in you. You see yourself in the 
outside world; what you like or dislike is your own self!. 


Wealth accrues by fair means as well as foul 


Shankaraachaarya declared, "Brahma Sathvam; Jagath mithya"---Brahman alone is Real; the 
world is false. But he did not therefore discard the world as beneath notice. He continued the 
work of Kumarila Bhatta, harmonised the various schools and sects of those days, established 
Mutts (Missions) for the propagation of the Adhwaitha (non-dual) doctrine in the four corners of 
India, Bhadhrinath, Sringeri, Puri and Dwaaraka and then left. "Brahma Sathyam, Jagath 
mithya" is the essence of the Shruthis (holy scriptures). That truth can be cognised by minds 
trained through Dwaithic (dualistic) worship of the personal God, and Visishtaadhwaithik 
emphasis of the jeevi as the limb of the Absolute. One batch of students after while should be 
passing out of a college while batch after batch is joining the first year class. So too more and 
more people must take up Bhakthi-Karma (devotional activity) and slowly ascend to the stage of 
full Jnaana (knowledge of the Supreme); then only can humanity achieve the Goal. With this 
idea Shankara established the Mutts. 


A man lost in the jungle was asked to move on in a certain direction; then, after some time, he 
saw a village; now, that village did not emerge for his sake, just then. He saw what was already 
there, that is all. So also, Adhwaitha shows you the way to something that is already there, but 
which you did not recognise so far---namely, your being the unlimited, illimitable Brahman. 


Well; just a word about the Varalakshmi Vratham, which Subbaraaya Shaasthry mentioned. Let 
Me tell you frankly, I do not like this Lakshmi Puuja, which people do, expecting to grow rich 
and accumulate wealth. They even speak of Dhanalakshmi and have special Sthothrams (sacred 


prayers) to propitiate Her. Lakshmi (wealth) accrues by fair means as well as foul; money is 
earned by gambling, by various forms of deceit, by highway robbery itself, by high and low, by 
all and sundry. Worship Lakshya, I shall appreciate you! Keep the /akshya (the Goal) of 
expanding your love till it embraces all beings, till it sees every being as your own self---keep it 
ever steady before your mind's eye; then, Lakshmi will, of her own accord, favour you to the 
extent necessary for realising the Goal. Never doubt that. Never falter. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 2-8-1963 


Life is a battlefield, a Dharmak-sethra, where duties and desires 
are always in conflict. Smother the fiery fumes of desire, of hatred 
and anger that rise up in your hearts, it is sheer cowardice to yield 
to these enemies that turn you into beasts. When obstacles come, 
meet them with courage. They harden you, make you tough. 


Sathya Sai Baaba 


18. The love of the gopees 


KOMPELLA Subbaraaya Shaasthry spoke about the coming on earth of the incarnation of 
Krishna and read extracts from the Bhaagavatha describing the antecedents of the birth. All of 
you enjoyed listening to him, though many of you are listening to the story for the hundredth 
time; the story of the Lord does not lose its sweetness when repeated, Jnaana, yoga and karma 
(knowledge of Supreme Self, meditation and selfless action) are, each one of them, hard to go 
through, but like chutney, which is salt, chilly and tamarind in the right proportion ground to a 
paste, bhakthi which is jnaana, yoga and karma in tile correct proportion, is bound to be 
appetising to all tongues. 


The Grace of the Lord is a subject dear to every one. It is a subject that is within the grasp of all. 
The Lord also can be addressed by any Name that tastes sweet to your tongue or pictured in any 
form that appeals to your sense of wonder and awe. You can sing of Him as Muruga, Ganapathi, 
Shaaradha, Jesus, Maithreyi, Shakthi, or you can call on Allah or the Formless, or the Master of 
all Forms. It makes no difference at all. He is Sarvanaama and Sarvaswaruupa (all names and all 
forms). He is the beginning, the middle and the end; the basis, the substance and the source. So, 
any story that brings into your consciousness, His Glory, His Grace and His Beauty must 
perforce appeal to you. 


Every thought sets up a function, agitating all around 


Believe Me, all Vriththis (mental modes or functions) are A-nithya (impermanent). A vriththi is a 
circle, like the circle that emanates from the place where a stone falls into the still water of a 
lake. The water gets agitated and the circle affects the water up to the farthest end. Every thought 
acts like the stone on the stillness of the mind; it Sets up a Vriththi. It agitates all round. The 
Pravriththi maarga (path of attachment) multiplies these circular waves and seeks to create 
further and Wider agitations. But, the Nivriththi maarga (path of detachment) aims at Stilling the 
waters. No agitation at all. Preserve the calmness, even the level. Keep the agitating thoughts 
away. 


Concentration on the Name and Form of Krishna tends to calm the waves of Vriththi. When 
E.M. Forster came to India, he was for some time with the Thakore of Rajkot and when he found 
the Thakore-engaged in dhyaanam (meditation) before the image of Raadha-Shyaam, he 
wondered at first what it was all for! The Thakore had no wants to fulfil. What could he pray for? 
One day, he asked the Thakore, "Why?" He replied that Krishna was for him the embodiment of 
Prema, Soundharya and Aanandham (Love, Beauty and Bliss), and so, when he meditated on 
that Form he was filled with love, beauty and joy. The senses, intellect and emotions, all get 
purified and clarified by dwelling on the pure :and the splendid. Forster was induced to try the 
first steps and though he found it rather difficult at first, the thrill engendered by the strange calm 
egged him on to persist. He found dhyaanam, good and useful. 


Krishna's pranks reveal His divine essence 


Krishna was only a few weeks old, when a certain ascetic came into the house of Nandha; 
Yasodha was having the baby in her lap. Of course this is an incident not found in any book- I 
have Myself to tell you this. The maids ran in, for, they were afraid the child might start weeping 
at the sight of the uncouth individual. He walked in nevertheless, and Yasodha found that when 
he was sent away, the baby raised a cry; not when he was approaching! The Muni also 


announced himself as having come to see Krishna Paramaathma (Krishna, the Supreme Self), a 
name that was new to the entire family. No wonder, the baby cried when that distinguished 
visitor was asked to go! Devaki had been given the vision of Krishna being the Lord Himself, 
but, this Muni had discovered the arrival of the Avathaar, by the Grace of the Almighty. It was 
Baaba who. had invited the Muni for His dharshan. 


The replies that Krishna gave when the Gopees complained to His mother about His mischievous 
pranks and thefts of milk, butter, etc., also reveal, by the inner meaning they convey, the divine 
essence that He was. 


"Why did you drink the milk from the pot she was carrying?." 

"She was taking it to be offered to God, perhaps, God might have drunk it up." 
"Where had you run away?" 

"I was always with you, is it not?" 

"Why do you hold that butter pot in your clasp?" 

"So that others may not eat it!" 

"Why do you put your hand into that butter pot?" 

"I am looking for a lost calf." 


These were the types of answers He taught them with. He was the Ancient One, in the new garb. 
His words came from the beginning of Time. 


Raadha's prema was pure without egoism 


The Raadha-thathwam (principle) is also a deep, inscrutable one. She was ever in the 
contemplation of the Lord and His Glory. She too saw the child Krishna as the Divine 
manifestation, separate from the human form. Yasodha one day was searching for Krishna who 
had strayed away; she sought almost everywhere and at last, she went to the house of Raadha. 
Raadha just closed her eyes and meditated on Krishna for a while and when she called "Krishna," 
Krishna was there. Then, Yasodha shed tears of joy. She said, "I love Krishna as a mother; I have 
a sense of egoism in me that He is my son and that I must save Him from harm and seek to give 
Him guidance and protection. Your prema is pure; it has no egoism prompting it." 


The gopees had that one-pointed prema (love), unwavering, clear and pure. The relationship 
between the gopees and Krishna as depicted in the Bhaagavatha has been unfortunately judged 
by persons who have not regulated and controlled their Vriththis. This subject is beyond the 
comprehension of such people. Only Brahmachaarins (celibates)of the most ardent and ascetic 
type like Shukha Maharishi who described it to King Pareekshith and in recent years, 
Raamakrishna Paramahamsa, can appreciate that relationship and pronounce upon its 
uniqueness. All the rest are apt to see in it only the reflection of their own failings and their own 
feelings. The language of samsaara (worldly life) is the only language they know; the regions of 
Thuriya---beyond the regions of wakefulness, dream and deep sleep---to which those experiences 
relate, are not within their reach. So, they drag the subject down to their own level and claim that 
they have mastered their mystery. 


Every Godward step makes you shed all attachment 


As a matter of fact, the Inner Eye, the Inner Senses are needed to grasp the meaning of this 
relationship. Oruganti has shown that it has eluded the grasp of most interpreters, for it is closely 
allied to the Adhwaithik experience of Nirvikalpa Samaadhi (the superconcious state where there 
is no mind) itself. The mind has to be the master, not the slave, of the senses, if the interpretation 
has to be just. Thoughts, wishes, deeds and feelings---all have to be purified of the desire for 
gain. Ahamkaara (egoism) itself must lose all its hold on the interpreter, as it did on the gopees. 
Prema towards the Lord such as the gopees had, should make a man strong, not weak. In fact, 
the gopees were not weakened by their Love; they were rendered tough. Raamakrishna too 
exhorted his disciples, like Narendhranaath, to grow strong, with the cultivation of prema 
towards the Lord. 


Every step taken towards the Lord makes you shed bit by bit all attachment to the world. How 
then could the gopees retain their physical awareness? Dhruva went into the forest to get from 
the Lord the boon of sitting on the lap of his father, a very ordinary wish of a plainly earthly 
type. But as he advanced in thapas, that wish disappeared from his mind and his mind was 
elevated to great spiritual heights. How can one who has tasted amritha (nectar) be eager to taste 
water? Or, crave for tamarind fruits after tasting kharjur (dates) and having it in his possession? 
Every craving will be sublimated into the higher realms of pure consciousness, the moment one 
enters the spiritual field. 


The gods came to the world as gopees 


And then who are these gopees, according to the Bhaagavatha itself?. They are the demi-gods 
who wanted to share in the glory of the Avathaar and who came down to the world as witnesses 
and sharers ill the Divine /eela (cosmic sport). They came for a purpose; they are not ordinary 
village folk, who could be dismissed as a crowd of voluptuous women. They saw in every 
gesture and gait, every word and phrase of Krishna the Divine, not the human at all. They had no 
occasion or chance to be agitated by a secular wriththi (thought wave); all vriththis were 
awakened by Divine promptings and urges. Like the magnifying glass which catches the rays of 
the Sun and directs them all to one spot, thus concentrating the heat on one point and helping it 
to ignite, the hearts of the gopees collected all the vriththis and concentrated them and caused the 
illumination and the flame. The flame burnt all dross; the illumination revealed the Truth. All 
other interpretations are to be laid at the door of either ignorance or scholasticism, the pompous 
pride of mere book learning, which scorns the exercise of discipline. 


Meaning of Krishna's theft of butter 


Krishna is condemned as a thief who stole butter from the cowherd maidens; but, the butter 
represents the bhakthi of the heart that is got after the process of churning. It is a question of a 
symbol being taken as literally true. He is Chiththachor (the stealer of hearts). The thief steals at 
night, in the darkness, without awakening the master; but, when this thief steals, the master 
awakens; He wakes him and tells him that He has come. The victim is left supremely happy and 
satisfied. 


Every gopee had the highest type of bhakthi in her heart. They saw only Krishna wherever they 
turned; they wore on their foreheads blue kumkum, in order to remind themselves of Krishna. 
There were many husbands who protested against the colour of the kumkum, but they dared not 
wipe it off, lest harm should befall them and the sacrilege recoil on them alone. [Here Baaba 


who had filled his hand with petals of Mallika (jasmine)flowers pulled apart by Him from 
garlands given to Him, showered the petals from one palm to another and they fell in a cascade 
of blue gems. Even the gems they preferred were of this type, blue, like Krishna. He showed the 
astounded gathering the gems He was referring to. Each gem had Krishna's form in it, beautifully 
clear. ] 


Do not have pride in your attachment to God 


There was a gopee named Suguna. One day, when Krishna was with Sathyabhaama, He 
pretended to have severe stomach ache and in spite of all the remedies that she tried she could 
not afford relief. Of course, it was all acting, superb acting such as the paralytic stroke I had for a 
week previous to Guru Pournami recently! Even Rukmini was not admitted into the house by 
her to inquire about Krishna's health. But, Rukmini found Suguna pining outside the door in 
great agony at the illness of the Lord. She gave her the articles and asked her to go in. Krishna 
welcomed Suguna and made her sit at His Feet and ate the fruits she had picked up from 
Sathyabhaama's own garden and suddenly, the ache had gone. It was her agony at the Lord's 
condition, her simple sincere devotion that was so effective. 


There should be no artificiality in your attachment to the Lord, no affectation, no pride, no 
egoism left, to soil the freshness of the flower you offer. Sathyabhaama protested when Krishna 
accepted the fruits, for, Krishna had brushed them aside as tasteless when she had herself offered 
them as the precious product of her assiduous gardening effort. They were tasteless, since her 
pride had entered into them now. When the simple rustic gopee picked them from the ground and 
saturated them with her devotion, they became tasty and attractive for the Lord, who cares for the 
bhaava (inner feeling), not the baahya (outer show)! 


The only prema that will not allow pride and envy to interfere with its purity is prema towards 
God. I know that many of you, who know that I have been taking only a cup of buttermilk daily 
for the last two months, are genuinely grief-stricken, though I have been talking to you that no 
work of Mine has been stopped or delayed as a result of what they call My "reduced intake of 
food;" that is a sign of their prema but really, I live on your Aanandham, not on this material 
food at all. I wish that you realised this and stopped worrying or weeping. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, Krishna Janmaashtami, 


12-8-1963 


Remember always that it is easy to do what is pleasant; but it is 
difficult to be engaged in what is beneficial. Not all that is pleasant 
is profitable. 


Success comes to those who give up the path strewn with roses, 
and brave the hammer-blows and sword-thrusts of the path fraught 
with danger. 


Sathya Sai Baaba 


19. Vamsi Kunj 


HERE was an occasion when Krishna laid His flute aside and declared that He would not play on 
it again. It is a long story, not found in books; I alone must tell you about it, for it is only the 
Person who has experienced it that can describe it, A bride called Neeraja came to Gokulam as 
the daughter-in-law of a Gopa family. Her husband and parents-in-law warned her against 
Krishna and His pranks and threatened her, on pain of dire punishment, to keep away from Him 
and to avoid Him by every possible means. 


It was Govardhana puuja (worship) day and all the gopas and gopikas had to go beyond the 
village limits to circumambulate and worship the Govardhan Hill, a festival they celebrated 
every year. Neeraja too went with the others and in spite of the severest warning, she peeped into 
a crowd of enthusiastic gopees watching the dance of Raadha with Krishna, in a flower bower 
near the Hill. She was so captivated by the Divine Presence that she was no longer the same 
person. 


Another day, while on the Yamuna bank, she saw Krishna fashioning a Flute from a reed taken 
out of vamsi kunj (bamboo bower) and she heard Him play!: Oh, it was overwhelmingly ecstatic! 
It was a call to transcend the material bonds to free oneself from the trammels of earthly 
endeavours. Neeraja did not care for any one now. She became God-mad. In fact, she was the 
first to hold the reins of Akrura's chariot when he was taking Krishna to Mathura away from 
Gokulam, and try to push the vehicle back! 


Krishna responds to the call of yearning 


Well; she was driven out of her house by the mother-in-law for that. She was an outcast. The 
whole village rose up against her; she spent her days in the vamsi kunj, her whole mind fixed on 
the Lord whom she had installed there. Years passed. Nandha, Yasodha and Raadha left the 
world. She was now 52 years old. One day, she prayed desperately to Krishna: I can no longer 
bear this forlorn life. My eyes have gone dry, they have no more tears to keep this Love, green. 
My heart too is fast turning a wasteland. Come, O Lord, come and save me, take me unto 
yourself. Krishna heard the prayer. 


He responded to her yearning and called her by name, so sweetly that the very Voice filled her 
with new life. The vamsi kunj was flagrant with Divine glory. Krishna came near and took 
Neeraja's palm In His Hand. "What do you desire?" asked He. She asked "What is the purpose of 
life?" "To merge In God." "Well let me merge in You...but, before that, before my Prema merges 
in yours, let me hear you play on that flute for a short while." Krishna smiled and gave the 
excuse that He had not brought His flute. But, seeing Neeraja's yearning, He plucked a reed from 
the vamsi kunj and broke it right and in a trice converted it into a flute. With Neeraja on his lap, 
Krishna played so melodiously on the Flute that the entire Gokula and even the whole world, 
was bathed in ecstatic joy. When He stopped, Neeraja had attained final beatitude and was no 
longer a limited individual gopee separate from Him. 


Krishna laid aside His flute and said, He will not play on it again. That is the story of one gopee; 
the story of every gopee will be interesting, each in its own way, for they were all so transmuted 
by the Bhakthi they bore towards the Lord. The gopees were declared by Naaradha in the 
Bhakthi Suuthras (aphorisms on devotion) to be the greatest among the bhakthas (devotees). 


Gokulaashtami day, 12-8-1963 


In your daily affairs, do not create factions, or revel in hatred. See 
the good in others and the faults in yourselves. Revere others as 
having God installed in them; revere yourself also as the seat of 
God. Make your heart pure so He can reside therein. 


Sathya Sai Baaba 


20. Su-dharshana 


LAST evening, when you heard about the Krishnaavathaara (Incarnation as Krishna), your 
hearts were filled with joy, which overflowed through the eyes, as I could see. Your minds too 
were purified by that experience. The Avathaara had, come in order to guard the world and to 
strengthen dharma (righteousness) as the means of guarding it. Books that contain the Lord's 
words and great men who know them declare that the Lord assume HumanForm in order to carry 
out these purposes. The story of Kuchela tells how one has to meditate on Him to worship Him 
and to honour Him. Kuchela knew what exactly had to be given to the Lord; the Lord cares for 
the feeling that accompanies the gift, the attitude with which the offering is made; He is not 
moved by the quantity or the cost. Dhroupadhi offered a tiny piece of leaf sticking to the side of 
the vessel in which she had cooked the meal and the Lord was so fully fed that He said. He was 
freed from all hunger. Rukmini placed just, a Single Thulasi (basil) leaf on the scale, but, since 
she had saturated it ‘with her devotion, it weighed as much as Krishna Himself. Kuchela took a 
little "beaten rice" and the Lord ate it with relish and was highly pleased at the offering so full of 
bhakthi. 


Have the goal of Saayujya always in View 


A piece of paper that is white tough and clean, is not as valuable as another piece of equal size, 
which though Soiled and dirty, has upon it the imprint of the Reserve Bank making it a hundred- 
rupee note. The imprint of bhakthi makes the "beaten rice" precious. Give the Lord the fruit, 
prema, that grows on the tree of life. Develop the illumination of prema and the bats of grief, 
envy and egoism will fly away into the darkness. 


You must have the goal of Saayujya (merging in the Absolute) always in view; do not give it up 
or forget it. Be like the river that flows slowly to tile sea. A person who has purchased a ticket to 
Calcutta from Madras, because that is the place he wants to reach, Will not halt at any other 
place on the journey; lie has the destination always in view. Of course, he may be interested in 
the sights and scenes on the way; he might get down here and there for refreshments but, he will 
not seek a home anywhere, in between Saalokyo, Saameepya, Saaruupya (being in the same 
place, nearness to the master and likeness of the Form of Master) may come in between; in fact, 
they do. But, you should not be satisfied with those stages. They are intermediate stations, 
remember. You have to reach each and travel beyond. 


In this Kuchela episode, the wife of Kuchela plays a more important role than Kuchela himself 
She has much more bhakthi; in fact, women are more devotional than men. They can master 
their minds better. It was her maternal love that prompted her to send Kuchela to the Lord so that 
her children might get a full meal. She had faith in the Lord. Kuchela hesitated and argued that 
Krishna might not recognise him or remember him or invite him in or accept his homage. 


Fear of God should be absent in a genuine bhaktha 


Kuchela is described in the Bhaagavatha as constantly engaged in the meditation on God. But, 
then, how can his doubt be explained? She urged him to give up all doubt and proceed at least as 
far as the gate of the Palace of Krishna. She was certain that Krishna would call him in, if he 
took at least that little trouble. Of course, fire warms all, but one has to go near it, is it not? 
Staying away, you cannot complain that the fire is not warming you. Kuchela was so nervous 
that he could be persuaded to go only up to tile gate. 


Once it was decided that Kuchela would go, she took from the place where she had hidden it for 
arainy day, a quantity of paddy, just a handful; she put it in boiling water, took it out and dried it 
and, then, frying it over the fire, she pounded it with a pestle to prepare the "beaten rice" that 
Kuchela said was Krishna's favourite food, while at school. Thai was tied to a corner of the cloth 
worn over the body and he moved on, his fear Increasing at every step. Such fear should be 
absent in the genuine bhaktha. He must approach the Lord as of right and earn the Grace that is 
his clue. 


Of course, the Lord showers his mercy on the Aartha (distressed person) and the Arthaarthi (one 
who longs for wealth), as well as on the jijnaasu (seeker of spiritual knowledge) and the jnaani 
(liberated person). The aartha is the person who is ill and suffering; the arthaarthi is the 
poverty-stricken who seeks prosperity and fortune. So, Krishna called him in, with 
overwhelming joy, and reminded him of the happy days at school which they had spent together 
at the Guru's Feet, and even while Kuchela was squirming to hide the common-place offering 
tied to the corner of his tattered cloth, Krishna sought out the stuff and began eating it with great 
relish. Bhakthi had made it very tasty to the Lord. 


The Lord can transform poverty to wealth 


It is related that Rukmini Devi held His hand when He took the third handful and the reason 
given usually by commentators is that she was afraid all the riches of the Lord would go over to 
Kuchela if a few more handfuls were taken in by the Lord! What a silly idea! As if the riches of 
the Lord are exhaustible, as if He would care if bhakthas carried all of it away, as if the Mother 
of the Universe is stingy in Her Gifts. This can never be true! The real cause for Her holding the 
hand of Krishna was- She claimed Her share of the offering of the devoted heart; She wanted a 
portion for Herself; it was Her right to have a share. 


Kuchela left Dhwaaraka rather disappointed because he was not given any donation or promise 
of a donation. He was sad when he remembered his family and the starving children. He was lost 
in grief and so, he passed his own house without noticing that: it had undergone a great change 
and had become overnight a huge big mansion. His wife, who saw him. called him back and 
related how suddenly, happiness had been showered, upon them by Krishna's Grace. 


Sweeten your speech, sanctify your deeds 


Kuchela's saadhana Started that day! Until then, he was just a ritualist, going through the 
outward forms of the rites prescribed in the Shaasthras. When he realised how the Lord can, 
through His Mahima (miracle power), transform poverty to wealth, He decided to win the Grace 
of God for securing perpetual, undiminished Joy, that is to say, win Saayujya. He got su- 
dharshana, the vision of what is Good for him, And, in the midst of the treasures that now filled 
his residence, he lived that life of an ascetic, without any attachment. He knew that it was all a 
dream, the riches now and the poverty then. 


The emperor dreamt he was a beggar and wept when he was refused alms at one door and was 
overjoyed when at another door, he got a stomachful. He woke up and he was no longer poor; he 
was an Emperor. Even that is a dream, an illusion. 


Brahman alone is Sath (real); Prakrithi is A-sath (unreal). Be in this awareness always, that is the 
highest saadhana. Seek Sudharshanam (vision of the Divine). Make your speech madhuram 
(sweet), and your good deeds an arpanam (offering). This is the three-fold path. Become a child, 
lose your conceit and pride. When you are still in the region of the gunas, motivated by desire 


(whether for the good or for the grand or the mean), you have yourself to seek the mother; when 
you are free from the bonds of the gunas (the enticements of desire), the Mother Herself will 
hasten towards you and fondle you in her lap. Purify your vision, sweeten your speech, sanctify 
your deeds---that way lies liberation. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 2-9-1963 


I do not accept from you flowers that fade, fruits that rot, coins 
that have no value beyond the national boundary. Give Me the 
lotus that blooms in your Maanasasarovara--the clear pellucid 
water of the lake---of Your inner consciousness; give Me the fruits 
of holiness and steady discipline. 


I am above all this worldly etiquette, which enjoins you to see 
elders with some fruit or flower in your hand. My world is the 
world of the spirit; there values are different. 


If you are happy with faith in God and fear of sin, that is enough 
"service," enough kainkaryam for Me. It pleases Me so. 


Sathya Sai Baba 


21. Vishaya, the visha 


KALLURI Veerabhadhra Shaasthry has made Aanandha well up in every one of you by his clear 
and moving description of the incidents of the Bhaagavatha. His words were apt and sweet; his 
comments revealed the inner significance of the events; he made all partake personally in the life 
at Brindhaavan of the families of the cowherds during the time that Krishna was among them. 
Some persons feel intoxicated by the emotions or they get near mad, on account of the devotion 
they have. But such overpowering emotions have to be mastered. One has to transform bhakthi 
into jnaana and become stronger thereby. 


Man's life is meaningful only because he can use it to see God. The goal of life is the final 
merging in the sea, God. You should not fill life with the world; that will make it a vanity fair, an 
insanity fair. Listen to all such things as will draw you towards the principle of Godhead; then, 
think it over in the silence; make it part of your consciousness. This process of manana 
(reflection) makes you a man; that is the test of man. 


Sensory object is man's most deadly poison 


Veerabhadhra Shaasthry described the scene of Kaaliya mardhana (Krishna's dance on the head 
of the serpent). Well, Kaaliya is a huge big serpent, full of poison, rolling in death and 
destruction. He is the representative of man, rolling in sensory objects, poison so far as its effect 
on life is concerned. Vishaya (sensory object) is the most deadly visha (poison). When Krishna 
danced on the head of Kaaliya, (incidentally I might add, you should make your hearts as smooth 
and soft as the hood of the snake), the poison was all vomitted! And the serpent was subdued. 
When God is revered, the world and all its poisonous fumes recede and you are restored to 
original health. Make the Name and Form of the Lord dance upon the hood of your heart. 
Krishna had no vishaya-vaasana (attachment to sense objects) and so, He could plunge into the 
pool and call out to Kaaliya and jump on to his hood and trample on it and squeeze the poison 
out. If you are deep in the mire, you cannot pull out another who has fallen into it. Be on the 
bank; do not get caught. You are now struggling in the mire of samsaara (worldly life), the 
slithery mud of attachment. So, how can you trample on the snake? You can save yourself only 
by calling on God, who is free from vishaya and who is on the bank. Hold His hand and He will 
pull you on to hard ground. 


Krishna never parted in those days from Balaraama; but, that day, He came alone, without him 
He was wearing a necklace of green beads a nose-ring of pearl and in his right ear, a ring of 
pearls. He were no shirt or coat just yellow silk round his waist and a kerchief wound round the 
head, or rather thrown carelessly round one end this way and another end that way! The peacock 
feather which is described by poets and sages, was not always worn. It was struck up only off 
and on. Of course, peacocks abounded in Brindhaavan then and they are found in plenty even 
today. On his bare chest, there was a mole which could be clearly seen, an inevitable mark of all 
Avathaars, including the Sais. 


Krishna had no objective desires 


Krishna saw the carcasses of animals which had died When they inhaled the poisoned air, near 
the Kaaliya pool; birds had fallen dead on the ground. Nothing green could survive in the 
neighbourhood. As soon as Krishna jumped into the pool to save the region from the serpent's 
havoc, his companions ran horne to bring the parents, so that they could intercede and stop the 


foolish pranks of their mischievous son. They were in great panic; only Raadha was calm and 
collected. She knew that for Him, it was a minute's fun, a moments sankalpa (resolve). He had 
no vishaya (objective desires) and so visha (poison) could not affect Him. 


Even objective desires will be transmuted into higher spheres of purity when one approaches the 
Lord. Nothing against Dharma can stand the Presence of the Lord. That fire will consume all 
impurities; and people forget that Krishna was just eleven years old, when He finally left 
Brindhaavan, the Scene of the Raasaleela, towards Madhura and from thence to Dhwaaraka. The 
Bhaagavatha itself explicitly says that. But, it is ignored, because the minds of the people and the 
poets who want to see sensuality in the Raasaleela are vitiated by vishayavaasana (attachment to 
sense objects). 


The boy, Dhruva, went to the forest to do thapas and get from the Lord a boon, so that his father 
might treat him as lovingly as he did his half-brother. But, as he progressed in saadhana, that 
wish was forgotten and more lofty ones came to occupy its place The Lord once He enters the 
mind will rid it of all evil Raam (God) and kaam (desire) cannot coexist, Lord and lust cannot be 
together. How then could the gopees have any body-consciousness, when they adored Krishna? 


The Lord never does anything without purpose 


Krishna had already :announced His Glory to the cowherd maidens by such divine miracles, as 
the uplifting of the mountain Govardhanagiri. He had proved Himself superior to Indhra, Brahma 
and Varuna. He had manifested the Universe in His mouth and showed that He had come on a 
Divine Mission to destroy the wicked and save the good There is no loukikam (worldliness) in 
their behaviour; it is all aloukikam (other worldly). 


The Lord never speaks a word without relevance or significance; never does anything without 
appropriateness or purpose. Garuda is the symbol of karma with the two wings of shraddha 
(faith) and bhakthi (devotion), the bird on which the Lord will take His seat, the hridhaya 
vihanga (the heart as the bird). Raadha is Prakrithi (Nature), known as dharaa (Universe), which 
helps you to think about the aadhaara (support), in a regular dhaara (continuous flow). 


The incident of the rope is another instance. Krishna felt that it was time to reveal His Truth and 
so, just as He showed all Creation in His mouth when His mother asked Him to show her His 
tongue, when she suspected He had eaten sand, He made even the longest rope too short to bind 
Him. It became the talk of the place and every one felt he had all the 14 worlds in Him! 


Know the secret passage to the heart of the Lord 


Avathaars choose the time and the mode of announcement of their advent and their Glory. Even 
in this avathaara, such miracles had to be done when I decided that the time was opportune for 
taking the people into My secret. 


Let your mind ever dwell on Krishna of such stature. Sanctify every word and deed by filling it 
with prema of Krishna or whatever Name and Form you give to the Lord you love. The gold of 
which an anklet was made, can become the gold for a crown on the head of a temple image; only 
it has to be melted in the crucible and beaten into shape. The waters of the river might be dirty; 
but, the bhaktha who sips it with a manthra or a sthothra (sacred sound or prayer)on his lips, 
transmutes it into a sacred theertha (sanctified water). The body becomes healthy by exercise 
and work; the mind becomes healthy by Upaasana (devout contemplation) and Naamasmarana 
(remembrance of the Divine), by regular, well-planned discipline, joyfully accepted and joyfully 
carried out. 


Ahimsa (non-injury) is the rice; Arpitha (dedication) is the gram; praayaschittham (expiation) the 
raisins; paschaaththaapam (repentance)is the jaggery. Mix all these well with the ghee, 
sadhgunam (virtue). That is the offering you should make to your Jshtadevatha (chosen deity), 
not the paltry stuff you make out of articles got for a paisa in the shops! The gopees knew this 
secret passage to the heart of the Lord and they realised Him quick and fast. 


The Lord has no hatred in Him 


You have heard that Krishna is Murali-Maadhava, and what exactly is the murali? You must be 
the murali (the flute). Let the breath of Krishna pass through you, making delightful music that 
melts the hearts. Surrender yourself to Him; become hollow, Vaasana-less, egoless, desireless; 
then, He will Himself come and pick you up caressingly and apply you---the flute---to His Lips 
and blow His sweet breath through you. Allow Him to play whatever song He likes. 


The Lord is all prema. He has no dhwesha (hatred) in Him. Once at Shirdhi, a certain Dr. Pillai 
came with much suffering, and he prayed that he might be given ten births with the chance of 
dividing the pain into ten parts, so that he could suffer a little each time and pay off his kaarmic 
debt, without being hard put to it having to pay it all off in one! He was informed through Kaaka 
Saheb that he should fall at the feet of Baaba and as he did so, Baaba got the pain transferred to 
himself. For ten minutes, Baaba suffered, at the rate of one minute for each janma (birth), and 
thus he rid Dr. Pillai of his obligation. Baaba was quite normal, as soon as the 10 minutes were 
over. 


Prema must be many-stranded in order to be strong and tough. A single strand,is .too weak.. 
Have it many-stranded, one towards the mother, another towards the father, .others strands 
towards husband, wife,, friend, son, daughter, etc. of course Prema. is all-embracing, it cannot be 
confined to one item and denied to, another. It is a current that flows over all Meditation on the 
Lord and His Prema will help you to tap it from the depths of your heart. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 6-9-1963 


There is no living being without the spark of love; even a mad man 
loves something or somebody intensely. But, you must-recognise 
this love as but a reflection of the Premaswaruupa (the 
embodiment of Love), that is your reality, of the God who is 
residing in your heart. Without that spring of Love that bubbles in 
your heart, you will not be prompted to love at all. 


Recognise that spring, rely on it more and more, develop, its 
possibilities, try to irrigate the whole world with it, discard all 
touch of self from it, do not seek anything in return for it, from 
those to whom you extend it. 


Sathya Sai Baaba 


22. Thamo gunam, thapo gunam 


ORUGANTI Narasimha Yogi has been explaining the Krishna-thathwam (principle) to you 
during the last three days. Pandiths (scholars)are the instruments through whom you can gather 
the key to the understanding of the mystery of God; they give you the gist of the Shaasthras in 
easy, simple style and interpret them in the light of whatever experience they have earned. You 
have to listen to them with shraddha and bhakthi (faith and devotion), in a mood of humility. 


Arjuna told Krishna, "I came into this battlefield a dheera (brave person). I have now become, a 
dheena (a man in distress) for J am but an instrument in your hands." Arjuna was a Chinmaya 
muurthi (embodiment of divine consciousness), not as he imagined, a Mrinmaya muurthi (mud 
filed body). He was suffused with Divine Consciousness, not earthly inertia. Only, he was not 
aware of It. A man gets into the company he deserves, is it not? From the company, you can 
judge him. Well; Arjuna had the Lord Himself for company! Arjuna had the shraddha (faith) to 
concentrate on the Geetha teaching, even in the midst of the battlefield, on the eve of the fight 
that was to decide the fate of his family. He had bhakthi enough to compel Krishna to show him 
the Vishwaruupa, the Viraatswaruupa (Universal Cosmic) itself! He had the humility to declare 
that he would much rather beg than kill his kith and kin; also to fall at the feet of Krishna when 
he could no longer see how he should proceed. 


Ajnaana is the disease afflicting the mankind 


Develop these qualities and you too can get the company of the Lord. Krishna aroused the 
raajasik (passionate) qualities again in Arjuna, by prodding him and laughing at him for his 
cowardice and un-kshathriya (watrior) attitude of renunciation; thus, the Thaamasik qualities of 
sloth and ignorance were removed. Later, He transformed him into a saathwik (noble, pious) 
hero, fit for the dharma yuddha (war of righteousness) that he was to wage. 


Ishaavaasya_ Upanishath mentions that ajnaana (ignorance), is the greatest sin. The 
Kaarpanyadhosha that the Geetha mentions is another name for the same ajnaana. Geetha is the 
specific for this fell disease, which afflicts the majority of mankind. You must all study the 
Geetha daily. Read a few s/okas and meditate on the meaning yourself; it will dawn on you in the 
silence of your heart. You need not read elaborate commentaries. Each word in the Geetha is a 
gem. No more do you need gemstones for the ear, the nose, and the neck; have the gem of the 
Geetha s/okas in your heart, let them activate your intellect and your hands. 


Essential purpose of all Divine play is Bliss 


So long as you are entangled in the sensual world you cannot distinguish the real from the unreal. 
But, you have to discover the real, through discrimination; there is no avoiding that 
responsibility; you have to do it, now or later. Power, status, wealth, authority---these are useless 
in this adventure. Alexander, during his campaigns in the Punjab, was anxious to see a celebrated 
sage; he went to the cave where the sage was, and expected that he would be received most 
thankfully and with demonstrations of welcome. But the sage simply asked him to move aside 
and go. He was not interested in the famous world-shaker, the Greek conqueror. Alexander was 
very angry; he threatened to kill the sage and drew his sword. But the sage said calmly, with a 
laugh "I do not die; I cannot die." That put some sense in Alexander and he put his sword back 
into the scabbard. 


Narasimha Yogi spoke of the /ee/a (divine play) where Brahma (One of the Trinity) takes away 
the entire population of Brindhaavan including the cattle; Krishna creates out of His 
maayaashakthi (miracle power)identical men, women and children and identical cattle and they 
carry on undiscovered, quite normally, for one year! Now Brahma is not different from Vishnu 
or Krishna; they do not work contrary to each other; they both work out the same plan. This 
ruupa (form) is that ruupa; this upaadhi (disguise) and that upaadhi are both of the same Mahaa 
Shakthi (Divine Energy). The essential purpose of all this /eela (divine play)is Aanandham 
(Divine Bliss). So, the One carries away when in one upaadhi called Brahma,. and creates 
substitutes, when in another upaadhi called Krishna---all for the sake of' the Aanandham it gives 
to the participants as well as to the onlookers and :those who listen to the story later. This is one 
way of announcing the Divinity of the Avathaara, Which has to be done so that men may listen 
and obey. The common man will sit up in wonder and his awe will ripen into faith; later, even if 
he salts discriminating and arguing pro and con, the Avathaar will only be glad, for the faith will 
thus be confirmed. 


Remove the feeling of inferiority that dwarfs you 


The mind is ever unsteady; it has to be educated; its quicksilver quality has to be curbed; it is 
really Chaithanya-swaruupam (embodiment of Consciousness) and it will become steady only 
when it is merged in Chaithanya, that is, the Divine. There may be ice on a lake; the ice is jada 
(inert); but, move it all to one side, press it aside and the sahaja swaruupam (natural form) of 
water, the Chaithanya reveals itself, That Chaithanya has no joy or sorrow. It is ever in perfect 
equilibrium "I am That" I am not affected by either. Mine is Samaadhi---intelligence which is 
sama (steady), unaffected, unchanging Wisdom. 


Remove the cataract and the vision becomes clear. So too, remove the feeling of inferiority that 
dwarfs you now; feel that you are Aathma-swaruupa, Nithva-swaruupa, Aanandha-swaruupa 
(Absolute, Eternal and Blissful); then, every act of yours becomes a yajna (sacrifice), a puuja 
(ritual worship). The ear, the eye, the tongue, the feet all become tools for your uplift, not traps 
for your destruction. Transform thamogunam (quality of inertia) into thapogunam (quality of 
austerity) and save yourself. 


Know the best way of showing your gratitude 


You are indeed lucky that such learned and experienced Pandiths share with you their 
scholarship and their joy. Practise mananam (contemplation) of what you hear; that is the best 
way of showing your gratitude. You have another advantage too. With your experience, you can 
understand the Bhaagavatham better. Swaami's nature is Vishwaprema (all-pervading Love), you 
have known, and Bhaagavatham is the story of Vishwaprema. 


I declare that I am in every one, in every being. So do not hate any one, or cavil at any one. 
Spread prema always, everywhere. That is the best way of revering Me. Do not seek to measure 
Me or evaluate Me. I am beyond your understanding. Pray or worship for your own satisfaction 
and contentment. But to say that I will respond only if I am called or that I will save only if I am 
thought of is wrong. Have you not heard the declaration. "Sarvathaah paani paadham?" You can 
hear My Footsteps, for, I walk with you, behind you, beside you. When you cry out in agony, 
"Don't you hear my heart's plaint? Have you become so stony-hearted?" My ear will be there to 
listen. Ask that I should protect you like the apple of the eye, My eye will be there to watch over 
you and guard you. Have dhoopam (incense) and scent-sticks for the puuja, and I smell them. I 


answer to whatever Name you use; I respond to whatever request you make with a pure heart and 
a sanctified motive. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 7-9-1963 


23. You and I 


AS Subbaraaya Shaasthry said, the deha (body) has to be used to ascend the ladder of the three 
gunas, from thamas (inertia) to rajas (activism) and from rajas to sathwa (goodness), so that 
finny, you may get beyond the ladder into the heights above. The deha is the root of all the grief 
and all the disquiet which is now the lot of man Why? The deha was acquired by means of the 
good and bad that was done in the previous birth. They are called collectively, karma. Karma is 
caused by attachment and hatred, affection and disaffection. They are the products of sheer 
ignorance, ignorance of the unity of all creation including oneself. This ajnaana (ignorance) can 
be removed only by Su-jnaana (good knowledge). When a man suffers from stomach-ache, the 
best treatment will be salts or a hot water bag applied to the stomach, and not medicated 
collyrium for the eye! 


Ajnaana can be removed by acknowledging the universality of God and the merging of your 
individuality in the Universal. First practise the attitude of "Nenu neevaadu" ("I am yours," in 
Thelugu). Let the wave discover and acknowledge that it belongs to the sea. This first step is not 
as easy as it looks. The wave takes a long time to recognise that vast sea beneath it that gives it 
its existence. Its ego is so powerful that it will not permit it to be so humble, as to bend before 
the sea. 


The three steps to reach Non-duality 


"I am yours. You are the Prabhu (Master). I am a dhaasa (servant). You are sovereign, I am 
bound." This mental attitude will tame the ego. make every activity worth-while. This is the 
religious outlook named Maarjaala-kishora---the attitude of the kitten to its mother, mewing 
plaintively for succour and sustenance, removing all trace of the ego. 


The next step is “neevu naavaadu" ("You are mine" in Thelugu)where the wave de]hands /he 
support of the sea as of right. The Lord has to take the responsibility of guarding and guiding the 
individual. The individual is important, worthy to be saved, the Lord is bound to fulfil the need 
of the bhaktha. Suurdaas said, "You are mine; I will not leave you; I shall imprison you in my 
heart; you shall not escape." 


The next stage is. "Neevu nenu---("You are I" in Thelugu )- --I am but the image, You are the 
Reality. I have no separate individuality; there is no duality. all is One. Duality is but delusion. 


The first sign of spiritual life is vairaagyam (detachment). If you have no vairaagyam, you are 
illiterate so far as spiritual scholarship is concerned. Vairaagyam is the ABC of saadhana. 
(spiritual effort). Vairaagyam must become strong enough to make you discard the bondage of 
the senses. Just a few minutes of thought will convince any one of the hollowness of earthly 
riches or fame or happiness. When you are affluent, every one praises you; when the tank is full, 
hundreds of frogs croak all round. When the tank is dry, not a single one is there to address the 
tank. 


Seek the difficult road of God-realisation 


If a corpse had a few jewels on it, the proverb says, many will claim kinship with the dead 
person; if it has no valuables on it, not a single person will come forward to weep for it! Consider 
when you are adding to your bank account further and further sums of money whether you are 
not accumulating troubles for yourselves and your children, making it harder for your children to 
lead clean, comfortable and honourable lives. When you struggle to achieve paltry fame by 


devious means, remember who among crores of your countrymen are honoured today and for 
what? Don't you see that only those who gave up, renounced, sought the more difficult road of 
God-realisation, instead of the easier path of world-realisation, are honoured everywhere? 


Welcome all the blows of fate, all the misfortunes and miseries, as gold welcomes the crucible, 
the hammer and the anvil, in order to get shaped into a jewel; or as the cane welcomes the 
chopper, the crusher, the boiler, the pan, the sprayer, the dryer, so that its sweetness may be 
preserved and used as sugar by all. The Paandavas never demurred when disasters fell thick upon 
them. They were happy that they helped them to remember Krishna and call upon Him. 


Submit to the Will of God in a resigned way 


Bheeshma was in tears on the arrow-bed, when he was about to pass away. Arjuna asked him 
why and he replied, "I am shedding tears because the miseries undergone by the Paandavas pass 
through my mind." Then he said, "This is done in order to teach the Kaliyuga a lesson, never to 
seek power, position or pelf, but to submit to the Will of God, in a completely resigned way, so 
that you may be ever happy and unmoved." 


The Lord rushes towards the bhaktha (devotee) faster than the bhaktha rushes towards Him. If 
you take one step towards Him, He takes a hundred steps towards you! He will be more than a 
mother or father. He will foster you from within you, as He has saved and fostered so many 
saints who have placed faith in Him. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 8-9-1963 


Anger and hatred can be used to ward off the evil that stalks the 
spiritual aspirant; be angry at tilings that hamper you, hate the 
habits the brutalise you. Cultivate jnaana (supreme knowledge) 
and visualise the Lord in all things and activities. That makes this 
human birth worth-while. 


Sathya Sai Baaba 


24. Be Mahaaraanis ! 


PRINCIPAL Parvathamma has been yearning long for this day, when I could come to your 
College and speak to you. This College, as she said just now, has been in existence for eighty- 
five years and it has educated and sent into various fields of life thousands of women. Bhaarath 
is the land where Bha or Brahmavidhya (knowledge of Brahman) has attracted the rathi 
(attachment) of its people, where the people have a natural attraction towards spiritual saadhana, 
where the call of tile Infinite is listened to with keenness. This keenness has now declined; it is a 
great misfortune; you must see that it is not lost. You should decide that it must be revived, at 
least in your own hearts. 


An intellect that is moved only by Truth and a Consciousness that will not tolerate the impurity 
of meanness or vice---these two are the pre-requisities for the fulfilment of that ideal. This is the 
aasthi (wealth) that will make a person an Aasthika (believer in God)! The intellect must 
investigate, as far as it can, the fundamental problem, why this birth, whither this life, whence 
this adventure, what the effect of human actions is on this life and on future lives, etc. 
Consciousness must dive deep into the Divinity that underlies it. 


Have faith in your own essential Divinity 


The education that does not confer vinaya and viveka (modesty and wisdom) is sheer waste of 
precious time; whatever else you learn or do not learn, equip yourself with the strength that is 
necessary to be virtuous, to resist temptation and the lures of the objective world. Viveka is not 
the cleverness that is given inordinate value today, but, the capacity to see things in their proper 
proportion, to evaluate the temporary and the lasting, the particular and the universal, the shallow 
and the deep. You must also have the attitude of reverence towards the past, the elders who are 
the repositories of the saintly spiritual wisdom anti experience which you have to acquire. 


Have also Faith---faith in your own essential Divinity, faith in the higher values attainable by 
eamest practice and the exercise of vairaagyam (detachment). Life becomes sweeter, with a little 
dose of denial too; if you get all your desires, it begins to cloy. Deny yourselves many of the 
things your mind runs after and you will find that you become tough enough to bear both good 
fortune and bad. 


Now, people are apt to go by the appearance, rather, than the reality of things There was a man 
once, who was such an ardent devotee of Ganesha that he used up all his riches to make golden 
images of that God as well as of the Mouse which is His vehicle, besides an umbrella, a seat, and 
other appurtenances, all of gold. Later he fell on evil days and so he had to sell all these loved 
things. The merchant who offered to purchase them started weighing each item and declaring the 
price it would fetch. When he said that the Ganesha would fetch as much as the mouse, for both 
were of equal weight, the man got enraged and complained that he was being let down. Ganesha 
must fetch more than the mouse! That was because he forgot the reality and attached value to the 
appearance, Form and the Name, and not to the substance. 


Education is not for mere living 


If value is given to the office that a man holds, which is but temporary, as soon as he retires and 
starts sitting on a bench in the Laal Bagh, people will stop recognising and saluting him! The 
schooling that gives only the outer polish is just a waste of opportunity. 


Education is not for mere living; it is for life, a fuller life, a more meaningful, a more worth- 
while life. There is no harm if it is also for a gainful employment; but, the educated must be 
aware that existence is not all, that gainful employment is not all. Again, education is not for 
developing the faculty of argument, criticism, or winning a polemic victory over your opponents 
or exhibiting your mastery over language or logic. That study is the best which teaches you to 
conquer this cycle of birth and death, which gives you the mental equipoise that will not be 
affected by the prospect of death, that will not be disturbed by the blessings or blows of fate. 
That study begins where this study of yours ends. 


When this material world is studied and analysed, you realise that it is just a conglomeration of 
good and bad and you aspire for something beyond this duality. The light will dawn on you, only 
after you have acquired Sathya, Dharma, Shaanthi and Prema. The root cause is that the basic 
thing is not known or experienced. How then can lasting peace be got? 


Joy and grief are not brought about by others 


When the doctor said, apply this ointment at the place where the scorpion stung your son, the 
fond father asked the son, "Where did the scorpion sting?." The boy replied. "in that corner" and 
the father applied the ointment to that spot on the floor! How can the pain disappear? Take the 
lamp to the place where the darkness is. Joy and grief are not brought about by others, they are 
emanations from within you. So, cure yourself, do not try to put the blame on others and start 
plans to cure them. 


You carry piles of books up and down, from your rooms to college and back; you know more 
about questions than about the answers. You can learn more by observation and meditation than 
by conning over the pages of books. The really valuable things, you can learn from the Vedhas 
and the Upanishadhs and religious scriptures. 


A Pandith engaged a boat to take him across the flooded Godhaavari. When the journey over the 
river started, he began a lively conversation with the boatman. He asked the boatman whether he 
had any schooling and when the reply came that he had none he said sadly, "Alas! A quarter of 
your life has gone to waste. It is as if you have drowned those years in the Godhaavari." 


The Pandith asked the boatman whether he could tell him the time from his watch; the boatman 
confessed he did not have a watch nor cared to have one. The Pandith deplored and said, "Half 
your life has gone into the Godhaavari." His next question was about newspapers, did the 
boatman read any, what was his favourite paper? The boatman replied that he did not read any 
nor did he care to know the news. He had enough to worry about already. The Pandith declared 
forthright that three-quarters of the boatman's life had been liquidated. 


Be prepared for both joy and grief 


dust then the sky darkened with storm clouds and there was an imminent threat of rain. The 
boatman turned to the Pandith, it was his turn to put a question. He asked, "Can you swim?" and 
when the frightened passenger confessed he could not, the boatman said, "In that case, your 
entire life is now going to merge in the Godhaavari." This is the case of the educated in India 
today They do not have the training that will help them in distress, or in dire need, to win back 
their mental poise. 


You are being carried along the flood of material pleasures and lures; how long can you drift like 


that? When you live in the world of desire, you must be prepared for both joy and grief. If you 
invite the Minister Bhoga (material enjoyment), you must be prepared for the visit along with 
him, of his Private Secretary Roga (illness)! Invite, on the other hand, the Minister Thyaaga 
(sacrifice), or his colleague Yoga (meditation] and you will be happy to receive their Private 
Secretary Bhoga (enjoyment), who plays a minor role in the presence of his master. 


Develop a pure and strong character 


Real education is not the command over a number of languages. I remember an incident that 
happened some time ago. The wife of an educated gentleman used to get letters from a certain 
Lakshminaaraayana, whom the husband suspected to be a boy friend of her college days and 
when a telegram came one day asking the wife to meet Lakshminaaraayana at the railway 
station, he hid the message and waited for developments, full of anger at the stranger as well as 
at his own wife. Tragedy was averted when Lakshmi, the college friend rushed in, disappointed 
that she did not meet her at the station according to the telegram. It seems she had come to that 
very town, because her husband, Naaraayana, had been transferred to that place! Mere literacy is 
the source of such silly suspicions! 


What is the worth of education if sheelam (virtuous conduct), is not found in those who claim to 
have been educated? Develop a pure and strong character. Remember most of you will get 
married and you will have the great responsibility of rearing up families, that is a Very valuable 
opportunity. Learn to adjust your likes and dislikes to those of others, learn the gentle art of 
sacrifice and service-keep in mind, when you react angrily against your mother-in-law, that a day 
will come When you too will have daughters-in-law! Try to appreciate their points off, view; 
they may have greater forethought, greater experience, greater sense of responsibility; they may 
know more about people and things than you, who are fresh entrants in their household. 


The family of the husband which you enter with marriage is a good training ground; it is a 
saadhana-kshethra (field of spiritual practice). When you are found fault with, do not fly into a 
rage; examine your Own conduct and discover the faults in yourselves; self-examination is the 
first step to self-improvement and peace. Do not exaggerate the faults of others, but give them a 
wide margin and see them as small; exaggerate yours, see them big and strive to remove them 
fast. Take all faultfinders as your friends and well-wishers for they give you warning-signals in 
time. 


Cultivate a sweet temper and sweet speech 


I find that now-a-days, the art of cynical argumentativeness has spread everywhere. This is a 
dangerous sign. On account of this, reverence has disappeared; respect for the teacher has also 
gone. Of course there are teachers who undermine their own dignity by such acts as begging 
cigarettes from their own students! There was a murderer who was sentenced in court, but, while 
arguing his defense, he pleaded, "I am the Aathma (Pure Self), as the Geetha declares. How can I 
kill or the deceased be killed?" The judge answered, "Do not worry. You will not die when you 
are hanged, nor can I get you executed. It is all Aathma, undying, unkilling, everywhere, in all." 
Dharma (Law)is applied by such people only when it suits them; otherwise, they do not care for 
its commands. 


Cultivate a sweet temper and sweet speech which is its natural consequence. Speak without 
anger or spite, without any artificiality or formality, straight from the heart. Then, you will be 
spreading joy and love among all. When your parents plead that they cannot afford to clothe you 


as you wish or give the various frills of finery that you crave for, do not get wild and quarrel with 
them. Be bold enough to resist temptation of yielding to the pressure of the crowd. Guna- 
poshana (nourishing the good qualities) is as important as deha-poshana (nourishing the body), 
remember. 


Be silent partners, inspirers and teachers 


You go about filling every bus, in attractive dresses, and carrying heaps of books, but, let Me tell 
you, the greatest beauty aid for women is sheelam (virtue). Attach importance to nishttha 
(discipline), and not to naashttha (breakfast). You can miss naashtha but not nishttha. Live a 
regulated disciplined life from now on; make it a habit, an armour that will protect you from 
harm. 


Pray to God and recite His Name or meditate on His Glory for some fixed period of time 
everyday; you will find it amply rewarding. Don't say, "Let me have a taste of the reward and 
then, I shall start the saadhana." Practise, and the experience will follow, must follow. 


This College is known as the Mahaaraani's Women's College. I want each of you to be a 
Mahaaraani (Queen) of your household. Mahaaraanis watch the world from the inner 
apartments of the palace, through interstices in the wall or enclosures; they can see, but they are 
safe from other eyes. That is the highest sthree-dharma (Women's duty), as laid down in the 
Shaasthras; you should not be seen or talked about; you must be away from public gaze; you 
must be silent invisible partners, inspirers and teachers. 


If you desire that others should honour you, you should honour them too. If others must serve 
you, serve them first; love begets love; trust engenders trust. Self-aggrandizement and selfishness 
bring disaster in their train. As a matter of fact, no joy can equal the joy of serving others. Be like 
this timepiece; show the correct time to all who desire to know, irrespective of the person who 
comes for the information. It has no likes and dislikes. 


A prayerful life will be a source of strength 


People call you weak. Do not believe it. Having all these strong points in your favour, 
intelligence, discipline, spiritual capacity, consciousness of other's excellences, awareness of 
one's faults, eagerness to improve yourself, how can you be called "weak"? 


I was asked by your Principal to plant a champaka tree in the garden of this college and I did it 
gladly; but the thing which will give me greater pleasure is to plant the sapling of prayer in your 
hearts. A prayerful life will not yield to the fury of passion; it will be a source of strength and 
Co-operation. 


Decline in the discipline of Naamasmarana (constant thought of the Lord) has been the cause of 
the decline of this country. A single household now has ten factions and parties; those who 
cannot reform their own homes have started reforming the country and advising co-operation and 
harmonious living to others. 


The knowledge of the Aathma as the very basis of all beings is now forgotten and that is the 
cause of Ashaanthi---all the unrest, the confusion and the moral crisis of today. It is to awaken 
the sleeping, and communicate to them this Message that I have come. I bless that all of you may 
have lives full of joy and peace; I bless that this College may have many many more years of 
useful life, useful in helping the women of this land to realise themselves and help others to do 
SO. 


Mahaaraani's Women's College, Mysore, 


12-9-1963 


The journey of every man is towards the cemetery; every day 
brings you nearer to the moment of death. So, do not delay the duty 
you must carry out for your own lasting good. 


Recognise that you are Shiva (God), before you become a shava 
(corpse); that will save you from further deaths. 


Sathya Sai Baaba 


25. A-naatha and Sa-naatha 


KANNADA is a sweet and soft language; but, I do not propose to speak in it now; I feel that you 
can follow Me even if I speak in Thelugu. I am happy to lay the Foundation Stone of this Home 
for Retarded Children and the Hostel and Workshops of the Mahila Makkala Koota, for service 
is the best form of worship. I know this is an institution that does real service. It is a light house 
in the sea of mere worldly-mindedness. 


For all the higher forms of service, bhakthi is the very life-breath. Of the two, Preyas (worldly 
gain) and Shreyas (spiritual merit), Sunandhamma has chosen Shreyas; so, even when she is 
ridiculed, she carries on; even when she is praised, she does not accept the praise. If she must 
succeed in this venture, she must strengthen her faith in the Lord. That is enough. 


When the election season is on, you find people suddenly going round and round and falling at 
the feet of all and sundry, praying for votes. They could have fallen at the feet of the Lord, and 
He would have showered His Grace. If he is a godly person, full of humility and the spirit of 
service, he would have got the votes he needed, even without this humiliation of door-to-door 
soliciting. 


Faith is the very breath of victory 


Be good, be serviceable, be useful, be kind, be God-fearing---the confidence of the people will 
be yours. I am sure Minister Kaanthi who is here will agree with Me when I say, that such a man 
has no need to beg for votes, people will themselves come forward and offer the votes at his feet. 
Faith, faith---that is the very breath of victory---faith in oneself, faith in the good work one has 
set upon; faith in its success, in spite of signs of failure. 


Attachment and hatred---these are the greatest enemies of progress in any scheme of social 
service, why, in any scheme of work. If the individual is deluded into believing that he is saving 
others, then woe be to him, for, there is no other at all. All are One, one man's sorrow is every 
one's sorrow. The fundamental flaw is the ignorance of man. If only he was wise, he would have 
known that all individuals are waves on the surface of the self-same ocean. 


Nishkaama karma (selfless action) is the ideal to be aimed at; now everything is measured by the 
result, the gain that accrues. Study too is for the salary one can get on the basis of the degree 
which is its goal. If you fan a person out of love, when you leave of, he cannot blame you but, 
when the paid servant who is the pankaahwaallah stops, the master takes him to task. In the first 
case, the act is done in the nishkaama way; there is no aim to seek gain, The desire for gain is 
like the poison fangs; when they are pulled out, the snake of karma is rendered harmless. 


Faith becomes steady through Saadhana 


The correct discipline to acquire the nishkaama (without selfish desire) attitude is dedication; 
and dedication is possible only when you have intense faith in God. That faith becomes steady 
through saadhana. Now, saadhana (spiritual effort) is like the snacks one eats; the main dishes 
are all of the world, from the world. The spiritual must be the major portion of the food. 


You must be aware of the danger of a fall, in time. Do not behave like the master of a house, who 
when his wife said, "I hear some noise; it is perhaps a thief’ replied: "I know; do not interrupt my 
sleep." In a few minutes, she said, "He has entered the house," but, the man said, "I know." Later, 
she said, "He is opening the box"; still, the man said "I know" and kept quiet. After some time, 


she said, "He is running away" and the master said, as formerly, "I know." He did not pay any 
attention to the warnings of the theft; so, too, you do not heed the warning, but move forward to 
the calamity, with eyes open. 


Once you feel that all are waves on the self-same sea you will no longer use the word, A-naatha 
(helpless orphan), which I found in the report that was read. In one sense, there is no A-naatha at 
all; all are Sa-naatha (protected by a guardian), for the Lord takes care of all. He is the Pashu- 
pathi, pashu meaning individual jeevas (living beings). There is only one Purusha (Masculine) 
in creation; all the rest are sthree (feminine). There is no fool too; that is only a role played by 
that particular manifestation of the jnaana swaruupa, which is Paramaathma. Nagayya might 
play the role of Thyaagayya, in the film on Thyaagaraaja, but, all the while his Nagayya is the 
truth, the reality. The Thyaagayya is a temporary role in the drama of life. 


Journey to God is to be through good karma 


Remember this and do not tarry on your journey to God. You fill up the petrol tank with fuel for 
the journey that lies ahead, is it not! When you propose to keep the car in the garage for long, 
you do not fill the tank. Well, the body too is fed with fuel so that it may go on a journey; 
journey to God. That journey is through karma, good karma, Nishkaama karma. Such karma is 
called kaayaka (relating to the body), the exertion of the kaaya (body) for the liberation of the 
soul imprisoned therein. 


Not all the raindrops that fall from the sky manage to reach the sea. It is only those that flow into 
a flowing river that attain the goal of all the drops; for, they come from the sea and they yearn to 
reach their source. 


I find that the Sun has invaded this side of the pandhal; the hall is not big enough to provide 
shade for all of you. I cannot bear to see you suffering. I find one man has fainted there. Here, 
take this Vibhuuthi (sacred ash) to him, let him drink it in a glass of water. {He waved His right 
Hand once and created a quantity of Vibhuuthi as a token of His Grace). When I am leaving do 
not crowd around and fall at My Feet. Do the Namaskaaram (obeisance) in your hearts; that is 
better than crushing everybody and pushing forward. There are many old men, sick persons and 
children; so, be calm and patient. Why do a thing, which does not give you full satisfaction, nor 
gives Me satisfaction? Make Sai the resident of your heart; that gives you hai (happiness) and 
Me, joy! 


Mysore City, Vaanivilaasapuram, 15-9-1963 


You must tread the spiritual path with an uncontrollable urge to 
reach the Goal; you must cultivate the yearning for liberation from 
all this encumbrance. 


Remember that you have to dwell in a house built on four stout 
pillars: dharma, artha, kaama, and moksha (righteousness, wealth, 
desire and liberation); Dharma supporting artha, and moksha 
being the only kaama or desire. 


However much you may earn either wealth or strength, unless you 
tap the springs of aanandha (Supreme bliss) within you, you 
cannot have peace and lasting content. 


Sathya Sai Baaba 


26. Building or begging? 


I MYSELF asked Sunandamma to call you all here this evening, so that I can talk to you about 
the great piece of social work you are engaged in. I laid the Foundation Stone for your Institution 
this morning; I blessed the endeavour, because you are serving women and children, especially 
children who are mentally defective and physically handicapped. I understand you have the help 
of experts in psychology, who can understand the special problems of the underdeveloped 
children. So far so good. 


As Trustees who have undertaken to help Sunandamma in this Mission of Mercy, I would advise 
you to start the construction of the rooms for the inmates and for the classes, first. The Prayer 
Hall can wait; the atmosphere of the place where such work is being done cannot be anything but 
a prayerful one. This is thapas (penance) that you are doing and the children and adults who 
watch you and your efforts do not require something more inspiring than that. 


Discover a via media between ancient and modern 


Sunandhamma was telling Me that some of you want the buildings to be reminiscent of ancient 
Indian architecture, a kind of temple, in fact; while others prefer the latest style, plain utilisation 
and cheap, without elaborate decorative motifs. You cannot revive the Parnashaala (hut made of 
leaves, hermitage) now, in the 20th century; you have to discover a via media between the 
Sanaathana and the Nuuthana (the ancient and the modern). Moreover, I want the Sanathana 
spirit in the heart; not in brick and mortar. 


When the children are all of this modern age, affected by its attraction and attitudes, how can the 
style of the building in which they dwell change their outlook? And what of the teachers? They 
are imbued with the passions and prejudices of the modern age. Change their hearts into 
Parnashaalas, full of the ideals and aspirations of the sages of this land, charged with simplicity 
and sincerity, moved by the urge to expand in love to all beings---then, the style of the building 
does not matter. It is the architecture of the mind that matters. If the needs of the modern age 
require a change, change the non-essentials. Do not dilute the truth so much that it loses its 
genuineness. 


If some one favours drinks of a blue colour or red, do not pour blue dye or red dye into the 
bottle; pour the drink into a blue or red glass, and offer it to him. That would be enough. So too, 
if one style of building is to be preferred, by all means, put up the structure; but do not change 
the essentials of the work to be done therein, or the outlook of the workers. 


Patience and strenuous effort will be rewarded 


Hitha and Mitha (pleasant and moderate), these are the directions. Let it not be too garish, too 
ramshackle, too costly, too fragile. Take the middle course; that will yield maximum benefits. 
The craving for sense objects cannot be given up fully, so transform it into an instrument for 
worship. Dedicate all your efforts to the Lord; accept all achievements and failures, as proofs of 
the Grace of the Lord. His Will decreed that they should so happen. Transform all the six 
passions into instruments for spiritual uplift. 


I know also that you are worried about funds for the completion of your plans. Sunandhamma 
even asked Me to show the way! Well, He who showed the way so long, will do so hereafter 
also. This wi// be completed; otherwise, I would not have laid the Foundation Stone. Good works 
never languish for want of funds; the Lord will come to their rescue. Only it may take some time; 


do not lose heart. The orange is quite bitter when it is green; but, time gradually sweetens it into 
a delicious fruit. Patience and strenuous effort will get rewarded. 


I must tell you, however, that for such good causes as this, you should not collect money in 
devious ways. Help should come form pious hearts, from well-earned money, from persons who 
know and appreciate the purpose for which they give. That is why I oppose all benefit shows, 
where you tempt people with a dance, or a drama or a film and collect money for your pet plan. I 
am also against lotteries, where the lure of getting a big prize, for which one does not do 
anything, a prize collected out of other people's earning, is used for the collection of funds. 


Let each one give, out of the fullness of his heart, on his own initiative, whatever he can give 
gladly, after studying well the present work and the future possibilities of the institution. Your 
duty is only to inform; do not try even to persuade; begging for the sake of work which is 
inherently good is an insult to human nature; the man who asks and the man who is asked, both 
are demeaned. 


I want to give you this courage and this confidence. Carry on in a spirit of humility and fortitude 
and you will succeed. 


Meeting of the Trustees, Mysore City, 15-9-1963 


All the joy you crave for, is in you; but, like a man who has vast 
riches in the iron chest, but, who has no idea where the key is, you 
suffer. With proper directions, dwelling upon them in the silence of 
meditation, it is possible to secure the key, open the chest and be 
rich in joy. 


Sathya Sai Baaba 


27. Human and Divine actions 


Many people consider all acts of worship, puuja, etc., as "His" and all acts of earning and 
spending as "Mine." But, this is a mistake. All acts are "His." There is no such distinction as 
Maanavakarma and Maadhavakarma (actions of man and God); all karma leads you towards 
Maadhava or away from Him. For example, you say that you fall ill, that you are in good health, 
etc. That is because you feel that the body is "you," whereas you are really only the Aathma, with 
the five sheaths which you have super-imposed on it. This is the result of the system of education 
now prevalent which teaches that the Aanandha one derives from the senses is all the Aanandha 
that one can get. It does not disclose to the individual the eternal source of Aanandha that he has 
within himself. 


There is no training in the art of acquiring mental peace. No one is told the secret of attaining the 
state of equanimity, amidst the confusion of modern civilisation. Everyone is induced to float 
with the current that drags humanity down to fear, anxiety and despair. Life today is similar to 
the situation when the master of the house is restricted to a tasteless regimen, while the members 
of the family revel in a banquet. The senses revel without limit but the Aathma is ignored. 


Modern education does not produce wise men 


Modern education produces only "learned fools;" it does not produce wise men who can meet 
life calmly and bravely. Its products know how to fill themselves with information, device tools 
or handle them for the destruction of fellowmen or cater to the whims of the senses---but, they 
are helpless to meet the crisis of death, a crisis that is inevitable. 


Hanumantha Rao of the I.A.S., who is the President of this Meeting said that, during the last 14 
years, when he had not visited this place, many great developments have taken place, including 
this Hospital. 


Some of you may ask why there should be a Hospital at all, here! Why should not Baaba cure 
diseases by an exercise of His Will? That is the question. Well, for one thing, this Hospital is not 
My only Hospital. Hanumantha Rao has a Hospital in Madras where disabled children are treated 
and trained to be useful and self-respecting individuals. That too is My Hospital. In fact, all 
hospitals everywhere are Mine. I visit them all. Why, all those who call out from their hearts for 
succour, in whatever language, from whatever clime, whether from hospitals or homes, are Mine. 
Do not confine Me to these few acres round the Prashaanthi Nilayam. Wherever a person craving 
for Prashaanthi (perfect peace) lives and prays, there a Prashaanthi Nilayam exists. 


Faith in Grace is not yet strong 


You should remember another point. The Hospital serves to increase faith, to demonstrate 
Divinity and to remove doubt. That is also necessary, Besides, you have to mark time, in 
consonance with the song that is sung. There are many who are hungry for medical treatment and 
they are satisfied only if drugs are given and injections administered. Their faith in Grace is not 
yet strong. So, a Hospital is required for such anugraha (grace), that is the crucial gain. The 
hospitals can be closed, especially if the spiritual saadhana used for gaining the Anugraha results 
in simple lives, spent in contentment and undisturbed calm. 


The King of Death does not bring a noose when he comes to drag people to his abode; the noose 
is made by the victim himself and he has it ready round his neck, awaiting the arrival of the end. 
It is the Karma-paasa (noose resulting from action) which each manufactures and winds round 


himself that ultimately drags him away. Become aware of your reality and you will lose the 
sense of identification with the body. That will make you disease-free. You will have perfect 
ease. This is quite easy, understanding that you are not the body. For, you are practising this truth 
every day for at least six hours, ever since birth! If that cannot teach you, I wonder which can. 


Every day, when you sleep, where are you? Who are you? Your senses are in-operative, your 
intelligence is in abeyance: you mind creates a world of its own and after playing in it for 
sometime, it lapses into inactivity. That is sleep, the nearest you reach in your journey to 
Samaadhi (super-concious state). 


Each one of you can become Bhagavaan 


Live in the Aathma thathwam (true nature of Self); that will ensure Shaanthi. With the poison of 
raaga and dhwesha (attachment and hatred) inside you, how can you be pronounced healthy?. If 
you experience the Aathma thathwam, you become Bhagavaan (Divinity) Himself. That is why I 
do not address you as Bhakthulaaraa! You are not Bhaktaas (devotees); you are more than that-- 
-you ought to become Bhagavaan; each one of you can become Bhagavaan by merging your 
separate individual jeevas (souls), in the Ocean of the Universal Aathma. 


Death comes swooping like the falcon on chicken feeding on the ground. The man who dies, 
prays to Me to receive him; the persons who weep at his departure, pray to Me to keep him alive. 
I know both sides of the picture, the past and the present, the crime and the punishment, the 
achievement and the reward and so, I carry out what is just, though modified by Grace. I am not 
affected one way or the other, by the arrival into the world of some or the departure from it of 
some others. My nature is Nithya-aanandham (eternal Bliss). You can share in that Aanandham 
by following My instructions and practising what I say. 


Shri Sathya Sai Hospital, Seventh Anniversary Festival, 18-I0-1963 


28. The day they got the light 


I AM surprised that you read out a Welcome Address to Me and extolled Me as jnaana 
swaruupa, Prema swaruupa (embodiment of Supreme Knowledge and of Love), etc. I must tell 
you that I am no stranger and therefore need no welcome. I am no stranger anywhere, much less 
here, of all places where I took birth. I belong to you, I am very near to you. Besides, I do not 
like this praise, for praise places you at some distance, whereas I take delight in being with you, 
beside you, around you. No father likes his sons to praise him! No son approaches the father with 
a Welcome Address, in which his scholarship, wealth, strength, virtues are listed and extolled. 
Kinship evokes kindliness; there is no need or chance for formal ceremonial behaviour. 


Now, you have asked Me to switch on these street lights and you have mentioned that this is a 
supreme moment---for, the village is to be free from darkness and full of light, hereafter! Let Me 
tell you, this village is not getting light, today! it got the Light, the Day this Shakthi took birth in 
this place! For, what is this little light that illumines just a few yards around each pole when 
compared with the Light that illumines the heart and spreads joy and peace. 


Light from Puttaparthi is widening over the world 


From that day, when this light appeared, you have been witnessing how the Light is widening 
over the country, attracting the attention of the entire world to this tiny hamlet nestling among 
these hills away from the flow of the turbid currents of civilisation. Now, you have buses and 
lorries coming along the newly laid roads. Just today the decision has been made to improve the 
roads around this village to the standard of tarred roads; you have at the Prashaanthi Nilayam an 
up-to-date Hospital, you have a fine school building for your children, and this and the 
neighbouring villages have the benefit of this very useful electric current, which you can now 
direct for various purposes at home as well as in the fields. 


You gave Me this garland of flowers when I came; but, I would have been glad if you, every one 
of you, had become a fragrant flower, free from insect pests of vice and wickedness, strung on 
the thread of devotion to God. That means, you must be united and of one mind, free from hatred 
and spite, factionalism and greed. Villagers are being ruined everywhere by elements that 
promote faction, and sow the thorny seeds of hatred, in fields where useful crops have to be 
grown. 


Here, many feel that 'you are not attending Bhajana or frequenting the 'Nilayam as much as they 
do. They say among themselves that the inhabitants of Puttaparthi, the village where Sathya ' Sai 
Baaba was born, have no Bhakthi! But, I know, that you are every moment thinking about Me, 
watching for Me, talking about Me, pointing Me out to visitors, expecting Me to return soon 
when I have gone out of this place, etc. If this is not smarana (constant remembrance), what is 
it? 

Injurious attitude is being perpetuated 


You must have seen women carrying a number of water pots one over the other on their heads; 
they may have babies on their hips, and children which they lead along; but, all the while, their 
thought will be about the hearth in their kitchens and the food that is being cooked there for they 
are anxious that it should not be spoiled. 


The strength-giving, peace-creating culture of Bhaarath has been submerged by the flashy, 
glittering ideals introduced from the West during centuries of foreign rule The attention of the 


people of this land is drawn from the heights, to the lowly needs of the senses and the stomach. 
Even after Indians have regained the power to shape their own future, the situation has not 
improved, for the same injurious attitude is being perpetuated. The beliefs and practices of the 
past are condemned as superstitions by the inheritors of that very heritage! I won't agree with 
people who dismiss them as superstitions; for, they gave those who believed and acted according 
to the belief, the most precious treasure of Aanandha and Shaanthi. They helped to pull out the 
poisonous fangs of karma, fangs which inject greed, egoism and hate. 


They taught man to do karma (action) as a sacred duty and leave the result to Gods thus avoiding 
two evils- the evil of pride and the evil of frustration---pride that the act was a success, 
frustration when it did not succeed. It also contributed some positive good; the karma was done 
well, as well as the individual can execute it, for all karma was transformed into worship of the 
Supreme. Man was saved by this emphasis of Nishkaama Karma (Selfless action), from 
unending desire and inexplicable sorrow. Now like water, man flows ever downward, and at the 
least disappointment, he breaks into bits and drops. 


Faith in the Divinity of man has to be restored 


Once again, that attitude must be implanted in Man. He has acted the role of clown or servant or 
an extra much too long; it is time he took on the role of a Hero for which he is destined, and 
equipped. So like the garland maker who selects flowers of various hues, sizes and fragrances for 
preparing a garland, the Prashaanthi Vidhwan-mahaasabha too has selected these Pandiths and 
prepared a Garland. The purpose of this Sabha is to remind every one of the role of the Hero he 
has to play. Of course, I am the sustainer of the flowers, not the garland maker! The heroism of 
the wise man has gone from this land; and the weakness of the ignorant has overwhelmed the 
people. This has to be corrected. Sloth has taken the place of earnestness; hesitation has halted 
courage. Even in other lands, the sense of values has to be restored and faith in the Divinity of 
Man has to be restored. That is the task for which I have come. 


Even the Pandiths who have great scholarship have no happiness; the scriptures that they have 
mastered are designed to confer peace of mind, contentment and unshakable joy, but, the 
repositories of that scholarship are a very discontented group today. They have the umbrella in 
their hands, no doubt, but it does not protect them against rain or shine! So, even they have to be 
made aware of the excellence of the knowledge they are carrying, and its curative property. 
Know thyself---not the Sun and Moon---is the specific for man's ills. 


Act up to your professed declarations 


Watch the mind, just as you watch the cable through which the current flows. Do not establish 
contact with the mind; it is as bad as contacting the cable. Watch it from a distance; then only 
can you derive Aanandham; search for the cause of Ajnaanam (ignorance)just where it resides 
Then you will find that the Mind in association with vishaya (sense objects) is the cause. Cut it 
off from the vision of vishaya and jnaana (wisdom) dawns. 


There was a person who proclaimed himself a Sthithaprajna (established in super-consciousness) 
and an adept in Yoga. He went into Samaadhi in a trice and sent his Kundalini Shakthi (inner 
cosmic energy) to the Brahmarandhra (crown of the head) !_ Then he got himself buried in the 
river bed; but he rose after a few days and started asking for Cash contributions from onlookers! 
It was a descent from the sublime to the ridiculous. You must guard against that. Be consistent; 
act up to your professed declarations. The members of the Prashaanthi Vidhwanmahaasabha 


have to share their learning and their experience and their joy with the people, that is their 
elementary duty. For this, they are not to receive any monetary benefits, for they are only doing 
their duty, increasing their own joy, sharing their own enthusiasm. 


I am sure this Sabha will move from victory to victory, for it is contributory to My Work. This 
huge auditorium was erected, would you believe it, in 15 days! It was all done by the Bhakthas; 
not a single cooly was employed. The Chithravathi river helped a good deal, for it supplied the 
sand with which the place was filled. No Government, no force of authority could have achieved 
this so soon; only devotion can inspire this consistent shraddha (firm faith). It is all the effect of 
Sankalpa (Will). The Sankalpa is there and so, the Mahaasabha also will carry on its great task, 
unhindered. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 20-10-1963 


The body is the cart and the mind is the horse that drags it. No 
food is given to tile horse, which is really the more valuable of the 
two. Give the mind and its culture the importance it deserves; then 
only is life worth living. 


Sathya Sai Baaba 


29. Loka Kalyaanam 


ONE meaning of Karma which is popularly accepted is that it is one's destiny, or fate, the 
inescapable "writing" on the brow, which has to work itself out. There is no escaping it. But 
people forget that it is not written by some other hand. It is all written by one's own hand. And 
the hand that wrote it can also wipe it off. The husk, with which the paddy is born, can be 
removed by effort; the Maayaa (worldly illusory power) which persuaded you to write all that 
destiny can be conquered in an instant and then, the entire page can be wiped away. 


Men are spinning cocoons for themselves; they suffer because they are unable to come out of it 
into the world of light. They are like the monkeys caught by the wandering beggar, dancing at 
the end of the rope and begging paisa from those sitting 


round the ring. Shankara said that he would willingly offer the monkey (mind) to Shiva so that 
He may teach it tricks which please Him and use it for getting alms for Himself. That is to say, 
Shankara proposed to fill his mind with thoughts of God, so that the monkey would be tamed and 
made to serve God's purpose. You too must make the mind the servant of God, not the slave of 
the senses. 


Criterion to determine the Dharma of each person 


You must have watched a bird sitting on a branch that waves in the wind. It is unafraid, because 
it has more confidence in its wings than in the branch; it knows that any moment, it can take to 
its wings and leave off the perch, the uncertain perch. The branch is prakrithi (objective world) 
and the wings are the anugraha (grace) of the Lord. Develop strength of wing and sit on any tree. 
You won't come to harm. But, if you trust prakrithi and rely only upon the protection it gives, 
you fall. 


Mullapoodi Naaraayana Shaasthri and Vaajapeyam Venkateshwara Avadhaani both spoke now 
of the difficulty of demarcating what exactly is dharma (duty) and what the criterion is to 
determine the dharma of each person. Well, the dharma that you have to follow is to be what 
you profess to be. This is an easy and intelligible test. If you feel and believe that you are a 
Brahmin, then you have to follow the dharma as laid clown for a Brahmin. If you feel and are 
convinced that you are the Aathman, then your dharma is the Aathma dharma (divine-oriented 
duty). If you feel and are certain that you are the body, then, the Deha dharma (body-oriented 
duty) is the dharma for you. 


But, every one must imbibe higher values and consider himself as Aathma and follow the 
Aathma dharma. That is the mission for which I have come. That is the work of the 
Vidhwanmahaasabha. Wherever the ants may be, sugar will be placed near the entrance leading 
to their colonies. All men are Mine; so the whole world has to be saved from. the consequences 
of ignorance or limited knowledge. I will get all My people near Me, for they are Mine and I am 
theirs. Then I will start teaching and training them, until they become entirely ego-free. 


Devotees seldom know what is good for them 


For the last 25 years, it has all been sweetness, kindness, soft persuasion; hereafter, it will be 
different. I will drag them, place them on the table and operate. That is to say, I have no anger or 
hate; I have only Love. It is Love that prompts Me to save them, to open their eyes, before they 
get deeper into the morass. 


The Organisation that was inaugurated yesterday will approach the people, those who are as yet 
ignorant of the great teachings of Vedha and Vedhaantha, who have not enough capacity to 
digest it and assimilate it into their system; so it will be given in small easily assimilable doses, 
with love and sympathy. Each one of those Pandiths will contribute some share to the 
eradication of Ajnaana. The watchword will be "Thamaso maa jyothir-gamaya," .... "Lead me 
from darkness to light"---the ancient Vedhic prayer. It will be lighting the lamp in village after 
village, lighting little lamps from these big lamps. 


This work has to be done; but the rulers won't take it up, nor do the ruled ask that it be done. 
Unless the child starts wailing, the mother will not feed it. But, this Mother is different. She 
knows that the child must be fed and when it is to be. The advent itself was according to My 
Sankalpa (Resolve); every step in this Avathaara is due to My own Sankalpa; not due to the 
prayer or petition of devotees. The devotees seldom know what is good for them. 


Foster the Vedhas and ensure world prosperity 


Since Brahmins are the custodians of the Vedhas and the Shaasthras, fostering the Brahmin will 
foster the Vedhas and the Shaasthras and ensure Loka Kalyaana (world prosperity). There are 
some who say that the Brahmin has monopolised the Vedhas and Shaasthras and that he is 
misusing that monopoly for his aggrandizement; it is said that the Vedha is a huge conspiracy by 
a clique of Brahmins for promoting the wealth of that community. This is very far from truth. 
Look at all the rules and regulations, the prohibitions and denials which the Brahmin has to 
observe; they were all laid down for the Brahmin by Brahmins themselves. Eating, drinking, 
moving about, sleeping, conversing, working, giving, receiving, earning, spending---all the 
various activities of living are controlled by hundreds of restrictions. This does not convey the 
impression of a clique bent upon enjoying at the expense of the rest of the community. 
Moreover, the regulated life of the Brahmin and the rites, vows, fasts, and Japam which he 
undertakes as part of his duty are intended to benefit the whole world, for securing Loka 
Kalyaanam. As a matter of fact, you must encourage more and more Brahmins to keep up the 
traditional way of regulated He. That is also one of the purposes of the Vidhwanmahaasabha. 


Goddess Bhavaani gave a sword to Shivaaji and sent him on Her work of restoring Dharma 
(righteousness). This Shiva-Shakthi is giving into the hands of these Pandiths the sword 
dhairyam (courage) and asking them to go forth in order to re-educate our people and remove 
their ajnaana. Shivaaji's sword was always used on behalf of .... Dharma only. Once, when 
Shivaaji with his army paid a visit to the Aashram of Samartha Raamadhaas, his soldiers invaded 
the field opposite and plucking the sugar cane, they ate off the entire crop. Besides, when the 
owner protested, they beat him off with the cane itself. Shivaaji heard about this and he not only 
punished the soldiers for the theft but, on the recommendation of his Guru, he made the land of 
the peasant tax free for all time! 


These Pandiths know the medicine for the Bhavaroga (worldly disease); learn it from them and 
begin taking it. Attend the meetings which they will address in the villages wherever your 
District Committee arranges. Accept whatever good they give. Become the soldiers of 
Prashaanthi, to drive away the Chinese from your hearts, those who are undermining your 
awareness of the Aathma. Honouring them is honouring Me; neglecting them, is neglecting the 
Vedhas and Shaasthras and it is as foolish as neglecting Me. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 21-10-1963 


30. Purusha and Purushotthama 


MAN has known about everything else, except death. Why should a person die? Of what benefit 
is it to die? Why does he die? The answer is in order that he may not die again. He is born, so 
that he may not get born again. Having been born, man earns and acquires land, riches, materials, 
grain, articles of comfort and luxury, which he feels will give him happiness and which therefore 
become the objects of his struggle. But, the object of realising God is forgotten. You may ask: 
"Why should any one seek company, do good deeds, direct his mind towards good thoughts?" 
You are listening to Me and what do you get when you so listen? You agree that I am giving you 
Aanandham, is it not? Well, what do you give Me in return? Give Me the Aacharana (following, 
observing) of what I am telling you; practise what I teach, that is enough. That is all I ask. 


Man should not die like a cat or a dog. He should leave the world better and happier than when 
he came into it. He must get away, full of gratitude for the chance given to him to see God in 
everything that he saw, heard, touched, smelt and tasted. He must remember the Lord, with his 
last breath. 


Never allow your attention to stray away from God 


To get that recollection, a lifetime of practice is needed. When you are at the steering wheel of 
the car, you may be hearing the talk going on inside the car and even join in it; you may be doing 
many other things, but, your attention will always be on the road ahead. When the mother returns 
from the well with three pots one over the other on her head, talking to her companions, her mind 
is concentrated on the baby in the cradle which she has left at home. So too, when you are 
engaged in the various duties and obligations of the world, never allow your attention to stray 
away from God, the Goal. Be always attentive to the signs of His 
Glory and His Mercy and His Omnipresence. A soldier is the result of many years of 
intense training; his courage and coolness on the front line are the product of several years of 
calculated exercise and discipline. As Raani Narasimha Shaasthri said, it is only 
after years of intense study that one can appear for an examination and the results are not 
announced immediately; you have to wait some more’ time _ for _ that. 
So, cultivate the habit of remembering the Lord with every breath; then only can you remember 
Him with the last breath. 


There was an old man lying on his deathbed. I think he belonged to the Kannada country. While 
in his last moments, he could only blabber some word, which his children could not understand; 
they called in a doctor and asked him to give oxygen or something so that the words might 
become clear; they surmised that he was announcing to them where exactly he had kept the 
money he had earned. So, they did everything to get the words correctly. They could distinguish 
only one sound, ka! So they asked whether he meant kanaka (gold) karu (calf), kanaja (granary) 
kasabarike (broom)! When the broom was shown, he nodded his head and died. So, he had to 
take birth as a broom! 


Death is a consummation which is inevitable 


You should not die like that man; you must die like Bheeshma. He lay on the bed of arrows 
while he taught the Shaanthiparva to the Paandavas, and he died with Krishna before him and in 
his heart. Death is considered as something to be afraid off as something that should not be 
spoken about in happy circumstances! But, death is neither good nor bad. You have no choice in 


the matter. You can't get it sooner if you welcome it; nor can you avoid it if you condemn it as 
bad. It is a consummation which is inevitable; from the moment of birth, the march to the 
cremation ground has started. Some reach the place quicker than others, some go by a round 
about route and arrive late. That is the only difference, between man and man. But, yet, man 
walks about as if death is but a distant calamity. When some neighbour loses 


his child, you console him saying that it is alia dream, that children are born and die because they 
are creditors who have come to realise old debts incurred in previous births, etc., etc. But, when 
you lose a child of your own, you do not console yourselves by the same arguments. They are 
only for the consumption of others. 


What dies is the body, not its occupant 


Arjuna addresses Krishna as Purushotthama, for He only is Supreme amongst the Purushas. 
Purusha means He who is in this Pain (fortified town), namely, this body. Each body has the 
Purusha in it and the entire Universe has the Purushotthama immanent in it. So, after all, what 
dies is the body, not the occupant of the body, the Purusha. The faith that you have the Purusha 
in you, will cleanse the mind of all evil and the senses of all evil propensities. The vessel too 
must be clean, not merely the drink. Without that, smarana or dhyaana done for however long 
periods they may be, will not yield fruit. That is why the Vedhas were entrusted to the Brahmins, 
along with rigorous rules of discipline. Without minds cleansed by that discipline, the study of 
the Vedhas is a barren exercise. 


When a man was about to die, the wife asked, "What is to happen to me?" The parents asked the 
same question; the children asked, "What is to happen to us?" Even the servants asked piteously, 
"What is to happen to us?" The dying man looked around helplessly and asked all of them "What 
is to happen to me?" He should have foreseen the event, if he was wise and prepared himself 
with an answer to that question. Then he could have died in peace and seeing him die so calmly, 
his children too could have benefited. 


Now, a fashion is spreading in conversation; "Oh! It is all God's Grace," when something you 
consider good happens to you. If it happens to somebody you don't like, it is not God's Grace 
evidently, for God is specially yours and not the other fellow's. When something you dislike 
happens to you, why don't you take that also to be a sign of God's Grace? Resign yourself into 
God's hands; let Him give success or failure, what does it matter? He may be bent upon 
toughening you, or it may be for your good in the long run. How can you judge? Who are you to 
judge? Why judge? Do your best and keep mum. Fix your mind on this attitude. 


Death will not give advance information 


You don't know when the cameraman is going to click. Mathew, who takes photographs at the 
Nilayam, at least jumps about in front of you with the camera pointed at this place or that; but, 
Death will not give any advance intimation, or say, 'Ready' and wait until you are ready. 
Therefore, be ready always, so that you may produce a good impression with His Name on your 
lips and His Form in your cleansed heart. 


You do not now realise your good boon in getting Me as the Guide. I shall not rest until I reform 
all of you. The basement for My work has ' been completed: now, the structure will rise upon it. I 
go round the whole world alone, with no paraphernalia and no publicity, because I am 
established in My own Glory, in My own Truth. I have Aathmic relationship with all, and so [am 
always succeeding. 


To protect the crop, the weeds have to be removed and manure must be applied; that is the work 
of these Pandiths of the Vidhwanmahaasabha, instruments that were long unused and neglected. 
Join this great work; it is the chance of a lifetime for you. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 20- 10- 1963 


The ills of the country are due to under-nourishment; not so much 
under-nourishment of the body, but under-nourishment of the 
spirit, want of spiritual exercise, neglect of spiritual regimen. 


Allowing the malady the fullest scope, people are engaged in 
reciting the names of the drugs in the pharmacopia! They do not 
make any attempt to take the drug in. 


The means of conveying into every home and village the life-giving 
waters of the spirit have all dried up or got choked up. That is the 
reason why under-nourishment, with all its attendant symptoms of 
debility, nervous disorder and mania is so rampant today. 


Sathya Sai Baaba 


31. The Geetha balance 


MANY Pandiths and scholars have explained the Geetha in many ways to you all these days; if 
you ask Me, I will say that the Geetha is like a balance, scales, needle and all. The scale on the 
left is shloka 7, of the second chapter, speaking of "Kaarpanya dosha." The fulcrum is the 22nd 
sloka of the Ninth Chapter, beginning with "Ananyaaschinthayantho maam," and the scale on 
the right is the shloka in the eighteenth chapter, speaking of "Sarva-dharmaan parithyajya." See 
how apt the fulcrum sh/oka is; it speaks of single- minded attention, steady, like the needle of a 
well-adjusted balance! Really, the Geetha begins with two scales and a fulcrum, the two armies, 
of Righteousness and Unrighteousness, with Krishna the Teacher in the middle! We have the two 
scales of Loukika and A-loukika (worldly and other worldly), clamouring for attention and 
respect, jnaana (spiritual knowledge) alone can remove the ajnaana (ignorance)of Arjuna, that is 
the Sankalpa (Will) of the Lord. 


The Jnaana has to be put into practice. Otherwise, it is useless. Once the deer of the forest 
gathered in a great assembly and discussed their own cowardice in the face of the pursuing 
hounds. They argued, "Why should we, who are equipped with fleeter feet and sharp antlers, be 
afraid of these insignificant dogs?" At last, a resolution was moved and passed that no deer 
should henceforth flee before hounds but, even while the cheering was going on, they heard the 
distant baying of the hounds and, not one stayed there; all had fled as fast as their legs could 
carry them! The resolution could not be put into practice! 


Karma has to be done as it is one's nature 


Now these Pandiths are well versed in the art of teaching and explaining the sacred scriptures to 
the people; what is lacking is training for the people in the art of listening to them and following 
their suggestions for spiritual advancement. The art of engaging in karma (action) without 
getting involved is the thing that has to be learnt, Karma has to be done, because it is part of 
one's nature, not out of any external compulsion. Suurya (Sun) is a Sahaja karmachaari (worker 
by nature), He draws the vapours of water high up to form clouds which pours back as rain; no 
one taught Him to do this. When you do the sahaja karma (action dictated by nature), it won't be 
a burden. It is when you go contrary to it and do something out of the way that you feel the 
misery. 


The police constable's life is not sahaja (natural); so, he feels happy when he comes home, and 
doffing his uniform, gets into ordinary clothes. When the baby wails, all rush towards the cradle 
because its sahajakarma is to smile and be contentedly happy. So too, karma done for the profit 
arising therefrom accumulates consequences which bind a man. It increases in size like a 
snowball, but karma done without any thought of the fruit therefrom, keeps on diminishing and 
leaves you free from all consequence. 


One cannot escape from doing karma 


The Dharma-karmas (virtuous actions) have to be done; there is no escape. Fleeing to the forest 
is no solution, for it only gives the situation a new turn. Your body may be in the jungle, but, 
your mind will wander in the market-place! There was a saadhaka (spiritual seeker) once who 
was initiated by a Yogi into some manthram (holy words); he wanted to meditate on it 
undisturbed and he found his home too full of distraction. He fled to the forest and discovered a 
convenient tree, under which he could meditate. Before long, the birds roosting on its branches 


started to clamour aloud and they showered on his head their droppings. He was greatly 
incensed. "Have I no place where I can commune with God", he cried. "Children at home; birds 
and bats in the jungle! I shall immolate myself, get born under better auspices and then, start 
saadhana afresh," he decided. 


So, he collected a pile of fuel and making a pyre out of it, lit it and was about to ascend it, when 
he was interrupted by an old man who accosted him. He said, "By all means, carry out your 
decision; but, just as now the wind blows from here towards those huts where we live; so, please 
wait until the wind turns its direction, for, the smell of burning human flesh does not agree with 
us. Or, if you are in hot haste, you can shift to some other place and avoid being a nuisance to us, 
poor folk." The saadhaka felt he had no freedom even to die. So, he returned home, and decided 
to brave it all there itself. He understood that karma has to be carried through in the objective 
world itself and there is no use trying to shake it off in a huff. From the A-shaanthi---the 
confusion and travail of the world---one has to snatch harmony and peace. 


Be in the world, but not of it 


Vishnu is described as "Bhujaga shyanam" (lying on the snake) and also as Shaanthaakaaram! 
The bhujaga (snake) which has visha (poison) represents the vishaya (worldly desires) and when 
you rest upon it, instead of allowing it to envelop you, you can afford to have shantham (peace). 
Let your boat be on the waters, but do not allow the waters to enter the boat. Be in the world, but, 
not of it. That is the secret of a successful life. 


Desire leads to ultimate ruin. It can never be destroyed by fulfilment. It grows upon each 
satisfaction and becomes a monster that devours the victim him self: so, try to reduce your 
desires, go on reducing them. There was once a pilgrim who accidentally sat under the 
Kalpatharu (a wish granting tree)! He was terribly thirsty and said to himself, "How I wish some 
one gave me a cup of sweet cool water!" And, immediately, there was placed before him a cup of 
deliciously cool water. 


He was surprised, but, drank it nevertheless. Then, he wished for a meal of tasty dishes, and he 
got it in a trice. This led to a wish for a cot and a bed and when he wished his wife was there to 
see all this wonder, she appeared in an instant. The poor pilgrim mistook her for an apparition 
and when he exclaimed, ,"O she is an ogress!" she became one, and the husband shook in terror, 
crying, "She will now eat me up," which she promptly did! 


The chain of desire binds one to the point of suffocation. Control, curb your tendency to wish for 
this and that. Tell the Lord, "You are enough for me. I do not wish for anything else." Why pine 
after golden jewels? Pine for gold. The Geetha teaches the lesson of 
Sharanaagathi(unconditional surrender to the Lord); wish for His Will to prevail, not your wish 
to succeed. This is what Krishna meant when He said, "Be a Sarvaarambha parithyaagi (one 
who renounces all self-centred actions)." 


Sharanaagathi is the main gate to attain Mukthi 


Death is but a passage from this life to the next; it is the change from old clothes to new, as the 
Geetha says. But, some cynics laugh at the comparison and ask, what about the death of new- 
born infants, children, youths and middle-aged persons? Their bodies cannot by any stretch of 
meaning be classified as jeerna, (worn-out)! Well, the clothes might not be old, but the cloth out 
of which they were made must have been from very old stock, so that though new clothes were 
prepared out of it, they had to be discarded soon. Again, there are some crooked men who refuse 


to believe in a previous life, because they cannot recollect the events! These people cannot 
recollect the events of one particular Magha Shuddha Dhashami, say, 5 or 10 years ago, though 
they are certain they were alive on that Dhashami! Forgetting the events of that day does not 
mean that they were not alive at all; it only means that they did not pay any special heed to them, 
they had no /akshyam (objective)or special reason to keep it in memory. 


Sharanaagathi is the main gate to enter the mansion of mukthi (liberation from birth-death 
cycle). It has four floors- Dhyaana, Karma, Bhakthi and Jnaana (meditation, activism, devotion 
and spiritual knowledge). Each floor rests upon the one beneath and the topmost one cannot be 
reached without ascending the first three. Remember this when you hear people arguing about 
the relative superiority of the yogas or labelling themselves as 'this' or 'that' in the Aadhyaathmik 
(spiritual) field. 


Human life is superior even to the life of gods 


The Geetha does not refer to any problem of family or social life. It teaches the spiritual aspirant 
the Path that leads to perfect communion with the Divinity inherent in himself. The reason why 
Bulusu Appanna Shaasthry extolled this human life as superior to the life not only of beasts but 
even to the life of the Gods, is that man alone can strive to squeeze out of his experience of this 
objective world, answers to questions on his own origin, significance and goal. Raamachandhra 
Shaasthry indicated the measures for clearing the mind of enmeshing obstacles so that the 
answers might be reflected therein. And the third Pandith who spoke today, Maddulapalli 
Sathyanaaraayana Shaasthry made it clear from the Shaasthras that the world has Shaantham, 
Aanandham and Jnaanam (Peace, Bliss and Spiritual Knowledge) as its fundamental base, real 
Reality. What is needed is to remove the shade that is hiding the effulgence, the screen that 
covers the truth from view. The Prashaanthi Vidhwanmahaasabha has been designed by Me for 
this very purpose. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 24-10-1963 


Try to break the coconut, as it comes from the tree; the shell is 
covered compactly by a coat of fibre. You cannot break the nut by 
hitting with a crow-bar even; take off the fibrous armour; breaking 
it is very easy. When you take a coconut to be offered in the temple, 
you take it, after removing the fibre; then, you offer it to God, 
breaking it into two halves. This is the symbol for destroying the 
ego and surrendering to the Lord. 


So you have to remove the fibre of desire for sense-objects and 
then, go before the Lord devoid of kaama and krodha (desire and 
anger); there you declare that you are ego-less by breaking the 
coconut into two. You will be accepted then, not before. 


Sathya Sai Baaba 


32. Thath-Thwam 


PERI Venkateshwara Shaasthry and others by their speeches, relieved you from hunger; now, it 
is My turn to sharpen your yearning, which is the hunger of the mind for the higher joy. When 
Dharma declines or rather, when those who have a duty to regulate their lives according to 
dharma lose faith in it, then, its restoration cannot be taken up by all and sundry. A broken 
bridge on a highway cannot be set right by amateur skill and the momentary enthusiasm of the 
villagers around. The very authority which laid down the road and planned the bridge has to 
initiate repair. The Lord has come again on this Mission; He has collected the engineers and 
contractors and the labour for the purpose. He is now set on the task. 


When Krishna knew that Brahma had taken away and hidden the cows and calves and the 
cowherds and boys, the whole lot of them that had gone out of their homes into the pastures, He 
created anew, the same number, the same types, the same persons, cattle and all, and nobody 
suspected for one full year that the genuine was hidden and that it was the duplicate that was in 
the village everywhere. All that was thus created was Krishna thathwa (true nature of Krishna), 
just as all that was hidden by Brahma Was also Krishna thathwa. You too are Krishna thathwa; 
what other thathwa is there, really? 


Everyone must be conscious of Krishna thathwa 


Even now with Me, My Maayaasrishti (creation out of the void), is for some definite purpose; 
just as it was then. Then it was to purify and sanctify the gopees; now, too, the aim is to purify 
and sanctify. Nara is limited and deluded; when that limit is crossed and when that delusion is 
gone, he is Naaraayana and he shines in his thathwa. 


Every one must be conscious of this thathwa, which is his reality. To make each one conscious 
of it is the aim of those who come for Dharmasthaapana (revival of righteousness). In the 
Mahaabhaaratha, the most noteworthy theme is this Dharmasthapana. When the Paandavas were 
exiled into the forest, it is as if the five Praanas (life breath) of Dharma, the sustaining forces of 
Dharma, were exiled. Dharmaraaja is the Praana of the Right Conduct, Bheema, of the 
Protective Might of Dharma, Arjuna of the Faith and Devotion needed as its foundation, Nakula 
and Sahadheva, of the steadfast faith essential for the practice of Dharma. When the Paandavas 
went to the forest, Hasthinaapura was reduced to Asthinaapura---a city of bones, without flesh 
and blood. 


You call Me Dharmamuurthi (personification of Virtue). No, each of you is a Dharmamuurthi. 
But, you have strayed away; to bring you back to the status that you have lost, that is My aim. 
This Prashaanthi Vidhwanmahaasabha, which has been established here this Navaraathri, will be 
doing just that job. Today, its aims and objects as well as the methods of working were discussed 
and settled, it is your Sabha; you can make use of it, in proportion to your bhakthi (devotion) and 
your shakthi (capacity). The deposits which these Pandiths have made in jnaanam and thapas 
(penance) are yours; draw cheques on them and they will give you the riches, without question. 


The sowing part of the work has begun 


Pandiths and scholars of Vedhas and Shaasthras have been suffering a lot, due to neglect by 
society. But, that is not the result of their having studied the Vedhas; it is because they have not 
put what they have learnt into action. Every one must wait till the fruit is ripe. It will take time 
for the growth of the tree, for its blossoming, for the fruits to appear, to ripen and to be filled 


with sweet juice. Pluck it before time and you have to throw it away. Why? To become a 
graduate and take a degree, one has to struggle with the alphabet at first, then read words formed 
by the letters, then study sentences and finally complete texts. 


The fruition of their studies has come now, after all these years, when the Pandiths have secured 
this medium for sharing their joy and their wisdom with their brothers and sisters. The Pandiths 
have been allotted districts and a selected few will be supervising the programmes in each 
district. The District Committees will arrange meetings and invite the Pandiths for the three-day 
sessions of the Sabha. 


The light is in you, you are the light 


This is the sowing part of the work, sowing the seeds of the Karma kaanda, the Upaasana 
kaanda and the Jnaana kaanda, of Vedhaantha, of Dharma Shaasthras, of the Glory of God as 
described in the Raamaayana, the Mahaabhaaratha, and the Bhaagavatha. You have to look after 
the fields, tend the young crop, feed it with manure of manana, and rid it of pests, and harvest 
the happiness that comes from eating the nourishing grain. That is the real agriculture for you. 
Chance to share in this agriculture will come only to a few, the few who are endowed with the 
merit of many lives. 


First, the Sabha will be concerned with Andhra Pradhesh and later, it will reach out into the 
Karnataka and Kerala States, and then into all the States of India, and within a short time, even 
outside India. Already, there are quite a few Sathya Sai Sanghas outside India and they are 
pressing for the extension of Swaami's Grace in this form too to their places. 


The first profit from such a Sabha is that you will be able to tend and develop something that is 
specially India. I am saying this, because you understand only the language of profit. Whatever 
you are asked to do, the first question is, "How much will be the profit?" This greed for laabha 
(profit) has made you sink in /obha (greed)! The highest profit is the arrival through this road 
back at the place from where you came, your Swasthaana. 


Brahma who was born in the lotus that arose out of the navel of Vishnu wondered how he came 
to be there and it seems he searched and searched for the place from where he came. He could 
not trace it at all. But, by some little thought, you can know, from where you came, or, rather, 
what your real nature is. Then what remains is the attempt to attain it. That is what is meant by 
Liberation, or Moksha. 


Simple faith in the words of the wise is more profitable than years of study and discussion. 
Meditate on such a Mahaavaakya as "Thath-thwam-asi" (That thou art) and as you go on 
revolving it in your mind, meanings will dawn upon you, without the help of any commentary. 
Commentaries only tend to confuse you. Think of the 'Thath' (Divinity); analyse the ‘thwam’ 
(yourself); and then, you will be convinced that ‘asi’ (equality) is the only solution. You are in 
the Light; the Light is in you; you are the Light---these are the steps. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 25-10- 1963 


You can be free from fear only when you are confident of the 
strength of the foundation. You do not see your breath or weigh it; 
but, breath is the very sustenance of life. The unseen is the basis of 


the seen. If you are caught up in the meshes of the seen, you cannot 
know the importance of the unseen. 


Sathya Sai Baaba 


33. It will not last 


THE greatest wonder of all is that nobody knows himself nobody struggles to know about 
himself, even among those who spend their lifetime in knowing about others. Your Self is 
something subtler than water or air or even aakaasha (space). It must go into the eye so that you 
may see; it must move into the hand so that it may hold; it must move into the feet so that you 
may walk. The senses are inert materials; the 'I' must operate so that they may function. 


That "I" is Brahman, mistaken to be separate! In the Thretha Yuga, vaanaras were made to act 
and talk like naras (humans); in the Dhwaapara Yuga, nara was transformed into Naaraayana 
(God) by the Grace of Naaraayana; in the Kali Yuga, the declaration is made that Nara is 
Naaraayana 


Himself. The Ghata-aakaasha (space in the pot) and the Matha-aakaasha (space in the 
monastery) are identical with the Mahaa-aakaasha (Vast sky space); only the upaadhis 
(disguises), ghata and matra keep up the illusion of separateness. The senses are the villains, 
they instill the delusion that you are the upaadhi (body). Curb them as the bull is curbed by the 
nose-ring, the horse by the bit in the mouth, the elephant by the goad. When the Paandavas were 
traversing the Himaalayas towards the end of their careers, Dharmaraaja was still affected by 
mental anxieties and so he prayed to Krishna to spend some time with them. On His departure 
from their dwelling, Krishna gave Dharmaraaja a note, which he was to read to himself 
whenever he was affected by joy or grief. The note read: "“Eppudoo undhadhu" (This will not 
last). That is one method by which mental agitations can be calmed. 


You are in this world under sentence 


Take life in the world as a compulsory duty imposed on you. You are now in jail under a 
sentence for crimes committed in a previous birth. The Superintendent assigns various duties- 
cooking, drawing water, hewing wood, etc. You have to do the work assigned to the best of your 
ability, without any expectation of reward. If you behave well, cause no trouble, and do the 
assigned duties without demur, then some days may be written off your sentence and you may be 
released sooner, with a certificate that you are reliable and good. This attitude will give you 
practice in nishkaamakarma (Selfless action), which is very valuable for curbing the senses. 


When you talk of God to some people, they ask, "We will believe, only if we can see Him." 
When the Vidhwanmahaasabha Pandiths go to the villages for their mission of spreading the 
truths of the Vedhas, this question will crop up. Then you have to ask them: "I won't believe that 
you have pain unless I can see pain with my eyes." God is Bliss, how can bliss be shown and 
seen? Whether others believe or not, 2 plus 2 is equal to 4, You may agree or refuse to agree, but, 
that is a fact, proved by the experience of all those who agree. So too is the fact of God. 


Live in constant thought of God 


You must live in the constant thought of God as well as of another fact, Death. The body is the 
car in which you are riding to death. You may meet death any moment, while riding; some tree 
or lorry or ditch or slush will bring it. Remember Death Remember that time is running out every 
moment; then, you will not be tempted to waste time in idle talk or vain pursuits or wanton 
mischief or vulgar entertainment. Travel in the car carefully, slowly, with due regard to the needs 
of others on the road; do not greedily try to overtake others, or compete in speed, know the 


limitations of the vehicle and the road! And then, you will not meet with any accident. Your 
journey will be a happy experience for you and the rest of the people. 


Jonnalagadda Sathyanaaraayanamurthy in his speech was exhorting you to teach, to reform, to 
reconstruct and do many other things. But, not all can enter upon such tasks, First, self; then, 
help, improve yourself, teach yourself, reconstruct yourself---and, then proceed to solve the 
problems of others, That reconstruction is quite easy, provided you inquire calmly into your own 
personality---"Am I the body, or the senses or the mind or the Buddhi, etc.?" You heard in the 
Burrakatha (folk tale) on Shivaaji, how Goddess Bhavaani gave the sword to him. This Shiva- 
Shakthi will give you the Jnaanakhadga and the Subodhakhadga (the sword of spiritual 
knowledge and spiritual instruction) that will destroy the forces of Ajnaana. Take it and become 
wise and happy. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 26-10-1963 


Activity results in either joy or grief, due to the attachment with 
which it is done. "I" and "mine" are the two fangs of the serpent; 
pluck them out, then, you can safely handle it and play with it. 


You need not give up activity. As a matter of fact, you have to be 
intensely active. 


In this Karmabhuumi (the land of sacred action), it is only through 
karma that you can transcend karma. 


Birds and beasts are not aware of this secret; man alone can select 
and accept the karma that is most profitable for liberation from the 
chain of karma. 


Sathya Sai Baaba 


34. Sankalpa 


KALLURI Veerabhadhrashaasthry declared now that the Swaadhyaaya Jnaana Yajnas (ritual 
sacrifices for Self enlightenment); which started on the 20th had ended; but, there is no 
samaapthi (conclusion) for the yajna. All life is a yajna; when does the yajna meet its 
samaapthi? J shall tell you. Sama means Brahma; aapthi means praapthi, attainment, reaching. 
When Brahmam is attained, that day, that moment, the Yajna which is Life can be said to have 
ended; not until then. This samaapthi marks only the end of these rituals. Carry on the yajna, 
wherever you are, by means of shravana, manana and nidhidhyaasana (listening. contemplation 
and deep meditation). 


Shaasthry today described the story of Rukmini Kalyaana. Now, this is not simply the story of a 
marriage. It is the union of Purusha with Prakrithi itself. The Brahmin intermediary is the 
symbol of Vedhic authority through which alone the merging of the two is known. Rukmini is 
the Jeeva (individual self) and Krishna is the Paramaathma. She is suffering from the rules and 
restrictions imposed by Prakrithi (objective world); Ahamkaara (egoism) is her brother; 
Worldliness is her father. But, on account of her sadhaachaara (good conduct), her mind rested 
on God. So she was able to plan a method of reaching God. 


One is born to serve out one's sentence 


Her prayers, repentance, yearning and steadfastness were rewarded. Her observance of the age- 
old code of good conduct at last saved her for she went out for the Gowri puuja (Worship & 
universal mother Goddess), before the marriage rite. In that temple she was immersed in the 
worship of God and so she was liberated from the bonds by the God who was lying in wait! The 
parents and the brother and all the relatives objected but, an individual is born to work out his 
destiny, not to act a role in some one else's drama. One is born to serve out one's sentence; when 
the sentence ends, one is free. You shall not remain in prison, on the pretext that a dear comrade 
is still in! Just think of this fact: Rukmini had not met Krishna before; there was no preliminary 
wooing. The soul yearned and it won. They had met in the realm of the spirit. 


This is no ordinary marriage, though the people who write about it and describe it in Harikathas 
(divine stories), speak of it as the romantic adventure of a wilful girl and a young care-free 
bravado! It is merging of thath with thwam (That with This). The same thing, if it is near, is 
referred to as this, and if far, is referred to as that; this is there (that is when it is not here but 
there). Thath is the same as thwam, only it is far; why is it far? Because it is beyond the reach of 
the intellect, the senses, and words. 


To communicate one's experience of the Godhead, words are inadequate; in fact, even the 
attempt is beyond the fortunate sage. Two pilgrims were passing through a forest and sitting 
under a tree, they were talking about the debt Man owed to several "mothers." One of them 
detailed a list of such "mothers," the Maatha that gave birth, the Go-maatha, the Bhu-maatha, 
and the Vedha-maatha (mother cow, motherland and mother scriptures). 


Conception of Brahman depends on one's experience 


The talk drifted towards the importance of Go-puuja (cow worship); and, they began discussing 
what exactly is meant by the word Go, which means a cow. There ensued a debate about its 
characteristics: a tail, two horns, four legs, an udder, etc. They rose up and wandered long to 
discover an animal with those items and at last espied a buffalo, which they worshipped to their 


heart's content. So, the conception of Brahman also will depend on each one's equipment and 
experience, but, that does not mean, there are so many different Brahmans. A man is called 
Daddy, Son, Uncle, Grandfather, Cousin, Nephew and Husband---but, that does not make him 
more than one individual! 


Our Vidhwanmahaasabha will establish this truth in the minds of all. It is not out for condemning 
any faith or attracting people into a new faith. It will be engaged in fostering the positive attitude 
in spiritual effort; encouraging, as Sanaathana Dharma (ancient, eternal, universal religion) has 
always done, all to move forward from wherever they are, in the direction of the Lord, whom 
they are free to picture in whatever Form they like. No harsh word is to be used when referring to 
another's faith, for, faith is a precious plant and harshness might make it wither. Know the truth; 
experience the Aanandha (bliss)---that is the Message that these Vidhwans (scholars) will carry. 


Those who say that Aanandha is the essential nature of man have the responsibility to be full of 
Aanandha themselves. You enquire of another person the reason why he looks depressed; you 
are not worried if he looks happy. Why? Because depression is unnatural; it is against man's 
essential nature. Water is cool; that is its nature. So, the hot spring in front of the temple of 
Bhadhrinaath by the side of the ice-cold Alakanandha is looked upon with wonder. Be yourself 
what you tell the other man to be. People will follow only the man who speaks out of personal 
experience. 


Shaasthras are based on Saadhaks' experience 


Some people were on this bank of the river and since they were strangers they sought 
information whether the river could be crossed at that point and how. A lame fellow said, "It is 
dangerous to cross at this point; go further down." They did not believe him, for he could not 
have waded through! A blind man said, "You can cross; only, keep more to the left for some 
distance and move to the right afterwards." They did not follow his advice, for he could not have 
known; he must have been led by some one else. At last a man came, who volunteered to take 
them across. "I have crossed often; I live on the other bank and I own lands on this side." So, 
they followed him with confidence and they could reach the other bank safe. 


A little child is taught names and facts by the elders; it calls a thing a dog; another thing a tree; a 
third thing, a stone. It says, when asked, that is a man. How does it know? Because it has been 
told so. The characteristics of animals, plants, trees, birds and men have been taught by the elders 
and it believes them and takes them on trust. Then why cannot you believe also in God? You are 
told that also; from thousands of years you have been told that there is God with many 
characteristics by which you can visualise Him. 


The Shaasthras (spiritual sciences) declare that the signs of God are such and such. The 
Shaasthras are based on the experience of saadhaks (spiritual aspirants) and they have as much 
authenticity as any thing else. Many things are taken on trust, depending on the reliability, the 
impartiality, the attainments of the people saying them. The rishis (sages) are impartial; they 
have no intention to deceive or mislead. 


Prema alone can understand prema 


If you feel that you too must have the experience or else you will not believe, well, come and 
experience. There is no use simply coming one day and going away the next day, saying, "I have 
seen Sathya Sai Baaba. He wears a fine long gown and He has wonderful hair." If you spend the 


time lounging in the hotels here or playing cards, or listening to tales, how can you understand? 
Determine to discover, decide to learn, dive deep, and then you will know. 


Thousands have come now and in the years gone by; many have no desire to know; many who 
have the desire are unaware of the fact that they must pay more attention to actual experience of 
the mind, not to the sense impressions. You may be staring at something, but, if your mind is not 
focussed on it, you cannot cognise it. If your body is in this auditorium, your ear in the hotel and 
your eye all round the compound, how can anything be learnt? Prema alone can understand 
prema (love). 


Prema is the manner of speaking; Truth is the substance; Dharma (virtue) is the language; 
Shaanthi, the result aimed at. As a matter of fact, I am Premaswarupa. I do not need any rest in 
My efforts to give you Aanandha. All this yajna, this gathering of Pandiths, this 
Vidhwanmahaasabha is for your Aanandha. 


Join this great task of Dharmasthaapana 


If all this arrangement is done somewhere else, what a great noise it would have made! People 
would have scoured the land with lists of likely donors, and worried this man and that, and 
finally boasted of their achievements. But, here, only just a few know about this. It was all a case 
of the Sankalpa (Will Power) working itself by the force of its own goodness. And, what do you 
bring to Me? Only, tears! Tears of grief when you come and tears of Aanandha when you go! 


I am unattached to any event or plan. I am not worried at all by fear of failure, for, I know that 
My Plan must succeed. This Prashaanthi Vidhwanma-haasabha too is not something new; it is 
Sanaathanam (eternal). Only, it is now once again set on the age-old Mission. This work of 
Dharma-sthaapanam (establishment of righteousness) is being done over and over again. You 
have now the chance to share in it; so, join this great task, and make your lives worthwhile. 


These evening discourses of Pandiths and My own sambhaasahna (discourses) have to stop 
from tomorrow; for, I must start meeting those of you who have brought huge loads of grief, 
discontents, difficulties and problems for My attention. That is also My Work and I shall gladly 
attend to it. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 28-10-1963 


Have a time-table for spiritualsustenance, just as you have now for 
Physical sustenance. 


A breakfast of pious repetition of Lord's name (japa) and 
meditation (dhyaana), a lunch hour ritual worship of the Lord 
(puuja), ‘tea and snacks' of reading scriptures or sacred books 
(pravachana) in the afternoon and a light dinner of devotional 
music (bhajana) in the early hours of the night. 


If you follow this regimen, you can sleep soundly and wake up 
refreshed. 


Sathya Sai Baaba 


35. Amirtha Vaani 


THEY speak of two types of Karma: Dhaihika and Daivika (physical and spiritual). But, this 
division is absurd and even dangerous. All acts and activities are spiritual, the body is but an 
instrument for spiritual progress and attainment. Modern education emphasises the physical and 
neglects the spirit, which is crucial. It teaches that joy derived through the senses alone are worth 
while; it does not give even a glimpse of the deeper and more lasting joy derivable through the 
spirit which is your real self and it is, in essence, aanandha, shaanthi, jnaana---Sathyam, 
Shivam, Sundharam (bliss, peace, spiritual knowledge---Truth, Goodness and Beauty). 


You must have noticed that I never address you as 'Bhakthulaara' for how can you be only that? 
You are Bhagavaan, you become that by just shedding the avidhya (ignorance) that makes you 
imagine that you are limited. That is why I address you either as Shaanthi Swaruupulaara , or 
Aanandha swaruupulaara, or Divyaathma swaruupulaara (Embodiments of Peace or Bliss or 
Divine Soul). That is your real nature, but, you are not even told who you are. Your misery is 
traceable to this failure to know yourself. 


Educators today do not teach the ways and means of crossing the sea of misery, of facing success 
and defeat, of remaining calm and collected. The brain is stuffed with information, the hands are 
trained in skills, but, the senses are not tamed, the intelligence is not curbed, the mind is allowed 
to run amok. That is the cause of the tragic crisis in the world today. 


Do karma full of joy and enthusiasm 


You have been born in this Karmakshethra (land of spiritual activity) and your duty is to engage 
yourself in continuous uninterrupted karma. Do not get bogged in gloom and sloth; do karma full 
of joy and enthusiasm, as if each act is an offering at the Feet of the Lord. Bhaaratha desham 
(India) is the Guru' peetham (seat of Spiritual Teacher) of Humanity; that is the role it has played 
and has to play; but, as consequence of undue attachment to the senses and the world, fostered by 
blind admiration and snobbish imitation, the role has been forgotten, to the great loss of 
ourselves and of the rest of humanity. The restrictions, regulations and rules of guidance for 
individual family, community, nation and humanity are either not remembered or brushed aside 
as obsolete. The joy, peace and contentment that one gets by observing them are themselves 
witnesses of their worth. 


The Pandiths and scholars who have assembled here, for the Prashaanthi Vidhwanmahaasabha 
being inaugurated now, have therefore a great responsibility for they must hold fast to the 
Prashaanthi (total peace) that the study and practice of the Vedhas and Shaasthras has conferred 
upon them; they must also share that Prashaanthi with all humanity. They must be bold, free and 
happy always, for they know that this is all an unreal dream. They know the goal of life and they 
are marching steadily towards it with every passing minute. 


Grief is the greatest friend of man 


All that is padhaartha (matter) must be transformed into paraartha (spirituality); that is My plan. 
The jnaana which the Vedhas and Shaasthras have given to these people must be distributed. At 
present these scholars have no self-confidence, because they are losing faith in what they 
themselves have hitherto considered invaluable. They send their children to technical courses 
and secular studies, for they are heavily pinched for the means of livelihood. What is the good in 
having an umbrella that allows the Sun to burn you and the rain to soak you, they have started 


asking! But, the Vedhic treasure-house has vast riches, which is urgently needed today. It is to 
conserve, develop and utilise it more fully that this Sabha is inaugurated now. 


The Vedha is the basis of dharma, which is like the Mother in its loving care for man. Bhaaratha 
bhuumi (India) is Yoga bhuumi, Karma bhuumi, Thyaaga bhuumi, not Bhoga bhuumi (Land of 
spiritual union, spiritual activity, renunciation and spiritual enjoyment). The Kauravas failed 
because they stuck to empire and greed for power, and fixed their minds 
on bhoga (enjoyment). The Paandavas secured Divine guidance and won, because they stuck to 
spiritual joy, ascetic self-control and simplicity and sincerity. To follow the same path is the sign 
of wisdom. That is the Path of Dharma (virtue)from which mankind has strayed away. Grief is 
the greatest friend of man, for it opens the eyes and shocks you into the search for the secret of 
shaanthi and santhosha (peace and happiness). 


There is no need for tears or despair 


A monkey put its hand into a pot of nuts and tightened its fist full of the food, but, it could not 
take its hand out of the narrow neck because the fist was too big for it. Unless the nuts were 
dropped back into the pot and the fingers released, the hand could not be got out! That is the 
situation of man today. His greed is giving him great pain but he has not discovered the fact; so 
he clings to his possessions and tries to pull his hand out; that gives him great pain. There is no 
use blaming the nuts or the pot. The fat, It is in the monkey itself. Prakrithi (Nature)is the pot and 
the sensory objects are the nuts. 


A bird sits on a tiny twig, in perfect confidence! Where does it get the confidence from? Not 
from the twig; but, from the wings which can take it aloft at the slightest sign of danger. The 
twig is Prakrithi (objective world) Sit on it lightly, gaily, confidently; but, rely more on the 
wings, namely the Grace of the Lord who can lift you aloft, away from Prakrithi at the slightest 
premonition of danger. The twig is not very reliable but, the wings are always there to save you. 


The revival of that dharma is a task which the rulers have not planned for; it is a programme 
which the people are not keen upon. Then, who has to take it up? It was said that I have taken up 
this Form in answer to the prayers of saadhus (noble souls) and others. There are some mothers 
who feed the baby only when it starts crying; the more considerate and loving type of mother 
knows when the baby is hungry; she need not be called to its side by a loud wall. This Mother is 
that type of Mother. I have come, because I felt I had to come. I resolved upon this. There is no 
need now for tears or despair, either among the repositories of the Vedhic wisdom or among the 
good, who suffer from the cruel winds of adharma (vice). This campaign will succeed; it will not 
fall. The welfare of the world will be ensured through the fostering of the Godly everywhere, and 
more particularly of these reservoirs of the ancient wisdom of this land. 


Dashara Discourses, November 1963 


Love is God. God is Love. Where there is Love, there God is 
certainly evident. Love more and more people, love them more and 
more intensely; transform the love into service, transform the 
service into worship; that is the highest saadhana. 


Sathya Sai Baaba 


36. Gift of spiritual knowledge 


EVEN in this holy place of Shrishailam, such a jubilant and auspicious celebration has not taken 
place since years. In this land where thapas (penance) alone is valued as significant, in this 
Karma bhuumi (land of spiritual activity), there is no reason why ashaanthi (confusion and 
turmoil) must spread; it is all due to the multiplication of wants and desire for sensual pleasure, 
instead of spiritual contentment. Even the starting of a Nithya Annapoorna Annadhaana Sathram 
(Place for gift of food to the poor)) here by the Akhila Bhaaratha Aarya Vyshya Sangham today, 
is a sign of the decline of faith and strength. There should not be any need to feed; the cry of 
"give" "give" ("dehi! dehi!") should not be heard in this land of Annapoorna, of plenty and 
prosperity. This place of must be approached in the hue spirit of humility and prayer. Picnic 
parties and tourists have no place here. 


There are many legends regarding the temple at Shrishailam. Mallikhaarjuna is the white, 
fragrant, Nirmala (pure) God, the Grace-showering Shiva, who bends in mercy at the slightest 
yeamming of the devotee. Bhramaraamba (the consort), is the Bee, hovering on the fragrant 
mallika (jasmine), drawn by the makarandha (honey) of the flower, the true representative of the 
bhaktha (devotee). 


Legends the fore-fathers have treasured 


Do not laugh at the legends that your fore-fathers have gathered and treasured. They have 
invested the place with sanctity and elevated the thoughts and fancies of generations of men. 
This shrine has consoled and comforted thousands and thousands of pious persons, year after 
year. Shankaraachaarya was here and he sang of the holiness of this place and the calm he 
enjoyed here. He has installed a chakra (sanctified holy symbol) which, I may tell you, is in a 
small cave by the side of Paathaala Ganga. 


The desire to do service to the poor and the hungry is good; but, it is taking a turn towards 
building up institutions and collecting funds and seeking donations. While this is being done, 
egoism increases; envy spreads; feelings of inferiority and superiority spring up; the mental 
peace one had is spent while one is caught in this affair. All the struggle falls on one man, though 
there may be a committee. And, when the institution is finally built, a sense of possession 
develops and though all institutions are the Lord's and nothing can rise or exist without Him, 
people forget it and claim all the credit. 


There are certain dire possibilities which I want all social workers to guard against. First, cleanse 
your own minds and then start advising others. Earn mental peace and strength for yourself and 
then try to secure them for others. Learn the secret of lasting happiness yourself and then, 
endeavour to make others happy. Seek the real limb, not the artificial limb. Get the doctor who 
would assure, "here-after your will not fall ill" and not the doctor who gives some relief to the 
present attack. 


The atmosphere of holy places should improve. The nature of Sanyaasis (monks) requires drastic 
correction. Too many of them are involved in householder functions; too many of them are after 
worldly fame and riches. All this will be done by Me as part of Dharmasthaapana. The 
Prashaanthi Vidhwanmahaasabha about which Veerabhadhra Shaasthry spoke is one of the 
instruments for this revival of dharma. 


Man needs food more for the Spirit 


More than food for the stomach, man needs food for the spirit. The “anna” (food) that 
Annapoornadhevi (Goddess of Nourishment) gives is the not food, rice and curry. The bhiksha 
(alms) that She is asked to give is Jnaana bhiksha, not the handful of rice that you think it means. 
It is Jnaana bhiksha, Prema bhiksha, Bhakthi bhiksha, Anugraha bhiksha (alms of spiritual 
knowledge, love, devotion and grace). Seek Her Grace to get more jnaana, more prema, more 
bhakthi and more of Grace. Do not lower the standard of service when serving pilgrims in this 
holy place; place emphasis here on bhakthi, vairaagyam and jnaana. Do not encourage pomp 
and insincerity here, of all places. If some one, out of sincere devotion, gives a naya paisa, accept 
it as if it is a crore, do not accept a crore if it is given with a view to parade wealth or advertise 
detachment. 


I am laying the foundation stone of the new block of this Sathram (pilgrims rest-house), and I 
bless that you may so act that the significance of the name Annapoorna is not neglected. You 
have My Blessings in full measure; join hands, all of you in this task and make it a success soon. 
Do not feed indiscriminately, and make this an asylum for idlers. Feed only those who come with 
yearning to spend some days in this holy atmosphere; then only will people be grateful. Feed 
those who come here for doing saadhana, for living their lives in the Presence of God; feed those 
who are living examples of the joy that comes from spiritual effort. 


Shrishailam, 5-12-1963 


The sages of ancient times divided karma into vikarma (that is 
intentionally done) and akarma (that is done without any intention 
to gain the consequence). Follow the latter and you will save 
yourselves from suffering. 


All other activities---the earning of wealth, of reputation, of fame 
and publicity---result in suffering. 


Sathya Sat Baaba 


37. Sahaja and a-sahaja 


SATHYA, Dharma, Shaanthi and Prema (Truth, Virtue, Peace and Love) are the four pillars of 
Sanaathana Dharma, the four faces of the Ancient Teaching. Of course, these words are on the 
lips of every one, but, what they mean is something quite shallow and ineffective. To describe an 
incident just as you saw it happen, is 'truth'; to give water to the thirsty and food to the hungry is 
‘Dharma’, to suffer calamity in silence is ‘Shaanthi' and to nourish wife and children is 'Prema’-- 
-that is the general Interpretation! 


But, this is all wrong. Truth is something that is not modified by time or space or characteristic. 
It must be the. same for ever, unaffected and unchanged. Then alone is it Truth. It should not be 
proved false by some subsequent event or knowledge. Dharma is a body of principles that are 
fundamental to social stability and individual progress. There are various branches of Dharma--- 
Karthavya dharma , Vama dharma, Aashrama dharma (obligatory duty, duties pertaining to 
status and stages of life), etc., but, the aim of all is to help man, stage by stage, towards liberation 
from grief and from the chain of birth and death. 


See how grand the conception of each is compare this with the common meaning that has been 
so far given. Then, take the quality of Shaanthi. It denotes the capacity to bear success and 
failure, joy and misery, defeat and victory, with perfect equanimity. And, Prema is the quality of 
Sarvasamaanatha (equality' of every one), of not only Ahimsa {non-violence) but the conscious 
acceptance of the duty of love, because every being is a spark of Divinity, as much of a spark as 
you yourself. 


All lies in the inspiration behind the act 


The first step in spiritual training is to curb the Jcchaa shakthi (power of desires), which prompts 
the senses to pursue objects, if the iccha (wish) is for God it is good; if for objective pleasure, it 
harms the individual, if a house is set on fire, it is incendiarism; if Hanumaan sets fire to Lanka, 
it is justifiable retribution and a good lesson. If a dacoit cuts off your hand, it is himsa (injury); if 
the doctor amputates it, he saves your life and so, it is ahimsa (non-injury). Vishaya vaasana 
(attachment to sense objects) makes an act low, Bhagavath vaasana (attachment to God) makes 
it sacrosanct. Daksha yajna (ritual sacrifice) was converted into a battle, because Parameshwara 
was not present; the Kurukshethra battle was transformed into a Yajna, becuase Parameshwara 
was present there. Arjuna dedicated himself at the Lord's Feet; Daksha scorned the Lord. That 
was the difference, and that is the explanation. It all lies in the bhaava (the motive), the 
inspiration behind the act and the word. 


Bhakthi (devotion) is not like lime pickle, to be used only when you have fever; it is man's daily 
substance, the vitamin he must needs have for physical and mental health. The contemplation of 
God is the main rice dish; the rest are side dishes, appetisers, fillers. Take the tablets, the 
Naamasmarana (constant thought of the Lord) tablets, and all the experience of your daily life, 
the good and the bad, will be digested nicely. You don't eat paddy, do you? You have the sense 
to remove the husk and then boil the rice before you eat it. So also, why do you take in nature as 
it is? Remove the allurement it has to the senses, make it just an expression of the Divine Will 
and then assimilate it. 


Do = Naamasmarana with full faith and pure heart You forget your nature in the complex 
tangle of artificiality; you miss the sahaja (natural) when you are caught in the net of a-sahaja 


(artificial). The natural is prema, shaanthi, sathya, aanandha. The artificial is hate, falsehood, 
war, grief and greed. You must discover the spring of your own truth; you cannot play truant for 
long; after many a birth, even if their number is a hundred, you have to reach the source from 
where you strayed. Your mind is steady when it is engaged in other activities; but, when it is 
focussed on God, it begins to waver. It does not like to stop its vagaries, which it will have to do, 
once God enters your heart. Tame it by Naamasmarana. That is the message which I have come 
to announce. Have the Naamam (God's Name) on your tongue, the Ruupa (Divine Form) in your 
eye, the Mahima (Divine Glory) in your heart---then thunderbolts will pass you quietly by. 


Do Naamasmarana in some set manner, with full faith and pure heart. When the country is 
endangered, it is as bad as when the body is endangered. The Name will give you courage to 
save the Mother. If all of you strengthen your moral qualities, and develop faith in God and 
Sanaathana Dharma (eternal religion), calamity can never visit this land. Let all Aasthikas 
(believers in God) proclaim the value of meditation on God. I shall bless that endeavour; I know 
that will save you and save the country. That is why I am blessing you on this note of joy. 


Shrishailam, 6-12-1963 


The consequence of karma can be wiped out only through karma, 
as a thorn can be removed only by means of another. Do good 
karma to assuage the pain of the bad karma which you have done 
and from which you suffer now. 


The best and the simplest karma is the repetition of the Name of 
the Lord; be ever engaged in it. It will keep out evil tendencies and 
wicked thoughts. It will help you radiate love all round you. 


Sathya Sai Baaba 


38. Project site, Puuja site 


I LIVE upon the Aanandha that you derive when you sing the Name and glorify the Form of the 
Lord. That is My food, My daily sustenance. So, I have no need to talk to you; it is sufficient if I 
sit here and draw in the Aanandha that you feel when you do Bhajana (group singing of the 
glory of the Lord), 


You have all gathered here from the distant corners of our country, from every state and every 
linguistic unit, in order to pool your separate skills of hand and head for the successful 
completion of this great task which will give food and happiness for crores of brothers and sisters 
for centuries. This is a great chance for all of you, a chance that comes to few, however skilled 
they. might be. It is a rare chance that comes to few in any country. The lake that will fill this 
gorge with waters of the Krishna river when you build the dam across it, will be your Nishkaama 
karma, a samudhra (an ocean of selfless effort). You will all see it and feel its coolness, depth 
and strength. It will gladden you and inspire you and make you feel that your life has been worth 
while. 


Don't go about this holy work in a haphazard way, without shraddha and bhakthi (faith anti 
devotion). You have to, by that shraddha and bhakthi, curb this mighty river, which has carved 
its way through these hard rocks since the beginning of time, and you have to obstruct its speed 
and its rage for the benefit of man and beast. Man has, by his skill and daring, to make this 
wayward child of Nature halt for a while, and pass on. 


Canalise your passions into useful fields 


This task will become lighter if man curbs his own waywardness and his own egoism, anger, 
malice, envy, and greed and the roaring flood of his passions. Dam them in your own hearts, and 
canalise them into useful fields. Utilise the force of those qualities to gain better results from 
your efforts and saadhana (spiritual discipline). Grow in those fields the fruits of Shaanthi and 
Prema. That is the agriculture that aspirants know, and which you can also learn with ease. For it 
is an ancient science, which your own forefathers practised for ages. I have come to remind you 
of it and to tell you all of the need once again to follow that path. 


Blood, phlegm, bile---these decide, by their proportion and predominance, the physical health of 
a man. So too there are three qualities that decide by their proportion and predominance the 
mental health of man. Just as you obey the rules of health for fear of falling ill, you have to 
practise certain mental restrictions and regulation so that you may have peace, contentment, joy, 
enthusiasm and faith. You have to apply the brake on the wayward mind so that it may not drag 
you into disaster. You have ever to work in the cool shade of two dreads: the dread of sin and the 
dread of God. 


You do not remember that you are really and genuinely Shaanthi and Aanandha, that you are 
fundamentally (and therefore, mentally too) Sathya, Nithya and Nirmala (Truth, Eternal and 
Pure). The anxiety and fear which haunt you now are caused by this loss of memory. The 
intention of the Lord is that you should have shaanthi and aanandha, every moment of your life; 
but, you forget the springs that well up within you, that have their Source in the Divinity 
enshrined in your hearts, and pine for what you feel you have not. 


Prescription for peace and contentment 


You may not have, all of you gathered here, the same Name and the same form, for the God 
whom you adore; you may differ in habits, customs, manners and styles of food and dress---but 
the Aanandha you derive from them is the same. Everyone of these has been designed by the 
wisdom of ages to give you security, safety and satisfaction. When the padha (word), is changed, 
the padhaartha (matter) remains the same; water is known by the word paani in U.P., Thanneer 
in Madras, Neeru in Andhra---but, the substance is the same. So, you may speak different 
languages or use different sound-signals and follow different habits of food and dress and even 
of worship and prayer. But, they are all, believe Me, instruments for your uplift and progress. 


I shall give you one prescription which will give you the Peace and Contentment which you 
seek: It is Naamasmarana (remembering the name of the Lord). Install on the tongue any one of 
the thousand names of the Lord, current in any part of the world, among any community of 
devotees. Repeat the Name for some time at least every day as part of your duty to yourself, a 
discipline which will yield good results, a habit which you Should cultivate as a compensation 
for the hard toil that you do by your body from sunrise to sunset. 


Spend a few minutes daily with God 


Bhaa-ratha (India) is the land where every one has rathi (attachment) to Bhaa or Bhagavaan 
(God); but, today, people are in fact losing that taste and that attachment. You may tell Me, "We 
are so busy, we have no time to spare." Well, I cannot believe it is true. I know that you are 
finding time, in spite of the hard work throughout the day, to attend cinemas, to engage in 
wayside chats, to promote and partake in factions, in quarrels and for many other distractions 
which add to the sum of your worries. 


It is best you stay away from companions who drag you to such distractions that weaken and 
wotry you; spend a few minutes every morning and evening in the silence of your own shrine or 
home, spend them with the highest of all powers that you know of. Be in His elevating and 
inspiring company; worship Him mentally; offer unto Him all the work you do; you will come 
out of the silence nobler and more heroic than when you went in. 


Just consider---do you come out of the cinema theatre more peaceful, more heroic, purer, nobler 
than when you went in? No; your passions are aroused, your animal impulses are catered for, 
your lower nature is fed. Nothing else can give one that rich reward, which silence and prayer 
and communion with the Master can give. Not even a decent bank account, nor a string of 
degrees, nor the muscles of a prize fighter. 


Spend money you earn usefully and wisely 


There is a story connected with the construction of the great temple at Kaalahasthi. It was built 
according to tradition by sage Agasthya, helped by Bhrigu and Bharadhwaaja. Every day when 
the Sun was about to set, Agasthya called every worker before him as he sat on the river bed and 
under his instruction, the two sages poured into the lap of each worker, sand taken from the bed; 
that was his wages! Now, that sand changed into gold in strict proportion to the work that the 
receiver had put in that day. If one did more work, he got more gold; if less, less. If one had 
wasted the entire day, it would remain sand, so far as that worker was concerned. There was no 
injustice, no grumbling, no favouritism. All worked in the presence of the All-seeing and so, all 
accepted the gold that was vouchsafed by the Almighty, for it was just his due, no more, no less. 


It is work that is done in this spirit, the spirit of the constant presence of the Lord, that is honest; 
the Lord will reward by His Grace the work that is done sincerely and gladly, not work that is 
done for fear of superior officers, or maistries (foremen). If your hearts are pure, your work too 
would be pure. 


Remember the grandeur of what you are engaged in, here. Remember the might of this river 
which you are persuading to obey you. That will make you humble and devoted. In the 
Prashaanthi Nilayam, the Bhakthas themselves carried on their shoulders stone, mortar and sand, 
and as a result of the seva they did, we have now a big hospital and a fine Paathashaala and a 
huge auditorium. The entire building is saturated with their Bhakthi and so I said once, the 
patients are cured by the aroma of that devotion itself. 


Be careful when you choose your friends 


You should use the money that you earn usefully and wisely. Crores of rupees are distributed at 
every project site to the workmen, but, at the end of it all, when the camp is broken and the 
people start packing, they have little to carry home! Do not fritter away your hard-earned 
incomes on tinsel, entertainment and temporary pleasure; think of your future, your children, 
your parents. Think also of the reaction these wasteful, attractions produce. Think of the harm 
they inflict on your precious character. Think of all those who are dependent on you for food and 
shelter and the love that you alone can offer them. Examine each item of expenditure with 
reference to these noble tasks. That is the sign of the wise man. 


Do not admit into your mind the demon of a-shaanthi (restlessness). Direct all your cleverness 
and all your intelligence to the successful execution of the great drama which all of you are 
helping to present. It is His Drama, He is the Director, you are but a role, an actor, carrying out 
His Will, speaking words that He has put in your mouth, making movements as directed by Him. 


It is all a matter of the company you fall into. Be careful when you choose your friends. Form 
small Sathsangs and meet regularly for Bhajana and mutual consultations about spiritual matters. 
Read some fine spiritual classics like the Bhagavadh Geetha. Fill your eyes with the Beauty of 
His Form, your ears with the story of His Lee/as (miraculous activities), hearts with the 
sweetness of His Glory; inspire yourselves by seeing Him everywhere. Think of His Immanence 
in every hill and dale, every man and beast, every tree, bird and insect. You will be really thrilled 
by the joy of that vision. That will make your work as light as puuja and as satisfying. 


Dwell on Brahman that binds all jeevas together 


The vaanaras (sub-humans)while building the bridge across the ocean, carried huge boulders on 
their heads, repeating Raama-naama all the while and that made the rocks weigh less; it is even 
said that they wrote the name on the stones and that made them float! Each time they hauled or 
lifted a stone, they sang Raama-naama in unison and so they were a happy lot, doing puuja; not 
work, which is unpleasant. Raama's Grace helped all to overcome obstacles. Take the name and 
make your work light; that is My advice to you. 


Your officer here gave Me a garland of flowers just now; it is made up of two things- flowers 
that were buds yesterday, that blossomed today, and will fade before morn; and the thread that 
was, is and will be. The flower is a-nithya (impermanent); it represents the jeevi (living being), 
that is subject to birth, growth and decay; the thread is nithya (eternal), it is Brahman (Omni- 
being), on which all Jeevis are strung---"suuthre mani ganaa ira." The Jeevas, like these 
flowers, are of different characteristics and natures and vaasanas (past impressions), but the 


string is one uniform consistent base, the Brahma Suuthra, that binds all together, in one 
common creation. Dwell upon that unity for some time at least, every day, and that will save you 
from all types of a-shaanthi {agitation). 


You are engaged in the task of conferring sukha, santhosha and sampath (welfare, happiness and 
prosperity) to crores of people; I bless you so that you may complete the sacred task quickly and 
successfully, without the shadow of misfortune of interruption of any sort, and with no 
discordant note. 


Shrishailam Project Site---Address to the Workers, 6-12-1963 


Without the control of the senses, man is like a horse without 
blinkers, like a bull that refuses to yield to the yoke; his saadhana 
is a waste of time and energy. The special feature of man's 
composition is that he has discrimination, detachment and synoptic 
intellect; he can discover Truth and be fixed in it, and gain 
unshakable peace. 


Sathya Sai Baaba 


39. The turn of the key 


THE task now is to install Dharma in every heart, to shed light on every road, through the 
revival of Vedhaantha. The world is like a famished person, waiting for a feast; it is like the 
parched land waiting for rain. I have seen and felt the atmosphere of this land surcharged with 
discontent and dishonesty; I have seen it from Kanyaakumari to the Himaalayas. That is the 
reason why thousands like you seek dharshan, sparshan and sambhaashana (sacred sight, touch 
and talk). Iam only surprised that thousands are denying themselves the chance. 


Man 'is daily growing more and more greedy to know more about the lives of others, more 
extrovert, in fact. He wants to escape from himself, by interesting himself in others. He does not 
want to worry about the details of his own life, or the problems of his own rehabilitation. Of 
what benefit is all this burden of information that you seek to carry in your head, this knowledge 
of the various regions of the world, without a knowledge of the region of your own self, the 
centre of all the interest that you evince? It is no good wandering all over the world, contacting 
men of various races, and getting engrossed with earning and spending without being able to 
know your own identity! 


To win Bliss, saadhana with vairaagya is essential 


The tree of the human body finds its fruition, when it yields prema. That sweet gift is the reason 
why it grew and had to be fostered. It drew its substance from the earth and the Sun. What does it 
give in return for the gifts it got from both these as well as from the human community prema. 
The fruit is sweet, but the rind can afford to be bitter. For the rind of anger, malice, envy, greed 
has to be peeled off, before it is put to use. Use the bitterness in you to preserve and develop the 
sweetness within yourself. 


From the experience of saints and sages, you can realise that the joy got from the external world 
is infinitesimal when compared with the Bliss won through spiritual discipline. To win that Bliss, 
saadhana (spiritual effort) full of vairaagya (detachment) is essential. When boring is done to 
draw water from the bowels of the earth, the pipe has to be kept free from air so that the water 
could rise up. If the air enters, the water will not rise. So too, be sure that attachment to worldly 
things does not mar your saadhana. Prema will not well up, if sensual pleasures and personal 
pride invade the Mind. 


So long as life persists, you will be caught up in heights and depths, good and bad, rights and 
wrongs. Duality is inevitable. It is even necessary. A hero shines against a background of 
villains; Prahlaadha's faith had to be tested against the background of Hiranyakasipu's denials; 
the Paandavas demonstrated the strength of meekness only when they faced the savagery of the 
Kauravas. A city has pipes for the drinking water, as well as for sewage Man has a system of 


arteries as well as veins, for the circulation of pure and impure blood. Both contribute to the 
health of the individual. 


Yoga is often turned into Roga 


The fault is: You know that a thing is improper, but still you continue to do it, curbing your 
conscience and suppressing the nobler impulses. The world is all set for profit, as the quickest 
means of attaining joy. High profit, quick profit, easy profit---why, when measuring or counting, 
you don't start with "One," but say instead, "Laabham" (Profit). The next one is two, of course, 
but, the idea with which you start is "Laabham," not Service! 


The problem should not be how to live glamorously so that you make others envy you, but how 
to live gloriously or better still, how to die gloriously!---so gloriously that you are not put to the 
humiliation of dying again. What do you take with you when you die? Mahamud of Ghazni 
instructed his Vazir to take his corpse to the burial ground with both his hands raised, so that 
people should see that he came with empty hands and went with hands as empty as when he 
came, though he had plundered the wealth of a hundred cities. 


Saadhana has to be taken up under the direction of an expert, who knows your health and 
temperament well. Over-enthusiasm and irregularity are both to be avoided. If viveka 
(discrimination) plays false, saadhana (spiritual practice) is a snare; a little forgetfulness of the 
limits of heating may spoil kiln of bricks; a few extra handfuls of washing soda will ruin a 
bundle of clothes in the wash; a few extra words with the neighbour regardless of time, and a 
whole potful of rice is overboiled and wasted. Vigilance, care, circumspection---these are very 
important for the Saadhaka. Yoga is often turned into Roga (disease), for lack of continuous self- 
examination. 


Attach yourself to the Larger Self 


A man weeping, because he has been bitten by a cobra in his dream, can be cured by just being 
woken up! No doctor is needed. So, too when Arjuna who was suffering from ajnaana 
(ignorance)was given jnaana (spiritual knowledge), he recovered and did his duty. The pain and 
the snake will both disappear if the dreamer is awakened. He is only imagining that a snake bit 
him. 

When you invite a blind person for dinner, remember that you have to lay two plates not one for 
one guest only. For, he will be certainly accompanied by a guide. The blind man is Arjuna and 
the guide is Sujnaana. Sujnaana (good knowledge) will lead him aright. Both are in the same 
person. Only, Sujnaana has to take charge and lead. 


Turn the key to the right, it is unlocked. Turn to God and righteousness, the lock opens, the chain 
falls away. Turn it to the left, you become bound; the bolt falls in; the chain holds fast. It is just a 
question of the point of view---outlook or Inlook? Out-query? In-query? 


For all this, the prime need is Faith. Faith in yourself! You can move mountains in the social 
level, if you conquer your mind in the individual level. Curb your powers and make them run 
along useful channels; that will result in Joy for you and others. To get that faith, know your 
Truth. To know that, attach yourself to the Larger Self, of which you are a part, by constant 
Naamasmarana. 


Speech at Dhronaachalam, 8-12-1963 


To get the attitude of surrender, of dedication, you must have Faith 
in God. 


This world is His play; it is not an empty dream; it has purpose 
and use. It is the means by which one can discover God; see Him 
in the beauty, the grandeur, the order, the majesty of Nature. These 
are but shadows of His Glory and His splendour. 


Upaasana (adoration of God), leads to the knowledge that He is in 
all; when you experience that there is no Second, that is jnaana! 


Sathya Sai Baaba 


41. Fine arts and the finest arts 


INDIA is the Moolasthaanam (sanctum sanctorum) of Sathya, Dharma, Shaanthi and Prema 
(Truth, Virtue, Peace and Love); she has been holding forth these ideals and emphasising their 
practice since centuries. Bhaarath means the land that has rathi (attachment) to bha or 
Bhagavaan; it means that the people here are God-loving, not so much God-fearing. If you love 
God, you have to love Man also. This teaching that Sathya is the basis of Dharma which lays 
down individual and social duties and obligations, and that Sathya is also the root of Prema and 
Shaanthi---this is the unique feature of Bhaarath. Sathya is enough; no other God need be 
worshipped.. Here, in the Gurukulams and the Rishiaashrams (hermitages), the emphasis has 
always been on practice, on Aachaara and Vichaara (conduct and deliberation). Use your 
reason; it is God-given gift. Satisfy yourself whether the prescription will cure you; then, follow 
also the course of discipline which is recommended with the particular drug. Then you gain 
Aanandha, full, free, undiminishable. That is the teaching which the people of Bhaarath have 
been receiving from the cradle to the grave for ages. 


Sundharamuurthy had arranged a "grand" procession for Me from his Institute to this Stadium, 
for, this day he is celebrating the Silver Jubilee of his Institute! Let Me tell you this now itself: I 
do not like this pomp and show. I do not derive any joy out of it. 


Do not waste money on pomp and show 


Pomp, such as this, has become a fashion now, even among ascetics and monks who ought to 
know better. They profess poverty and simplicity and yet, they allow or encourage their disciples 
to waste much energy and money on pomp and pageantry which serve only to develop the 
egoism of themselves and their followers. The emphasis on show makes a thing hollow of all 
meaning. The misery of the present age is largely due to this empty ritual of insincere 
demonstrations. 


You should all resolve to maintain the honour and dignity of the country, which is your respon- 
sibility. Bhaarath is entitled to be the Guru (preceptor) of the world. Her's is no mean history. 
This is the land of Krishna, where the Vedhas and the Upanishadhs saw the light, where 
Shankaraachaarya established monasteries for the propagation of the Sanaathana Dharma 
(eternal religion). This land will be saved, for it has a mission to perform, which no other can 
fulfill. 


Don't yield to silly fears that this or that country will endanger its freedom. That is impossible. 
The Avathaar of the Lord has come and the effect will be safety for this holy land. Live the life 
that was held forth as the ideal by the sages of the past and happiness is ensured. That kind of life 
will give internal contentment and quiet calm. 


Festival of the Aathma is more magnificent 


Prayer is a more powerful force than military re-enforcements: if made with a sincere heart it 
will be certainly answered. It will strengthen the hands of the people of this land more than any 
other source of encouragement.’ It will join the hearts of the people more than lectures or 
pamphlets can do. What is the use of trying for the unity of mankind or the union of this 
continent or that, with so many factions and misunderstandings festering this country? Become 
united yourselves sincerely and firmly, before advising others to close up their ranks. Repent for 
the faults of partisanship committed by you and begin a new chapter of brotherly co-operation. 


Sundharamuurthy and his friends and coworkers are happy today because of the 'Silver Jubilee’. 
It is a festival for the Institute: but, I consider the Festival of the Aathma to be more magnificent. 
The Aathma has an eternal festival! It is Aanandhaswaruupa(bliss-filled). It is beyond time and 
so does not calculate the passage of time. How Can man celebrate a festival, let Me ask, while he 
is afflicted by Deha bhraanthi, Indhriya bhraanthi, 


Mano bhraanthi and Loka bhraanthi? He believes the falsehoods (bhraanthi) that are named the 
body, the senses, the mind, the world! He pursues them and tastes joy and grief; and, when a 
certain number of years is passed in the pastime, he celebrates a festival! 


Man is a compound of animal and angel 


This is maayaa (illusory power) within Maayaa (the great worldly illusion). I have not come to 
announce to you that this Institute has finished twenty-five years of existence. I am concerned 
with the spiritual arts, the finest arts, rather than the fine arts. I want that Sundharamuurthy 
should depict in dance spiritually elevating subjects, like Raadha and Krishna and their sublime 
relationship that is beyond the ken of man. He must give up themes such as drunkards, evil men, 
power-drunk personalities and clowns, which cater to vulgar tastes. Adjust all items of dance and 
dramatic representation to the spiritual urge in man; foster it, fertilise it and take people a little 
nearer to the Goal. 


Man is a compound of animal and angel, we can say. He has in him the wolf, the monkey, the 
bullock, the jackal, the snake, the peacock, the bear---and he has beneath all these, the pure 
Spark of Divinity too. It is the duty of all who cater to the senses of man to transform the low 
values now pervading, and transmute them into higher values. The rulers too must canalise the 
enthusiasm and imagination of the people along healthy lines. 


Bangalore, Shivaajinagar, 14-12-1963 


41. Samadhrishti 


THOSE who live in Malleswaram have made good arrangements for celebrating the Annual 
Festival of the Bhajana (community singing) that they have been conducting here. Bhajana 
always gives aanandha and shaanthi. See that it is not used for increasing your egoism, or 
mutual recrimination, or envy or pride, as very often happens. Be humble, be calm, be tolerant. 
Co-operate with all and treat every one with courtesy and kindness. 


Bhakthi is not a uniform to be worn on Thursday evenings, when you gather for bhajana, and to 
be laid aside when the bhajana is over. It must mean the promotion of an attitude of humility, of 
revering parents, teachers, elders, and others; it is a mental outlook, an attitude that is ever- 
present. It is the sustenance of the heart, just as food is sustenance for the body. Like the needle 
of the compass always pointing to the North, never deviating from that direction, returning to it, 
readily, gladly, quickly, whenever it is shaken off that line, so too the bhaktha (devotee) must 
face the Lord ever, must be happy only when he is set towards Him. 


The spiritual Thriveni leading to samadhrishti 


Many people think of God only when grief overtakes them; of course, it is good to do so; it is 
better than seeking the help of those who are also equally liable to grief. But, it is infinitely better 
to think of God in grief and in joy, in peace and strife, in all weathers. The proof of the rain is in 
the wetness of the ground; the proof of bhakthi is in the shaanthi the bhaktha has, shaanthi 
which protects him against the onslaughts of success as well as failure, fame, dishonour, gain and 
loss. 


Bhakthi is the river Ganga. Vairaagyam (detachment) is the river Yamuna and Jnaana is the 
river Saraswathi of this spiritual Thriveni (confiuence of three rivers). Jnaana is the through- 
train; you just board it, that is enough; it takes you direct to the destination. Bhakthi is the 
through-carriage; though it may be detached from one train and connected with another, if you 
get into it, you need not worry; so long as you stick to your place, it is bound to take you to the 
destination. Karma is the ordinary train; if you board it, you have to disembark, climb in and 
climb out at every junction, load your luggage and unload it, and do a good lot of work to reach 
your destination. 


Bhakthi alone is enough, even to acquire jnaana. It ends in Samadhrishti (seeing only Brahman 
in all) and it destroys egoism. Jnaana too gives you these. Naaradha once offered to teach the 
Gopees (illiterate cowherd women), the principles of philosophy, Vijnaanabodha, as he called it. 
Krishna agreed. But, they said. "We do not care for your learning and your discourse. We see 
Krishna everywhere and in everything and so, we have no hate or envy or malice. We have 
Samadhrishti and we have no ahamkaaram (egoism). We believe this is enough for us." 
Naaradha found that what they claimed was correct; so he left discomfited. 


You are not travelling Godward 


Now, most of you are leading a double or treble life; Yogam (practising union with God)in the 
morning, bhogam (enjoyment) the rest of the day and rogam (suffering) at night. You seek 
Aanandha outside you and suffer from the ulcer of desire inside you. You utter one thing with 
the tongue and carry out the opposite with the hand. You claim to be seekers of Jnaana but you 
are attached to the delusion you have cultivated. You have a ticket for Calcutta but you are 
travelling in the train headed for Bombay! With the body which is your ticket, Vijnaana , and 


Vairaagyam (world knowledge and detachment) t as your luggage, you are travelling not in the 
train which goes Godward but in the train leading to Prakrithi (objective world). This is the pity! 


The roots must go deep, deep down to the level of underground water. The trees that grow on the 
bunds of canals are green with thick foliage. Your roots must also go deep into the Divinity that 
will keep you green whatever the dryness of the weather or heat of the Sun. 


You can recognise God in your own self 


This is the Age of Profit. The question that any one asks when he is asked to do a thing is, "What 
is the profit?" "How much is the profit?" "How sure is the profit?" Well. Let Me also ask, "Of 
what profit is all this feeding and growing, this striving and struggling, this earning and saving 
and spending, this losing and gaining, this speeding in cars and planes, if by these means you do 
not get peace in the mind, joy in the heart?" 


All these activities only serve to hide the real nature of the individual, to overwhelm it under a 
mass of trivialities, to suppress the natural influence of the real Truth of Man. Develop a love for 
God, then you can recognise Him very near you, in your own Self. That is the assurance I am 
giving to all of you. 


Malleshwaram, Sathya Sai Bhajana Mandali, 
15-12-1963 


The conquest of the ego is a very hard task; years of persistent 
effort are needed to get success in this endeavour. For getting a 
Degree you struggle in the University for a number of years, 
poring over books night and day, how much more difficult is this 
examination, success in which guarantees lasting happiness, and 
escape from the weary round of birth and death. 


Sathya Sai Baaba 


42. The Divine Voice 


NARAKAASURA is present in every one as kaama, krodha, lobha (lust, hate, greed)and as 
bhaya and dhukha (fear and grief), which are against the very nature of man. Just as an umbrella 
with inferior cover, cannot protect you from rain, but only one with a waterproof cover, so too in 
this stormdriven world incessantly flushed by-torrential rain, an umbrella with kaama-proof and 
krodha-proof covering is required. The five bhuuthas (fire, earth, water, ether and wind) cannot 
harm one who is equipped with such protection. The five Durgas (fortresses) in which 
Narakaasura is said to have taken refuge are the five elements. There is great Avyaktha shakthi 
(latent power) inherent in every one and when that shakthi is made vyaktha (explicit), man 
deserves to be called vyakthi (individual). When that is made manifest. the aswra (demon) will 
automatically be destroyed. Your reality is Aathma; your quality is Aanandha. What does it 
matter to you if the Narakaasura of the Puraanas is killed, by Krishna and Sathyabhaama. For 
you, Krishna is Paramaathma (Super or Omni Self) and Sathyabhaama is the jeevi (individual 
self). Paramaathma destroys the evil propensities with the active collaboration of jeevi: jeevi 
defeats evil with the active Grace of the Lord. 


Make kaama, the servant of Raama 


India is the repository of spiritual power: but now, scarcely any one practises the disciplined life 
which is the mark of that power. Even now millions go on pilgrimages; millions of copies of 
sacred texts and spiritual lore are bought and read-thousands of ascetics and gurus are scattered 
over the land and they receive the homage of the people. But yet there is no peace in the heart, no 
food ill the stomach, no clothes to keep the cold off the body. India which is Annapoorna- 
swaruupa (the granary of the earth), has now to go about with begging bowl for food for her 
children. This tragedy is caused by ill-discipline, by want of self-control. by what can be called 
A-swaa-raajya (the absence of Self-Government, Government of the Self). 


Sathyanaaraayana, when he acted the role of Sathyabhaama in the drama, remembered always 
that he was Sathyanaaraayana, though he was also aware that he had a part to play in the drama 
and he played it well. It would be a failure if he forgets either his Sathyanaaraayana-hood or his 
Sathyab-haama-hood. So, too, act in the world but remember your genuine Self. When humanity 
forgets that this is a play and starts assuming it real, the Lord comes down to remind them of it. 
Otherwise, when the execution scene is enacted heads will fall; when Lanka is set on fire in the 
drama, the theatre itself will be consumed. Do not take the world more seriously than it deserves. 


There is space for only just one throne in your heart. But, now you are inviting too many to sit on 
it or you try to put two thrones there, one for Raama, and one for kaama; or, when you find it 
difficult, you are inviting Raama and Kaama to squeeze themselves into that one seat! Or, you 
install Kaama and want Raama to sit down below as his henchman! No wonder Raama deserts 
you. Make Raama the deity on the throne and utilise kaama as His servant---there is no harm. 


Cultivate the inward look 


The mother-cat, it is said, takes hold of the new born kitten and shifts it from place to place, 
seven times, within few days of its birth, so that its eyes might open and it might see! The kitten 
gets proper vision after going through seven transfers but, man does not get the vision (viz,, that 
he is in reality the deathless, birthless, infinite Aathman) even after he is shifted from womb to 
womb a million times! This is the tragedy of ignorance and sloth. 


You have heard of the story of Gajendhra moksha, the elephant caught and dragged by the 
crocodile, appealing helplessly to the Lord and the Lord sending down the Sudharshana Chakra 
(discus) to slay the tormentor and save the beast. The story has a deeper meaning, which has 
universal appeal. The wild elephant is the jeevi (the individual), full of sensual greed and blind 
with delusion. It enters the tank of samsaara (flux), of the objective world. There the crocodile 
of egoism grasps its leg in the vice of its teeth and pulls it down deeper and deeper into the mire 
of Samsaara. 


There is a definite process for God-realisation 


The individual struggles by itself for a long time until pride is exhausted and its faith in its own 
powers is spent. Then, it appeals in complete sharanaagathi (surrender) to the Lord and what 
does the Lord send? Sudharshana. Mark that word, What does it mean? Sudharshana---Good 
sight! Beneficial outlook! A vision that is correct, conducive to lasting joy, namely, the inward 
look, away, from the sense objects, Aavriththa Chakshu. As soon as that sight is cultivated, 
egoism is destroyed and the jeevi is freed. 


Live and act in the world, by all means; but, deal with samsaara as you apply collyrium to the 
eye. The eye is not blinded by the collyrium, it is rendered more efficient, more charming, that is 
all. So too, samsaara (worldly life) must make your saadhana (spiritual effort) more efficient 
and more pleasing to yourself and others. Be like the lotus which though born in mud rises 
higher, through the waters, on the region of sunlight. It requires both mud and water for its 
existence but, it knows their real value; so it does not allow itself to be contaminated by either. 


A great sage once fell in with a gang of non-believers in an atheist settlement. They crowded 
around him and plied him with impertinent queries and insisted that he must show them the God 
in whom he believed. The sage promised to do so, but, asked for some milk, before he could 
demonstrate God. The vessel of milk was brought; he sat silent for a long while, stirring the milk 
with his finger. The crowd got exasperated at the delay and at his silence. They asked him what 
he was at; he replied that he was only trying to spot out where the butter was, top, middle or 
bottom? The crowd shouted that it was everywhere, in every drop of milk and that he could see it 
only when the preliminary process of churning was done. Then, the sage answered, "Well, the 
Lord too is immanent in every atom of this Universe. He can be perceived and experienced only 
when the preliminary spiritual exercises of saadhana are done. There is a definite well-known 
process for God-realisation also, just as there is a definite well-known process for butter 
realisation. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, December 1963 


I want devotees to improve their behaviour and character. It is no 
good attending the temple and sharing loudly, with cymbals in 
your hands, in the singing of devotional songs there. They are but 
external signs of enthusiasm. God watches the bhaavam (the 
thought power behind), not the baahyam (the outward pomp) 


Sathya Sai Baaba 


