Sathya Sai Speaks 


Sathya Sai Speaks: yes! And, listening to that Voice 
Man crawls from off the slime, in every clime! 

Those who do not rise, for they yearn to be raised. 
Feet buoyant, light, equipped with wings---they rise! 
The blind do see; the deaf do hear the mighty melody. 


They spend many years the in the pit of night 

But, when they hear the Voice--- 

They shed the shame and bathe in Light; 

They're free from womb and tomb! 

Sathya Sai speaks; yes! And, listening to that Voice. 
Man splits the manacle of hate; 

He sees himself as all the roles 


In this nine-days' play; all the flow in this turgid stream! 


This play written in blood and tears 

By a just and joyful God, Man knows. 

Sathya Sai speaks; yes! And, listening to that Voice 
Hearts get churned and yield soft butter! 

Minds do fade as mist, free from ego dust. 

Brains are bright and the goal is clear. 

Tongues enjoy the fragrant taste 

Of the sacred splendid Name. 

Eyes discard the cataract, of craving for this and that. 
Spines are straightened, gaits erect. 

Hands are cleansed, heads get shrunk 


Zeroes transformed to hero bands. 


Sathya Sai speaks; yes! And, listening to that Voice 
Seekers have found; and those that climb do reach! 


Hesitation halts and courage dawns; Conviction's Roots do 


feed the tree of Faith. 

Sages have felt the thrill. 

Of God Himself, so kind, so light, 
Speaking to Save and Salve. 

N. Kasturi 


1. Close the windows and save the lamp 


The Mukkoti Ekaadhashi, which happens today, is also known as Vaikuntha Ekaadhashi (day 
sacred to Lord Vishnu). The two speakers who addressed you described the traditional legend of 
the Samudramanthana (churning of the ocean), with all the details found in the Bhaagavatha of 
the Ksheerasaagara (ocean of milk), the Kurma avathaara (Vishnu's incarnation as tortoise), the 
Mandara mountain, Vaasuki (venomous serpent), the asuras and suras (demons and celestials) 
and the various articles and things that appeared from the ocean, culminating in the amritha 
(nectar that gives immortality)! That legend has great value for you, because you too have to 
churn the ocean of your heart and win the nectar for yourself. The legend is only a reminder, a 
cue, a call. 


The heart full of sathwaguna (quality of purity and poise) is the ocean of milk. The steady 
contemplation of the Divine, either as your own reality or as the ideal to be reached, is the 
Mandara mountain plated in it as the churning rod. Vaasuki, the serpent that was wound round 
the churning rod as a rope, is the group of the senses, emitting poisonous fumes during the 
process of churning and nearly frightening the Asuras who held the head. The rope is held by the 
good and the bad impulses and both struggle with the churning process; eager for the results 
which each has set its heart on. 


The lesson of the legend 


The Grace of God is the Tortoise incarnation, for the Lord Himself comes to the rescue, once He 
knows that you are earnestly seeking the secret of Immortality: He comes, silently and 
unobserved, as the tortoise did, holding the manana (reflection) process unimpaired and serving 
as the steady base of all spiritual practice. Many things emerge from the mind, when churned, 
but the wise wait patiently for the appearance of the guarantor of Immortality, and seize upon it 
with avidity. That is the lesson of the legend. It is a summary of Aathmavidya (science of the 
Self). 


The song that the Doctor sang at the beginning of this meeting, Bhajagopaalam (be attached to 
Krishna, the Divine cowherd), carries the same message, perhaps in a simpler and easier form. 
Remembrance of the Lord's name is the method of crossing over the ocean of the worldly life for 
this age; remembering the Lord by means of His Name is enough to save man. The Lord is 
Aanandamaya (of the nature of Bliss); He is also Aananda (divine bliss), which is to be tasted 
through the Name. It is Sath-Chith-Aananda (Being-Awareness-Bliss Absolute). You may doubt 
whether such a small word like Raama or Sai or Krishna can take you across the boundless sea of 
worldly life. People cross vast oceans on a tiny raft; they are able to walk through dark jungles 
with a tiny lamp in their hands. The Name, even the Pranava (Om) which is smaller, has vast 
potentialities. The raft need not be as big as the sea. 


The recitation of the Name is like the operation of boring, to tap underground water; it is like the 
chisel-stroke that will release the image of God imprisoned in the marble. Break the encasement 
and the Lord will appear; cleave the pillar, as Prahlaadh (Lord Vishnu's devotee) asked his father 
to do, and the Lord who is ever there will manifest Himself. Churn and you bring the butter, 
latent in the milk, into view. That is the experience of every mother that every daughter learns; in 
the spiritual field, you learn that spiritual practice from yogis, who have gained and offered that 
navaneetham (fresh butter) to Krishna. 


Curing the infection of Samsaara 


There are many who ridicule these yogis (God-centred men) and scoff at them. They call them 
selfish, anti-social, self-centred idlers who run away from their obligations and seek asylum in 
solitude and silence. But, being near does not ensure usefulness. Being far does not imply hatred 
or fear of company or uselessness. Viruses enter the very blood stream and surely, nothing can 
be nearer to you; yet, they are mortal enemies. Members of the same family are envious and 
suspicious of one another; those born as brothers or sisters fight in courts of law and fill the 
pockets of lawyers. Even twins seldom love each other. It is not being near that counts. 


These yogis moved out into lonely spots and sought teachers of the inner path, much as young 
technicians do today, going to Japan or America or Russia in order to learn skills that will help to 
build a better India. They do not give up kith and kin and all chances to make a fortune, because 
they are afraid of facing the hard realities of life; they do not flee from loss or defeat. They go, to 
seek the secret of eternal joy; they win it for themselves; and, by their lives, they inspire others to 
win the precious secret, by treading the path they have found useful. 


No one calls the man who has gone abroad to equip himself better, as an engineer or doctor, 
selfish; why then should the man who undergoes greater deprivations to equip himself better as 
an engineer of the mind, utilising its undoubted powers, not for bondage, but, for liberation, be 
tarred as ego-centric? This only shows ignorance of true values. There are isolation hospitals 
where patients suffering from chronic infectious diseases are treated and cured. The hermitages 
in the forests are such hospitals, where people who want to be cured of the infection of worldly 
life can undergo the treatment and come out free in order to serve other patients. 


Ajnaani sees the same Self in all 


Today is the Day when during the Saagaramathana (churning of the ocean), Amritha (nectar) 
emerged and was distributed to the Gods. The Gods had slid into the calamity of losing their 
immortality! Man too is the child of immortality; that is the reason why he cannot force himself 
into the conviction that he would die. He sees his neighbour die, but believes that he would 
somehow escape it. The man of realisation (jnaani), however, is ever ready to east off this 
encumbrance and escape from the prison of name and form. Emperor Janaka was such a person 
of realisation. He never lost the consciousness of the Oneness. 


Once, Sulabha, the celebrated woman dialectician, visited his court and during the discussion, 
she challenged Janaka to treat her also as his queen, for, "as a jnaani, you should make no 
difference between persons," as men of realisation see the 'same self in all. But, Janaka retorted, 
"As a jnaani, you should recognise Oneness; there is no validity in talking of men and women as 
distinct." Thus he taught her real jnaana, the highest wisdom. 


Mere drinking the Nectar which I create will not confer immortality on you. Everything that is 
born must die; everything that is constructed will disintegrate. But you can escape death, by not 
being born again. When you know that you are the limitless aathman (self or the soul which is 
the infinite consciousness), then you are no longer subjected to the limitation of birth. That is the 
secret. How to know that? It is the result of a long process of sharpening the intellect and 
purifying the emotions and the impulses. You may do the most rigorous japa (repetition of holy 
name or symbols) or practise the direst, of austerities, but if you are not virtuous, all of it is sheer 
waste. 


You are the limitless Aathman 


You may have the best of vegetables, you may be the most capable cook, but, if the copper 
vessel in which you prepare the vegetable soup is not tinned, the concoction you cook will be 
highly poisonous! So "tin" your heart with sathya, dharma, shaanthi and prema (truth, right 
conduct, peace and divine love), it will then become a vessel fit for repeating holy name or 
symbols, meditation, religious vows, pilgrimage, ritualistic worship and the other dishes that you 
prepare in it. 


It is an uphill task: to reform one's tendencies and character. A man may study all the text-books 
of spiritual practice, all the scriptures, and he may even lecture for hours on them; but he will slip 
into error when temptation confronts him. Like land that is parched, the heart may appear to be 
free from any crop of evil; but when the first showers fall, the seeds and roots underneath the soil 
change the waste into a carpet of green. 


There was a wandering mendicant once who refused to reveal his caste or creed, origin or 
destination. A shrewd housewife discovered it quite easily; she fed him well and when he lay fast 
asleep snoring, she applied a red-hot rod on the sole and the man shrieked "Allah" The real core 
can never be altered, or hidden, or suppressed. 


But, what is the real core ? It is not the particular religious belief or the name or the language that 
one has learned from the mother's lap. It is the Absolute Reality which you are. You know in the 
very depths of your being that 'you are and will be,' that is the characteristic of Sath (Existence 
Being). All beings have it. You are also eager to 'know’, 'to expand by knowledge,’ 'to reach out.' 
All beings have it, this urge for expression. That is the characteristic of Chith (Awareness). You 
seek 'joy'; all beings do so. That is the characteristic of Aananda (Divine Bliss). The aananda in 
you seeks its kin everywhere, in everything. That is why it is said, sath-chith-aananda is the link 
between Thath and thwam, the particular and the universal. Everything is asthi (exists), for, it is 
sath; it is bhaathi (expressing itself), because it is chith; it is priya (pleasant), because it is 
aananda. 


If you are able to equip your mind with this consciousness you are a Person of Realisation. Else, 
you are a masquerader. There are three types of minds: (1) minds like ginned cotton, ready to 
receive the spark of highest wisdom and to give up in one instant blaze, the weakness and 
prejudices of ages, (2) minds--like dry wood, who succeed but only after some little time, and (3) 
minds, like green logs, which resist the onslaught of the fire of jnaana with all their might. 


The little game that Lord plays 


Herds of cattle run towards a mirage to slake their thirst, but you ought to be wiser. You have 
discrimination (viveka), and renunciation (vairaagya); you can detach yourselves consciously 
from pursuits which you discover as deleterious. Sit quiet for a few minutes and ponder over the 
fate of those who run towards the mirage. Are they happy? Have they the strength to bear 
distress and distinction, with equanimity? Have they a glimpse of the Beauty, the Truth, the 
Grandeur of the Universe, the Handiwork of God? Have they the vision of themselves as the 
centre of the Universe? 


You have read that the Lord, melted and moved when one performed acute penance, comes and 
asks, softly and sweetly, "My dear child! What is it you need?" He has manifested Himself to 
give but, yet, consider the Grace which induces Him to ask, "What is it you need?" He wants you 
to express in words what you have yearned for and ask the Lord whom you have brought before 


you through the exercise of silence. That is the little game He plays. And sometimes He wills 
that the question is answered in the way His plan demands! Raavana's brother Kumbhakarna was 
blessed with a timely twist of the tongue: so, he asked for nidhra (the power to sleep), instead of 
nigraha (the power to slaughter)! 


The see-er should not attach himself to the seen; that is the way to get free. The contact of the 
senses with the object arouses desire and attachment; this leads to effort and either elation or 
despair; then, there is the fear of loss or grief at failure and the train of reactions lengthens. With 
many doors and windows kept open to all the winds that blow, how can the flame of the lamp 
within survive? That lamp is the mind, which must burn steadily unaffected by the dual demands 
of the world outside. 


Complete surrender to the Lord is one way of closing the windows and doors, for, then, in that 
stance of Sharanaagathi (complete surrender to God), you are bereft of "ego" and so, you are not 
buffeted by joy or grief. Complete surrender makes you draw upon the Grace of the Lord for 
meeting all the crises in your career and so, it renders you heroic, more stalwart, better prepared 
for the battle. 


Resolve on this auspicious day to enter upon the quest of Truth. Uththaraayana is Uththama 
kaala (the best time). For the morning of this day the great Bheeshma waited long on his bed of 
arrows, the morning when the Sun turns North, the direction of the Gods, where Shiva resides. 
The Sun is the deity that controls the eye, the vision of man, and so these six months, when the 
Sun is proceeding Shiva-ward, are very propitious for man too, to do likewise. 


The real Heavenly Nectar 


There are some dealers in timber in the East Godaavari district here. They know that logs are 
floated down the Godaavari during the high floods and they are retrieved from the waters after 
miles and miles of journey, at Rajahmundry or some such place. Railway sleepers are floated 
down from the Himalayan forests through the Ganga and caught at Haridwar in thousands. Join 
the flood, the flowing stream and the journey becomes easier. So too, if you practise spiritual 
discipline to attain the Lord, when the Deity of Vision is moving towards the Divine Region, you 
get the benefit of the momentum. Today, it is also Vaikuntha Ekaadhashi. Many of you expect 
Me to go to the Chithravathi riverbed and create nectar and give it to all. Well, on the road to the 
river, you meet herds of cattle that move to the river and return. You have earned this 
Vaagamritham (word-nectar), from this discourse, which you can treasure in your minds and act 
upon. This is the real Heavenly Nectar; know its worth, do not allow it to be wasted, garner it to 
become Godly. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 13-1-1965 


Supari is brown, paan is green, chunam is white 
but when these are chewed together 

the colour is red. 

When the three gunas, Sathwa, Rajas and Thamas, 
are equated in Saadhana 


the result is Shaanthi. 


SHRI SATHYA SAI 


2. The sun at your doorstep 


A man in great distress clamoured for a ticket at the booking office of the railway station, but the 
clerk within was helpless, because the man did not know where he wanted to go. He was anxious 
only to get away; he had had enough of the place. All men, sooner or later, behave like this; even 
if one lives a hundred years, he has no desire to continue, for he finds all his kith and kin, his 
near and dear, have dropped on the roadside and he has been deserted, by death. Life is no 
unmixed good. No one is happy if he is immersed in worldly life. Man is tossed about on the 
waves of joy and grief, he is buffeted by fortune, good or bad; he is the target of brickbats or 
bouquets; the evil around him affects his peace; anxiety robs him of sleep and quiet. It is as if 
one attempted to sleep on a bug-infested cot. Therefore, man tries to escape from all this, into 
some thing, some where; he is not sure, which or where! 


The spiritual teacher (guru) can guide you where to go, which place to seek; but, he cannot make 
you reach it. You have to trudge along the road yourself. The teacher might take special classes 
and give special coaching; but, learning has to be accomplished by the pupil himself. There are 
two kinds of accomplishments: apraaptha praapthi and praaptha praapthi. The acquisition of 
something which you did not have is apraaptha praapthi; if you do not have a mike, you go and 
purchase one or hire one. It is praaptha praapthi if you become aware of a thing that you had 
with you, but imagined that you did not have. A friend comes and asks a loan of ten rupees from 
you, you are sorry that you have not got the tenner and that you are not able to come to his rescue 
when he is in dire need. An hour later, when you sit down and open the pages of the Geetha, you 
discover a ten rupee note that you had placed between the leaves long ago and forgotten, How 
happy you are at this! The ten rupees are so good as newly earned. The Guru asks you to search 
between the leaves of the book of your heart, and, lo, the treasure is there ready to render you 
rich beyond compare. Purpose of human effort 


Krishna did not remove the delusion of Arjuna by His resolve, in a trice, as He doubtless could 
have done; He made him go through all the steps of hearing, reflection and concentration 
himself. The patient must take the medicine, not the doctor; the doctor only prescribes and 
persuades. One thing too must be said. The aspiring disciple must have an inkling already of the 
Truth; or else, he cannot master the secret. The telegram is sent in the Morse Code; so the man 
who sends as well as the man who receives must be aware of the code. 


The doctor spoke of people who come to Me with various aims; yes; but when some of them do 
not get exactly what they want, they blame Me and not themselves for wanting things that are not 
conducive to their progress or for not deserving to get them from Me. Why blame the Sun that he 
does not illumine your room ? Open the doors and the Sun, who has been waiting at the doorstep 
for just that moment, floods the room with light. You must use your intelligence to deserve the 
Grace of God. That is the purpose of human effort. 


The disciple washed the clothes of the guru and they were hung for drying on a line in the 
hermitage. The guru wanted them dried quickly, but the disciple could not avoid delay! He had 
hung them folded into four; human intelligence must have inspired him to hand them in single 
fold, so that they would have dried quicker. Likewise, one should use his intelligence in the 
spiritual field and carry on his spiritual practice unimpaired. After all, the quickest way to dry 
clothes, the best way to prepare a tasty dish, these are secondary skills; the primary one is the 
skill to overcome the temptations of the senses, to journey inward into the region of the impulses 


and give them a higher purpose. Of what use is it to cleanse and polish the exterior of a drinking- 
cup? Cleanse the interior, instead. 


Use the stick of intelligence 


Remembrance of the Lord's Name is the best detergent for the mind. It is the means of crossing 
the sea. The Name is the raft that will take you safely across. The Name will remove the veil of 
illusion, that now hides the Universal from the Individual. When that veil fades out, man finds 
Himself before himself; he beholds the Universe that he is. 


Man has infinite power and infinite potentiality, for he is a wave of the Ocean of Infinity. You 
can be aware of this, if you only dare reason a bit. The fruit won't drop if you mumble manthras 
(sacred formulae) under the mango tree; you will have to take a heavy stick and throw it at the 
bunch. Use the stick of intelligence and throw it at the problem of "you and the world"; that will 
yield fruit. 


That is why I insist on your seeking, and remaining, in good company, the association with the 
holy. Being in the midst of such spiritual heroes, you can fight against evil with greater chance of 
success. Once when Garuda (the celestial bird of Lord Vishnu), the sworn enemy of snakes, went 
to kailasa (Abode of Lord Shiva), he saw the snakes that Shiva wore round His neck, His arms, 
His waist and Feet; the snakes were safe now and they hissed with their puffed hoods at the 
celestial bird which could not do them any harm, since they were in such Divine Company. 
Garuda said, "Well! Glide down from that Body and I shall kill every one of you!" That is the 
value of being in good company, for the spiritual practitioner. For the one who has reached 
success also, holy company is valuable, for it is like keeping a pot of water inside a tank of 
water; there will not be any loss through evaporation. If the spiritually advanced person (yogi) 
lives among worldly men, the chances of his yoga (union with God) evaporating into bhoga 
(enjoyment) are very great. 


Value of good company 


Being in company of the holy is like the bit and bridle for the wanton steed, the anicut and canals 
for the raging flood. The value of holy places, consists in just this; kindred spirits congregate 
there and contribute to the deepening of spiritual yearning. You can take sweet and sustaining 
counsel together in such places and strengthen your faith and devotion. If in any place, you do 
not find such an atmosphere, avoid it and move on, until you secure it. 


You must be careful about the food you take; for, the jihva (tongue) and the guhya (organ of 
generation) are the two great foes of man; the cravings of hunger and sex drag you into perdition. 
Desist from catering to the tongue and its greed; do not be a victim of lust or taste. Have pure 
food and eat it in company of the pure. Be moderate in food and keep the senses strictly under 
control. 


Also, have an eye on the number and volume of your desires. Discriminate and discard 
superfluous attachments and acquisitions. A fakir (holy man) is one who has no fikr, (worry). 
What is the root of worry? Wants; and the efforts to fulfil them; and the fear of not succeeding to 
the extent desired. Reduce wants and you reduce worry. You congregate here in the Nilayam 
verandah, seeking personal interview with Me, with a load of wishes in your heart, wishes that 
you want Me to fulfil. Why carry all the load? Carry only one load, the desire to win the Grace of 
God; He will confer what is best for you. Leave the rest to Him. 


You have to choose between God and Nature 


There was a grandchild once who sat on the lap of his grandfather and asked him the very plain 
query, "Grandpa, do you love me?" and the old man immediately replied, "I do". The child asked 
next, "Do you love God?" for which too the old man said, "Yes." Then, the child retorted, "If you 
love God also, then, you cannot be loving me; if you love me, you cannot be loving God at the 
same time, or to the same extent." That is true. You have to choose. Love Nature and you have to 
ignore God; love God and you will realise that Nature is but His Raiment. 


Perform action, but do not hanker after the fruit. Do not complain that you did not get public 
recognition for the donations you gave to some Trust. Fruits, whether good or bad, you yourself 
have to consume; so the best means of liberating yourself from the consequences is to ignore the 
fruit and do perform action, for the sake of action only. You will not be burdened with either sin 
or merit if you act so. If you crave for the profit, you will have to be prepared to accept the loss 
also. If you construct a well where four roads meet expecting to get merit for slaking thirst of 
men and cattle, you cannot shirk the demerit you will be credited with, when some one falls into 
it and gets drowned. 


If you fan a person out of love, you can leave off when you must; but a servant accepting wages 
for fanning his master has to continue whether he likes or not. Give up the desire for 
remuneration and you are free; accept it or ask for it and you get bound. That is the secret of 
"renunciation of the fruit of action" (karmaphala-thyaaga). 


Life is unreal as a dream 


Above all get convinced that life is as unreal as a dream; do not get attached to it beyond 
reasonable limits. A man once suddenly gave up hearth and home and went out of the village, 
because he was too poor to maintain his wife and children. On his leaving, conditions became 
even worse and the poor woman had to witness the death of their little child, due to starvation. 
The next day, the husband happened to come back and when the wife reported the sad news and 
wept; he said, "Woman! Last night, I slept in a choultry and I had a dream. I was a very rich 
man, with a fine bungalow and a happy family of six buxom children; I had fine swings and posh 
chairs in the garden, plenty of servants to order about. When I woke up, I lost all of them. For 
whom am I to weep now? For the six children I lost in the morning or the child that was lost 
yesterday? Those six will never play again; this one too cannot run about. When I dreamt, the 
child was nonexistent; when I awoke those six are non-existent. What exists is only the perceiver 
of both the dream and the waking state the "I." 


Know that ‘I’, know that ‘IT’ is the same as "HE". You can know it only by intense spiritual 
discipline that is not marred by anger, envy and greed---vices that sprout from the ego. When 
you get angry, you act as if you are possessed by an evil spirit; your face becomes ugly and 
frightful. As a matter of fact, like the red bulb winking when danger is approaching, the eyes and 
face become red as a warning. Heed that signal and betake yourself to a quiet lonely spot; do not 
give free vent to wicked vocabulary. Envy and greed also emanate from the ego and have to be 
carefully watched and controlled. Like the tadpole's tail, the ego will fall away when one grows 
in wisdom. It must fall away; if it is cut, the poor tadpole will die. So, don't worry about the ego; 
develop wisdom, discriminate, know the ephemeral nature of all objective things; then, the tail 
will no longer be evident. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 14-1-1965 


Each one from ego takes his birth and clad in ego dies and comes 
and goes, gives and receives and earns and spends, and deals in 
lies or speaks the truth, in ego all the while .... Those who do away 
with their ego attain salvation. 


Remove the roots of egoism from the field of your heart. That is 
enough .... 


SHRI SATHYA SAI 


3. Follow His footprints 


Shastry described the Bhaagavatha thathwa to you. This Bhaagavth is so called because it deals 
with the Leela, Mahima and Upadesha (divine sport, greatness and instruction) of the Lord, as 
manifested during His various appearances in history. The career of the Lord, whenever He 
appears, is made up of two strands, one earthly and the other Divine---one external and the other, 
inner. You heard just now of the breaking of butter pots by the infant Krishna. The outer 
meaning is that the child broke the mud pots wherein the milkmaids of Brindavan kept the butter 
they had prepared. The inner meaning is that Krishna broke the material casement in which their 
souls were imprisoned and liberated them from temporary attachments. He then appropriated to 
Himself what always belonged to Him---the butter of Faith. This butter is the result of the 
churning of the mind, the spiritual discipline of self-purification. 


The Lord will manifest Himself only when the pillar is split in twain, with the sword of yearning. 
Hiranyakashipu did it and immediately, the Lord appeared from within that pillar. He had not 
hidden Himself there, anticipating the contingency. He is everywhere; and, so, He was there also. 
The lesson that Hiranyakashipu learnt was that the deha-thathwa must be split as under if the 
dehi-thathwa must reveal itself. That is to say, the "I-am-body" consciousness must go, if the "I- 
am-embodied" consciousness, must emerge. So long as you are in the dehi (I-am-embodied) 
consciousness, no pain or grief, pride or egoism can tarnish you. It is like sea water. Take a small 
quantity of sea water and keep it separate in a bottle; it will get foul in a few days. But, so long as 
it was in the sea, nothing could foul it. Be in the sea, as part of it; do not separate yourself, do not 
individualise yourself, do not feel that you are the deha (body), apart from the dehi ('T'). 


Unflinching discipline is essential 


This must be your deeksha (steady pursuit). And, the deeksha must express itself in actual 
practice, as nishtha and sikshana. Nishtha means discipline, control; sikshana means training of 
the senses, the emotions etc. Naashta (food) should be subordinated to Nishtha. The deha is but 
an instrument to realise the dehi. Yoga is explained as chiththavriththi nirodha---the curbing of 
mental agitations. It also means the Union which is possible when mental agitations are curbed 
and equanimity is achieved. Every chapter of the Geetha is called a yoga, in order to lay stress on 
this aspect of the Teaching. 


Bhakthi or jnaana or karma must all lead to the achievement of equanimity; otherwise, they are 
simply pseudo. Water as such or fire as such cannot move a train; they must both co-operate to 
produce a third thing, steam. The steam moves the engine forward. The curbing of the mind 
takes you to the winning post. Kerosene oil and air must both unite to form the gas which ignites 
in the petromax lamp to give light. 


To cross safely the flood of "birth-death-continuum" the bridge called nishtha or discipline of an 
unflinching kind is essential. It must be a sturdy safe bridge. Or else, you will fall into the raging 
waters and be drawn into the sea, infested with sharks---lust and anger. See how great heroes like 
Prahlaada did not loosen their hold on the Lord, in spite of heavy odds. Prahlaada never gave up 
the repetition of the Name of the Lord, though he was tortured, twisted and burnt. One must have 
that determination and that faith. Sorrows and disasters are as the clouds that flit across the sky; 
they cannot injure the blue depths of space. Your duty is to strive on, from this very moment. Do 
not vacillate or postpone. Who knows when death will knock? May be, he may knock this very 


night, this very moment! Therefore, do not delay. Do not postpone for tomorrow the dinner of 
this day? Feed the spirit as scrupulously as you now feed the body. 


Seek God with one-pointed attention 


Detach yourselves from the senses; then, only can the Aathma shine. I do not mean that you 
should destroy the senses. The mind must be withdrawn from its present comrades, the senses; it 
must be loyal to its roal master, the intellect or buddhi. That is to say, you must separate the grain 
from the chaff, through the exercise of viveka and then, fix your desire on the things that last and 
nourish, rather than on things that are flashy and corroding. Keep a lamp in a room with all its 
five windows open; the wind will blow it out, for the flame is swayed from all directions. To 
keep the flame burning straight, close the windows. The senses are the windows; the flame is the 
mind concentrating on the single purpose of God-realisation. What do the outward-bound senses 
know of that sweetness? They are like the frogs that hop about on the petals of the lotus; they are 
unaware of the nectar in that flower. Only the intellect can reveal that to you. 


The Shastry said that Yashoda reached the place where the child Krishna had hidden himself, by 
following the footprints he had left behind him, with his curd-besmeared feet. He could not be 
caught when she attempted to tie a rope round his waist and drag him to herself. That rope was 
the rope of ego; how can the Lord be bound by your ego? It was found to be always short, two 
finger breadths short, every time! What does that indicate? It means that there were two virtues 
short---and that explains why every rope, however long, was too short. The two virtues were: 
Dharmanishtha and Brahmanishtha, steadiness in rectitude and in aspiration. It is enough if you 
seek him, through one-pointed attention and devotion, through his footprints: beauty, strength, 
truth, morality, love, sacrifice, goodness in Nature and in the heart of Man. 


The great mystery of Adhwaitha 


Adhwaitha means, all this is Aathma; then, why this apparent variety? Variety is the picture 
drawn by the delusion that you are the body, that you are the 'character' the drama has cast on 
you! In the drama, you sing and speak, weep and laugh, always aware that you are yourself and 
not what the apparel and acting make you appear to be. Chandramathi bursts into tears when her 
'son' dies of cobra bite; the spectators weep at her plight, but the person who acts so well is 
untouched by grief. The reflection of the Moon in the lake is broken into bits but the Moon 
above is unaffected. Do not yield to grief because the reflection is broken; it is due to the 
weakness of the medium, water. So too, when you think you are the body, which grows and 
withers, is elated or disheartened, you see the reflection as broken; but the genuine thing, the 
Reality is unaffected. 


You must have heard the beggar at the door calling out in his crude jargon, "I am anaadhi" 
meaning "I am anaatha". He wants to tell you that he has none to support him but, his words 
mean, "I am beginningless." Yes, he is revealing to you the Great Mystery that makes all beings 
his kin! And then, when he says, "bhikshaam dehi," you take him to mean, "Give me alms." Just 
consider the word he uses for 'give'. He calls out "dehi" meaning also, he who is the owner of 
this body, he who resides in this body, the Aathma. He is teaching you that you are really the 
Aathma, wearing the apparel of the body and so, you and he are One. 


Bhakthi is not a matter of beads 


Dwell always on high thoughts. When air fills a football, it takes the form of the ball. When it 
fills a balloon, it takes the form of the balloon, oval, sausage shaped, spherical or spheroid. The 


mind assumes the form of the objects with which it is attached. If it gets fixed on small things, it 
becomes small; if on grand things, it becomes grand. The camera takes a picture of whatever it is 
pointed at: so take care before you click. Discriminate before you develop attachment. If you 
have attachment towards wife and children, land and buildings, bank accounts and balances and 
when these decline, you will come to grief. Develop attachment towards the Universal and you 
too will grow in love and splendour. 


That attachment must be sincere and steady. Bhakthi is not a matter of beads and beards; nor 
does worship consist of flowers and camphor; to address people immersed in these as "bhakthas" 
(devotees) is blasphemy. With crooked vision, character, thoughts and feelings---how can 
bhakthi sprout or bloom? Do not be led away by bell ringing or incense-smoke. The field must 
be cleared of bush and thorns; it must be ploughed and furrowed; watered and dampened to 
depth; then the seeds have to be planted into the earth; scattered on the surface, they do not 
germinate, Plant the seeds, water the field, remove the weeds; keep away stray cattle, manure the 
plants; dust them with pesticides, and then, you can collect the crop. Saadhana (spiritual 
discipline) means and includes all these steps. 


You are judged by your spiritual discipline; not by the number of temples you have gone into or 
the quantity and cost of the offerings you have made in those shrines. Do not calculate the length 
of time you have spent in the company of the Lord's Name, and exult. Calculate rather the length 
of time you have wasted, away from that contact, and repent. Have that name ever in your 
thoughts and you can brave any calamity. Remember how Seetha braved the taunts, insults and 
tortures of the aggressors in Lanka; what was it that gave her the mental stamina? It was 
Raamaanaama and nothing else. Kaama and krodha cannot co-exist with Raamaadhyaana 
(meditation on Raama). 


Bad karma will spoil saadhana 


The action of Raama dhyaana will remould your mind. The most tasty dish will become 
uneatable if a drop of kerosene falls on it. One bad karma will spoil the spiritual discipline. 
Siddhaartha, who was kept long inside the palace grounds, away from the world of grief, asked 
for a chance to go into the city and when, during that ride through the carefully cleaned streets, 
he saw one after the other the harrowing scenes of illness, old age and death and the tonic sight 
of a monk, his buddhi (intellect) was corrected in a trice. Buddhih karmaanusaarini---intellect 
follows action---it is said. The efforts of his father to keep him isolated and happy were foiled; 
Truth dawned on him in a moment; and the train of events which his father dreaded for 22 years 
did happen. Siddhaartha left his wife and child and sought to find the secret of Liberation for all 
mankind. 


Kamsa was himself driving the chariot whereon his newly wedded sister and her husband sat; he 
was riding on the crest of a wave of unmixed joy; just then, he heard a celestial Voice chiding 
him for that joy. It said, her eighth child would slay him. That sentence transformed him into a 
monster of hate. That one karma affected him so much. Engage yourselves in action that will 
direct your intellect and mind along divine and sublime channels. Win Grace through karma; do 
karma that will win Grace. If the lamp does not burn, it proves that you have not lit it. The Lord 
is neither benignant nor malignant; your progress is reflected back as Grace; your decline is 
reflected back as its absence. The mirror just reflects. It has no partiality or prejudice. 


Immerse yourself in meditation 


Always have the meaning and purpose of life in view. And experience that purpose and that 
meaning. You are That; that is the truth. You and the Universal are One; you and the Absolute 
are One; you and the Eternal are One. You are not the Individual, the Particular, the Temporary. 
Feel this, know this. Act in conformity with this. Some one came to Ramanamaharshi and asked 
him thus' "Swaami! I have been doing intense dhyaana for the last 18 years; but I have failed to 
realise the Ideal on which my dhyaana is concentrated. How many more years should I continue 
thus?" Ramana answered, "It is not a question of a certain number of years. You have to continue 
dhyaana until the awareness that you are doing dhyaana disappears. "Forget the ego; let it melt 
and merge, with all its layers of consciousness. 


There are some who, while meditating, strike at the mosquitoes that pester them! No, Immerse 
yourselves in dhyaanam until you transcend all physical and mental urges and impulses. 
Vaalmeeki was covered by the ant-hill that grew over him; people discovered him by the sound 
of Raama naama that emanated from that mound. Ignore the deha (body) so that you may 
discover the dehi (indweller); do not get engrossed in outer finery but delve deep and discover 
the inner splendour. 


What does the saadhana of ignoring the body imply? It means turning aside from the 
temptations of the sense, the overcoming of the six enemies: desire, anger, greed, attachment, 
pride and malice (kaama krodha, /Jobha; moha, madha and maatsarya). Anger turns a man into a 
drunken brute. The other impulses are equally vicious. Seek only salutary karma; eat only 
saathwik food--food that will not disturb the equanimity you earn through your saadhana. Do 
not break the even tenor of your spiritual practice. Remember how Raamadas never gave up his 
Naama saadhana in spite of jeers and jail. 


You can be really healthy and happy only when you are immersed in the Universal. If you are in 
aathma thathwa (essential nature of the Self), you will be fresh, happy and healthy. When you 
separate, and feel that you are in deha thathwa (principle of body), you start declining. 


Offer God the fragrance of your virtue 


The Bhaagavatha says that Krishna was stealthily eating the butter that was stored in the houses 
of the gopees. What is the significance of this behaviour? Did he go about stealing butter because 
he had no butter at home? It is not butter that he coveted; it is the cream of virtue kept in the 
(heart) pot that he wants. That cream is the genuine Aathma, secured after vigorous churning, 
And, was it 'stealing' that he did ? He is 'Hari', He who robs, who appropriates. He sees all, 
Himself unseen. As soon as He enters, you awake, your inner consciousness is alerted. You offer 
Him the fragrance of your virtue, the courage of your heart, the wisdom of your experience. That 
is the kind of thief He is! Cultivate love towards Him. Likes and dislikes are more the products 
of habit and training. The senses drag you away from Him; but, do not yield; they will lie low 
soon. Sincere yearning born of steady discrimination--this alone can help you. I bless you that 
you may grow in these from day to day. I won't keep you longer. Sing a Naamaavali or two and 
then, you can disperse. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 29-1-1965 


4. Kare kankanam 


You heard the discourse on Krishna thathwa, based on the famous dialogue between Krishna and 
Rukmini, as the text. That dialogue appears very worldly, but the transcendent can be understood 
by the common man only through the language of the transitory. The unknowable has to be 
hinted at through the crude landmarks of the already known. Take the hymn that describes 
Krishna as, "Kasthuri thilakam". Outwardly, it delineates the beautiful form and describes the 
ornaments and appurtenances of the Lord. But each of these words has a deeper significance 
which should not be missed. 


The thilakam or dot of kasthuri or musk on the forehead of Krishna is the symbol of the Eye of 
Wisdom, the Inner Eye, the inward-directed vision, like the third eye on the forehead of Shiva. 
Kasthuri means jnaanam or supersensual knowledge or wisdom. Then the hymn speaks of 
kowsthubha gem on the chest. It indicates the aananda in the heart, the untarnished aananda of 
the Lord who is Aananda swaruupi (bliss personified). Next in the poem is the shining pearl on 
Krishna's nose-ring. Well, the Navamoukthikam on His naasaagra (nose-tip) is indicative of the 
success that attends one-pointed concentration on His Glory for which the tip of the nose is 
considered by adepts in yoga as a point of help. And, the pearl is, in Hindu mythology, produced 
out of the rain drop, from the first, pure, unsullied showers that is swallowed by the oyster that 
has been waiting long for the precious gift from the heavens. It indicates the transforming effect 
of yearning and the natural thirst for the pure and the true which irks the human heart. 


Take the next item in the description’ the Flute in the hand. That reminds all of the need to make 
oneself into a hollow reed, with no trace of the pith of material greed. Become straight, empty 
yourself of all obstructing desires and the Lord's breath will flow through you, making sweet 
music that awakens every soul. 


The three vows of Lord Krishna 


And the kankana, in the description, 'kate kankana'. That does not mean 'bangles', which is the 
meaning given in the lexicon. Kankana is the word for dedicatory armlet, worn when a person 
resolves on a vow. You may wonder what the vows are which Krishna took upon Himself! I 
shall tell you what they are. They are mentioned in the Bhagavad Geetha, for all humanity to 
read, know, and believe. There are three vows in all: 


(1) Parithraanaaya saadhoonaam, vinaasayacha dushkrithaam, dharma samsthaapanaarthaaya 
sambhavaami yuge yuge---"For the protection of the good and the punishment of the bad, for the 
establishment of the Moral Order, I shall concretise Myself, age after age". 


(2) Ananyaaschinthayantho maam ye janaah paryupaasathe, theshaam nithya-abhiyukthaanaam 
yoga kshemam vahaamyaham.---"Whoever is wholly immersed in My contemplation, with no 
other thought, I shall be ever with Him- and I shall bear the burden of his welfare". 


(3) Sarvadharmaan parithyajva maamekam saranam vraja, aham thwaa sarva paapebhyo 
mokshayishyaami, maasucha---"Surrender unto Me, giving up all other duties and obligations; I 
shall liberate you from all sin; do not grieve." These are the three vows that Krishna has taken, 
and the armlets are reminders of these tasks on which He is set. 


Feel the truth with subtle intelligence 


The poem goes on to another item, the Harichandana (yellow sandalpaste) that He has applied 
over all His limbs. He wears yellow robes and has the fragrant yellow sandal all over. The 


yellow is the symbol of Prakrithi, which He wears as His outer apparel and attraction. In fact 
Prakrithi or Nature is what He is pleased to wear or appear in; He can don it or doff it at will. It 
is His Aathma maaya. The poem ends with the beautiful Name by which Krishna is addressed. 
Gopaala choodaamani, the Crest Jewel of the cowherds! What are the cows? The 'go's? 'Go’ 
means the Jjeevi,’ the individual soul, of which He is the paala, protector; the Lord fosters the 
cows and leads them into safety and peace. 'Go' also means the indriyas or senses that roam 
about to graze in the external world and Gopaala is the Lord, who curbs and guides the senses 
into safe secure paths. This meaningful description was the product of the experience of a Yogi, 
who had the vision in his spiritual ecstasy; so, there is no suggestion of the sensual in the entire 
poem. 


The Bhaagavatha epic is related to King Pareekshith by Shuka, the greatest of the sages who was 
planted in unshakable Brahmacharya; this is enough guarantee that no trace of the sensual has 
infiltrated into it. This dialogue between Krishna and Rukmini has also to be considered in the 
same worshipful attitude. 


You should cultivate an attitude of inseparable attachment to the Lord, who is your very self. If 
He is a flower, you should feel yourself a bee that sucks its honey; if He is a tree, be a creeper 
that clings to it; if a cliff, then feel that you are a cascade running over it; if He is the sky, be a 
tiny star that twinkles in it; above all, be conscious of the truth that you and He are bound by 
Supreme Love. If you feel this acutely, not with the gross intelligence, but with the subtle 
intelligence, then, the journey will be quick and the goal can be won. The sthula buddhi (gross 
intelligence) keeps you walking but, the subtle intelligence flies you to the destination. The gross 
is too much weighed down by the body; the subtle transcends the body and lightens the burden. 


Free yourself from wish and will 


The Shastry mentioned the axiom, Ekamevaad-witheeyam, One only, not Two. If it is not two, it 
may be three; so, it is defined also as One only. It is the inner motivator of all 
(Sarvaantharyaami), like the string running through all the beads. If it is inside all, why is. it not 
observable in all, you may ask. Picture a rosary of several types of beads' coral, pearl, tulsi, 
rudraaksha, crystal or conch, etc. The string passes through each and holds all the beads 
together, no doubt; but it is only in the transparent beads that it is visible. So too, you have to 
make yourself transparent, free from wish and will, that hide or befog: then only, can the Inner 
Motivator be seen. You cannot argue that since it is not seen, it is not there. To earn 
transparency, purity of intention, impulse and instinct is essential; that is achieved by systematic 
and sincere spiritual discipline. 


A ladder has to be as tall as the height you want to reach; your saadhana has to be as long as the 
time taken to reach the goal. When the walls are completed, the scaffolding is removed; when the 
Vision of the Reality is attained, japa, vratha, puja, archana, sravana, keerthana---forms of 
spiritual discipline can be dispensed with. You must be watching for every chance to dwell on 
noble thoughts, do elevating tasks, curb the downward pull of the ego. 


Let Me give one instance. Take your own name. The name must be resonant of the real Self, not 
a description of the body, as Nallaiah or Kempiah or Kariyappa---the Black man, the Fair man or 
the Dark man. Have names that are saturated with divinity, like Raama or Krishna or Lakshmana 
or Bharatha. And know and follow the implications of the name. 


Live up to your name 


A son named Raama nowadays files a suit against the father for his share of the property! A son 
called Lakshmana is the leader of a faction against the elder brother! Live up to the name you are 
known by. Do not shorten the names and behead them into lifeless corpses, like V. D. Rao, for 
Vasudeva Rao, or V. A. Dani for Vishweshwara Avadhaani. Keep them as they are, so that you 
as well as others can have the precious chance of uttering the name of the Lord at least when 
they accost you. It is a crime against your parents and ancestors to defile the name that they have 
handed down to you, live it yourself and hand it on to your children, and children's children, 
unimpaired. 


For all types of spiritual discipline, congenial company is very necessary. Man is shaped by the 
company he keeps; so, be ever vigilant of the air you breathe; it is fouled by the foul thoughts of 
the men among whom you move. The pure water that falls as rain from the sky is changed into a 
hundred tastes and colours by the soil on which it falls. But, even the slimy slush of the gutter 
has some hope of turning into pure water again; for, when the Sun shines, it can rise as vapour 
into the clouds and regain its pristine nature. To cleanse the mind, prayer is the water and 
repentance is the soap. Mere water or Vim cannot do the job; repentance must be followed by 
resolute determination not to repeat the wrong. You must pray for help in saadhana, through 
Grace. 


Where there is duality, there is fear 


Guard the wisdom gained from the snares of attachment and aversion---this must be the theme. 
For, where there is duality, there is fear, there is decline and death. Victory, at the polls ensures 
power for only five years: when that period ends, the M.L.A. has once again to seek the votes. 
Good acts done with attachment ensure Heaven, from where one has to come again to Earth, 
when the deposit is spent out. 


A man landing at Madras with a thousand rupees is master of all the bazaars, cinema houses, 
hotels, taxis to the extent of that sum, but, when his purse is rendered empty he has to escape 
back into his village, perhaps as a ticketless traveller, harassed by policemen at every halt. No, 
heaven is no solution for the hunger of the soul! The river must reach the sea, not the desert 
sands; the waters have to merge with water. That is the consummation, named Kaivalya, or 
Saayujya. To keep that goal ever in focus, have the wavering mind continuously in leash. When 
the Sun is in the sky, the Moon is blazed out of sight. Buddhi, the sharpened intellect, is the Sun; 
the pale satellite, waxing and waning, the Moon, is the Mind. So, give intelligence full 
prominence; let the mind subserve the dictates of reason, not of passion. 


Become the ruler of the senses, not their slave. Hrishikesa, an appellation of Krishna, means 
Master of the senses; Gudaakesa, an appellation of Arjuna, also conveys the same sense. That is 
the reason why they two became comrades. The senses drag you into the jungle of nature; so, 
what use is it for you to flee into the jungle, with the senses wild with hunger? Why did the sages 
go into the jungle? To sink their minds in the silent calm of the forest; to dwell ever in the 
thought of God whose voice is heard when all other voices cease. If you close the windows that 
bring in the other voices, then, your home can be transformed into a Forest of Freedom, a 


Hermitage of thapas (penance.) "Where Raama is, Ayodhya is" said Sumitra to Lakshmana. 
Instal Raama in your heart, it becomes Ayodhya, that is to say, ‘invincible,’ 'incapable of being 
captured by foes." 


Reduce contacts to a minimum 


Be silent yourself; that will induce silence in others. Do not fall into the habit of shouting, talking 
long and loud. Reduce contacts to the minimum. Carry with you an atmosphere of quiet 
contemplation, wherever you happen to be. There are some who live in a perpetual hullabaloo, in 
a tornado of noise. Whether they are in an exhibition or a fair or a hotel, or a temple or the 
Prashaanthi Nilayam, they wag their tongues and will not stop. These will not proceed far on the 
Godward road. 


There are others who relish disputes and arguments; they are never content with obvious facts; 
they must create doubts where none existed before, and shake faith. They dispute whether Raama 
is superior to Krishna, or whether Krishna is a fuller or a lower incarnation of Godhead! People 
who have not touched the outskirts of the Capital City dare dispute about the appearance and 
glory of the Emperor, who resides in the Palace in the heart of the City! That is the pitiable state 
of scholarship today. 


The Maharaajah of Burdwan once held a Conference where the excellences of Shiva and Vishnu 
were considered. The Panchaakshari (five-letter) manthra of Shiva and the Ashtaakshari (eight- 
letter) manthra of Vishnu were expounded by rival Pandits and extolled. The Maharaajah refused 
to offer exclusive loyalty to either Shiva or Vishnu; he wanted the Chief Priest of his palace, who 
was a great scholar and Saadhaka, to pronounce his judgement. He said that none of the Pandits 
had seen Shiva or Vishnu, though they were all prepared to argue on behalf of them. He declared 
that any one who had seen either will be silent about not only what he had seen, but even of what 
he had not seen. That declaration put an end to the quarrels, and every one returned home rather 
shamefaced at their inexperience! 


The first step of the spiritual discipline 


Winnow the real from the apparent. Look inside the event, for the kernel, the meaning. Dwell 
over on your Aathmic reality; you are pure, you are indestructible; you are unaffected by the ups 
and downs of life; you are the true, the eternal, the unchanging Brahmam, the entity which is all 
this. A mere five-minute inquiry will convince you that you are not the body, or the senses, the 
mind or the intelligence, the name or the form, but that you are the Aathma Itself, the same 
Aathma that appears as all this variety. Once you get a glimpse of this truth, hold on to it; do not 
allow it to slip. Make it your permanent possession. 


As a first step towards the acquisition of this viveka (wisdom) and vairaagya (detachment), enter 
from now on into a discipline of Naamasmarana---the incessant remembrance of God through 
the Name of the Lord. A fashionable excuse that is trotted out by those who do not like this 
discipline is 'want of time!' It does not need any special time or extra allotment of time; it can be 
done always, in the waking stage, whether you are bathing or eating, walking or sitting. All the 
hours now spent in gossip, in watching sports or films, in hollow conversation can best be used 
for silent contemplation of the Name and Form, and splendour of the Lord. 


Now, you complain of want of appetite for God. You have lost appetite because you have eaten 
unwholesome food, not because you have had a surfeit of good food. You have no knowledge of 
which food is wholesome, what are its components, etc. You believe that the unwholesome food 
you get, through the impure gateways of the senses, will keep you healthy! Learn this lesson 


from here and return, better equipped, to your places. If you fail to learn this, then you have 
wasted money and time coming and staying here. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 30-1-1965 


Purify the heart by being good and kind to all. Do not attempt to 
find fault with others. 


Look upon all with love, with respect, with faith in their sincerity. I 
would ask you to treat your servants kindly. 


Do not entertain hatred or contempt in your heart; show your 
resentment if you' must, through words, not action. 


Repent for the errors that you commit and decide never to repeat 
them, pray for strength to carry out your resolutions. 


SHRI SATHYA SAI 


3: The pleasant and the profitable 


Last year too I happened to be here in this town (Penukonda) in the month of February; now I am 
here again, four days after the year is over! This does not satisfy Me, this annual visit. My 
mission is to spread Aananda and so I am ready to come among you, not once but twice or 
thrice, as often as you want Me. The drill and gymnastics exhibited by the boys and girls of this 
School pleased the eye, by the patterns and the quick skill shown. The songs provided a pleasant 
background, and I must speak a word in appreciation of the Physical Education Expert, who 
arranged this show. He is so eager to promote the physical education of the students that he has 
asked again and again for a first class stadium for the school. He is eager to put this school at the 
head of all the schools of the State, so far as his field is concerned. Such enthusiasm is 
commendable. I bless his efforts. 


You probably think that, since people from all parts of India even from countries outside India 
pass through your town in continuous flood towards Prashaanthi Nilayam at Puttaparthi, they 
must be pouring their contributions into the coffers of the Nilayam. Let Me declare the truth to 
you; I do not take anything from any one, except their love and devotion. For the last 29 years, 
this has been My consistent practice. The people who come there are giving Me just the wealth 
that you have all given Me today, the wealth of Faith, Devotion and Love, that is all. 


To understand any one, you must be with them and near them; you must approach them, not with 
hatred or anger, but in friendship and love. So too in My case. How can you know Me, if you do 
not come near Me and unto me? 


Students! You must win a fair name for yourself, your parents and school by your earnestness in 
study and enthusiasm to serve others. Your parents are bearing great hardships to keep you here 
in comfort; they are toiling in the fields, in the sun and rain, and sending you hard earned cash, 
expecting you to study well and support them. First, pay back the debt of love to them; do not 
behave in such a way that they repent the day when they put you to school. All other debts come 
later, even the debt to the motherland or mother-tongue, of which so much is heard now, all over 
the country. 


Meet obstacles with courage 


I find that the students of this School have been calm, while all round a storm is raging over this 
problem of language which is best left to the elders of the land. I am glad you are carrying out 
this programme of School Day so joyfully and nicely. When such storms brew, parents are 
overcome by anxiety, for they are in the dark about the movements and activities of their 
children. Keep them free from worry; show them the gratitude they deserve; return them the 
Love they pour freely into your hearts. Remember always that it is easy to do what is pleasant; 
but it is difficult to be engaged in what is beneficial. Not all that is pleasant is profitable. Success 
comes to those who give up the path strewn with roses, and brave the hammer-blows and sword- 
thrusts of the path fraught with danger. As a matter of fact, no road is strewn with rose petals. 
Life is a battlefield, a Dharmakshethra, where duties and desires are always in conflict. Smother 
the fiery fumes of desire, of hatred and anger that rise up in your hearts; it is sheer cowardice to 
yield to these enemies that turn you into beasts. When obstacles come, meet them with courage. 
They harden you, make you tough. 


Steps that lead to Self-knowledge 


The best way to get rid of weakness is to strike at the very taproot of the tree---the mistake that 
you are the body, with this name and this form, these senses, this intelligence and this mind. 
These are all the luggage you carry. Don't you say, my nose my mind, my hand, my reason, just 
as you say, my book, my umbrella? Who is this T that calls all these 'mine'? That is the real 'you'. 
It was there when you were born, when you were sleeping forgetful of all else, forgetful even of 
your body with all its equipment, internal and external. That T cannot be harmed; it does not 
change, it knows no death or birth. Learn the discipline that makes you aware of this Truth and 
you will be ever free and bold. That is real vidya, the Aathmavidya, which the sages have 
gathered for you. The thousands who come to Puttaparthi are coming there for this precious 
wealth; you too must, one day or the other, learn this and save yourselves. All men have to reach 
the goal, travelling along the path of wisdom. 


This knowledge comes as soon as you look into yourselves and analyse your own experience. 
But, in order to get the craving for that analysis, you have to educate yourselves into the attitude. 
Developing good habits, avoiding bad ones, mixing in the company of the pious, being active in 
good deeds, serving those in distress---these are all steps that will lead you into the glorious path 
of Self-knowledge. You can, even now, take to this discipline and save yourselves from grief and 
distress. I bless that you may get the will to do so and to persist in the saadhana, till success is 
won. 


School Day, Zilla Parishad Higher Secondary School, 
Penukonda, 20-2-1965 


It is dedication to the Lord that sanctifies all activities. 
He is the raison d'etre for all activity. 

He is the prompter, the executor, the giver 
of the required strength and skill, 

the enjoyer of the fruit thereof 

So, dedication must come naturally to you, 
for, all is His and nothing is yours/ 

Your duty is to believe 

He is the impeller of your activities, 

and draw strength from that belief. 

Until the wound heals and 

the new skin hardens, 

the bandage must protect the place. 


So too, until reality is realised, 


the balm of faith, holy company and holy thoughts 
must be applied to the ego-affected mind. 
SHRI SATHYA SAI 


6. The burden of the badge 


I have called all of you here today so that I may tell you something about the attitude you must 
cultivate while doing volunteer service at the Nilayam. I Myself have selected you for this and 
that itself is a rare privilege. There are so many among the thousands who have come for the 
Upanayanam and Shivaraathri Festivals who are pleading with all their heart to be given the 
chance; but you have caught My eye and you alone have been picked. I must tell you that 
volunteering is not just a momentary spurt; it cannot be done well, without deep discipline, long 
training and humility. You cannot be ready for that role all of a sudden, as soon as the badge is 
pinned on your shirt. 


First, you must be conscious of the value of aajna, (the command), which so far as I am 
concerned, is more a Direction, than an Order. The Geetha was the aajna of Krishna, though 
Krishna supplemented it with copious explanations of the why and the wherefore. Arjuna 
admitted that he was a prapanna, that he had surrendered to His Will. So, there was no need for 
Krishna to argue with him or to see that he was convinced of the correctness of His Command. 
Still, in order that Arjuna might fight with a full heart, He gave him the reasons which supported 
the course He laid down for him. Likewise, I too want you to know why I desire that you should 
act in a particular manner and why I do not like you to behave in another manner. 


Next, you must develop prema (love) for all. Do not think that a volunteer is a superior person, 
more devoted than the rest; do not look down upon the rest, as disturbances and nuisances. If you 
have prema towards Me, you will have prema towards all, since Sai is in every one. You sing at 
the bhajana (congregational chant), Anthaa Sayi mayam; ee jagamantha Sayi mayam---"All this 
is Sayi-full; this World is Sayi-full". So, how can you have love for this Sai alone? You have on 
the walls of this Prayer Hall many pictures of Swaami; you revere the pictures; you take each of 
them to be Me. If someone speaks ill of any of them you do not like it, do you? You stand before 
the picture and exclaim in joy, "O! Swaami!" Remember every human being is My Picture. Why, 
every being is Me. Anthaa Sayi mayam, isn't it? So, when you treat any one harshly, you are 
treating Me harshly. When you are insulting any one, you are insulting Me. 


The six duties of every householder 


This is your home and all those who have gathered for these Festivals are athithis (guests) or 
your kith and kin. There are six duties that every grihastha (householder) has to perform every 
day: snaana, sandhya, japa, homa, puja and athithiaa sathkaar, meaning bath, worship during 
morning, noon and evening, recitation of the Name of the Lord, offering ritual articles in the 
sacrificial fire, ritual worship of the Lord, and hospitality to guests. You are to see that the guests 
are treated in that spirit of hospitality. You are sevaka, dedicated to service. Whether the people 
whom you serve thank you or traduce you, you must gladly do the task allotted to you. For, you 
are serving yourselves, not them, remember. Bouquets or brickbats, receive them with equal 
calm. It is only those who identify themselves with the body that are exulted or pained; you must 
feel that you are the dehi, not the deha (the self, not the body), that will give you the strength to 
serve best. 


While doing your work do not argue that this particular bit is your jurisdiction and that other one 
is not; do not be sticklers for boundaries and limits. Support each other, supplement each other in 
joyful co-operation; strengthen each other. Act as an ideal sathsanga (spiritual gathering), 
infusing into each other energy and enthusiasm. That does not mean that you should carry a 


greater burden than that allotted to you. Do not interfere wildly with what other people are doing; 
or, criticise others sullenly. Be worthy of the status of persons connected with the Prashaanthi 
Nilayam. There should be no place in your hearts for malice or envy or even competition. Spread 
around you the atmosphere of Prashaanthi (tranquillity); do not rush about, falling on all and 
sundry, discovering faults where none exists. That is misdirected enthusiasm. 


Observe the rules of Prashaanthi Nilayam 


Do nothing to disturb the calm of others; for, you know how valuable calmness and quietness are 
in your own case. I hope you know it. Behave towards others as you wish them to behave 
towards you. That is the measure of your love. Seek out the old, sitting in the sun or darkness, 
outside the auditorium, for, they are too weak to push to the front lines; seek out those who are of 
defective vision or hearing; and bring them gently near the dais making room for them, by asking 
younger persons to vacate their seats. You should not claim any special privilege for your 
badges, in the Bhajana Hall or at the Auditortum. Those who come first have the first chance; 
don't argue and create a scene. Let people sit quietly, wherever seats are available, when they 
arrive; each must earn his or her place and claim it, not in the Auditorium, but in My heart; do 
not claim it in these brick and mortar halls. 


In the rules of the Prashaanthi Nilayam, it is laid down that those who come after the bhajan or 
discourse starts, must not distract the attention of those who are immersed in it by striding up to 
the front lines or to some vacant space in the front. See that this is observed strictly. Nothing 
should be done by any one to distract attention, once the programme has started. You have come 
here, away from kith and kin, eager to uplift yourself and progress in the spiritual field; why then 
should you slide into old habits that breed egoism and hate? 


Volunteers must not wait for chances of service to come to them; they must be on the look-out 
for them, alert and ready. Then, they can find them all around. It is the heart of stone that blinds 
the eye to the pain that others endure. 


Look out for chances to serve 


I have directed all residents of the Colony to inquire of their neighbours, as the first task of the 
day, whether they are well. This is not just a courtesy call, but a genuine token of love. Among 
the thousands who have gathered here, there are many who would be thankful for some help. 
Some kind hand that will lead them to food or shelter, the river or the Mandhir, the auditorium or 
the hospital. Speak to them gently and offer to be of use to them. 


Do you not see Me and hear Me, moving among them? I speak softly and endearingly; for, I love 
them ardently, in spite of all their faults. Why then should you be harsh and rude? There is no 
kinship so dear as the kinship forged by spiritualities. Family relationships are not so firmly 
based on identity of aims and sameness of effort. You are bound by bonds that are more 
longstanding and pleasant. Let these people return home and exult in the discovery that, at 
Prashaanthi Nilayam, they have kith and kin who respect them and love them, as no relative has 
done so far. 


Volunteers should give up life of comfort 


You must realise now that this badge which I gave you is not a passport for easy life; it means 
strenuous routine, the giving up of comfort, the acceptance of hard toil, sleeplessness and 
sacrifice. If you are used to a soft life, you are useless as a volunteer, or for anything else. 
Reduce your wants to the minimum; do not yield to the temptation of carrying a transistor radio 


and listening to all that enervating stuff. Examine your room, your table, your wardrobe, your 
box and find out how many superfluous things you have accumulated. You have acquired them 
because you saw some one having them and you felt that unless you too possessed them you will 
look small in their company. 


A foolish desire to be esteemed up-to-date, to keep up with fashion, has made you gather 
needless habits and needless articles. Man can be happy with much less equipment than you 
seem to think essential. When some article is with you for some little time, you feel it is 
indispensable and you do not know how to live without it. Like the silkworm, you weave a 
cocoon for yourself, out of your fancy. Do not allow costly habits to grow, costly from the 
monetary as well as the spiritual point of view. Watch your likes and dislikes with a vigilant eye 
and discard anything that threatens to encumber your path. 


Detachment is generally called vairaagya, or the absence of raaga. It is a precious spiritual 
quality, which, if it must sustain you, must be based on jnaana. Now, you have here this silver 
figure of Shirdi Sai Baba; when you think of the silver, its fineness, its cost, etc., there is no Sai; 
when you think of Sai, His Mahima, His Leela (miracle power and divine play), there is no 
silver! 


Volunteer's role is a call for personal improvement 


At Thirupathi, when you stand before the Venkateshwara idol, if you think about the stone, its 
colour, its geological structure, its weight, etc., there can be no Venkateshwara in your mind; fill 
yourself with the thoughts of the Lord of the Seven Hills, and then, there is no stone before you! 
So also, see everywhere, in this carpet, this towel, this vessel, this wall, the basic Brahmam (the 
Eternal Absolute), and you will be filled with spiritual knowledge, jnaana. There will be no 
attachment; this is the “San/am Brahmamayam" (All filled with Brahmam) finale of all saadhana 
(spiritual practice). Do not despair; practice it from now on, step by step; at least see everything 
as His; offer everything to Him; do everything, as for Him, leave everything to Him. Be an 
instrument; an instrument has no likes and dislikes; be just a tool; be an efficient tool. 


Spread joy at all times. Do not pour into others' ears your tales of woe and worry; carry a smile 
on your face so that every one who sees you can catch that exhilaration. When you tell others of 
your success, your purpose is to create envy in them. You must not only love others, but you 
must be so good that others too may love you. Try to console, encourage, strengthen, and 
enlighten those who are miserable, downhearted, weak or ill-informed. Get yourselves equipped 
for this role. That is the role into which you are ushered now. This chance that I have given you, 
to move about as a volunteer here, is a call for personal improvement and saadhana. When 
thousands are thirsty for this chance, imagine how lucky you are and how great is the 
responsibility. 


When you assist some eager aspirant to do meditation undisturbed, you earn not only gratitude, 
but, even a share of the merit. For example, a mother may hasten into the hall, when the bell 
strikes at 4.30 a.m. for the Pranava (Primal Cosmic sound, OM) recital, leaving her child 
sleeping in the shed. If the child awakes meanwhile and starts screaming, a lady volunteer can, 
without calling the mother out, herself take the child on her lap and pacify it with a soft lullaby, 
until the mother arrives. Serve others gladly; do not serve with an air of superiority or the sour 
face of disgust. Let people know that you are genuinely glad at the chance to help. 


Serve others gladly 


Do not pretend or patronise. If you simply say, "Do not talk aloud" or give some such blank 
direction, you are patronising and treating people with disdain. They deserve to be told why. Tell 
them that silence is the very first rung of the ladder of saadhana; that it is the hall-mark of 
Prashaanthi Nilayam; that they must learn to make every place where they are, a Prashaanthi 
Nilayam; that loud talk disturbs those who practise Naamasmarana (remembrance of Lord's 
name) or dhyaana (meditation) or japam (recitation); that noise breeds further noise. This is a 
workshop, where damaged minds and hearts come for repair or overhaul. In the workshops, there 
will be the din of hammer, the clang of wheel, the whirr of engine and the clatter of chains. In 
this workshop, there must be heard only the whisper of the Name of God. With new parts fitted 
and new coats of paint, cars emerge out of the workshop as good as new and they run smoothly, 
without trouble, for miles and miles. People must find this place also as a workshop for persons, 
who are travel-worn, weary, or about to enter upon a long journey. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 24-2-1965 


7. Recruits for my Army 


The samskaara (purifying ritual) of Upanayanam (investiture of sacred thread) is beneficial not 
only to the boys who were initiated, but, for every one of you, who witnessed it and drew 
inspiration from it. The learned Pandit from Delhi spoke to you now of the meaning of this 
samskaara; it has made all these lads "twice born", "dwithiyam mounji bandhanaath" he said. 
The belt of munja grass has given them that status, he said. The Upanayanam---the ceremony of 
leading the lad to the teacher---and the recital by the initiate of the Gaayathri manthra (sacred 
formula) which prays for clear intellect, are the first steps towards the ultimate Realisation of the 
Reality. Pandit Raamasaran explained how the Gaayathri is the essence of the Rig, Yajur and 
Saama Vedhas and how the traditional conception of the Gaayathri Devatha embodies a 
harmonious blending of the five divinities---Vishnu, Surya, Maheshwari, Ganapathy and 
Ishwara, representing the Five Elements---and how prayer to Gaayathri confers the material and 
spiritual needs of man. 


Every man is burdened with one body and four births! He is born a Sudra; for, as a child he has 
no sense of cleanliness or definite ideas of right and wrong. By the rite of initiation into spiritual 
life, that is to say, when he is taken as a pupil by a guru, who takes up the responsibility of 
leading him to the Goal of Human Life, he becomes dwija, twice-born, entering into the second 
chapter of his human career. When he has finished the spiritual disciplines and studied the 
scriptures, he becomes a Vipra (the wise); at last, when as a result of those practices and 
experiences, he visualises Brahman as immanent in all, he is a Braahmana. A Vipra attains 
Brahmajnaanam and becomes a Braahmana. This is therefore the first step, but the most 
important step, in the process of self-realisation. 


Aim of all human effort 


The parents endow you with the material body, the deha; the Guru points out to you the Dweller 
within the Body, the dehi. So, he is entitled to be honoured as a God, say the Vedhas. Maathru 
Devo bhava,' Pithru Devo bhava; Aachaarya Devo bhava (Honour mother, father, teacher, each 
as God). To make gold more amenable to the operations attendent on ornament making, it is 
alloyed by the addition of a little silver or copper; so too in order to manifest the multiple variety 
of Nature, the Brahmathathwam (essential nature of Brahman) is converted into an alloy, with 
the addition of a little egoism or Mamakaaram; the Guru teaches you to regain the pure 
unalloyed Brahmam by the processes of sravanam, mananam, and nididhyaasa (listening to, 
recapitulating and concentrating on God's glories) in the crucible of the intellect. The 
jeevathathwam and the Brahmathathwam (essential nature of the self and Brahman) are then 
clearly understood as facets of the same entity. 


The aim of all human effort is to achieve this One (Ekam), that lies behind all this plurality. 
Without achieving it, man can have no peace, within or without. No amount of repetition of the 
shaanthi manthra is capable of granting him that. The Guru reveals to the disciple the invisible 
current that activates the many seemingly distinct instruments, like the bulb, the mike, the fan, 
the refrigerator, the tape-recorder, the stove, etc. He deserves your gratitude. He is like the 
stranger who entered the cottage of a poor man and announced that underneath the floor of that 
hovel, there lies hidden a precious treasure which he can take and own, by a few minutes of 
digging! The sage Vishwaamithra devised the Gaayathri manthra as a fine drug for the spiritual 
aspirant; he is also to be revered, for the drug awakens your buddhi and confers upon you viveka, 


vichakshana and _ vairaagya---(wisdom, discrimination, and non-attachment)---the three 
distinguishing marks of humans, elevating them far above other animals. 


Subtle power of Gaayathri manthra 


Samskaara involves double actions, removing dirt and applying paint, when the word is used 
with reference to a house. This Gaayathri has the subtle power of removing evil tendencies and 
implanting virtuous habits, and so, the Upanayanam is a unique samskaara. Man is Divine; he 
has the Lord dwelling in his heart, but yet he is bound, miserable, limited, weak, agitated. Why? 
He is ignorant of his reality. He imagines himself weak, limited, bound and he is so shaped by 
the mind, which is the source of that imagination. How then can you be freed? How are you to 
overcome this bhrama or delusion? If you desire to overtake a train, you must speed in a car or 
board a plane. No vehicle slower than the train will help. So too, if you intend to overcome the 
delusion, you must establish yourself in God; the delusion of Maanavasakthi (man-power) can be 
overcome only by the attainment of Daivasakthi (God-power). The Gaayathri promotes the 
acquisition of Daivasakthi. 


Gaayathri means 'that which saves, when repeated"! It is the torch of jnaana, given into the hands 
of these lads venturing into the regions of intellectual inquiry and sensory restrictions. As paddy 
is treated to a process of pestling and winnowing and cleaning in order to get rice that can be 
cooked and eaten, these boys have to de-husk the individual, discover the Aathma hiding inside 
the five sheaths of physical matter, vital energy, mind, intelligence and bliss (Annamaya, 
Praanamaya, Manomaya, Vijnaanamaya and Aanandamaya Kosas). The Sandhyaavandana rite 
they are enjoined to do, three times a day, from this very day, is part of this process of de- 
husking. Time must be found, time can be found, provided they have the will and they get 
encouragement from the elders. Supplying the calories for the spirit is as necessary a process for 
happy living as supplying calories for the body; breakfast, lunch and dinner, Praathas sandhyaa 
(morning worship), Maadhyaahnika (noon worship), and Saayamsandhyaa (evening worship), 
all six are equally essential. You miss any one of the six at your peril. 


Inner cleanliness should be the first aim 


Dear boys, you have today got the Gaayathri, the milk from the four teats called four Vedhas of 
the udder of the Cow that is Godhead; it has in it the sustenance that will make you shine with 
spiritual health. You must now carefully use if for your good; do not spill it or spoil it; boil it, 
make curds out of it, churn it and get the butter that is immanent in it. It will become curds by 
means of your contemplation on the Lord, (Bhagavathchinthana); with the churning-rod of 
discipline, collect the butter of aananda (bliss). You were initiated in this holy Presence, 
remember, the Presence that so many thousands covet; so, you have a special responsibility to 
fulfil your Brahmacharya (the path of celibacy and learning), that leads to Brahmajnaana 
(knowledge of the Supreme Being). The body is fundamentally unclean, but yet it craves to 
achieve both cleanliness and Godliness, because its nature is purity and holiness. 


Inner cleanliness should be your first aim. Which do you cleanse more in a drinking vessel? The 
interior or the exterior? You may have fine vegetables, excellent tamarind juice, chillies, salt, 
dal; the cook may be a master of the art; the oven may be the perfect type; but, if the copper 
vessel is not tinned, the ‘saambaar' (soup) will be turned into dangerous stuff that cannot be 
taken. It will act as poison to those that eat it. Sathkarma (virtuous deeds) and sadaachaara 
(good habits) act to protect the saambaar from contact with copper. 


For you the Gaayathri and the Sandhyaa rites, three times a day, will act as the 'tin' for the 
Hridayapaathra (the heart-vessel), where emotions, impulses and instincts are cooking. The 
discipline of Sandhya will tame all instincts even as the mahout's goad subdues the might of the 
elephant and trains it to perform tricks in the circus ring. Do not fail to make the best of this 
chance. 


Efficacy of unseen merit 


As many as 450 boys have had this chance today. Some persons at Prashaanthi Nilayam felt that, 
this being the examination season for school boys, many may not be able to come and get 
initiated in this sacred presence; but, see how, on account of strikes and consequent disturbances, 
schools were closed, examinations were postponed and almost all who had written about their 
desire to come are here before Me! This is another reminder of the efficacy of unseen merit; the 
rain falls on barren land and all the seeds hidden underneath the land sprout, making a green 
carpet to cover the area! No one knew, except Myself, that there were these seeds of earned merit 
awaiting the showers of Grace in the heritage of these boys. 


For the revival of Sanaathana Dharma (Eternal Religion) these boys will be efficient 
instruments. They will replenish the glory of Bhaarathavarsha. They are today recruited into My 
army. I am achieving the re-establishment of Dharma, the restoration of the Vedhas, and it is 
with that in view that I am initiating in My Presence every year boys from all parts of India. This 
samskaara is fast losing its significance; the recital of the Gaayathri and the performance of the 
Sandhya rite are both being neglected; so, they have to be restored to their pristine glory. This is 
an important step. Until you see the Akshara (the Unchanging), you must practise the kshara (the 
changing), which helps you to transcend it. When once you are able to pronounce 'cat', you can 
give up reading the word as 'c-a-t'. The Gaayathri will help you to reach the Akshara; practise it, 
three times a day, in the Sandhya rite. The Deha-maatha (the mother who bore the body), the 
Loka-maatha (the Mother who sustains the Universe) and the Gaayathri-maatha (the Mother 
who saves you from bondage and ignorance)---all three deserve your devotion and worship. 


Upanayanam Day, Prashaanthi Nilayam, 25-2-1965. 


Desire is a storm, 

greed is a whirpool, 

pride is a precipice, 

attachment is an avalanche, 
egoism is a volcano. 

Keep these away so that, 

when you recite the name of God 
or do meditation, 

they do not disturb the equanimity. 
SHRI SATHYA SAI 


8. Shiva in shava 


Today, when from the Himaalayan ranges down to Kanyaakumaari Cape, the entire land is 
resounding with the declaration, Shivoham, Shivoham, it is indeed your good fortune that you 
have been able to come here and be with Me. On all such days set apart by tradition for the 
contemplation of one's innate Divinity, you must examine your own equipment and decide on 
what to discard and what to retain. All qualities, attitudes, habits that remind you of the Absolute 
into which you have to merge, have to be retained and developed; all that draw you away into the 
relative world of Time and Space, have to be discarded or at least recognised as having but 
temporary value. 


All the joy you crave for, is in you; but, like a man who has vast riches in the iron chest, but, who 
has no idea where the key is, you suffer. With proper directions, dwelling upon them in the 
silence of meditation, it is possible to secure the key, open the chest and be rich in joy. 


The flames of anger, pride, hatred, envy are more devastating than other fires; they arise in the 
mind stealthily and in spurts; they are ever demanding more and more to feed upon. Fire is 
called anala in the Geetha, for anala means, "not enough!" Fire never says, "Enough" or "I am 
satisfied." You dread fire when it leaps at a distance; what then is to be said when it is inside 
your very self? How to put out these awful flames? Well, Sanaathana Dharma (the ancient 
spiritual code) has certain extinguishers tested by experience and guaranteed by sages. They are 
Sathya, Dharma, Shaanthi and Prema. Saturate your heart with these and you are rendered fire- 
proof. 


You seek joy and earn pain 


Like the frog caught and held in the mouth of a cobra which, unaware of its fate, flicks its tongue 
at a fly, you too are unaware of Death which holds you in its fangs. You seek joy and earn pain, 
hunt for pleasure and bag grief. You attach yourselves to the body that decays and let go the God 
that lasts. Of course, a thousand wise men have poured this into your ears, but their words have 
fallen on hard ground and 'refused to sprout. Had they fallen on the soft soil of your heart and 
been watered by the tears of contrition, certainly they would have germinated and grown. A 
clean Consciousness is as a lamp; pour into it the oil of Grace; place in it the wick of Self- 
control; keep in position the chimney of Naamasmarana, so that the gusts of Joy and Grief might 
not scotch the flame. Light the lamp, with some Mahaavaakya (Great Statement), like Aham 
Brahmaasmi (Self is Brahman) or Thath thwam asi (Thou art That). Then, you will not only have 
Light; you will be a source of Light. 


The Flag I am hoisting now is a call to light your own lamps. The symbol on it is here on the 
ground, represented elaborately and clearly for all to see and learn. These concentric circles 
round the Lotus Pillar mark the stages of the progress of the spiritual aspirant to the Goal. He has 
to pull himself across the sandy waste of Desire, up the blood-red steps of Anger and Hatred, 
through the cool green spaces of Bliss, to attain the vast silence of Yoga (union with God). There 
he must get well established in meditation, like an erect Pillar. You will notice that there are six 
rings on that Yoga-danda or Pillar in the centre of the Circle. They are the Chakras (energy 
centres), up which the Kundalini Shakthi (the Serpent Power) of the saadhaka passes towards the 
Goal. And what is the Goal? The blossoming of the Lotus of the Heart and the emanation of 
jnaana-jyothi (light and wisdom) from it, consuming all delusion and making the Individual 
Splendour merge in the Universal Splendour. 


Three gates of Prashaanthi Nilayam 


You will also notice that the Prashaanthi Nilayam has three gates but, no wall around, or even 
fence! Some sage has asked' For Him who has the Universe as His residence, which is the front 
door? Here too, we have entrances everywhere, nothing to keep people out! The first gate is 
Thamoguna (quality of inertia) and if you enter it, you aloe drawn by the garden, the decorations, 
the festoons, and the music into stepping across the Rajoguna (quality of activity) gate, and pass 
on to the Hall, where Sathwaguna (quality of poise and serenity) prevails. There is a meaning in 
whatever I do or speak; I never indulge in significance-less acts. These gates too have a lesson 
for you. 


Do not treat a holy day like Shivaraathri as a holiday, set apart for picnic, cinema, card-game, 
revelry, rivalry and fun. The rishis (sages) fixed these clays in the calendar for the contemplation 
of God and the service of God in man, for the removal of the weeds of vices and weakening 
habits. Contemplate the Aathma-linga (spirit of the soul), the Jyothi-linga (the effulgent form), 
which this day emerges from Me; be convinced that the Linga is in every one of you, for it is a 
mark of the Shiva that resides in the shava (body shell). Allow the vision of the Aathmalinga to 
enter into your inner consciousness and elevate it into Divine heights; do not waste the few days 
that you are bent on spending at the Prashaanthi Nilayam, into days of hectic chatter, vain 
disputation, idle curiosity or restless wandering' learn the discipline of the place and limit your 
talk, your association, your comfort, so that you may live in thoughts Divine, not merely in this 
atmosphere but later, in your own homes. Take delight in the shaanthi (peace) of this place; do 
not disturb it by thought, word or deed. Utilise this rare chance, this unique opportunity, secured 
by the merit of many births, for self-improvement. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam: Mahaashivaraathri: 8 a.m. 


Flag Hoisting Ceremony, 1-3-1965 


Each one from ego 
takes his birth and 
clad in ego dies 

and comes and goes, 
gives and receives 
and earns and spends, 
and deals in lies 

or speaks the truth, 

in ego all the while. 
Those who do away with their ego 
attain salvation. 
SHRI SATHYA SAI 


9. Deathless though dead 


Shivaraathri is the day on which Maheshwara takes up the Linga form for the benefit of spiritual 
seekers; what they have to seek from Maheshwara is Jnaana (spiritual wisdom). "Jnaanam 
Maheswaraa dhichched."--- It is jnaanam that makes manifest the Divinity latent in man. It is 
the final achievement of all thapas (penance), all yoga and yaaga. You cannot get that joy or 
even a fraction of that joy, pursuing earthly pleasure. To cure you of the bite of a cobra in a 
dream, you have to be awakened, that is all. 'Waking' is the acquisition of jnaana. That jnaana 
(knowledge) is got by ceaseless dhyaana (meditation) of the glory and potence of the Almighty. 


Two things are essential for happy life. Dhaanya and Dhyaana. Dhaanya (grains) for the 
sustenance of the Body and dhyaana (contemplation) for entering the temple of the Lord and 
merging in His Glory. It was said by Shastri that sages retired into the silence of the forest and by 
means of hard mental toil won for mankind the great treasure of spiritual experience and 
inspiration. He gave many examples of such seers; but, there are some who condemn this 
retirement from the jostling crowds and call these heroes, cowards afraid to face the stern 
demands of life! They label them as selfish, desirous of their own salvation, regardless of the 
rest. 


The real reason for their taking refuge in lonely places is to learn the secret of liberation for the 
benefit of humanity. It is like the young man who goes abroad now for higher technical training; 
you cannot condemn him as a coward or socially useless individual, when the very purpose is to 
sharpen and deepen experience and become more useful! The purpose of the sages is only to 
keep the senses away from things that delight and deviate, to escape the infection that will 
damage the springs of joy. 


Passions are only apparent 


The Aathmavidya that they specialise in when they are in the ashramas and thapovans 
(hermitages) of the forest brings salvation to all those who later come in contact with them. Their 
calmness and joy will inspire others too. You find fault with them for leaving you; but what good 
does the man who stays, achieve? People behave in the same family, though living together, as 
snakes and scorpions to each other. Many a home reminds you of a menagerie rather than a cosy 
abode of joy and peace! 


This morning, I spoke of anger, hatred, envy and pride as flames of fire consuming the mind. 
Now, the Shastri from Delhi said that such passions are only apparent and that the real You are 
not bothered by them! This reminds Me of a story. A boy offered to label the names of the 
articles contained in tins and cans and pots in the kitchen of his house and his mother agreed; he 
wrote and pasted correctly on all except the sugar tin. Upon that he placed the label, RED 
CHILLIES! When reprimanded, the boy said it was only to deceive the ants, which will not 
swarm over a red chillies tin! Superficial Vedhaantha (Vedhic philosophy) will not keep the fire 
away. 


Of course these qualities are useful sometimes like the hiss of the cobra to keep the disturbers 
away. Anger and hatred can be used to ward off the evil that stalks the saadhaka (aspirant); be 
angry at things that hamper you; hate the habits that brutalise you. Cultivate jnaana (Supreme 
Knowledge) and visualise the Lord in things and activities. That makes this human birth worth 
while, Do not seek faults in others; for the others are but manifestations of the Lord you are 
seeking to realise. It is your own fault that you see in others. There are only two things in this 


world, one apparent, the other, real; the Ashethra and the kshethrajna. The kshethra is the deha 
(body) and the Kshethrajna is the Dehi (Self). The Joka (world) is the Form of the Lokesha (Lord 
of the world); the World is the Body of God. 


Make death a sublime act of liberation 


You are awake when you feel that you have full knowledge; but, when awake, you are aware 
only of the many, not of the One. It is only when you are in deep sleep that all the multiplicity 
vanishes; then you are not aware of the world and of your deluded picture of it. Examine even 
while awake the stages of dream and deep sleep and realise that wakefulness is a handicap to the 
seeker of Truth; the senses are deceptive; they are inefficient instruments. Ramakrishna 
Paramahamsa once shocked everyone by slapping Rani Rasmani on the cheek, while she was 
praying before the shrine at Dakshineswar, for he knew that she was asking the Mother not 
liberation, but bondage! Make use of the chance given to set yourself free; do not foolishly let it 


go. 


Perhaps, when you return to your village, you too will tell people, "There were thousands and 
thousands of people from all parts of India and even some from foreign countries, at Puttaparthi. 
There was a big rush to have Baba's darshan (sight), etc." That is not what you should take back 
from here. There was a lady once who attended the musical recitation of a Puranic story; she sat 
through all the long hours; she described the gathering, the noise, the lights, the mike, the 
loudspeakers, but, what the story was which the reciter expounded, she had no idea at all! Learn 
from here the value of silence, of naamasmarana, of bhajana, of japa, of dhyaan, of single- 
minded remembrance of the Lord, of the association with spiritually kin. These will stand you in 
good stead, when distress assails you. 


The master of the house was dying and when the wife and children pestered him with their 
anxiety, "What is to happen to us, when you leave us?" the dying man turned to them in equal 
despair; "What is to happen to me, when I leave you?" he asked and died. Do not move 
helplessly on to that doom of despair. Do not die in spirit, though the body may fall away. Know 
that the real "You" is deathless; make death a sublime act of liberation. 


The three Nishthas of spiritual pursuit 


Such knowledge can come only through a life devoted to Dharmanishtha (steady pursuit of the 
moral code) and Karmanishtha (steady devotion to the duties of one's stage of life). These two 
must end in the evolution of a third Nishtha like fire and Water producing steam to haul the train 
of wagons, or, like oil and air producing gas in the engine to haul the car. The third Nishtha is 
Brahmanishtha---the steady contemplation of the One Basis of all this seeming multiplicity, 
namely, Brahmam. The Nishtha becomes steady by practice that your separate individual 
existence is merged in the great Deluge of Wisdom, which merges you in Him, restores you to 
Him, rather. 


Many thousands have come today to this Prashaanthi Nilayam and joined this unique satsanga 
(holy gathering). Many who were coming regularly for all Shivaraathris to witness and be 
elevated by the sight of the Aathmalin-godbhavam (Oval shaped Form of Self) have not come 
today; many who have not come so far have had the good fortune to be present. It is not mere 
chance. In the spiritual field, why, in all fields, there is no chance at all. Such fortune is due 
either to Grace or spiritual practice. Enter into prayerful silence and be blessed by the Great 
Vision of the Emergence of the Aathmalinga. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam Mahashivaraathri, 1-3-1965 


Mind does not have any powers. 

The only power is Aathma Shakthi, 

the power of Aathma. 

Mind has no form. 

Mind can be said to be woven of desires. 
The Aathma shines on the heart, 
whether the heart be pure or impure. 

If the heart is purified 

and if the strongest desire is for God, 
that is the best. 


10. Root or rope? 


In the discourse you heard just now on the methods by which the Shaastras have asked man to 
pay his debt to the gods, the sages and the ancestors, you heard how Sanaathana Dharma has 
laid down a "thornless path" for the progress of man, from humanity to divinity! Thornless or 
thornful, each has to tread the path, alone and in full confidence. 


Arjuna was the brother-in-law of Krishna; they were great friends too; there was obviously no 
time to lose, in elaborate explanations and questionings while on the battlefield. Besides, Krishna 
had undoubtedly the power to transform in a trice the way-ward mind of his kinsman into an 
illumined instrument for resolute action. But, Krishna did not use the power! He only prescribed 
the medicine and the regimen; Arjuna had to swallow the drug and follow the regimen himself, 
in order to be saved. He said, "You are My friend, you are My kinsman, you are now so near to 
Me that I am now your charioteer, you are also in great distress; I agree that the delusion which 
has overpowered you must be removed quickly; but, your ajnaana (ignorance) must fall off 
through your own efforts, not through some miracle of My design." Truth that is won by one's 
own struggle with untruth will be lasting treasure; the struggle strengthens one to treasure the 
treasure, for not all can bear the revolutionary consequences of that possession. 


Unsteady mind can be tamed 


Arjuna confessed to Krishna that the mind is ever agitated and restless; he said he had failed to 
calm it. He said it was like the wind, blowing where it listeth. There is a fine story about Karna 
which I shall tell you. He was applying oil to his head, preliminary to bath, from a jewelled cup. 
Karna had taken the oil in his right hand and robbed it well into his hair, when Krishna appeared 
and when Karna rose to revere Him, He said He had come to demand the cup from him as a gift! 
‘I am surprised that You, the Master of the Universe, have a desire for this paltry thing, but who 
am I to ask you questions? Here is the cup; I gift it to You,' he said, and placed it in the Lord's 
right hand with his left hand. Krishna took him to task for that error in Dharma, offering a gift 
with the left hand. But, Karna said, "Pardon me, O Lord ! My fight hand is smeared with oil; I 
was afraid that if I take time to wash the hand and make it fit to give the cup, wayward mind, 
which now has agreed to the gift, might discover some argument not to accede to your request; I 
might therefore be deprived of the unique good fortune, by the fickle mind with which I am 
burdened. This is the reason why I acted on the moment and passed it on to you, regardless of the 
breach of a rule of etiquette; please sympathise with me and pardon me", Karna pleaded. Karna 
knew that the mind was unsteady. But, as Krishna advised Arjuna, it can be tamed by 
detachment and discipline. 


The mind must become the servant of the intellect, not the slave of the senses. It must 
discriminate and detach itself from the body. Like the ripe tamarind fruit, which becomes loose 
inside the shell, it must be unattached to this shell, this casement called body. Strike a green 
tamarind fruit with a stone and you cause harm to the pulp inside; but, strike the ripe fruit and see 
what happens. It is the dry rind that falls off; nothing affects the pulp or the seed. The ripe 
saadhaka (aspirant) does not feel the blows of fate or fortune; it is the unripe man who is 
wounded by every blow. 


The secret of liberation 


A king was once out hunting in the forest and while pursuing a fleeing stag, he fell into a 
forsaken well which was very deep, No one of his retinue knew of his plight, for the stag had 


taken him far away into the woods, before his men could get trace Of him. Luckily, even as he 
fell, he grasped the root of a tree that was hanging aloof from the side of the well, and thus 
escaped the death that yawned underneath. After a few agonising hours, he heard some one 
reciting aloud the names of the Lord, near the mouth of the well. It was a holy man and when he 
caught the faint echo of the unfortunate king's cry, he let down a rope and called out to the King 
to hold on to it tight, so that he might be pulled up into safety. The question now before the 
King-was Root or Rope? 


Of course the root helped him to survive, but, it had value only until the rope was offered. It 
would be folly to stick to the root even after the rope was ready to save. The root must be 
appreciated, but, thankfulness should not be exaggerated into attachment. Samsaara or worldly 
existence is like the root; the rope is the secret of liberation, through some Mahaavaakyaa 
(sacred utterance of Truth), that discloses in a flash the Truth. 


Liberation is just the awareness of Truth, the falling off of the scales of delusion from the eye. It 
is not a special suburb of select souls; it is not a closed monopoly of expert saadhakas. Like the 
Godaavari losing its form, its name and its taste in the sea, liberation dissolves the name and 
form, aptitudes and attitudes. You are no more a separate, particular, individual. The rain drop 
has merged in the sea, from where the drop arose. Of course there was no bondage, at any time, 
and no prison; there was only a fixation in the mind that one was bound, that one was in prison, 
that one was limited and finite! 


Caution to be observed regarding food 


To purify the mind and the intellect for the correct reflection of the Truth, the first caution is in 
regard to food. Indeed, this is a very serious matter for saadhakas. There lived in Malur, Mysore 
State, a pious Brahmin who was a great scholar. He had an equally pious wife, He was always 
intent on puja and japa-dhyaana and was known far and wide for his virtuous character. One 
day, a sanyaasin (mendicant) called Nithyaananda came to his door seeking alms; so, he was 
happy beyond measure. He invited the monk to take dinner with him the next day so that he 
might honour him with due hospitality. He hung green festoons over his doors and made 
elaborate arrangements for the reception.. But, at the eleventh hour physical impurity rendered 
his wife unfit to prepare food for the honoured guest or for any one else. A neighbour 
volunteered to cook the meal and she was brought in and introduced into the kitchen. 


Everything went off well and all were happy as they could be, under the circumstances. Only, the 
monk was wrung during meals by an overpowering desire to steal the silver cup which the host 
had placed near his plate. In spite of his best efforts, the evil idea won and the monk hurried to 
his abode with the cup hidden in the folds of his robe. He could not sleep that night, for his 
conscience pricked him so. He felt he had brought disgrace on his Guru, and on the rishis (sages) 
whom he invoked by the manthras he recited. He could not rest until he ran back into the 
Brahmin's house and, falling at his feet, restored the article with tears of repentance trickling 
down his cheeks. 


Every one wondered how such a saint could stoop so low; then, some one suggested it might be 
the fault transmitted to the food he ate, by the person who cooked it. And, when they examined 
the history of the neighbour, they found that she was an irrepressible thief! The thieving 
tendency had by subtle contact affected the food she prepared. This is the reason why spiritual 
aspirants are advised to live on fruits and tubers only when they reach a certain stage of spiritual 
achievement. 


Wants of man are neverending 


The saadhaka must welcome obstacles, for, they are but challenges, opportunities to prove one's 
mettle, to help one in overcoming attachment to the body. Shivam has no fear; only shavam 
(corpse) fears. This is Shivaraathri, the Night of Fearlessness, of Auspiciousness, of Mangalam. 
You are happy you have come on pilgrimage here' but let Me tell you one thing: unless you 
control the stream of desire that springs in the mind, this is just wasted opportunity. If your wish 
if fulfilled, you revere Me; if it is not, you revile Me. That is how desire debases you. 


When one wish is fulfilled, ten rise in its place. For, there is no dearth of want; the same person 
has come to Me seeking success at the examination, then, a job, then a father-in-law, then a 
child, then a rise in the salary, a transfer to a cheaper place, a seat in the Medical College for the 
son--a never-ending series of wants, until at last, he comes seeking My Grace for an end to 
worldly pursuits and for initiation into the path of spiritual liberation! Chintha (anxiety) is what 
such people dwell on. Chintha means, in Telugu, the tamarind tree. They dwell on the tamarind 
tree, the Chintha tree; but, My tree is the 'Santhosha tree, the Tree of Joy’. 


Man is worse than even a dog, for he forgets favours received; he denies his master; he trusts the 
ear, even though the eye belies the ear. He behaves as if he has two tongues; whom he praises to 
the sky today, he belittles and disbelieves the next. The dog knows its master, whatever role he 
may put on in the play---king, servant, clown. It is grateful for the leavings on your plates, which 
it is allowed to lick after your dinner. But, man has no gratitude even for the amritha he gets. 


Give up attachment and be free 


No one can liberate you, for no one has bound you. You hold on to the nettle of worldly pleasure 
and you weep for pain. The kite is pursued by crows so long as it carries the fish in its beak; it 
twists and turns in the sky trying to dodge the crows who seek to snatch the fish; tired at last, it 
drops the fish. That moment it is free. So give up the attachment to the senses, then grief and 
worry can harass you no more. The kite sits on a tree, preening its wings, enjoying its happiness. 
You too can be so happy, provided you drop the fish you have in your beak. 


When you know that thieves have broken into your neighbour's house, you become extra- 
cautious and every night, before you retire, you examine every lock and bolt in the house. When 
you know that death has carried away a victim from the house next door, why do you not 
examine yourselves, whether you are equipped to meet it when it comes for you? Why do you 
immerse yourselves in distractions like building houses, piling bank-balances, celebrating 
picnics, contesting elections? Engage yourselves rather in things that will make you immortal, 
serve your best interests by service to the world. Seek your own reality? That is what a wise man 
should do. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 2-3-1965 


11. Aspire for the nobler role 


The body is the temple of the Self; the world is a structure raised on one strong pillar, "I". For, 
when this "I" is dormant during deep sleep, there is no world, so far as you are concerned. You 
are alone, when you sleep. Before you were born, there was no world for you. After you die, 
there is no world of which you are conscious. To get this jnaana (knowledge) fixed, you have to 
pass through the preparatory schools of karma and upaasana. Karma (dedicated activity) helps to 
cleanse the heart of egoistic impulses; wpasaana (contemplation) helps to focus attention on the 
Universal and the Absolute. Then jnaana emerges. This is what the Shastri referred to as the 
conjunction of three rivers, in the poem he read now. Once you win that jnaana, you are the 
equal of the wisest, for there is nothing more to know. 


Karma and upaasana depend upon the dharma of the particular stage of your life, as well as the 
guna that rules you. Even amritha will be harmful to life, if it is drunk through the nose. There is 
a way of life, a method of uplift, a path of progress, distinct for every seeker, different from those 
of others. The true Guru knows which suits you best. I t does not mean that the Guru is partial or 
prejudiced; it only means that he is kind and considerate. For, he does not insist on all men 
wearing the same straitjacket. A washerman had a dog and a donkey; the donkey to carry the 
clothes to the river and back, the dog to watch the clothes hung to dry. One day, the dog refused 
to bark, for it was illtreated that morning by the master; it was mum even when a thief was 
bundling up the clothes. So, the donkey decided to bray in order to warn the washerman. But he 
mistook it as sheer impertinence and so, without pursuing the thief, he belaboured the poor beast 
for all its pains! Each must do only one's allotted task; or else, confusion will arise and multiply. 


Let God's will prevail 


When dharma (which means, that which is worn, the apparel, clothes) was sought to be removed 
from the wearer, the Lord blessed Dhroupadi, with the grant of an unending series of saris. 
Today, the Sanaathana Dharma which is the robe of Bhaaratha maatha (Mother India) is sought 
to be taken away by her unworthy and deluded sons and so, the Lord has come to grant solace 
and strength. You will see splendid saris pouring into her lap from every door of the Durbar Hall, 
where she is being insulted. You will witness this great miracle, by the Avathaar (God incarnate) 
come to protect her honour, her heritage of Aathmic treasure. 


The whole secret lies in detachment or vairaagya. The tongue has oil, fat and greasy substances 
rolling over it; but, it is unaffected by these; it does not become greasy. The eye is unaffected by 
the collyrium. The mind too must be unaffected by the experiences of success and failure, of gain 
and loss, of well-being and illness; it must be surrendered at the Feet of the Lord. Let His Will 
prevail. What profit does your little will bring you? Just close your eyes for five minutes and 
think of the profit your efforts have won for you. 


One wish leads to another; one bond brings about ten others. You marry; you get a daughter who 
has to be given in marriage; you struggle to finish your education; you struggle to finish your 
son's education; he struggles to finish his son's. Thus it goes on, like a never-ending chain. "This 
one wish if fulfilled will be enough, I won't ask for anything more", you say; but I know you will 
come and ask for something else, which is the consequence of that wish. It is in the very nature 
of human desire; for, the joy one gets through its satisfaction is imperfect, limited, temporary, 
pregnant with grief. You sow bitter seeds and pray for a harvest of sweetness. You wail over the 
soil, the plant, the rain. What can they do? The seeds themselves are diseased, defective. 


Truth will always win 


The Vedhic injunction, given through the sages, is "Sathyam vada; Dharmam chara"---Speak the 
Truth; walk in the path of Virtue. Harischandra knew the authority behind that injunction. He 
respected that authority and followed that injunction whatever the consequences. He lost his 
kingdom, his honour, his everything. He sold his wife and son as slaves; himself, he had to sell 
for cash! He was reduced from being the occupant of the Imperial Throne to watching over the 
cremation of corpses and collecting fees therefor. He had to refuse the fight of being burnt, to his 
own dead son and insist on the fees being paid by his own helpless Queen! But, he stuck to Truth 
and won. Truth will win, whatever the obstacle; otherwise, the Vedhas would not have 
commanded man to stick to it. 


The Lord has to take the Form that is suitable for the task He has to fulfil. To catch a gang of 
dacoits, the Police Officer has to move among them as a dacoit. That is why the human form has 
been taken. But, who, challenged with impunity by their own wives, dare challenge the 
Avathaara and ask for proofs! Of course, if you desire to understand, you are welcome; be near, 
watch, learn and believe. Put on the role if you have the courage and the conviction that you can 
enact it well. Are you not tired of playing the parts of beggar and clown, in scene after scene, 
birth after birth? Aspire for the nobler role, at least now, in this birth. 


Have intense craving for God's Grace 


The Shastri while describing the various forms of bhakthi mentioned that the bhaktha is like the 
needle which is always drawn towards the magnet. But the needle has to be near enough; it has 
also to be clean enough. You stay far away and complain that Grace has not come! You do not 
scrape off, by the process of repentance, the mud and rust that prevent attachment. You come 
near for some time and stray away into the distance. I don't mean physical distance at all. You 
may be physically far, but mentally by My side. I do not measure distance in miles or metres; I 
am with you, in you, beside you, ever; only you have to be aware of Me and make use of My 
Presence. 


You must become an Aartha, torn by intense suffering to sense the Lord. Suffer the pangs of 
distress. You must realise that mere suffering is fruitless, without the knowledge of the path to 
attain the Lord. That is to say, you have to be transformed into a jijnaasu, a seeker. Analyse the 
four Purushaarthas (four goals of life) and realise that Moksha (Liberation) is the goal, the 
culmination. Start craving for that, as an Arthaarthi, the lover of the truest gain. Seek that which, 
when secured, all else is secured. 


Finally, when you realise that your true 'Nature is the Aathman, you become a jnaani. But, this is 
an arduous path and so, many who are attracted to it leave off and lose themselves. Then, like the 
winner of a cash prize, who revels in some city like Calcutta or Poona or Madras or who dwells 
in some place of pilgrimage like Shirdi or Rishikesh until the entire prize money is spent, later 
they are harassed by the police for loitering in public places for want of a place to rest their 
heads. Heaven too is like this' a place where you can stay, until your last pie, but only until then! 
Moksha alone is unchanging, eternal. 


Develop Sath-Guna to earn Grace 


You come to Puttaparthi, secure a picture, and taking it home, begin worshipping it every day or 
every Thursday; but, all that is simply sathkarma (good activity). They won't take you far. You 
must also develop sath-guna, virtues, good habits, good attitudes, good characteristics, a good 


character. Otherwise your life is a chain of pluses and minuses, one cancelling the other out, 
totalling up to a mere zero. When you say, Thath thwam asi (Thou art that), you must have the 
traits of that which you claim to be. You say, "that and this" are the same; then, reviling that or 
revering 'that' is the same as reviling 'this' or revering this. 


There are many who pray to Me to give a name to their children, or to feed them with the first 
morsel of rice. These are two rites prescribed by the Shaasthras. Hence the rite requires that the 
child be given the Name of God, Panduranga, Venkatesha, Srinivasa, Sathyanaaraayana, 
Lakshminaaraayana, etc. But, you curtail it into L.N. and you forget what the L is for or the N. A 
"Raama' does not try to live up to the name he bears; he files a suit against his father and gives his 
father great misery. A Lakshmana assaults his brother, a Seetha applies for divorce. It is better to 
be born a boulder than as man with such a character. 


Why is it that the world reveres Raama and revolts at Raavana? Raama is not its uncle's son or 
Raavana, its stepmother's child! It is the kinship of the spirit, your innate goodness, responding 
lovingly, adoringly to the goodness in Raama and reacting revoltingly to the wickedness of 
Raavana. 


It is not enough, nor is it essential that you should repeat the name of Raama loudly; respect it in 
the fullness of love and admiration. If you have no spring of Love in you, dig into your heart 
with external instruments like pujas, sthotra (worship and adoration), etc. and it will start to 
flow. 


Welcome problems and suffering 


From tomorrow, I shall be seeing you, one by one, the ailing, the old and the sick first, and the 
others later. Many of you have come with problems of health or mental worry of some sort or 
other. They are mere baits by which you have been brought here, so that you may contact the 
Grace, and strengthen your faith in the Divine. Problems and worry are really to be welcomed as 
they teach you the lessons of humility and reverence. But, not all continue the attachment they 
are able to establish; they lose the fortune that has fallen into their hands. You will see the day 
when the Chithravathi sands alone can accommodate the gatherings that assemble here from all 
parts of the world; when the sky alone can provide a roof for them all. Many hesitate to believe 
that things will improve, that life for all will be happy and full of joy, that the Golden Age will 
ever recur. Let me assure you that this Dharmaswaruupa (Righteousness personified) has not 
come in vain. It will succeed in averting the crisis that has come upon Humanity. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 3-3-1965 


No one has right to advise others, 
unless he is already practising what he preaches. 


SHRI SATHYA SAI 


12. Dharma and dharmashaala 


Bhaarathavarsha (Indian subcontinent) knew that the secret of peace lay in service and love 
towards all beings. The culture of this land proclaimed that the best form of service is to foster 
the practitioners of the good life, the sages and spiritual aspirants. Do not decry the servants of 
God; do not obstruct the charity of the generous; do not discourage the study of the scriptures 
even if you cannot positively promote any of these; that is the lesson taught in this land. 


Peace cannot be ensured by the piling up of atom bombs, the systematic amassing of weapons. 
Without removing hatred from the heart and planting love therein, mere terror and counter-terror 
cannot establish cordiality and harmony. "You purchase a bean and demand a gourd as an extra." 
Your effort is so microscopic: your expectation of fruit is gigantic. How can this wish for peace 
be realised? Little is done to cleanse the mind of hate, but every one expects international peace 
tomorrow at dawn. 


At present, every one is after sukha (happiness). The hunt for comfortable jobs and positions of 
influence, the founding of banks and business houses, the growth of bungalows--all this is 
evidence of the eagerness to live in happiness. But, there is no eagerness to live in shaanthi 
(peace). Sukha (happiness) is confused with shaanthi; sukha is taken to be the same as shaanthi. 
No one of the rich or well placed or prosperous or powerful has peace. You can investigate and 
find out for yourselves the truth of this. Peace is not found in the pass book or many-roomed 
bungalow or godown or iron safe. Your whole attitude is topsy-turvy. 


It is as absurd as putting the cart before the horse. The physical is subordinate to the spiritual. 
The body is the cart and the spirit, the horse. Of course, the cart should be kept 


in good condition; vice ruins the body and makes it unfit for the journey of life. The mind is the 
horse and that is neglected and not groomed for the journey. It is starved. In this land where 
Meera, Jayadeva, Valmeeki, Thyaagaraaja, Raamadas and Tukaaraam, by their intense yearning 
and fortitude, showed the path of achieving lasting joy, precious years of life are thrown away in 
silly adventures. 


"IT am the holy" attitude breeds grief 


The four Mahaavaakyas (great truths) which the Vedhas proclaim, announce that all this is 
Brahmam, one unitary uniform substance, appearing only to the diseased eye as many. Aham 
Brahmaasmi---"I am Brahman"---you must assert; then, you transmute yourself into sons of 
Immortality; (Amrithasya Puthraah); now, since you bleat aham dehaasmi---I am the body (the 
combination of five elements, that one day splits into those elements)---you degrade yourself into 
Amrithasya Puthraah---sons of Illusion. That attitude breeds grief; it is the root of discontent. 
People who stay in air-conditioned rooms have no coolness in their heart; people who resided in 
the caves of the forest had it. It is not external temperature that counts; it is the inner temper. 


Here, the Mahaasakthi (Supreme Power) in the Name and Form of Chengalamma is established 
and evident. And, this foundation stone for a dharmashaala (choultry) for the pilgrims who come 
to adore Her is being laid by Me. It is significant, for I never do any casual act. Every single act 
has a deep significance. This temple and this dharmashaala are bound to serve mankind more 
and more. That is the meaning of prathishtha, the establishment of temples and the institutions of 
service related to them. 


Dharma leads you to God 


This building is named a Dharmashaala, a Hall of Dharma, a School of Dharma. It should not 
be merely a free lodging house for pilgrims. It should have an atmosphere of dharma, which the 
pilgrims must inhale and get inspired thereby. The temple will inspire Aathmadharma, leading 
the pilgrim into himself, to search for the Mahaasakthi that is behind the Icchaasakthi, the 
Kriyasakthi and the Jnaanasakthi (power of the will, the work and the wisdom) that man is 
endowed with. 


The Dharmashaala must inspire him to deepen faith in the Vriththidharma, (the moral code that 
regulates and enriches his profession), the Varnadharma, (the restrictions and regulations that 
strive to canalise his impulses and instincts, into fields that are special to his place in society), 
Aashramadharma (disciplines laid down for the blossoming of the spiritual consciousness during 
the four stages of life as student, as householder, as a recluse, and as asceric), Viseshadharma 
(code of conduct in special situations) and Saamaanyadharma (code of conduct common to all). 
That will make the name Dharmashaala really appropriate. Dharma is the path by which the 
Mahaasakthi in the temple of your heart can be tapped, experienced and realised; without 
adherence to dharma, it can never happen. 


Dharma (virtuous conduct) purifies the mind and leads you to God. It creates a taste for the 
Name and the Form of God. When you love the Name and Form of Krishna, you will naturally 
respect and obey the command of Krishna, which is found in the Bhagavad Geetha. Have the 
Name on the tongue and the Form in the eye and the demon called aasha (unending desire), will 
fly from your mind, leaving joy and content therein. This kind of constant dwelling on the 
indwelling God will promote in you love for all beings. You will then see only good in others. 
You will strive only to do good to others. 


Do your duties with God as the witness 


Now, all things have gone up in value; man alone has become cheap. Endowed with the costly 
gems of Reason, Discrimination and Detachment, man has allowed them to slip away and he is 
beset with dire poverty, as a consequence. He has become cheaper than animals; he is 
slaughtered in millions without any qualm, because of the terrific growth of anger, hate and 
greed; he has forgotten his unity with all men, all beings, and all worlds. The contemplation of 
that unity alone can establish .world peace, social peace and peace in the individual. All other 
efforts are like pouring sweet-scented rose water on a heap of ash, ineffective and foolish. I bless 
all efforts made by each of you to build shaanthi (peace), on this foundation of Aathmajnaana, 
knowledge of Aathmic unity. 


Gatherings like this must be arranged to spread the message of the Prashaanthi 
Vidwanmahaasabha in order that you may know the truth about yourself and seek to experience 
it. As Kumaararaaja said in the beginning, try to practise in your daily life at least one or two of 
the things. I spoke to you now. Do all daily duties, with God in your heart, as the witness. This 
gathering is like a flood that has come from all the four quarters; it gives an assurance that 
Sanaathana Dharma (Eternal Religion) will certainly rise in splendour in this land. It teaches 
man to investigate the truth about himself and the world. Is that not the most proper thing for 
man to do? What is wrong in prompting man to engage himself in the task? It is mere ignorance 
that keeps you away from this task. Start now, with the first step, Naamasmarana, (remembrance 
of the Name of the Lord, the Universal Indweller); that will lead you on to the further steps, until 
the goal is reached. 


Changalamma Temple, Sulurpet, 22-3-1965 


Whenever there is a vacuum in any heart, 
love flows into it 

and is glad that it can fill the emptiness. 
It is never held back; 

it is offered in abundance 

without guile or deceit. 

it does not wear the cloak of 
falsehood, flattery or fear. 

The tendrils of love 

aspire to cling only to 

the garments of God. 

It senses that God resides 

in His splendour, in every heart 

to discover that the seat of God 

is real devotion. 


SHRI SATHYA SAI 


13. The voice of thunder 


I must exhort you to make the best use of the fine chance that you have now got, with the 
opening of the Sai Baba Temple by Me in this town, where you are now struggling in the sea of 
worldly confusion and anxiety. The chance must be used for the best profit; that is the sign of the 
intelligent man. As the heart is to the body, so is the temple to a village or community. Building 
of temples, installation of idols therein, celebrating various festivals in connection with worship 
there---are all sath karmas, (good deeds); they provide training in service. They give 
opportunities for sacrifice, detachment. They are a form of thapas (penance). So, I am glad this 
temple has come up, through the penance of the people. 


Of late, this is deteriorating into a fashion, this building of temples and mandhirs. First, people 
must instal the Lord in their hearts. Then they become entitled to engage themselves in building 
temples for the Lord. Again, the construction of new mandhirs and temples has led to the neglect 
of old ones, which is a very wrong thing to do. The old temples have been built in strict 
accordance with Shaastraic rules and many generations of devotees have filled them with their 
piety and prayer. It is a sacrilege to pave the way for their decline. Moreover, this has become a 
new type of business, this multiplication of temples. In order to raise new ones, (and hasten the 
ruin of the existing temples), people start collecting funds and in the process, many enrich 
themselves, at the cost of the gullible public. When there is the anguished cry for food and 
shelter, money is spent on temples, where they exist in plenty already. This is not to be 
encouraged; the same Lord is worshipped everywhere, and you need not build a temple for every 
new Name or Form. Tell people to see in all Forms and under all Names the same God. That is 
the training they need. 


Multiply virtues, not buildings 


The search for Truth, the fostering of morality---these have been the ideals of India, and these 
were considered essential for the realisation of Godhead. That is the reason why into this narrow 
sector, on this long narrow road and along the bye-lanes and cross-lanes, this flood of humanity 
has poured itself. I suggest to this Committee that they should change the venue of the meeting 
tomorrow so that people may sit comfortably and listen to the discourses. Seeing your devotion 
and patient suffering, those .who doubt the description of the devotion of the Gopaas and Gopees 
of Brindavan in the Bhaagavatha can be convinced that the Bhaagavatham is right. It is to slake 
this thirst that you all have for spiritual inspiration and knowledge, that the Prashaanthi 
Vidwanmahaasabha, about which Patrudu spoke, has been established by Me. It will perform this 
duty all over the Country. 


In past ages, many sages, kings and ascetics left home and dwelt in the solitude of the forests and 
having earned unlimited Aananda themselves, they taught others the source of their bliss, 
namely, the Divine that is encased in the human. Remove the vices of lust and hatred and put out 
the raging flames of anger and greed; then, they said, the innate shaantham and soukhyam 
(tranquillity and happiness), the swaruupam and swabhaavam (one's own form and nature) of 
Man, will manifest unhindered. Shaantham is the swaruupam, soukhyam is the swabhaavam of 
Man. 


Individual reconstruction is much more important than the construction of temples. Multiply 
virtues, not buildings; practise what you preach, that is the real pilgrimage; cleanse your minds 
of envy and malice, that is the real bath in holy waters. Of what avail is the name of the Lord on 


the tongue, if the heart within is impure? Injustice and discontent are spreading everywhere due 
to this one fault in man: saying one thing and doing the opposite, the tongue and the hand going 
in different directions. Man has to set himself right and correct his food, his recreation, his 
method of spending his leisure as well as his habits of thought. 


World is the 'middleman' between 'I' and 'You' 


There are only two entities at first: "I" and "You", Thath and Thwam, Aham and Brahma. But a 
third, this Prakrithi (world), has come between, or rather deludes us as being in between. You 
know some people who go about carrying proposals of marriage, the middlemen. They go to the 
bride's parents and suggest a certain groom and they praise him to the skies and create a desire 
for securing him in marriage for the daughter; then they move on to the bridegroom's village and 
persuade that party to insist on a large sum as groom-price before agreeing to accept the daughter 
of the first party; when at last the marriage is concluded, they disappear. Prakrithi is like this 
middleman. When "I" and "You" have united, Prakrithi disappears. Its role is to reveal the "you" 
to the "I'"---that is all. 


As a matter or fact, the "I" is of the same nature as "You," like the river and the sea, or like the 
wave and the sea. That is the reason why I always address you as Amritha-swaruupulaara--- You, 
whose nature is immortality! Prema-swaruupulaara---You, whose nature is Love? Shaantha- 
swaruupulaara---You, whose nature is Tranquillity!. No one addresses a gathering as 
Dushtulaara---O you wicked ones! or Durmargulaara---O you vile ones! For such words are not 
true, they do not describe man's real nature, which is love, tranquillity, goodness, immortallity. 
This wickedness, vileness and vice are errors of judgement, straying away during the pilgrimage, 
through ignorance, delusion, confusion, etc. 


The various brakes operating on man 


Go straight along the path of karma (action) and dharma (virtue) towards Brahma (the Supreme 
Reality); this is your destiny. Karma has to be done, there is no turning away. Each has his 
allotted task, according to the status, taste, tendency and earned merit. Do it, with the fear of God 
and of sin, deep in your heart. Welcome pain and grief so that you take both success and failure 
as hammer strokes to shape you into a sturdy saadhaka. Inner content is more important than 
outer prosperity. 


Dharma is the moral code, the experience of sages, the controlling discipline which checks the 
mind and the senses. There are many such brakes operating on man' Vyakthi dharma (controls 
affecting the individual, as such), Sahaja dharma (controls affecting the nature of man, as man), 
Aashrama dharma (controls affecting the stage of life, like student householder, ascetic), Vama 
dharma (controls pertaining to the duties cast upon man as a limb of the community), etc. All 
these brakes are complementary, they do not cause confusion, they help progress, each in its own 
way. Krishna reminded Arjuna of his Vama dharma as a Kshatriya, and also of his Sahaja 
dharma as a jeevi (an instrument in the hands of the Lord). Besides these, there is also the 
Visesha dharma (obligations on special occasions or when faced with special situations). You 
must therefore walk warily towards the Goal. 


This temple is but brick and mortar. This idol is but stone. But, you are determined to see in it 
the Divine Principle. If you can penetrate behind the stone and see the Divine Basis, how much 
easier it is to see the Lord who resides in the heart of every living, every human being? Try to 
realise that first, so that your faith in this idol and this temple can be well settled. Revere Man; 


that is the first step towards reverence for God; for, Man is prathyaksha (perceptible), God is 
paroksha (imperceptible). 


Recognise that you are Shiva 


The Upanishads say that thunder teaches Da, Da, Dha...Daya (compassion) to the ogres, Dama 
(self-control) to the gods and Dharma to men. Now, since man is all three---part ogre, part god, 
part man---he must practise all three himself; daya (be kind to all), dama (be the master of your 
mind and the senses) and dharma (be constantly alert on the path of fight); that is the advice 
given from the sky in the voice of thunder. The journey of every man is towards the cemetery; 
every day brings you nearer to the moment of death. So, do not delay the duty you must carry out 
for your own lasting good. Recognise that you are Shiva (God), ere you become a shava 
(corpse); that will save you from further deaths. 


The very first thing you have to do, to impress upon your mind the reality, is to recite the Name 
of God and dwell on His Glory in the mind, so that the tongue will not stray into lesser topics or 
the mind drag you away into inferior fields. I shall therefore make you sing a few names now. 


Kaakinada, 24-3-1965. 


14. Awake! Arise! 


You must tread the spiritual path with an uncontrollable urge to reach the Goal; you must 
cultivate the yearning for liberation from all this encumberance. Remember that you have to 
dwell in a house built on four stout pillars: dharma, artha, kaama, and moksha (righteousness, 
wealth, desire and liberation); Dharma supporting artha, and moksha being the only kaama or 
desire. However much you may earn either wealth or strength, unless you tap the springs of 
aananda (bliss) within you, you cannot have peace and lasting content. There is Sathyathwa, 
Nithyathwa (reality of truth and eternity) in you; you need not earn them from any one else. The 
four pillars of Purushaartha (goals of human effort) are made firm and stable by fixing them on 
the bedrock of the Nithya Sathya Thathwa (reality of eternal truth) in every man, the Divine in 
fact, on which the human is superimposed. 


Maanava (man) means a person who has no trace of ignorance! And so, if you seek to deserve 
that name, you must remove it by incessant activity, moved by good impulses. But, while your 
efforts are little, your expectations are great. Your achievement is little, your boast is great. 
When some one asked a water carrier whether his leather bag was clean, he replied, "It is cleaner 
than the bag into which you pour the water." Look to the inner purity rather than the outer one. 
Examine yourself, do not venture to judge others. Search for the pearl, not the shell; the gem, not 
the tinsel. 


Everyone can achieve Moksha 


You must have heard of people seeking moksha (liberation) and getting moksha; many may be 
under the impression that it is some rare honour that only a few secure or that it is some area like 
Paradise or a Colony of the Elect or a Height that some heroic souls alone can climb up to. No; 
moksha is something which all must achieve, whether they are heroic or not; even those who 
deny it have to end by realising it. For, every one is even now seeking it when he seeks joy and 
peace; and, who does not seek joy and peace? Moksha is when you have lasting joy and lasting 
peace. Tired with temporary joys and transient peace, man will at last endeavour to know the 
secret of permanent joy and peace, that is to say, of Moksha, Liberation from the cycle of birth 
and death. 


If only men knew the path to permanent joy and peace, they will not wander distracted among 
the bye-lanes of sensual pleasure. Just as the joy felt in dreams disappears when you wake, the 
joy felt in the waking stage disappears when you wake into the higher awareness, called Jnaana. 
So, the Upanishads say, "Get up, arise, awake"; time is fleeing fast. Use the moment while it is 
available, for the best of uses, the awareness of the Divine in all. When you die, you must die not 
like a tree or a beast or a worm, but, like a Man who has realised that he is Maadhava (God). 
That is the consummation of all the years you spend in the human frame. 


This essential teaching is absent in modern curricula; men and women live many years without 
knowing the secret of joyful, peaceful living. The educated are today more discontented than the 
uneducated, whereas they ought really to be calmer and less subject to agitations of the mind. 
Education today is a thin veneer that heightens egoism and hypocrisy. 


All are travellers to God 


Some one was found writing "pepper" on a tin of sugar and when asked the reason, he said, "It is 
only to cheat the ants"! The label "education" on the present system of teaching and training the 


young cannot cheat any thinking person, who looks for the real purpose of education: the 
unfolding of the Divine in human personality. Humility and an attitude of reverence are essential 
for man. They are not promoted by the educational process of today; the processes recommended 
in the Upanishads ensured these two. 


"Revere the mother as Divine; revere the father as Divine; revere the teacher as Divine; revere 
the guest as Divine", they exhorted. Every one has the Divine in him; so no one should be 
slighted or neglected. The parents who gave you this wonderful chance to realise the reality and 
the teacher who opened your eyes to the treasure within you, the guest who gave you the 
splendid chance to render service to the living embodiment of God right in your very home, all 
have to be revered, and served with humility. The educated man is like the man who asks for a 
ticket at the booking office of a railway station, but does not know to which place he is going! 
But all men are travellers, pilgrims rather, to God, who is drawing them to Him. 


Kaakinada, 25-3-1965 


Never be afraid of death. Never forget God, 
Never take this World as real. 
SHRI SATHYA SAI 


15. The three-day fair 


Man did not come here to sleep and eat; he has come to manifest, by disciplined processes, the 
divine in him. That is why he is called vyakthi, he who makes vyaktha (clear) the Shakthi 
(power) that is in him---the Divine energy that motivates him. For this purpose he has come 
endowed with this body and the intelligence needed to control it and divert it to useful channels 
of activity. You must achieve this by Dharma-nishtha and Karma-nishtha---steady pursuit of 
morality and good deeds. 


You have been yearning for My coming among you, steadily for over six years now, I have 
therefore come today to cool your hearts and give you joy. When you suffer from the burning 
sun, you are refreshed by a dip in the Godaavari river. When your hearts are parched by the 
burning desire fore equanimity, you must dip in the cool company of the spiritually great. Have a 
time-table for spiritual sustenance, just as you have now for physical sustenance. A breakfast of 
pious repetition of Lord's name (japa) and meditation (dhyaana), a lunch hour of ritual worship 
of the Lord (puja), 'tea and snacks' of reading scriptures or sacred books (pravachana) in the 
afternoon and a light dinner of devotional music (bhajana) in the early hours of the night. If you 
follow this regimen, you can sleep soundly and wake up refreshed. Feel that you are born with 
the dawn of every new day; that you nestle in the lap of death when your eyes close in sleep. For, 
what happens in deep sleep? The body, the senses, the mind, the intelligence, all are negated and 
there is not a trace of awareness of the world. 


All human beings are part of His Glory 


If you do so, there will be no accumulation of the consequences of acts, from day to day; the 
accounts of every day will be closed with ‘death,’ at the end of that day, especially since you 
dedicate every act to Him who motivated it and surrendered the fruits thereof to Him who 
consummated it. If you plan to give joy to others, you will yourself be joyful. Who are these 
others? Even when the Lord has come with a definite human body, all human beings that you 
come across are but parts of His glory and His splendour. /shwarassarvabhuthaanaam hriddese 
Arjuna thisthathi---"O ! Arjuna, the Lord dwells in the region of the heart in all beings", says the 
Lord in the Bhagavad Geetha. 


You may ask how can we find time for all this, when we have to toil every moment for feeding 
and clothing ourselves? But you forget that the Lord will grant you these material things, and 
even immortality, if only you place full reliance on Him. Whatever you do, have the name, 
Raama or Krishna or Shiva or Haft, on your tongue; no extra time or energy is needed for that. 
When you rise in the morning, rise with the Name on your tongue, slide into sleep with the Name 
on your tongue. 


You know a story of Naarada, I believe. Vishnu once chided him and said a farmer had greater 
devotion than Naarada. The sage felt annoyed and wanted to verify it for himself. He went to that 
village and sought out the ryot and observed his life for some days. The man repeated the name 
of the Lord only thrice a day (!), once as he rose from sleep, a second time when he started 
taking his only meal of the day at noon and a third time when he laid himself down to sleep. 
Naarada felt he was badly insulted by being pronounced inferior in devotion to this casual reciter 
of Names. He returned to Vishnu and presented his report and hoped that Vishnu would correct 
His estimate of the ryot's devotion. 


The Lord asked Naarada to undergo a test which at first appeared to be a mere whim. With five 
pots placed one over the other balanced on his head, He wanted Naarada to walk around His 
Residence. Naarada had to comply; he walked warily, slowly, with his entire attention fixed on 
the five pots uneasily resting on his head, and managed to come safe to the sacred presence, with 
all the pots intact!, He was surprised when Vishnu asked him, "Now, tell Me, how many times 
did you remember My Name while walking round?" Naarada had to confess that he had cleanly 
forgotten the Name and did not pronounce it at all. Then, Vishnu declared, "Do you realise now 
that that farmer, who is carrying the five pots of fortune and misfortune, right and wrong, and 
attention concentrated on Nature and her vagaries, is really superior because he recites the Name 
at least thrice a day?" 


Consider the cultivation for the spirit 


You clear the field of thorny plants and bushes, you plough it and water it, you sow select seeds, 
you pluck out the weeds, you fence it to keep out cattle, you spray the crops with insecticides and 
at last, you reap the harvest for which all this struggle was undergone by you. But, you must get 
busy with another type of cultivation too, for the spirit. Consider the condition of the field of 
your heart; it is overgrown with the thorn and bush of lust, anger, greed and envy. Remove them, 
root and all. Do not allow the land to lie fallow. By continuous good works, plough the field and 
fill the field with the water of prema. Select the naama (divine name)---seed that appeals to you-- 
-and sow it on the field; discipline is the fence which will guard the growing crop against cattle; 
virtue is the pesticide. Fostering the field with great care you can bring home the precious 
harvest of Aananda, in due course, provided you do not hurry or get desperate. 


Life is a three-day fair 


Do not divert all your energy to the cravings of the body, which ages every minute and is fast 
moving towards the burial ground. Life is a three-day fair; it is like a flower' that fades by 
eventide. Old age, when physical charm is lost and when you have to depend on others for 
everything, will soon be upon all. Prepare then for death, have the equipment to meet it calmly, 
joyfully, with quiet resignation to the Will of the Lord. You cannot get it in a trice, when you 
want it; it is the result of long years of practice. See the hand of God in everything that happens; 
then, you will not exult or grieve. Then your life will be one continuous puja or dhyaana. 


I want all of you to develop brotherliness, the feeling of cooperation, of love and respect of each 
for the rest. Then, this village will be without parallel. Why foul the atmosphere with hatred and 
envy, when each of you ploughs his own land and eats his own food? You get into all this bother 
because you do not know how to fill your time with beneficial activities. In order to promote 
harmony, the first rule you must follow is control of the tongue. Do not give all your thoughts 
immediate expression; select, ponder, and then, speak out. Speak softly, sweetly, without malice 
in your heart; speak as if you are addressing the Sai who resides in every one. "Use the tongue to 
recite the Name Of the Lord; use the feet to go on pure and holy errands; use the heart to contain 
pure thoughts and feelings. 


Today, towns and cities with their noise and glare are attracting every one towards them; but, 
villages are far more desirable. Reverence for holy things, for elders, for moral codes are still 
strong in the villages; in the towns, men have become as quarrelsome as dogs. Their speech, 
thought and feeling have all been standardised into patterns. There man is considered to be an 
animal that has to be petted or tamed, fed and clothed and housed and humoured. The Divinity of 


Man, the fact that Maanava is but Maadhava (man is but Divine), is ignored in the rush and 
worry of town life. 


Sign of the genuine devotee 


So, learn to be happy and content where you are; do not run towards towns hoping to secure 
happiness and contentment there; have inner riches, not outer acquisitions. Make your home the 
seat of virtue, of morality, of love. Control anger and greed. That is the sign of the genuine 
bhaktha, not unrestricted speech and movements. You may claim to be a devotee and declare 
yourself as such, when you speak; but, unless your egoism has gone and you love all equally, the 
Lord will not acknowledge your devotion! From this day, keep all personal animosity away from 
your conduct. Feel that you are kith and kin of each other belonging to the same family bound 
together by love and cooperation. Live amicably, live joyfully, undisturbed by faction and 
hatred; for, some day or other, you have to give up all that you hope to gain through these 
factions and these hatreds. Listen to the advice of the elders of the village' they have your welfare 
in their minds. 


Keep this Aananda of today in your hearts and develop it by means of manana or rumination. Do 
not run about excitedly and fall on the car as I move out, causing injuries to women, old men, 
and children. Bhakthi must be disciplined and controlled. It is because you have that disciplined 
bhakthi (devotion) that I have come to your place. 


Samara, 26-3-1965 


16. Types of road to God 


This vast sea of aspirants who seek darshan and yearn to learn about spiritual matters may be a 
new experience to the organisers of this function; and even to the authorities in this city; but, let 
me tell you, it is nothing strange to me. Nor is the message I bring anything new! It is the 
message of the Vedhas, tested by time and guaranteed by the experience of many who put it into 
practice. This precious message is being forgotten and neglected for want of persons who 
continue to bring it to your attention; man is busy with so many trivialities that he has ignored 
the essential purpose of his sojourn here. The very hands that should have cherished this message 
that can save man in India as well as in all countries of the world, those very hands are trying to 
crush it and deny it. 


This is the very reason that the people of India have lost the peace and joy that is their heritage; 
they have lost the key and are suffering. Like the rest of humanity, they are struggling in despair, 
to squeeze a little joy out of the objective world which is subject to change and chaos. How can 
joy result from adharma, out of the neglect of morality and virtue? Dharmo rakshathi 
rakshithaha---Righteousness guards its guardian. 


Without the control of the senses, man is like a horse without blinkers, he is like a bull that 
refuses to yield to the yoke; his saadhana is a waste of time and energy. The special feature of 
man's composition is that he has discrimination, detachment and synoptic intellect; he can 
discover Truth and be fixed in it, and gain unshakable Peace. 


Three stages one has to go through 


The Vedhas have three sections Karma, Upaasana and Jnaana. Karma is the section dealing 
with the activities that strengthen and purify faith and devotion; Upaasana is the section dealing 
with worship of the personal God, the dedication Of all acts to the Highest, the Inner Witness, 
the surrender of all skills and experiences unto the Immanent Power---these two endow man with 
one-pointedness, ekaagratha. As a result of these two, consciousness is able to recognise in a 
flash jnaana (knowledge)- --the fact of its being Divinity itself. All these three stages have to be 
gone through. The seed has to be sown, the sapling protected, and the fruit tasted. Instead of this 
one-pointedness, we have many-pointedness now: one-pointedness for coffee, another for the 
cinema, a third for the radio and so on! This has led to undue care being bestowed on hollow 
unrealities, and to the neglect of things which feed and foster the sense of holy discipline. 


This is the reason why irreverence, injustice and corruption stalk the land. Every one condemns 
this state of affairs. The very persons who accuse others are ready to commit those wrongs when 
they get the chance. They are not toughened enough to resist the temptation. No one stands firm 
for they have not found the rock of the Aathma; they have no knowledge of their Aathmic reality. 
The teaching of all the scriptures and of all the sages and saints is to recognise the Aathma within 
and to build life upon that bedrock. 


What is required for the discovery of that bedrock? You must be able to withdraw into yourself 
and meditate on your own true nature, and the truth of Nature. It is the privilege of every child of 
India to know the science of this inquiry and to practise it. It is the right of every seeker from 
every land. This is the wealth that will really save man from misery; all the rest are mere 
shadows, mirages, castles in the air, they drop with the body that valued them. 


Acts that promote irreligion 


Really speaking, it is the so-called aasthikas (believers, religious people) who by their conduct 
are promoting naasthikam (un-belief, irreligion) in the land. They revel in finding faults in holy 
men, in telling tales against elders, in cynical criticism and hollow ritualism. All this recoils on 
them. Whether it is Raama, Krishna, Raamakrishna, Sai Baba, Meher, Haranath or Sathya Sai, 
do not revile, even if you cannot revere! This flood of hatred and blind criticism is caused by the 
craving for fame, for followers, for pomp and display, for imposing buildings and rich devotees. 
Where love alone should be evident, hatred prevails. In Kaakinada, I know there is rivalry 
between one Sai Baba temple and another. There is competition for collecting funds and 
celebrating festivals. By these, you are fouling the sacred name itself. 


You must have observed that I do not mention in any place about your worshipping Sai Baba. On 
the other hand, I strongly discourage attempts to build temples in My Name. I ask them, instead, 
to renovate and utilise the temples existing all over the country. This "Mandhir Construction 
Scheme" has become a profitable spiritual business. People go about with lists of likely victims 
and squeeze donations out of them in My Name. In this business, a great deal of back-biting, 
malice, envy and greed are generated and it ends with factions blaming each other in every place. 
Why go about doing Sainatha publicity or Meher publicity or Haranath publicity? Pushing your 
master's name forward easily degenerates into tarnishing the name of the other man's Guru or 
God and this leads to defaming both master and disciple. 


No short-cuts in the spiritual field 


Do not believe if any one comes to you and declares, "Sathya Sai Baba came to me in my dream 
and commissioned me to do publicity for him. Please help me as far as you can". I do not 
commission any one for such work, either in dream or while he is awake. Such men are cheats; 
treat them as such, without mercy. There are others who show you something and say. "Sathya 
Sai Baba likes me much; He gave this," and then, they beg for help. This is an insult to the 
Divine Principle itself. 


There are no short-cuts in the spiritual field. As a matter of fact, bhakthi is even more difficult 
than jnaana; for, to get the attitude of "Thou" not "I" one has to surrender completely to the 
Higher Power, personified as the Lord. The ego has to be fully curbed; the faith that "not even a 
blade of grass can shake in the wind without His being aware of it and thus having caused it". 
has to be implanted in the mind. Bhakthi is not a leisure time job. Erase sensual desire; clear the 
heart of all blemish; then, the Lord will be reflected therein as in a mirror. 


Spiritual discipline is very necessary; it is not enough if you place charcoal over the cinders; you 
must fan vigorously, so that the charcoal too is changed into burning cinders. It is not enough if 
you are at Puttaparthi. You have to engage in saadhana to win My Sankalpa (resolution). You 
may ask why the burden of the consequences of acts done in previous births cannot be easily 
brushed away; no, they can be destroyed, as a heap of cotton is burnt by a spark of fire. 
Jnaanaagni dagdha karmaanam---the spark of jnaana will destroy the effect of karma, in a trice. 
These consequences are like the cloud of dust that follows a bus, when it runs on a fair-weather 
road; when the bus reaches the gravel road or the metalled road, the dust is less, but it is still 
there. When at last it enters the tarred road there is no dust. The mud track is karma; the metalled 
road 1s upaasana; the tarred dust-free road is jnaana. By human skill and effort it is possible to 
reduce the burden of past karma. 


There is no higher wealth than Peace 


You do not wait with folded hands for the cup of coffee to cool down to the required warmth; 
you ask for an extra cup and you start pouring the coffee from one cup to the other, is it not? The 
same anxiety, the same saadhana has to be shown in spiritual matters also, to take in the 
beverage of Divine Grace. Subbarao spoke of Jesus now in his speech. Jesus was great because 
He showed the value of saadhana and the equanimity that can come through spiritual discipline. 


There is no higher duty than truth, no higher wealth then shaanthi. Give up the senseless pursuit 
of western fashions and western moral codes that are demeaning the Divinity of Man. Cultivate 
the virtues of reverence and humility. Now, I must close, because since three hours so many 
thousands of you have been sitting in this hot sun, without even a stir or a whisper. This is 
Prashaanthi; this is real devotion. In spiritual matters, the more we subject ourselves to 
discipline, the more joy and peace .we are able to enjoy. 


The Principal of the Engineering College made all arrangements for this vast gathering at a very 
short notice; the students of the College have under his leadership served you in a very 
disciplined manner. For their tireless activity and for the aananda they helped you to derive 
today, you must be thankful to them. Really, among present day Colleges, this Kaakinada 
College has impressed Me by the spiritual urge evident among the students. Students are the real 
promoters of the prosperity of future India. They must cultivate strong virtues and be 
courageous, enthusiastic helpers of society. If their future is planned well, in both material and 
spiritual fields, they will shine and earn a great name for the country. 


Kaakinada, 26-3-1965 


Life is a market. 

In life, giving and taking, 
bargaining and speculating, 

is a part of the game. 

Life has 

its ups and downs, 

its profits and losses, 

its joys and sorrows, 

depreciations and appreciations 
and balance sheets. 

But the giving of bhakthi (devotion) 
exchanging for mukthi (liberation) 
is the most powerful business for all. 


SHRI SATHYA SAI 


17. This joy and that 


This ancient fort is a reminder of the evanescence of earthly glory and the essential futility of all 
efforts to achieve worldly glory and conquests. These walls and bastions were once the symbols 
of power and wealth; now, they are symbols of the fickleness of fortune. They have themselves 
become pathetic ruins, teaching you that Time is the greatest conqueror. Everything material 
undergoes change; nothing can remain the same. Today merges into tomorrow; it is itself the 
consequence of yesterday. It is a constant flux, samsaara, the flow of Time, the flood of change. 


Really speaking, this Fort built centuries ago for purposes of defence and aggrandizement has 
realised its goal today, when this vast gathering of eager seekers meets under the shadow of the 
walls to hear from Me the message of Sathya, Dharma, Shaanthi and Prema. The kings of 
Pithaapuram have clone many meritorious acts of charity, encouraging the study of the Vedhas, 
Shaasthras and scriptures, constructing and maintaining houses of worship and temples. Acts 
such as these will never go unrewarded; good seeds sown must sprout 


and yield. Many scholars have flourished here and I must reveal to you that I came here today 
primarily because of the Prema that Vaaranaasi Subrahmanya Shastri bears towards Me and that 
I bear towards him. The fact that in spite of the very short notice of My arrival at this place on 
my way to Yelamanchilli, you have come here in thousands, is to be ascribed to your yearning 
for the higher life and your earnestness to contact the Divine. I know this already. This too is a 
reason for my stopping here for some hours. 


My message of Prema 


The beaming joy on the faces of this vast multitude is the food that I live upon; I am refreshed 
when you are happy and content. My thirst is quenched by the joy which lights up your eyes. 
Your aananda is My aahaara (food). I do not feel like talking to you at all, for I desire only to 
communicate to you My Joy and to get into communion with your Joy. This mutual fulfilment is 
the essential thing; talking and listening are subsidiary. Moreover, this visit was thought of just 
while we were starting from Kaakinada and you have all gathered at this late hour of night; so, I 
am not quite pleased at this hurried affair. I shall certainly come again and be with you longer 
and confer on you more Joy. 


I shall leave one message for you to ruminate upon, that is the message of Prema. Love is God, 
God is Love. Where there is Love, there God is certainly evident. Love more and more people, 
love them more and more intensely; transform the love into service, transform the service into 
worship; that is the highest saadhana. There is no living being without the spark of love; even a 
mad man loves something or somebody intensely. But, you must recognise this love as but a 
reflection of the Premaswaruupa, (the embodiment of Love) that is your reality, to the God who 
is residing in your heart. Without that spring of Love that bubbles in your heart, you will not be 
prompted to love at all. Recognise that spring, rely on it more and more, develop its possibilities, 
try to irrigate the whole world with it, discard all touch of self from it, do not seek anything in 
return for it from those to whom you extend it. In your daily affairs, do not create factions, or 
revel in harted. See the good in others and the faults in yourselves. Revere others as having God 
installed in them; revere yourself also as the seat of God. Make your heart pure so He can reside 
therein. 


The best and the simplest karma 


The consequence of karma can be wiped out only through karma, as a thorn can be removed 
only by means of another. Do good karma to assuage the pain of the bad karma which you have 
done and from which you suffer now. The best and the simplest karma is the repetition of the 
Name of the Lord; be ever engaged in it. It will keep out evil tendencies and wicked thoughts. It 
will help you radiate love all round you. 


The sages of ancient times divided karma into vikarma (that is intentionally done) and akarma 
(that is done without any intention to gain the consequence). Follow the latter and you will save 
yourselves from suffering. All other activities---the earning of wealth, of reputation, of fame and 
publicity--result in suffering. Gain internal peace, internal joy; that can be done only when you 
act without an eye on the gain. The act must be its own reward; or rather, the act must be 
according to the prompting of the God within, so that its consequence is left to Him. Practise this 
attitude consistently and you will find great Peace welling within you and around you. 


Pithaapuram, 26-3-1965 


Be in the World 
But let not the world be in you. 
SHRI SATHYA SAI 


18. Maanasa Sarovar 


For three years the people of Yelamanchili have been persuading Me to come to their village and 
give darshan to the people of this area, and at last, their wish has been fulfilled. I see about fifty 
thousands have gathered here. This chance to grant you joy has come this day; for, everything 
has its proper time and cause (kaalam and kaaranam). 


The Pandit spoke of ‘matham' and how it has become quite frequent for people to change their 
religion, from one to another, without knowing the principles of either or even without any 
attempt to follow the principles of the one they already know. Matham means opinion, 
conclusion, point of view. "/thi me matham," (this is my religion) it is often said by disputants, in 
Suthra literature. So, when mathi (intelligence) changes or grows or deteriorates, matham also 
suffers a change. That is only natural. Even among the followers of one matham or religion, 
since mathi and its standards are different, all are not endowed with the same faith. So, there is 
no use following reason; very often reason follows the dictates of prejudice or predilictions; one 
must follow the dictates of the rishis who were above all pettiness and egoism. They say, [thi 
Vedhaanusaasanam: “this is what Vedha enjoins." They do not even claim it to be their 
discovery. Chithshakthi (Grace), revealed to them the basic truths for the progress of man. 


The same God who revealed, out of His Grace, the Vedhas, has to come again and again, 
whenever people seek to pitch their petty intelligences against the Eternal Intelligence. The petty 
intelligences are but the bond-slaves of the senses; they lead man astray, fascinated by the 'will- 
of-the-wisp' of sensual pleasure. The Vedhas, on the other hand, beckon them towards eternal, 
undiminishable joy; but man does not pay heed. He wanders in the dark, seeking in the outside 
world what he has lost in the inner world of the spirit! 


Spiritual food given by the Vedhas 


The scriptures lay down various stages of spiritual development and the rigour of the discipline 
for each stage is tuned to the level reached by the aspirant. As a child is fed on breast milk for 
some months and then, on cow's milk, and later given bread and crisp bitable bits when the teeth 
have grown---so too, man is given by the Vedhas spiritual food suited to digestive development. 
In the early stages, the jnaana of the Unity (which is misread as Diversity) cannot be grasped. So 
bhakthi or upaasana is recommended. Bhakthi comes naturally for it is only the expansion of the 
love that is inherent in man. To get grounded in bhakthi, good activity, good company, good 
listening and good behaviour are essential. 


Look at the self-control and humility of Lakshmana. When the ornaments (thrown over by 
Seetha while being carried through the sky by Raavana) were placed before him by Raama and 
he was asked to identify those whom he could recognise as Seetha's own, Lakshmana could 
recognise only the 'toe-rings' of his sister-in-law! He said he used to see them when he fell at her 
feet in reverence, as the first duty of the day. As regards the other personal ornaments and jewels 
of Seetha, he could not say anything, for he had never lifted his head and looked at her. How 
many brothers can claim today that depth of reverence towards their sisters-in-law? Now, young 
men behave rudely, they peer at girls insultingly, they follow them along the roads and make life 
miserable for the girls. Or look at Dharmaraaja, who preferred the life of a step-mother's son to 
the life of either Bheema or Arjuna (!) when the Yaksha offered to grant him the life of any one 
of the four who were dead--Bheema, Arjuna or the stepmother's children, Nakula and Sahadeva; 


his magnanimity saved the lives of all four! Who will act so today when faced with such a 
choice? 


The essence of Vedhic teaching 


There is now no love among even uterine brothers and sisters, what to speak of step-brothers? 
This high moral standard once ensured individual progress and social cohesion. Now, both are 
missing. The body---the tongue, the ear, the eye---are all being misused by man. Only wild 
beasts inflict terror; only cattle get frightened; man is neither and so he should not do either. Man 
is truly incapable of fear, he is the embodiment of Love; he is a child of Immortality, he is the 
temple of God. That is the essence of Vedhic teaching, as found in the Upanishads. 


Love has first to gladden the home. There is no love now between the elders and the youngsters 
in the home; children do not revere parents. This moral decline will certainly undermine unity 
and strength. Moral decline is worse than military decline; it will lead to greater disaster. If you 
always repeat the idea of "naadhi, naa "("mine, mine"), how can you be useful to others? 


Uy 


Sacrifice is the 'salt' of life; yaaga or thyaaga is the secret of peace and joy. 'Go' means "indriya' 
or the senses; so, the word 'Go-paala' means, he who controls the senses. And, why should they 
be controlled? So that they may not stand in the way of thyaaga or sacrifice. All the senses are 
self-centred, egoistic. They must be educated to be "inward-directed", towards the Aathma which 
is Universal. That is gained by trusting to Go-paala by entrusting the senses to Him. Every one 
must pass through sath-karma or good deeds, into the realm of expanding Love and from Love 
he learns the lesson of sacrifice, of dedication, of surrender to the One Overlord. This takes him 
on to faith in the supremacy of Godhead, everything else being but His shadow, His being the 
One and Only Reality. 


I ask for purification of hearts only 


Since such things have happened in this region, i must tell you one thing more. There are many 
Swaamis and Gurus who go round from place to place, with the avowed object of collecting 
money from their devotees. This is a heinous act, especially for Sanyaasins (renunciates) to 
engage in. Many persons have also started using My name for the purpose of collecting money 
for various purposes or material. If such men come to you, send them back with the admonition 
that they are doing wrong. I ask for bhakthi, shraddha, saadhana (devotion, faith and spiritual 
discipline)---purification of hearts--that is all. Only beggars ask for money; I will never associate 
Myself with the temporary, the tarnished, the tawdry, and the mean. Then, there are some who 
proclaim that Iam "coming upon some one" and speaking through them! They pretend to be My 
mouthpieces and communicate to others My advice and My suggestions, as if I have ‘authorised’ 
them or as if Iam Myself telling so through them. Now hear this. I never speak through another; 
I never possess another or use another as a vehicle of expression. I come direct, I come straight, I 
come as I am, to confer peace and joy. 


I do not accept from you flowers that fade, fruits that rot, coins that have no value beyond the 
national boundary. Give Me the lotus that blooms in your Maanasasarovara---the clear pellucid 
waters of the lake---of your inner consciousness; give Me the fruits of holiness and steady 
discipline. I am above all this worldly etiquette, which enjoins you to see elders with some fruit 
or flower in your hand. My world is the world of the spirit; there, values are different. If you are 
happy, with faith in God and fear of sin, that is enough "service", enough kainkaryam for Me. It 
pleases Me so. In the East Godaavari District and hereabouts, persons who claim to be 


"possessed" by Me are appearing recently in large numbers, with their own gangs of brokers and 
agents. Order them out, wherever you come across them. Do not yield to their tactics and lower 
your own dignity as devotees of the Lord. 


Yelamanchili, Vishaakhapatam Dt., 27-3-1965 


Struggle to realise Aathma to visualise God,' even failure in this 
struggle is nobler than the success in other worldly affairs. 


SHRI SATHYA SAI 


19. Pandits have the keys 


This region is called Konaseema, the Delta, the Endland; it is famous as the home of traditional 
scholarship in the Vedhas and the Shaasthras; it has a large number of Sanskrit Schools even 
today and the number of pandits versed in Vedhic lore still following the rigorous discipline laid 
down by the Dharmashaasthras (religious scriptures) is large enough to win the respect of the 
people of this country. When the region has won fame as the repository of spiritual learning, it 
must also be taken to be the teacher of detachment from the pursuit of artha and kaama 
(wealth/power and sense pleasure), both of which have to be restrained and regulated by dharma, 
the first among Purushaarthas. It is indeed a great misfortune that, in this Kali Age, India which 
upheld the Adhyaathmic (spiritual) ideal for centuries and stuck to it, in spite of economic and 
political upheavals, is entering the competitive struggle for existence, irrespective of the moral 
code which the ancients laid down. 


Dharma is the swaruupa (form) of India; Sathya is its swabhaava (innate quality). But most 
people today feel that happiness is to be sought for, by whatever means. This evil doctrine has 
caused discontent among all classes, and in the attempt to relieve the discontent, further adharma 
is being resorted to. This is the situation that prompted Me to found the Prashaanthi 
Vidwanmahaasabha; many pandits of this region are members of this Sabha. They have now this 
great chance to use their talents in the service of humanity and to spend life in fruitful activity. 


Activity results in either joy or grief, due to the attachment with which it is done. ‘I’ and "mine" 
are the two fangs of the serpent; pluck them out, then, you can safely handle it and play with it. 
You need not give up activity. As a matter of fact, you have to be intensely active. In this 
Karmabhumi, it is only through karma that you can transcend karma. Birds and beasts are not 
aware of this secret; man alone can select and accept the karma that is most profitable for 
liberation from the chain of karma. If he seeks happiness by satisfying the demands of the sense, 
he learns that happiness won by that search is inseparably mixed with misery. 


Function of the science of Yoga 


You know from experience that deep sleep gives you maximum happiness. Think over it for a 
while; have you ever, in the waking stage, experienced that degree of calm; of quiet, of 
equanimity, of happiness? That is why nidhra is said to be the nearest approximation to 
samaadhi. If even the impulses and. instincts and thought-waves dormant during sleep disappear, 
then, the joy becomes perfect and full. This happens when the Sun of jnaana illumines you. That 
drives away even the minutest speck of darkness; in fact, darkness is just the absence of light. 


There are three principles that have to be overcome before knowledge (jnaana) can dawn: the 
Physical (Dehathathwam); the Sensory (Indriyathathwam) and the Mental (Manasthathwam). 
Even the mind has to be overcome before the One can be cognised; for, the mind seeks variety 
and change; it revels in the contact with the objective world called vrittis. The prevention of 
these vrittis in the mind, of the ever-widening circles in the Maanasa- Sarovara (the Lake of the 
Mind), whenever a wish or thought or a resolution is dropped into it---that is the function of the 
science called Yoga, Union. Union of what, with which? Union of "Thath" with "thwam", of you 
and the rest, resulting in the One, without a Second. 


Make your mind cling to God 


You have met here in such huge numbers so that you may learn from these Pandits and from Me 
that "Yoga is desirable and possible." The path can be known by a little reasoning and thereafter, 
it can be trodden step by step until the goal is reached. You have come in hundreds of thousands 
from all the villages and towns for miles around, spending time, money and exertion. Take back 
this lesson from here, retain at least this much of knowledge, that attachment causes pain and 
detachment results in joy. But, you cannot easily detach yourself from activity; the mind clings 
to some thing or other. Make it cling to God, let it do all things for God and leave the success or 
failure of the thing done to God, the loss and the profit, the elation or the dejection. Then, you 
have the secret of Shaanthi and contentment. 


To get this attitude of surrender, of dedication, you must have Faith in God. This world is His 
play; it is not an empty dream; it has purpose and use. It is the means by which one can discover 
God; see Him in the beauty, the grandeur, the order, the majesty of Nature. These are but 
shadows of His Glory and His Splendour; that is why, the Vedhas have three sections or 
Kaandaas: Karma, Upaasana and Jnaana. Karma leads to the consciousness of the ever-present, 
immanent, all-powerful God. Upaasana (adoration of that God), leads to the knowledge that He 
is in all; when you experience that there is no Second, that is Jnaana! In the past, when people 
were observing the discipline which gave them shaanthi and soukhyam (peace and contentment), 
they were happy; they could not be swept off their feet by fear or disappointment. But, M.A.'s 
and B.A.'s are today unable to get jobs suited to their standards; the income is too poor for their 
own sustenance. They are helpless and unhappy; they do not help their parents or make them 
happy. 


Devotees should improve their behaviour 


The Vedhic scholars themselves have fallen victims to this rash for jobs and degrees, for their 
children too run after the glittering tinsel of a degree, which does not fill their stomachs or fulfil 
the cravings for peace and calm. They have lost faith in the Vedhas themselves; else, why should 
they discard them so fast, in exchange for a few rupees? Nevertheless, there are some, in Andhra 
Pradesh also, who preserve their faith and who are serene in the face of everything. They are not 
known to newspapermen, they are not news; they live apart and happy. Nobody worries about 
them and they do not worry any one. 


People, nowadays, know the history of film stars, while they are profoundly ignorant of their 
own history. Pay attention to your real needs; cultivate virtues that will add joy to you and 
others, not habits that ruin your health and empty your purse and lower you in the estimation of 
others. I want bhakthas (devotees) to improve their behaviour and character. It is no good 
attending the temple and sharing loudly, with cymbals in your hands, in the singing of devotional 
songs there. They are but external signs of enthusiasm. God watches the bhaavam, not the 
baahyam..--the thought power behind, not the pomp above. 


The two injunctions of the Vedhas are: Sathvam Vada, Dharmam chara---Speak the Truth, 
practise righteousness. Sathkarma (good deed) is the tree, Sad-bhaava (good intention) is the 
root. The Sadbhaava is that which serves your best interests, viz. lasting happiness, final 
liberation from the cycle of birth and death. Take the mind off the sensory pleasures and fix it 
upon God; then, bhaava gets pure; whatever you think or say or feel will be for the good of 
yourself and others. 


Some people laugh at spiritual aspirants and call them idle visionaries who seek something that 
is not tangible, that cannot be weighed and valued! How can any one ignore the foundations and 
be content with the knowledge of the walls and the terrace? You can be free from fear only when 
you are confident of the strength of the foundation. You do not see your breath or weigh it; but, 
breath is the very sustenance of life. The unseen is the basis of the seen. If you are caught up in 
the meshes of the seen, you cannot know the importance of the unseen. 


India is the Guru of Humanity 


This ought to be known to every one, not the mountains of information that is filling the head 
now. The key for liberation is contained in the Vedhas and these Pandits have it. That is the 
reason why Bhaarath lays claim to be the Guru of Humanity. If that claim is to be respected, 
Indians must themselves live the life. Every one must be immersed in Shaanthi (peace), derived 
from dedicated work, work offered as worship, work done with no desire or attachment for the 
benefit therefrom. But, what do we see today? There is no peace in the home or in the mind, no 
cordiality between brothers, no reverence for parents, no love between partners. You must first 
achieve victory at home; you can then call on others to strive for victory. Mere devotion is not 
enough. It must be regulated by reason and discrimination. Or else, it will not flow along sane 
lines. Reason makes devotion a sharp instrument. Reason out the purpose of your sojourn on the 
earth, the purpose of the intelligence with which you have been endowed. Then, devotion will 
encourage you to fill your days with steady, controlled activity, towards Liberation. 


Amalaapuram, 28-3-1965 


20. Undernourishment and the cure 


We hear many people lamenting the state of affairs and talking of the spread of injustice and 
falsehood, of cruelty and hatred in the world and in this country. This is like shouting for a drug 
after the illness has set in; prevention is much more beneficial than cure; sometimes, the cure is 
rendered more difficult on account of the complications due to long neglect. 


The present decline in morality is due to decreasing faith in the Vedhas, Shastraas and 
Upanishads in our country. Some people are in the habit of condemning all those who do not 
believe in the Vedhic Dharma as atheists; but, there are no atheists at all among men. An atheist, 
when he declares 'There is no God," is first affirming. "There is", and then, denying something 
that he has affirmed. Though he may deny God, he does not deny Love or Reverence or Wonder 
or Awe; these are all expressions of theistic faith. The 'atheists' too yearn for a goal; they 
remember a place from where they came, though like all others they are unable to locate it. They 
know they are proceeding to a place where they get full happiness; they pine for it; they dream 
about it; they have their plans for reaching it. They have like all others the hunger, the pain, the 
discontent. 


Just as the doctor diagnoses the origin of the pain, the aspirant goes to a guru who is an expert in 
the different forms of mental yearning for the goal. Every one feels the urge to see and know 
Unity, where there is multiplicity; this knowledge is contained in the Brahmasuuthra, which like 
a string penetrates all the different beads of the same rosary. 


There are different approaches to God 


All the thousands of individuals here before Me now are so many thousand flowers, strung on 
that one thread, Brahman. In Brahman, you all find unity, the unity you have missed, because 
you were engrossed in your own separateness. That is the truth; all else is delusion; you have let 
this unity go un-noticed, because the men who know it are neglected, their declarations are 
dismissed as depraved! There is no dearth of sustaining spiritual food in our country; but, yet, we 
have this pitiable spectacle of a people starving in the midst of plenty. 


The ills of the country are due to under-nourishment; not so much under-nourishment of the 
body, but under-nourishment of the spirit, want of spiritual exercise, neglect of spiritual regimen. 
Allowing the malady the fullest scope, people are engaged in reciting the names of the drugs in 
the pharmacopoeia! They do not make any attempt to take the drug in. The means of conveying 
into every home and village the life-giving waters of the spirit have all dried up or got choked 
up. That is the reason why undernourishment, with all its attendant symptoms of debility, 
nervous disorder and mania is so rampant today. 


'Matham' is a matter of mathi---religion is a matter of the intelligence. Unless you are able to 
equalise intelligence, you cannot equalise religions. There are different approaches to God for 
different mathis, suited to the likes and dislikes of individual temperaments. Some are work 
minded; some are contemplative, some are exterior-oriented; some are prone to examine the 
inner consciousness, more than the external. 


There are disciplines suited for each of them in the Sanaathana (ancient) scriptures: Bhakthi, 
Jnaana, Karma, Upaasana, Yoga, etc. The milk in which butter is immanent, implicit in every 
particle, in every molecule, is the One. The curd into which it is broken by fermentation has the 
butter separate, but yet as part; that is the One, with the Second, as an integral part of it, 


Vishishta - adwaitha (qualified non-dualism). The churning separates the butter clearly and it is 
rolled into a ball, it is kept floating in the liquid from which it has been taken. The two have 
become clearly distinguishable; they are spoken of as two, dwaitha (dualism). These are but 
three names for three stages of the same substance. 


People should strengthen the hands of Pandits 


The One is the reality. It is not to be found exclusively in one place only, however hoary the 
place. Neither Arunachalam, nor Thirupathi nor Kedaaram can claim to be the place where It is 
to be found. Its address is given in the 61st shloka of the 18th chapter of the Bhagavad Geetha: 
"in the heart of all." 


Pandits who are versed in the sacred scriptures of this land are the real leaders of the people, for, 
they can show the path of self-realisation, which is the highest duty of man. They must, as the 
sages and scholars of old used to do, counsel the rulers and guide them in the path of Dharma. 
But now, the rulers keep them afar, while the people shower ridicule on them! If they now cater 
to the low demands of the rulers, they will degrade the ideals which they must cherish and 
promote. It requires a great deal of integrity and courage for them to escape the temptations of 
the situation and stand firm on the principles laid down for them in the Shaastras. Hence, there is 
not much hope of the Pandits being used by the rulers. There is every chance of the Pandits 
themselves losing their grip over fundamentals, if they approach the rulers for patronage. So, the 
people themselves have to take up the task of strengthening the hands of the Pandits and of 
deriving the utmost benefit out of these repositories of ancient learning. 


Faith in Almighty is the strongest foundation 


The Pandits themselves are a divided lot; they have lost the capacity for united effort. I am 
speaking so plainly here, for this Kona Seema is the nursery of many learned Pandits. My task is 
to bring together the Pandits and make them aware of their noble heritage and their still nobler 
duty, to develop contact with the rulers who will benefit by the impartial wisdom of the 
Shaastras and the Upanishads and the Vedhas, seen and recorded by masters of detachment and 
thus establish peace and harmony in the world. I will certainly succeed; only, you have to be 
patient for some time. 


The mansion called life must be built on strong foundations; the pursuit of artha, and kaama---of 
wealth and welfare, of all desirable objects---must be regulated by the standard of Dharma. 
Dharma fosters those who foster it--"Dharmo rakshathi rakshithah." The strongest foundation is 
ever-present Faith in the Almighty. Some may ask, "If He is Almighty, why then is he not 
patent?" Well He reveals Himself only to the person who yearns for the answer, not the one who 
puts questions out of impudence or ignorance. 


He will be patent only in the transparent heart, the heart that is not clouded by egoism or 
objective attachment. The string of the rosary is patent only in the sphatika or the crystal beads, 
not on the coral or rudraaksha beads. Though the string runs through these latter also, it can be 
seen only by splitting those beads; that is the meaning of the story of Hiranyakashipu who split 
the pillar; when he did that, he could see for himself the Lord who is the core of every object and 
being. 


Coconut-breaking is symbol for destroying the ego 


Try to break the coconut, as it comes from the tree; the shell is covered compactly by a coat of 
fibre. You cannot break the nut by hitting with a crow-bar even; take off the fibrous armour; 
breaking it is very easy. When you take a coconut to be offered in the temple, you take it, after 
removing the fibre; then, you offer it to God, breaking it into two halves. This is the symbol for 
destroying the ego and surrendering to the Lord. So you have to remove the fibre of desire for 
sense-objects and then, go before the Lord devoid of kaama, and krodha (desire and anger); there 
you declare that you are ego-less by breaking the coconut into two. You will be accepted then, 
not before. 


This conquest of the ego is a very hard task; years of persistent effort are needed to get success in 
this endeavour. For getting a Degree you struggle in the University for a number of years, poring 
over books night and day; how much more difficult is this examination, success in which 
guarantees lasting happiness, and escape from the weary round of birth and death. Some people 
have their minds and senses like cotton balls and a spark of jnaana will set them ablaze and they 
achieve victory! Some others have them like dried faggots; they take longer time, but, victory is 
certain. Most have minds and senses like green fuel and even the raging fire of jnaana may be 
put out by the onslaught of the moisture contained in them. 


Make your mind and senses like clean finely ginned cotton. How can you do this? By contact 
with scholars and those who have experience in spiritual practice, like these pandits here. Listen 
to them; revolve their teachings in the. depths of your memory; practise what they advise; yield 
gladly to their guidance. Start now. Scholarship starts with the alphabet; learn A and B, C and D 
and go on until the end. The margosa fruit may taste bitter at first but, there are many who enjoy 
eating it, for, steady practice makes them sweet to the tongue, especially when you get convinced 
that they are good for curing illness. 


Success or failure is your own making 


For example, when you sing Naamaavalis (songs containing Lord's names) try to roll on your 
tongue the sweetness of the meaning also. On the basis of the material you can ascend to the 
spiritual; only, you must know that it is possible, and develop the faith that removes all 
hesitation. When you sing of Raadha, as you did just now, "Raadhaa maadhava nanda laala!" 
do not imagine that Raadha is a woman and Krishna, a man. You can become Raadha, now, here, 
if only you know what Raadha represents. She is the basis (aadhaara), which is worshipped 
(aaradh) as everflowing stream (dhaara); she is the very basis of the world, which is another 
name for God Himself. Have it as a dhaara (flowing from your tongue), the Name of the Lord; 
avoid all lesser talk. On the Ocean of Milk, (the Ksheerasaagara) of the Pure Mind, plant the 
peak of Mandara, steady faith, in the unity of creation; take the serpent, Grace of the Lord 
(Ishwaraanugraham), and use it as a rope to churn the ocean; churn it through meditation and 
spiritual discipline (dhyaana and saadhana); then, you are able to acquire the Nectar---the 
essence of Vedha, of spiritual knowledge, of spiritual experience. 


The Lord is impartial; you punish yourself, you reward yourself. A young student who was 
nervous about the examination in the English language went to a temple and prayed to God for 
making the questions easy for him. He promised in exchange a Thanks giving Feast. It happened 
so, and he could answer all the questions to his entire satisfaction in half the time allotted for the 
purpose. He did not give in the answer sheets immediately; he called for extra sheets and wrote 
down a list of articles he must purchase for offering the Thanksgiving Feast to God: jaggery, 


rice, cardamom, ghee, etc. He had many more minutes at his disposal; he noted down the cost 
and finding it beyond him, he revised the list and found many items which he could score off. 
While busy with this flippant assignment, the bell rang and the supervisor ran up to him to 
collect the answer sheets. In the hurry of the moment, he handed over the sheets whereon he had 
written the list of articles and through sheer miserliness, scored out most of the items! So, the 
young man failed; it was all his doing. God is impartial; He is like the thermometer that cannot 
misinterpret, or exaggerate or falsify. Success or failure is your own making, you decide your 
destiny; the Lord has no share in deciding it. 


You have the appetite for spiritual truth 


It is already very late, you have to go to your places. There are many old people, women and 
children among you. I can understand the trouble you have undergone out of your Love for Me, 
coming long distances, walking or journeying by boat or bullock cart, denying yourselves food, 
sleep and rest, struggling even for drinking water and a little shade under a tree. Seeing this vast 
ocean of humanity, one gets assured of the value, the continuing value of the heritage of 
Bhaarathavarsha. You have moved enmasse from your villages like ants from ant-hills. Why? 
Because you have the hunger for God, the appetite for spiritual truth. 


I must tell you one thing now, for this has grown into quite a sensation, especially in East 
Godaavari, around Amalaapuram! I am not blaming any one or laughing at any one; but the truth 
must be made public. There are quite a few who declare that I am coming "upon them" (1), 
possessing them rather, and they sway, shake and shiver and say all kinds of things, claiming that 
I am speaking through them or that they are under My Influence. They answer questions and 
‘foretell’ things and perform many tricks to collect money or things from people who do not 
know Me and My reality. All this is sheer deceit; it is a disease that is spreading. Do not 
encourage it; nip it whenever you see cases of people suffering from it. Such people have agents 
and brokers; scotch them first and their puppets will disappear. They wear the dress of holiness, 
but their greed announces them as vile. People say 'Baba appeared to me in a dream and 
commanded me to do this and that, to you, to collect so much from you etc., etc. Do not give 
heed to such cheats; punish them in the way they deserve. That is the advice I have to give you. 


Amalaapuram, 29-3-1965 


It is easy to conquer anger through love, attachment through 
reasoning, falsehood through truth, bad thoughts through good, 
and greed through charity. 


SHRI SATHYA SAI 


21. The rare chance 


The one advice that I give you is this: Do not foul a single moment of your precious life. Spend it 
in the most useful manner, to earn joy for yourself and others unsullied joy. You have come in 
lakhs from all the villages of this Delta to this Amalaapuram. There are many among you who 
are too old to come to Puttaparthi to have My darshan (audience) and many are suffering from 
bodily ills, which do not allow them to push forward to the front lines here. Have some 
consideration for them; stand where you are; do not push and try to rush forward. I am on this 
high terrace; wherever you are, you can see Me. 


There is work now only for the eye and the ear; not for the tongue. When you have the chance, it 
is wise not to miss it. I have come in order to confer aananda (bliss) on you. I am prepared to 
stand here, until all of you have your fill of aananda. Why then should you raise this clamour? 
God can be felt and experienced only in the deepest silence. All noise must subside; then, His 
Voice can be heard clearly. 


The tongue is the token of true breeding. "Hey! you clout! Did you hear soldiers march this 
way?" a man asked a blind farmer. Minutes later, another person accosted him, "Blind man! 
Open your mouth and tell me whether you heard the noise of soldiers marching this way." Later, 
a third voice approached him, "Sir, did you hear some soldiers marching along this path?" At 
last, another person came near and placed his hand upon his shoulder, "My tear man, please tell 
me whether you heard men marching along this road?" The blind man correctly described his 
interrogators later in the order of their appearance as a soldier, a Captain, a Minister and the King 
himself. The words reveal the breeding of the speaker. 


The silent man has no enemies 


The tongue is the armour of the heart; it guards one's life. Loud talk, long talk, wild talk, talk full 
of anger and hate--- all these affect the health of man. They breed anger and hate in others; they 
wound, they excite, they enrage, they estrange. Why is silence said to be golden? The silent man 
has no enemies, though he may not have friends. He has the leisure and the chance to dive within 
himself and examine his own faults and failings. He has no more inclination to seek them in 
others. If your foot slips, you earn a fracture; if your tongue slips, you fracture some one's faith 
or joy. That fracture can never be set right; that wound will fester for ever. Therefore, use the 
tongue with great care. The softer you talk, the less you talk, the sweeter you talk, the better for 
you and the world. 


When you crowd so thick and rush round, pushing people forward and backward, it is a good 
chance for thieves and pick-pockets. You stand lost in your own luck; your attention is 
concentrated on Me, while the attention of those others is concentrated on your purse or golden 
necklace. 


I know the agitations of your heart and its aspirations, but you do not know My Heart. I react to 
the pain that you undergo, to the joy that you feel; for, I am in every heart. I am the dweller in 
that temple. You must know Me better, for how can a telegram sent in Morse code be understood 
by the receiving office, when the receiver does not know Morse? The prema (love) that you give 
is of the same Morse Code, as the aananda (bliss) I give you. 


Bhakthi must be directed along the channels laid down by reason. Your bhakthi is making you 
behave wildly like the furious flood of a river. You crowd round this place where I am residing, 


night and day, in sun and rain and raise Jais (cries of victory), to persuade Me to come and give 
darshan. This is not correct, My dears! This is not bhakthi; this is not prema. Of course, even 
without your making all this noise, I gladly come on to the terrace and give you the darshan you 
ask for, in your heart of hearts. That is the voice I hear most; not the voice coming out of your 
throats. 


Use your life to spread joy, not grief 


Most of the clamour that you cause is due to wrangling for space, the stronger ones insisting on 
their rights and even robbing others of their rights. This is a place where you must try to help, not 
hinder; this is the atmosphere of perfect peace, prashaanthi. Do not behave here as you do when 
you gather elsewhere. There is no scope here for envy or malice, hate or competition. When 
kaama (intense desire), and krodha (anger) are rising in hot flames from the heart, how can the 
cool rays of shaanthi (peace), sathya (truth), ahimsa (non-violence) and prema (love) emanate 
therefrom? This human birth is a rare chance! Use it for spreading joy, not grief. Of course, it is 
natural for man to resent, to grow angry. But you should not allow anger free and furious scope. 
The raging floods in the Godaavari have to be restrained by bunds, anicuts and dams, so that the 
water may reach the sea, without scouring the fields on either bank. You too must set limits to 
your own anger and hate, and honour those limits. 


You know that first you have to plough the land, feed it with water; then, sow the seed, pluck out 
the weeds, guard the crop by a fence from cattle and goats and wait patiently for harvest time. So 
also, the heart has to be ploughed by means of virtues fed with the water of Divine love, before 
the seeds of Divine Name are sown; later, the field has to be watched and weeds have to be 
destroyed it is best to prevent the cattle of unsteadiness and doubt, by putting up the fence of 
Discipline; then, the Name of the Lord will flower into Meditation and the rich harvest of 
Knowledge can be reaped. 


Now, you are allowing the precious fertile field to lie fallow; the field of the heart is infested 
with thorns and weeds; it yields no joy to any one. Cultivate the heart and garner the grain of 
Aathma-aananda. That aananda is your heritage; it is yours for the asking. But, you do not know 
how or whom to ask. Ask grief to quit and aananda is patent, as the very basis of your "I-ness", 
your Sath (existence) and Chith (consciousness) It is very simple. Grief will disappear as soon as 
you discover its real origin, for it has arisen out of ignorance only. 


Amalaapuram, 9.30A. M. 29-3-1965 


Let no one suffer 

the slightest pain 

as a result of your 
thought, word or deed. 
Let this be your saadhana. 


SHRI SATHYA SAI 


22. The code of correct conduct 


Indescribable joy and glory come within the reach of man when the Universal Immanent 
Principle decides to assume human form. You are all standing in the scorching sun for hours and 
so, you can realise what it is to be offered a cool drink when you get parched in the heat. The 
Avathaar comes to offer this cool comforting drink to parched humanity. Mere repetition of the 
words, Sathya, Dharma, Shaanthi and Prema will not quench the thirst; the words rice, curry 
and rasam (soup) will not satisfy hunger. How can you get aanandam from words? Practise 
them, that is the message that the Avathaar brings, with all the authority that It can wield. What 
you have heard and seen must be spoken out, without exaggeration or abridgement; that is sathya 
or truth speaking. Of course, when the mind is controlled, the intelligence is sharpened and 
purified; you see only the one everywhere, in everything, at all times; then that one becomes the 
only Truth, which you see, hear and speak of---for, there is nothing else to see or hear. 
"Sathyaannaasthiparo dharmah"---"There is no duty higher than Truth." 


Some people raise the question, "How can we make a living if we adhere to Truth?" Well, you 
cannot escape death, whatever way you spend your days. It is far better to die, adhering to Truth, 
than die, sliding into falsehood. Do this duty to yourself first; then, consider the rights of others. 
Falsehood looks easy and profitable; but, it binds you and pushes you into perdition. Purify your 
feelings and impulses; do not worry that others are not doing similarly. Each man carries his 
destiny in his own hands. You will not be bound, because others are not freed. You should strive 
for your salvation, at your own pace, from where you started when you were born into this 
chance. One coconut garden may have a thousand fruits; the neighbouring garden which belongs 
to you may have only eight hundred. But, you are rich only to the limit of the number that grew 
in your garden. You have no right to the fruits grown on another's tree. Earn yourself, for 
yourself. Two people may have two acres each in the same village; but, they reap different 
quantities of grain, depending on the skill and attention they bestow, and the quality of the soil, 
the seeds and the manure they use. 


Do not give up your code of duties 


For each person, there is a code of conduct laid down in the Shaastras (scriptures), according to 
age and status, the profession adopted, the stage of spiritual attainment reached, the goal of life 
accepted, etc. Do not carp at the behaviour of others, or at the efforts they make, to get 
consolation and courage amidst the turmoils of life, for the path that one has chosen, the Name 
and the Form of God he prefers! Also do not give up your code of duties and take up that 
recommended for some one else. Arjuna was overcome by human sympathy when he refused to 
slaughter his kith and kin and seek regal luxury through such sinful means; he preferred being a 
mendicant. Then, Krishna had to remind him of other levels of dharma, which override the 
purely natural dharma. They were: (i) the Varnadharma of a Kshatriya, which insisted on his 
fighting the forces of evil and which branded withdrawal from the battlefield as a heinous sin; 
(11)Aathmadharma, which urges you to concentrate on the Aathmic reality, and not worry about 
defeat or success, fame or dishonour, but be an instrument in the hands of the Lord. 


Along the lines already familiar to you, continue the worship of the God of your choice; then you 
will find that you are coming nearer and nearer to Me; for, all Names are Mine and all Forms are 
Mine. There is no need to change, after you have seen Me and heard Me. That is what I wanted 
to tell you, since the Shastri spoke to you of Avathaars and their significance. 


You have stood too long in the hot sun: if I speak longer to you, I would only be adding to the 
misery; so, I shall stop now. Go to your several places now, without rushing or pushing, causing 
trouble and confusion. There are children, old persons and many sick people among you. So, be 
careful. 


Amalaapuram 11.30 A.M., 29-3-1965 


Unity is Divinity. 

Purity is Enlightenment. 
Let us live together 

Let us experience. 

the gifts of things together. 
SHRI SATHYA SAI 


23. Rope round the neck 


This land is the Karmakshetra, the land where all activities are sublimated into saadhana 
(spiritual practice) and the goal of merging in the Absolute is ever held before the particular, 
individualised man. But, this land has started pursuing the mirage of sensory pleasure and 
worldly happiness, forgetting that only spiritual success can give peace. Though people discover 
soon that no one can be happy fully, by getting rich or becoming an expert in any science or 
master of any art, or building up a healthy physique, still, they seek happiness through these 
means alone. What has to be done is to develop detachment step by step, dwelling on God and 
fixing attention on His grace, power and wisdom. 


The Vedhas have three sections karma, upaasana and jnaana. Karma or activity engaged in with 
a dedicatory attitude, regardless of the benefit it may result in, builds up purity of mind. 
Upaasana or systematic worship of God contemplating on the glory and splendour and His 
manifold expressions equips you with concentration. These two lead to a clear grasp of the 
Reality, that is to say, you acquire jnaana (spiritual wisdom); the veil of delusion drops and 
glory stands revealed. Now, these three are neglected and even scoffed at. Know that no object is 
per se pleasing or joygiving. It is you that find it so, the joy is in you. You pour it on the object 
and ascribe it to the object, by the trick of projection. If an object itself is capable of producing 
joy, it must be welcomed by all at all times and places. This is not the case so far as any object is 
concerned; the joy is only projected on it by the mind of the individual. 


The innermost core of man is pure 


Delusion has to die; then only does the cycle of change end. Then only is man liberated from the 
bonds of birth, life and death. Call it saayujyam (reaching the goal, or merging in the Absolute or 
Universal), or Brahmasaakshaathkaaram or Aikyaanusandhaanam (becoming one with Infinite)- 
--the names may differ, but the finish is the same' Every mortal must attain immortality; for he is 
Amrithasya puthrah, a child of Immortality. That is why I dislike people condemning themselves 
as sinners, ‘born in sin, living in sin, fundamentally sin itself’. 


I always remind such people that it is treason to their inner reality to heap such stark falsehoods 
upon their own heads. This becomes clear when you address any one of these people as, "Hey! 
Sinner!" they will turn round in anger and threaten you with hard pounding. Why? Because that 
word 'sinner' wounds their innermost core, which is Nirmala, Nischala, Nithya and Nisswaartha 
(Pure, Fixed, Eternal, and selfless). If you hit a tamarind fruit when it is green, the seed too will 
get the impact; but, hit it with a stone or hammer when it is ripe, the seed will not get hurt. Be 
like the seed in the ripe fruit; feel that you are unaffected by the blows of fate; when you get the 
jnaana that you are not the body (deha) but the Self (dehi), then. no blow can hurt you. 


The Shaastri versed in Vedha spoke of Yama, the God of Death, having kaama and krodha, as 
the leader of the army with which he attacks mankind. But Yama is not an identifiable person 
riding on a buffalo, with a noose in his hand for roping in the souls of those whom he wants to 
drag to his realm. No. The God of Death is called Kaala, Time. Time is the God of Death; time 
knows no mercy; when the time is over, you have to leave; each day, your span is shortened by 
24 hours. He is as omnipresent and omnipotent as Time. He does not run a rope factory to drag 
into his home all the millions who die. The dying person has the rope already spun and twisted 
round his neck. He has only to come and pull! He spins the rope by every act of his, during all 


the years of his life, now or in the past. All acts done with egoism, self-interest, an eye on the 
beneficial consequences, the fruits, give a little more length, a stronger twist, to that rope. 


Know the true values of yaaga and yajna 


Good deeds done in a dedicatory spirit do not add to the length or strength of the rope. They give 
shaanthi and santhosha (peace and happiness) in plenty. Why, you had a very good illustration 
of this just today. The final offering of sacred objects in the sacrificial fire of the Rudrayaaga 
was done here at 10 a.m. and, there was a welcome downpour of unexpected rain at 10-05 a.m:! 
Those who do not know the true values of yajna (Vedhic ritual of sacrifice) and yaaga (ritual of 
worship) ridicule these rites and shout that they involve the loss of precious ghee and fuel, which 
could be put to better use. They do not realise that the food they themselves consume is a 
colossal waste, for, they do no good to the world or for themselves. Their cigarettes are a waste, 
indeed, a dangerous waste; their bush coats, the films they, saw, the hours they listened to the 
radio are all waste. 


You see a sculptor working away at a rock with his chisel and you condemn his work of chipping 
pieces as waste of precious time and valuable stone. You do not know that one day a form of 
Divine beauty will emerge. You see the ryot scatters valuable seeds on the mushy field; you 
blame him for wasting eatable stuff! You do not realise that he will harvest it a hundredfold in a 
few months. Your criticism is born of ignorance and shortsight. The rain that fell this morning 
and surprised everyone did not surprise Me, for it is the inevitable consequence of the yaaga. It 
is a special science, which these Pandits know; honour them for it. 


There are many who talk cynically of even Sathya (truth), Dharma (virtue), Shaanthi (peace) and 
Prema (love). They say that if you stick to truth nothing can be got done, that a little lie helps 
much; that Dharma is what suits the need of the moment; that if you practise Shaanthi, you will 
only receive all the blows on your own back; that if you become famous as a man of prema, the 
entire village will squat on you and share your hard-earned wealth. Therefore, they conclude, 
you will be a fool if you decide to practise these four virtues. 


Practising what you preach is Dharma 


But, just think a little and you will find out the absurdity of the criticism. It is the lie that requires 
intelligent bolstering, clever avoidance and deeper memory! It is much easier to speak the truth 
and be done with it. What you have seen or heard or done, speak about these just as you saw or 
heard or did! And, what is Dharma? Practising what you preach, doing as you say it has to be 
done, keeping precept and practice in line. Earn virtuously, yearn piously; live in the fear of God, 
live for reaching God---that is Dharma. 


Minister Narasinga Rao quoted in his speech some officer-friend who spoke to him about the 
dangers that lurk in a community that suddenly gets a lift in the standard of living, due to some 
dam or industry being established in their home land. He said planners must first pay attention to 
the control of the recklessness and the spirit of bravado and crime that accompany sudden access 
to riches. Of course, this is a universal experience, this association of vice with wealth, of madha 
with dhana. The poor are rich in devotion to God; Kunthi prayed that her difficulties may 
continue, for they keep the Lord ever in her mind. Riches are a great handicap in the path of 
spiritual progress. So, though you may be rich, do not cultivate attachment to the bank account or 
to the mansions, cars and comforts you command. Have them as if they are given to you on trust 
by the Lord. 


Listen to the epics and correct yourself 


The Vedhas are called Sruthi, because they have to be heard with attention. Sravanam (listening) 
implants ideas: it inspires you to take stock of your condition, to note your deficiencies and 
failings and even your excellences and merits. The ear has great potentiality to correct, reform 
and guide. Listen to the Raamayana and the Mahaabhaaratha; it is a chance that many are losing 
now. Then discover for yourselves the greatness of Raama, Krishna, Meera and Raadha. Dwell 
on their lives, the example they place before you; correct your habits, your outlook, your attitude 
to the world, to society, to yourself. That way lies salvation. The ear fills the head; the head 
directs the arm; the arm acts. So, hear good things; do good things; share good things. That gives 
joy and contentment. 


Speak softly, kindly; that is dharma. Give generously, wisely; wipe the tear and assuage the sigh 
and the groan; that is dharma. Do not simply throw money at the needy; give with respect and 
reverence’, give with grace. Give also with humility. Try to live with others harmoniously. This 
is called Kaliyuga (the Iron Age), but it has become worse. It has become Kalahayuga, the Age 
of Factions! Factions in the family, the village, the community, the country, the nation, the 
world. The root cause of all this is the emphasis on the ego and the desire for cheap and 
temporary pleasure. 


Earn the riches of jnaana, as Janaka did, through association with the great sages of the day, as 
Dasharatha did from Vasishta. These Brahmins, scholars in the Vedhas, have in them the jnaana 
you need; they have preserved them in spite of poverty and neglect. They have been scorned by 
the rulers and the ruled, the people and the politicians. Their knowledge heaped in their 
'godowns!' is fast getting useless through not seeing the light. You might be wondering why I am 
taking them with Me from place to place and even sympathising with Me for the task that I have 
taken upon My back, for, in your opinion, it is a lost cause. No; it is not lost; the Avathaar has 
come to see that it is retrieved and restored. I derive Aanandam through them and with them. 


To condemn all is unjust 


Do not judge them by their dress or their exterior. There may be among them a few who do not 
live up to the high standard they profess; that percentage is like the few small stones found in a 
bag of rice, small in quantity and easily recognisable. Do not condemn the clouds which shower 
sheets of pure water, because after it falls to the ground some water gets dirty. To condemn all is 
unjust, untrue and unkind. Take My own instance. I never exult when I am extolled, nor shrink 
when I am reviled. Few have realised My purpose and significance; but I am not worried. When 
things that are not in Me are attributed to Me, why should I worry? When things that are in Me 
are mentioned, why should I exult? "Sayveeki Sarvamu yes, yes, yes," (for Sayee it is always 
s.s.s.). If you say, "Yes; you are the Lord," I am the Lord to you, if you say "No", I am No to 
you. 


I am Anaanda, Shaantham, Dhairyam (Bliss, Equanimity and Courage). Take Me as your 
Aathmathathwam (Reality of Aathma); you won't be wrong. Resolve from this day to see only 
the good in others, to develop the good in yourselves. That is the best saadhana. Discard anger, 
hate, envy and greed; do it by dwelling always on the Name that summarises and signifies the 
Glory of God. Nurturing anger and hatred in the heart is like carrying a pot with many holes for 
bringing water. 


Foster depositories of ancient wisdom 


During these days when I am going about in the East Godaavari District, people have witnessed 
the devotion and sincerity of lakhs of men and women. Spiritual thirst is present in a large 
measure; the tendency to run towards the. Divine is here. It is latent, but strong. Just as when the 
showers of rain come, the bare plains become green with grass, since the rain feeds the roots 
underground, My presence has made the spiritual yearning lying dormant in your hearts, sprout 
in profusion. That yearning has made you ignore the importunities of hunger and thirst, and 
given you great joy and contentment. 


.Foster these repositories of our ancient dharma and wisdom, the Pandits. You run to them only 
when you need a priest for. marriages or other ceremonies. You never care whether they are fed 
or clothed, whether they have enough opportunities to study the scriptures, to teach their 
children, to live as teachers and guides of society. Honour them, make full use of them. 


Rajahmundry, 30-3-1965 


Life is just a chance 

to see for yourself 

your beginning and your end.. 
SRI SATHYA SAI 


24. Be above and beyond 


The seed grows slowly into a huge spreading tree; so, too, through tiny acts, soft words and kind 
deeds, man elevates himself into a Divine Being! The worst action is to do the opposite of what 
you preach’ to deny by the hand what you dole out of your mouth. If you cannot act up to your 
declarations, keep quiet; do not go about advising and advertise that you are hypocrites. Do not 
preach dharma (virtue) while decrying it in deed. Dharma is steady, unchanging; it can never 
decline. What happens is: those who have to practise dharma decline in faith and steadfastness. 
By practice is a man judged; not by the precepts that he pours forth. One speaker was just now 
giving a list of sages and saints who were born in this District in the past; but, you must ask 
yourself the question: "What use have we made of their experience? How have we benefited?" 
When that list is being elaborated upon, you have to hang down your heads and lament the 
decline in spiritual development! You have to ask, "How have we deserved this heritage?" 


The President quoted an English poet who said that life is like a pastime for God, who crushes a 
butterfly, after playing with it for some time. 'They kill us for their sport"; "Life is a tale told by 
an idiot", he quoted. He said what Western poets spoke of Fate as blind and cruel and had 
recently developed despair regarding human progress, in spite of technical and technological 
advances. This only reveals that they have no deep experience, no illumination. 


Separate yourself from the grief 


The experience of saints in this country is different. They have known (and you have also to 
know) that the body, with a form and a name, is just a temporary habitation. Form and name 
make anything temporary. You hear of the Lord giving darshan (audience) in the temple, 
wearing a diamond-set hastham (hand) ! That means the Lord is conceived as having a Name 
and a Form, which are limitations and therefore, temporary, attached to a particular manifestation 
only. Form and Name are needed for experiencing sukha (pleasure) and sukha involves dukkha 
(grief) also; they are the obverse and the reverse of the same coin, this side and the other side of 
a sheet of paper. 


Grief is caused, as joy is caused, by the attachment of the senses to objects; once you know that 
you are not the senses or the mind, but He, who operates the senses and wields the mind, you 
cross the bounds of pleasure and pain. The President of India had a recent domestic bereavement; 
but he did not import that grief into his role as President, did he? No. The duties of the President 
were performed without any hindrance or loss of interest. Separate yourself from the grief; you 
are the President of your Realm. The senses and the mind, with all the attendant impulses, 
desires, attitudes, etc., are your servants, instruments that have to carry out your orders. 


The Vedhas teach you this truth. Once, as part of a marriage procession, an elephant was also 
pushed along: a wicker-elephant, life-size. People looked at it in wonder and some even dared to 
find fault with it, saying the legs were too short, the ears were inadequate, etc. But, the thing was 
filled with crackers and, in a few moments, when it was lit, the whole contraption exploded in a 
blaze of brilliantly-coloured shooting stars with a tremendous bang. Why should there be so 
much criticism of a thing which, like the body, will soon go up in flames? The body is but an 
instrument for a high purpose, the realisation of the Glory that fills the Universe, of which you 
are a fraction! 


Road to God is filled with immense hardships 


Use all the talents of your senses, the intelligence and memory, for this purpose. Transform 
values, sublimate desires; let the higher always overrule the lower. Like the ass that carries 
sandalwood, without knowing anything more than its weight, man too carries the burden of 
wordly worries, without being aware of the fragrance which he can really get from the very 
burden on his back. The senses will drag him away from the higher purpose, so they must be 
kept under strict control by rigorous training. Without this mastery over the senses, all the 
elaborate puja (ritual worship), all the long hours of dhyaana (meditation), all the vows you 
observe, are mere mummery. 


True devotion must not get dispirited; nor elated or satisfied with lesser gains. It must fight 
against failure, loss, calumny, calamity, ridicule and against egoism and pride, impatience and 
cowardice. Read the lives of Jayadeva, Thukaraam, Raamdas and Sakkubai; go through the 
stories of how the Gopees calumnied Raadha; then, you will realise the immensity of the 
hardships they underwent, when they travelled on the road to God. You find now a number of 
people who open their mouths wide in admiration of Western countries who prepare rockets to 
travel to the moon and go round the earth. They may circle lakhs of miles in space, but, they 
know not how to proceed half an inch more towards their neighbour, or brother; they do not dare 
explore their inner reality, though they are eager to explore the outer illusion! 


The Truth that is in all beings is also in you. Search for that; discover that unity; that source of 
courage, of love, of wisdom. You do not realise that it is He who digests the food that you 
consume, for, as He says, in the Geetha, "I am the Vaishwaanara---fire that is in the bodies of all 
beings and digests the four types of food they eat." That fire digests food, but, it is careful not to 
destroy the stomach itself! He is the basis of all activity, though Himself unconcerned. 


Do not allow the world to get into you 


Be like the lotus, unattached to the slush where it is born and the water in which it is bred; the 
merits and demerits earned in past births is the slush, where the jeevi is born; maaya or the 
enticing illusion called world is the water, which sustains; but do not allow that enticement to 
affect you. Be above and beyond the earthly attachments like the lotus. Know that though you 
may be in it, you should not allow the world to get into you and affect your sense of values. 


It is the stilted sense of values that makes you carry a radio receiver strapped to your shoulder, 
even when you come here! This has become a fashion; sons-in-law now try to extract a transistor 
radio from their fathers-in-law, as quickly as possible. There was a young man in a big town; it 
so happened that his father arrived on a visit and was received at the railway station by the son 
himself. They were going home in an auto-rickshaw when the father, already confused by the 
roar and noise of the traffic, noticed some one carrying a small rectangular box, strapped on his 
shoulder. He saw many more such boxes, carried proudly by young men, fashionably attired and 
walking in a strut, with nonchalant gaze. He asked his son what they charged in the town for a 
shave and when the son answered, a half-rupee, he was surprised that it was so cheap. 'These 
barbers going about with those boxes strapped on their shoulders are so well dressed and rich 
looking that I thought they must be charging five rupees at least," he said. The poor man thought 
the transistor radio sets were barber's boxes. In fact, many who carry them and tune in do not 
know the A B C of music, eastern or western, nor do they know an iota of geography or history 
or politics to appreciate the news. They carry watches on their wrists, but do not know what hour 


it is, they have to stretch their wrists before those sitting next to them! They cannot read a watch, 
nor have they any engagement to keep. All this is but needless multiplication of misery! 


Know that which, if known, makes known everything that has to be known. This was the advice 
given to Uddalaka by his Guru, as mentioned in the Upanishads. You are the core, the centre of 
your world. Without you there is no world for you. Unless you know yourself, you cannot know 
the world which is your creation. Now, you ask every one you meet, "How do you do?" But have 
you ever asked the question to yourself, "How do I do?" You ask every third person, "Who is 
he?" But, have you asked the first person, "Who am I" and searched for the answer? That is what 
the Vedhaantha teaches, that is what these Pandits are eager to tell you. 


Steady enquiry is essential 


Some of you may ask, what is the use of telling all this to such vast gatherings, things that have 
to be whispered in the ears of ardent seekers only. Well, how do you know that there are not 
many such here? I know there are many who will treasure what they have heard to-day; they will 
ruminate over it; perhaps they will remember it, when the need for it becomes urgent and acute; 
they will then say to themselves, "Ah, Baba told us this that day when we heard Him at 
Rajahmundry." Nothing that is experienced will go to waste. It will shape the course of events; it 
will change attitudes and habits; it will purify and clarify situations and outlooks. That is why I 
want you to read the Bhagavad Geetha; this learning of the Geetha is like learning eetha 
(swimming). Eetha saves you from drowning. Geetha saves you from drowning in the trecherous 
flood of worldly desire. The Geetha is the real purpose for which the Avathaara of Krishna was 
undertaken. 


Man's four main duties 


The Geetha is His command; how can you earn the Master's Grace if you do not carry out the 
Master's Commands. If the son says, "Leave me to myself. I need no instructions from you", how 
can he expect the father to give him a share of the property? The Geetha also helps you to 
recognise the incarnations of God. Usually, when the Lord appears with Form, man is pestered 
by doubts and he actually loses the precious chance. He asks himself and all those whom he 
meets "Is it true? Can it be true?" and before his doubts are removed, he deserts the quest and 
wanders into the wilderness. Of course, steady inquiry is essential; do not be led by others; 
awaken your own reason, amass your own experience; and, decide for yourself your own path. 
Then only can you get joy in treading it; if you are forced to take a path by others or persuaded 
into it by some one else, then, when the first obstacle turns up, you will get dispirited and turn 
back. 


What exactly is your duty? Let Me summarise it for you. First, tend your parents with love and 
reverence and gratitude. Second, Sathyam vadha, Dharmam chara' Speak the truth and act 
virtuously. Third, whenever you have a few moments to spare, repeat the Name of the Lord, with 
the Form in your mind. Fourth, never indulge in talking ill of others or try to discover faults in 
others. And, finally, do not cause pain to others, in any form. 


Now, the only thing that is cheap is "man." All else have gone up in value. Man is the thing most 
defamed, most neglected. The Minister was saying yesterday that when costly projects are 
planned and finished, when the area becomes rich and prosperous the inevitable result is an 
unfortunate increase in crime and vice, because there is no plan to build up the moral stamina of 
the human community the project is intended to benefit! The community can be really happy 


only if it has fine health, steady peace of mind and intelligence valued and directed to the service 
of others. The recognition of the evanescence of the body and all things material must over-rule 
the tendency towards pride and pomp, and check avarice and ambition. 


Means have to be as noble as the end 


Whatever happens, the path of virtue should not be given up. When Hanumaan saw Seetha in the 
Ashoka Vana at Lanka, surrounded by ogresses, forlorn and helpless in the midst of her captors, 
he fell into such overpowering agony that he said to himself, "The whole world is sunk in sorrow 
since this Mother is grieving; I shall take her on my shoulder and leaping across the sea, restore 
her to Raama and make her happy." He invited Seetha to accept his proposal. But, listen to what 
Seetha replied. She resisted the temptation to escape from captivity, to reunite with her Lord, to 
rejoin her people, her kith and kin. She struck to the path of Dharma; "I should not, out of my 
own will, touch any male other than my Lord. Besides, it will detract from the glory that awaits 
my Lord, who will certainly liberate me by the prowess of his arm. If you carry me back now, 
you will be repeating the act for which we now condemn Raavana." The means are as important 
as the goal; the end does not justify the means; it has to be as noble as the end. 


The President referred to the Prashaanthi Vidwanmahaa-sabha as having been founded by Me, 
but remember, any institution or individual engaged in feeding the roots of Dharma are Mine; I 
am in every one who does good, speaks good, and thinks good. 


Rajahmundry, 31-3-1965 


If the place you must reach is very near, you can just step across; 
if the distance is more, you may need a vehicle, bullock- drawn or 
horse-drawn; for longer distances, you may require a car or a 
plane. But, the Lord is nearest to you. Slide ajar the door of 
delusion; part the curtain of ignorance; open the closed eye; He is 
right there, before you. The fog of sensual pleasure is hiding Him 
from you. Switch on the light; the darkness disappears and He 
becomes visible. 


SHRI SATHYA SAI 


25. Plenty of holy men 


Matters of the spirit are matters of experience. Devoid of the underground stream of steady 
striving for experience, man's innate divinity and holiness are fast forgotten and ignored. This 
can be regained by means of Vedhaantha (philosophy based on Vedhas) and a proper study of 
the Shaastras. Some people carp at Vedhaantha and say that it makes men lazy and encourages 
them to run away from their responsibilities; but, the first responsibility of every one is to 
himself; he is the source and centre of all his attention. 


This kind of cynical criticism has become a fashion nowdays; it only reveals the ignorance and 
egoism of the critic. They say that the Sanyaasins (monks) are like mistletoes fattening on the 
toils of others, a set of idle parasites. But, to condemn the institution of Sanyaas on the basis of a 
few individuals is wrong. Who can judge the inner urges, except the Lord? You may be misled 
by the quantity, variety and cost of flowers, or the tears flowing from the eyes, or the hymns 
sung by the tongue, or the hours of listening to divine stories that a man might have to his credit; 
but it is the resident within who knows the genuineness of the feeling. There are countless 
numbers of such devoted men and women in this country, even now. I know, because, I am with 
them. 


The person who spoke on Saint Thyaagaraaja lamented that such saints are now so rare. They are 
not rare. There are many now, alive and happy. Those who seek will be able to discover them. 
Seek the company of the good, the seekers, the aspirants, the detached. Then, you will see the 
light. Listen to holy discourses; read sacred books. Your effort and the atmosphere of the place, 
these two will lead you to success. Holy place, holy river, holy company, holy day---when these 
conjoin, it is the chance of a lifetime; make the fullest use of it. 


Be ever in contact with God 


Now, holy days have become holidays when you make merry, eat your fill, go out on picnics and 
hikes, and generally indulge in sensual pleasures, which end in dejection, disease and discord. 
The place has a subtle and powerful influence on the man. Maarkandeya held tight the Shiva- 
linga and so, Yama's noose bound both himself and Shiva; that was the reason the boy was 
saved. The story teaches you to be ever in contact with God, for you do not know when the 
noose will be thrown. Attach yourself to the Highest, call it by any name, conceive it in any 
form. But, remember, without Dharma you cannot attain it. Don't be led away into the by-paths; 
keep to the highway. 


If you yield to alpabuddhi (inferior thoughts), you will be losing the akhanda-thathwa (principle 
of the Universal). Never give ear to slander, ridicule or praise. They are all bubbles on the 
surface. They are mere manipulations of words, the magic of vocabulary, the tamash of style, the 
dance of phrases. Learn the means of winning Grace and earning purity from those who know; 
the elders, the scholars who have put their learning into practice. Don't despair; don't hesitate. 


Grace can wipe off the past; Sath-prayathna, Sath-sanga and Sadaachara (good self- effort, 
good company, good practices) can ensure happiness in future. The three cardinal principles of 
the Hindu faith are: Belief in a series of births: belief in Avathaaras of the Lord for the re- 
establishment of Dharma and the transformation of those who have strayed from it; and belief in 
karma, the fact of every activity having its inevitable consequence and of human destiny being 
shaped by cumulative effect of all these consequences. Karma is the cause of births, the jeevi 


(soul) being compelled to undergo another ordeal for clearing its accounts and becoming free of 
both credit and debit. 


Develop the inner joy that is everlasting 


You might ask, "How is it, then, that, while in this life, we do not remember any single event that 
happened to us in previous lives?" It is something like a man knowing too many languages; 
when he speaks in Tamil, no Telugu word will come to his mind; when he speaks in English, his 
thoughts will be framed in that language only. If you forget this birth, and concentrate on the 
other, then you can know. But, you seldom give up the attachment to this life! 


A volcano throws up its lava on the screen of the picture house; a dam bursts and the flood 
waters it had impounded roar along towards the sea, submerging vast states; but the screen is not 
burnt, nor does it get wet in the least. The screen is the truth; the film is an illusion, however 
realistic it was, however genuine the feelings it aroused. Know this and so direct your life that 
this knowledge is the background of all your actions. Thus, you will have great peace and great 
joy. 

With a mind full of egoism and hatred, you can never hope to have peace and joy. A tree that 
bore plenty of fruits dried quickly; some one attributed it to the evil eye of the passers-by. Others 
said, perhaps it was not watered; but, the owner asserted he was watering it adequately. No one 
could diagnose the reason, except a forest officer, who said, 'The roots have been affected by a 
pest," There was a bhaktha coming to the previous sarira (body) called Raadhika at Shirdi; he 
was always suffering misery, but, only for those who observed his external movements. At heart, 
he was supremely happy. Develop that inner joy; it is everlasting, full. The seed of the Lord's 
name has been sown 


It is now two years since the Prashaanthi Vidwan-mahaasabha was started. So, it is natural that 
the question is asked, "What has it achieved?" You will be wrong if you thought I am having all 
these Pandits about Me and that I am going from place to place with them to get publicity for 
Myself or for them. I do not need any publicity, nor do they. They have to know themselves and 
they have to help you to know yourselves, that is all. The Vedhas and the Shaastras speak only 
of this. But, you must admit, because it is patent everywhere, that a great change has come as a 
result of the Prashaanthi Vidwanmahaasabha. Hitherto, even in these parts, the audience for 
spiritual talks could be counted on the fingers of one hand, one could easily tick off the names of 
the persons who usually attend. But, look at the flood of eager humanity that gathers now! The 
appetite for spiritual knowledge has increased tremendously. 


This is some progress. The seeds have sprouted; they have become evident in the hearts of the 
people. Now, by careful fostering, the harvest can be won. The seed of the Lord's name has been 
sown in lakhs of hearts; the poshana (fostering) is your duty; its rakshana (protection) is My 
pleasure. Fostering the saplings is your duty; protecting them from harm is My pleasure. The 
Pandits too, must share with the hungry and the thirsty the knowledge that they have, the 
inspiration that they alone can give. 


Rajahmundry, 1-4-1965 


26. Matham and mathi 


Matham is a matter of mathi; 'religion' is based on the urge that moves the 'mind'; if the urge is 
divine, we have a divine religion; if it is bestial, then, the things held lovable and desirable will 
be bestial too. Join the particular with the universal, the limited with the unlimited, the river with 
the sea. This is the process called Yoga. This can be achieved through Bhakthi or Karma or 
Jnaana. 


You must develop this attitude of 'merging' with the divine in all that you do, this attitude of 
dedication, of surrender to His Will. This is the best means of realising Him. The Geetha, about 
which all the four Pandits whom you are honouring today spoke, was itself the result of Arjuna's 
surrender, his prapaththi. The Geetha does not prescribe the same remedy for all; each must get 
himself diagnosed by an experienced doctor of the spirit and then follow his advice, until he 
reaches a state of health, when he can restore equanimity to himself by his own effort. You need 
not learn all the sh/okas (verses) and all the commentaries by heart and exhibit your scholarship, 
engaging in contest with other scholars. It is enough if you put into practice one shloka, the one 
that suits your spiritual stage, that appeals to you most. That first step will itself take you nearer 
the second step, the second will make the third easier and so on until the end. 


If the cow is the representative of Dharma, then, the four Vedhas are the teats in its udder, where 
the life-giving milk is stored; the Gopaala (Krishna)milked the cow and gave it to the world, as 
the Geetha. It has to be taken into the heart. Of what avail is "medicine" if it is poured into the 
ear? It has to be taken in, so that it might act and strengthen the blood-stream. So too, there is no 
use in listening for hours to discourses on the Geetha; take the lesson in. Put it into practice: 
apply it in daily life. Realise the divinity in you, that is the lesson. 


Observe truth and justice in every act 


There are two statements in the Geetha, both complementary: Shraddhaavaan labhathe jnaanam 
(the man with steady faith wins wisdom) and samsayaathmaa vinasyathi (he who doubts 
perishes). The doubt that overpowered Arjuna was removed by the teaching of Krishna and the 
necessary shraddha was inculcated. As a matter of fact, the Geetha is a conversation between the 
jeeva and Brahman, the limited or, rather 'the idea of the limited', with the Unlimited. The 
dehavasthra is worn by the dehi: the body is but a vesture of God, who is eternal and permanent. 


Seeing one's own reality is the opening of the doors of liberation; for this, the mirror of the heart 
has to be prepared, by coating the back of the heart with sathya and dharma. Otherwise, the 
image will not appear. In every act of yours, if you observe truth and justice, then you can see 
your own reality revealed. You may say that the burden of past acts and their inevitable 
consequences have to be borne; but, the Grace of the Lord can burn that burden in a flash; the 
revelation of reality will, in a flash, save you from that burden. If you see yourself in all and all 
in you, then, you have known the reality, says Krishna in the Geetha. Therefore, you have to 
develop the same quantity and quality of Love that you have for Me, towards all others. When 
you are the Universal, where can you say, your street is or your house is? You are then no longer 
an individual; you are the Universal. Get that idea fixed in your mind. The Lord will be easily 
moved; He is like butter, a little warmth is enough to melt His heart. When Prahlaadha 
approached Him, the ferocity of the Narasimha Form of the Lord cooled down. 


Consider the welfare of humanity as a whole 


The three Pandits you have honoured today are preserving and propagating these vital truths of 
our culture for the last thirty or forty years; there are many more men of this calibre still to be 
recognised and honoured. Many people condemn Brahmins as a class and charge them with 
trying to promote their caste interests, writing the Shaastras (scriptures) and trying to have a 
monopoly of the Vedhas. But, have you considered how difficult the Shaastras have made the 
life of a Brahmin? No one will willingly impose such restrictions on so many of his own acts and 
movements, but these people have done it and tried to live accordingly for centuries, and their 
chief inspiration for subjecting themselves to this restriction has been not power or pomp, but 
"the welfare of humanity!" Consider this. 


That is the outlook of Indian culture, the welfare of humanity as a whole. That is also the reason 
why it has survived, while all its contemporaries of the past have sunk into oblivion, some 
without a trace of theft influence on posterity. This culture has stood firm because it is built upon 
the Vedhas, the authentic experience of the seers. It is only those who are obsessed by doubt that 
lose those precious jewels of spiritual wisdom; there are some who hesitate to accept good and 
useful things that others suggest, though these same people are daily taking countless other facts 
on trust! 


Imagine the enormous efforts of these seers, as a result of which the path of spiritual progress has 
been cleared by them for the good of all! Why do you not proceed along it? If you take the very 
first step, you will immediately recognise that their experience is authentic. What is the use of 
blaming them, instead of trying their prescription? But, you must be aware, of course, of your 
illness and long for a cure. 


Develop confidence in yourself 


The Geetha must be carried by this Samaaj to the villages and its message must be instilled into 
the daily lives of our people. In order that you may get the authority to do this, you must 
yourselves follow the Geetha in your daily life. Develop confidence in yourself and in the culture 
you have grown up in. There is no advertisement needed for it, it has its own inherent value and 
the proof of its value is in the shaanthi it confers and the courage it implants. 


I am sorry these Pandits, who are great scholars, did not speak longer because they wished Me to 
address you for a longer time. Whether they speak or I speak, the subject is essentially the same; 
liberation from delusion and escape from darkness, by the recognition of the light that is 
effulgent within. 


Rajahmundry Hindu Samaaja, 2-4-1965 


All good things have to be done the hard way. Ease and elevation 
cannot go together. 


SHRI SATHYA SAI 


27. Uplift of villages 


The very first function in the New Year Vishwaavasu is this vast gathering at Sathyavada, a 
veritable ocean of humanity, formed by rivers and streams from miles around, an ocean of joy, 
rather than an ocean of humanity! Man is born for the attainment of that joy, not for sheer eating 
and revelling. Real and lasting joy can be won only by a life led along the path of Dharma. 
Dharma makes the inherent Divinity of Man shine forth; that illumination is the purpose of Life, 
of the recurring sequence of birth and death. Man has in him the spark of Divinity, which is 
omnipresent, omniscient, omnipotent and immanent in the entire Universe; in order to become 
ever aware of this innate Reality, man must learn the technique laid down by the scriptures, 
revealed by the same Divinity. 


The very first lesson in the primer of this spiritual text is "the control of speech." Speech is the 
armament of man; other animals have fleetness of foot, sharpness of claw, fang, horn, tusk, beak, 
talon. But, man has sweetness of speech, which can disarm all opposition and defeat all the 
designs of hatred. Sweetness makes you Pashupathi, (Divine); harshness makes you Pashu 
(bestial). Mere outward politeness or sweetness is hypocrisy! Sincere speech must flow from real 
sweetness of heart, a heart full of love. Remove all evil from the Maanasa sarovara, (the 
pellucid Lake of your Mind), and make it a fit abode of Godhead. 


Dedicate the deed and its consequence to God 


De not aspire to be a servant of God, working for wages; you reduce yourself to that' level if you 
ask for this and that from Him in return for the praise that you offer or the sacrifice you undergo; 
even if you do not ask, if the bargaining attitude is in your mind, or, if you feel disappointed that 
God did not give you desirable objects in return for all the trouble you took to please Him. Do 
not calculate profit; do not count on returns; do not plan for the consequence; do, since you have 
to Do, since it is your duty. That is real puja. Dedicate the deed as well as the consequence to 
Him. Then you become His own, not a cooly, demanding wages. That is the highest level a 
bhaktha can reach through saadhana. That is the reason why nishkaama karma (desireless 
action) is so highly extolled in the Geetha by Krishna. 


The heart has the precious treasure of Aananda, but man does not know the key to open the lock; 
that key is Naamasmarana---the repetition of the Name of the Lord---with a pure heart. Purify 
the heart with the four instruments’ sathya, dharma, shaanthi and prema. Always endeavour to 
do good to others, to think well of them and to speak well of others. This endeavour will wear 
away your egoism and attachment to things that cater to your pleasures. Do not behave like birds 
and beasts, always engaged in earning a living or rearing a family. Struggle for higher things; use 
the higher talents with which you are endowed. 


I am glad this village has responded so well to the call of the higher things in life! All villages 
must awaken to this Vision of the Supreme. Do not be dispirited; it will happen soon. As a matter 
of fact, humility and reverence are fast disappearing in the towns; uppishness and irreverence are 
becoming the fashion there. The fear of sin has faded; there is no faith left in the towns, either in 
God or in themselves. But, these virtues---humility, reverence, dread of sin, faith in the victory of 
truth and the efficacy of virtue, the existence of an eternal everpresent witness---these are still 
existing and flourishing in the villages. People who have themselves fallen ,are now attempting 
to "uplift" the villages; people who are suffering from the mania to imitate strange cultures are 


talking of preserving and propagating the genuine culture of India which villages are still 
nourishing, and planning for the same. 


Man becomes a prisoner of his own desires 


Some consider themselves great because they have vast territory, some because they have 
finance, some because they have arms, some because they have vast populations; but, the real 
wealth, real greatness is virtue which earns the Grace of God. The Kauravas had everything that 
the world honoured and envied; arms, ambition, friends, allies, forces, riches. But, God was not 
on their side, for, they were wicked; and they reaped disaster and disgrace. All things that people 
pride themselves on having, give aanandam only when they come, but they have grief when they 
disappear, as they must some day or other. But the Grace of God is Sathya, that is to say, 
persisting without change at all times and at all places; it is Nirmala, uncontaminated by any 
blemish, full, complete, almighty; it is Nischala, unaffected by modifications. Instead of earning 
that Grace and the Aananda that flows from it, man spins a cocoon around himself from the 
sticky fluid of objective attachment and becomes a prisoner of his own desires. "I" and "Mine" 
are the two poison fangs of the cobra of worldly life. Pluck them from your make-up and you are 
no longer dangerous to society, and to yourself. 


Discover the prime purpose of human life 


I know that you have to lead an exacting life in the villages, waking with the cock-crow and 
sleeping when the birds start sleeping. Of course, you have to work for your food, raiment and 
housing and for your family, to keep all those depending on you happy and comfortable. But, I 
want to ask you a question: Is this all? Does this complete the task? What has happened to the 
prime purpose of human life, which you have earned after ages of struggle? Of what avail is all 
the long years spent in this body if you have not discovered the answer to the essential question: 
"who am I?" Know that, become masters of your own realm, the realm of the senses, the 
intellect, the feelings, the impulses, the instincts, the attitudes, the prejudices. Then only can you 
claim to have Swaraajya. When in your own household, the sons rebel against the parents and 
brother harbours hatred against brother, how can you call yourself 'master'? So, too, when your 
senses drag you in one direction and your intellect in another, how can you claim to have Swa- 
raajya? 


I must warn you against two infectious diseases that are rampant in the country now; selfishness 
and the habit of reviling others. Investigate, examine, and then you have the fight to pronounce 
judgement. Investigate, examine and then, you will realise that the self is better served by serving 
others; you will realise that there are far more useful ways of spending time, the little time that 
you have here in this life than reviling others or praising them. Rather than, concerning 
yourselves with the faults and excellences of others, care more earnestly for your faults; foster 
more carefully your own excellences. That is My advice to you today. 


Sathyavada, 4-4-1965 


28. The bird on the swinging bough 


The New year is called Vishwaavasu and you must take it as a call to strengthen your Vishwaasa 
(Faith); faith in your own Aathma, your own Divinity, which manifests itself as Love, as desire 
for immortality, as detachment, as admiration of virtue, the awe and wonder that Nature 
provokes. But, man is neglecting a grand opportunity, the opportunity of imbibing his own 
genuine grandeur. He prefers to burn the sandalwood trees for sale as charcoal, for, he does not 
know the value of the wood. The Divine he takes to be just human; the goal he has set before 
himself is the winning of suwkha and shaanthi; that is the proper thing to do, but, he stops after a 
few steps, mistaking the pseudo for the real, that is the tragedy. He believes that if he gets two 
full meals a day, a few yards of cloth to wear, and a roof over his head, with a few sundry 
superfluities, he has reached the goal; but the joy he derives is paltry, mixed with grief, easily 
turning into pain, harmful to others, full of pride, envy, malice, greed and other harmful 
ingredients. The body that is sustained on food which will not keep fresh for even a few hours, 
how can it be fresh for long? That which is made and marred cannot for that very reason be truth; 
for, truth cannot be made and marred. It is, was and will be, without any modification. 


What is the immortal part of man? Is it the wealth he has accumulated, the residences he has 
built, the physique he has developed, the health he has acquired, the family he has reared? No, all 
that he has done, developed or earned are destroyed; he has to leave them all to the ravages of 
time. He cannot take with him even a handful of earth, the earth he loved so much. If only the 
dead could take with them a handful each, earth would have become so scarce that it should have 
been rationed by now! Discover the immortal 'l' and know that it is the spark of God in you; live 
in the companionship of the vast measureless Supreme and you will be rendered vast and 
measureless. 


Consider all objects that you collect here as given on 'trust' to be used in this caravanserai, during 
your pilgrimage, in this Karmakshetra (the field of action). You have to return them when you 
leave; they belong to another. When you hold a currency note in your hand and say proudly, 
'This is mine" that note laughs at you, for, it says, "O, how many thousand persons have I known, 
who have prided themselves like this!" The body is but a tent. Don't fondle that delusion; pant 
for the dehi (indweller), He who resides therein and makes it active, makes it ponder and 
conclude and act. 


The body is but a tent for the pilgrim 


As the carpenter shapes the wood, the blacksmith shapes iron, the goldsmith shapes gold, so the 
Lord shapes in His own way, as the fancy suits Him, Prakrithi or the Created Universe, the 
Manifold, woven of Space and Time and Guna. Know that the Lord is the basis; and lose all fear. 
The tiny sparrow sits on the storm-tossed bough, because it knows that its wings are strong; it 
does not depend upon the tossing bough to sustain it. So too, rely on the Grace of God; earn it 
and keep it. Then, whatever the strength of the storm, you can survive it without harm. 


Discriminate; discriminate all the time; use viveka and vijnaana (spiritual knowledge) and 
experience of the waking stage, the dream stage and the stage of deep sleep. In the dream stage 
the senses are negated; buddhi (intellect) does not work; only the mind is the master: it creates its 
own 'world'. A tiger mauls you in the dream; a snake strikes deep into your leg. You feel all the 
pain and all the fear. How do you cure the unhappy man? There is no need to bring a doctor or a 
magician with his charms. Wake him; he is cured! He knows that there was no tiger or snake or 


bite or pain. So too, jnaana will immediately remove all the dual experiences of joy and grief, 
derived from these non-real objects. 


Sanctify every moment by holy thoughts 


You say, "I was awake," "I dreamt," "I slept soundly". Now who is this "I"? Who is this "I" that 
has none of the three stages, that persists from birth to death, that deals with the body and all the 
organs and senses, all the various feelings, impulses and experiences as 'its', ‘its possessions’, 'its 
instruments’? That 'T' is the thing to be known and once known, you must not allow your mind to 
stray away from it. 


An empty iron box gets valued when it contains jewels; the body is honoured when it contains 
the jewel of consciousness and the valuables called virtues. Life has to be lived through, for the 
sake of the chance to unfold the virtues. Otherwise, man is a burden upon the earth, a consumer 
of food. Whether you like it or not, the length of your life is being clipped every day; the Sun 
takes a day off it when He sets. You have to pay Him this tribute. You cannot get it back, 
however hard you pine for it or promise to put it, if given back, to better use' once gone, it is 
gone for ever. And how can you be sure of the day ahead? You may not live to see it. So, 
sanctify every moment by holy thoughts, words and deeds. 


Even if you have no steady faith in God or in any particular Name or Form of that Immanent 
Power, start by cantrolling the vagaries of the mind, the pulls of the ego, the attractions of sense- 
attachment. Be helpful to others; then, your conscience itself will appreciate you and keep you 
happy and content, though others may not thank you. Life is a steady march towards a goal, it is 
not a meaningless term of imprisonment or a stupid kind of picnic. Be patient, humble; don't rush 
to conclusions about others and their motives. 


You have six fires raging in you 


When fire rages, you try to put it out by throwing sand or water, and you keep a stock of these in 
readiness. But, you have six fires raging inside 'you---lust, anger, greed, attachment, pride and 
hatred. What have you in store to put them out? Keep ready sathya; shaanthi, dharma and 
prema. They will help you to scotch the flames; they are effective extinguishers. 


Each one eats to assuage his own hunger; so too each one must discover the best way to appease 
his own spiritual hunger. Do not be led away by the scorn of others or by the recommendation of 
others. Contact your own reality in the silence that you create by quietening the senses and 
controlling the mind. There is a Voice that you can hear in that silence. The true witness of your 
having listened to that Voice is your behaviour. A tree is held and fed by the roots that go into 
the silent earth; so also, if the roots go deep into the silence of your inner consciousness, your 
spiritual blossoming is assured. 


Yesterday, a very large number of old men, women and children were put to great trouble, since 
there was great rush and jostling for space. Since all were moved by prema towards Me, I felt 
responsible for all that. I sometimes feel that I should not thus move out to places, for when lakhs 
of people come, quiet becomes difficult. The loudspeakers too joined in adding to the confusion 
by going out of action. You must learn not to lose patience, but to wait and put the chance to the 
best use. 


Repalle, 6-4-1965 


You are the whole, 

the infinite, the all. 

You as body, mind and soul 

are a dream; 

but what you really are 

is Existence, Knowledge and Bliss. You are the God of Universe. 
You are creating the whole Universe and drawing it in. 


SHRI SATHYA SAI 


29. The immortal guide to immortality 


These days when anxiety casts its shadow over the land, the recollection of the birth and 
achievements of Raama acts as armour to the agitated mind. Raama is in truth the Vedhas 
personified. He is Vedhadharma in human form. Today, what you celebrate is not the birth of the 
son of Dasharatha, called Raama, but of the birth of Dharma itself. You must be happier at that 
thought; it is a double birthday. When Dharma declines, and the joy of practising it and living it 
and saturating thoughts and deeds with it, is no longer sought after, when that joy is forgotten 
and even denied, the Lord incarnates, according to the assurance He has vouchsafed. That is the 
way of the Lord. 


The arena of life is raised on four pillars' Dharma, Artha, Kaama and Moksha (Righteousness, 
Wealth, Desire and Liberation). They sustain and support. When the arena loses two and 
struggles to stand on the remaining two, viz., artha and kaama, naturally, anxiety, pretence, grief 
and greed afflict mankind. Each pillar must co-operate and complement the parts that the other 
three play. Dharma must sublimate artha, that is to say, through moral means alone should the 
means of living be obtained. Artha must be won through dharma and used in dharma. Kaama 
must be primarily for moksha; that is to say, desire must be directed to liberation from bondage, 
not to the forging of new chains or the addition of further links in the chain of birth and death. 
The first of the four, Dharma, must interpenetrate and strengthen the next two, so that the fourth 
may be attained. Devoid of the first and the last, mankind is reduced to the level of beasts and 
birds. 


Dharma subsumes all stages of life 


Artha and kaama should not be sought after, in isolation. The fact that today there is fear and 
anxiety in all sections of the people and in all stages of life, shows that men are pursuing only 
artha and kaama and neglecting dharma and moksha. It was once the pride of India that it was a 
land of peace and fearlessness, of spiritual effort and adventure, which guaranteed social and 
individual content. Now, Indians must again dedicate themselves to the revival of that way of 
living, of Dharma which subsumes all the stages of life. In this campaign, it is the duty of every 
individual, irrespective of caste, creed, sex or extent of possessions or learning, to join 
enthusiastically. For, it comes quite naturally to an Indian since it has drawn out the best in him 
for centuries and the yearning for it is in his blood. 


How are you to adopt Dharma in the process of living? That is laid down by the Avathaaras like 
Raama. That is the purpose of His coming. Dasharatha had four sons of whom Raama was the 
foremost. They represent the four Purushaarthas, Dharma being the foremost; the other three 
serve and are strengthened by Raama, who is described as Vigrahavaan Dharmah: the very 
image of Dharma. 


The difference between man and demon (maanava and daanava), is just this' Maanava or man 
has or ought to have dharma, dhama and dhaya---morality, self-control and charity. The 
daanava or demon does not have these nor does he consider them as desirable qualifications. He 
spurns them and pays no heed to their promptings. These three Dha's are essential components of 
humanness. There are as many stages of maanavathwam proceeding towards Maadhavathwam 
as there are hearts; for, all are pilgrims from daanavathwam or demonhood to maanavathwam or 
humanhood and thence, to Maadhavathwam or Godhood. The pilgrims move at their own speed 
and with the Name-Form that inspires them. 


Religion is a mode of the mind 


There are some who talk of unifying religions; but religion is a mode of the mind and there are as 
many religions as there are minds. If you can unify minds, you can unify religions; but, it is an 
impossible task. Unless the altars of all hearts are made uniform, this attempt is bound to fail. 
And it is not worthwhile. Jeevo devassanaathanam (the self and God are eternal), said the 
Pandit, now. Yes. The Brahmathathwam or the Universal Principle is nirmala and nischala (pure 
and immovable) but the Deva imagines itself to be the Jeeva. Brahman feels bound to Name- 
Form and so, it has to regain the lost awareness. This is done through Dharma. 


Samartha Raamadas appeared before Shivaji, with his usual call for alms: Bhavathi Bhikshaam 
Dehi. Shivaji realised that the Guru is God; so, he wrote something on a piece of paper and 
deposited it reverentially in the alms bag of Raamadas. "For the relief of hunger how can paper 
suffice?" asked Raamadas. Shivaji prayed that the paper may be read. The paper recorded a gift 
of the entire kingdom and all that Sivaji owned to the Guru. Samartha Raamadas replied: "No, 
My dharma is Dharmabodha, the teaching of dharma, instructing the people in the right way of 
life; Kshatriyas like you must follow the dharma of ruling the land, ensuring peace and content 
to the millions under your care." Sage Yaajnavalkya too once refused a kingdom, because he 
cared more for the Kingdom of Moksha, the realm of eternal freedom. Sage Vasishta is also said 
to have renounced a kingdom, offered him by Raama. 


That was the ideal in the past; it is only now that men pursue paths that lead them away from 
Dharma. You have allowed the treasure that the sages gave you to drop from your grasp. Though 
the medicinal root that you so badly need is lying across your path and has actually tripped your 
step, you have no eyes to recognise it and realise the value. What a pity, this! 


Look at the way Raama refused to accept the kingdom out of which he had willingly come, to 
carry out the wish of his mother, and the plighted word of his father, when Bharatha entreated 
him piteously to take it from him. Raama taught that artha and kaama should not be allowed to 
over-rule dharma and the discipline of moksha. For, fundamentally, the objects of the world are 
incapable of conferring joy. 


Good deeds will wipe out the tracising of bad 


Once when Naarada was proceeding to Vaikuntha, the abode of the Lord, he espied a yogi who 
was engaged in severe ascetic practices. The yogi prayed to Naarada to bring back from 
Vaikuntha information about the date of his becoming entitled to entry there-into. Naarada 
promised to do so. When he stood in the presence of God, he pleaded on behalf of the yogi and 
asked that he may be informed of the date. The Lord replied, "Tell him that he will be coming 
here after as many more births as there are leaves on the tree under which he is doing penance." 
Naarada felt sad and dispirited when he thought of the grief into which the yogi would be 


thrown on hearing this disheartening news. But he mustered courage to announce it nevertheless, 
for, the yogi insisted on hearning the news that he had promised to bring. 


When at last Naarada broke the news, the yogi was transported with joy; he was not dispirited at 
all. He jumped and danced in glee. He was lost in the thrill of his hope being so near fulfilment. 
All consciousness of the world disappeared from his joy-filled mind. So, the Lord himself 
appeared before Him and offered him Vaikuntha immediately. But, the Yogi said, he would bide 
his time, for, he did not like the Lord's word, which Naarada had brought, to be falsified! The 
Lord had to convince him that good deeds and thoughts and feelings will wipe out the tracings of 


bad; so, he had by his enthusiastic acceptance of the Lord's will got over the consequences of 
past actions. 


The law of karma is not an iron law; by dedication, by purification, which invites benediction, its 
effects can be modified, and its rigour mitigated. Do not despair; do not lose heart. When vices 
hold sway over your heart it becomes foul and sooty. The flames of kaama, krodha and lobha 
(desire, anger and greed) char the heart. Grace is proved by the quenching of these flames. Grace 
confers aanandam, which kaama, krodha and lobha can never confer. 


Practise the discipline laid down by Raama 


The word Raama itself indicates Aanandam. Raama is Aanandaswaruupa. In every being, He is 
the Aananda in the innermost core, the Aathmaaraama. How then are you being affected by 
grief? Because you ignore the core, you identify yourselves with the shell, the body. Today, the 
holy day of Raamanavami, you should immerse yourself in the Aathma as Dharmaswaruupa, as 
the motivator of the moral life. There is no place where Raama is not; no being to whom He 
denies Grace. He does not arrive or depart; He is immanent, eternal. So, to celebrate a Day as 
the day on which He was born, is itself a sacrilege. 


Raama for you should mean the Path He trod, the Ideal He held aloft, the Ordinance He laid 
down. The path, the ideal and the ordinance are eternal, timeless. Follow the Path, stick to the 
Ideal, obey the Ordinance---that is the true celebration. Then alone does your life become 
fruitful. Now, you worship His Form, you repeat His Name; but, you ignore His Orders. This is 
no real Prema at all. Without actual practice of the discipline laid down by the Lord to purify the 
mind so that He may be reflected therein, all else is mere show, empty ritual. 


Godhood can be reached and realised 


Running after momentary joy, people exile themselves from the Kingdom of God. The value of 
human birth consists in this; it is only from humanhood that Godhood can be reached and 
realised. Contemplate on this unique good luck today, use it not for feasting but plan your future 
so that the goal is quickly attained. Such days must be fully dedicated to thoughts of God, 
thoughts that elevate and inspire. People spend holy days as holidays, when they revel in picnics 
and hikes, watch films, play games, gamble and quarrel over a game of cards. This is entirely 
wrong. Days like Gokulaashtami, Shivaraathri, etc., must be welcomed as opportunities to 
broaden the heart, deepen faith and enlarge sympathy with fellow beings. To tarnish them by 
indulging in sensory pleasures is to insult the hoary tradition. 


I have heard many complain that it is difficult to achieve ekaagratha (one-pointedness); even 
some so-called great men have told me so. But the fault is not with the times, it is in themselves; 
they have no adequate shraddha---faith and steadiness. The steadiness they exhibit in the pursuit 
of worldly goods and worldly comfort they do not transfer to the pursuit of inner calm. They 
complain of lack of time, as if all their waking hours are now utilised for worthwhile purposes! 


I must also condemn the absence of gratitude, which is rampant today. Ingratitude is the hall- 
mark of wild beasts, not of man. Man today is all humility, all obedience until his wish is 
fulfilled. Once it is satisfied, he tries even to ruin the person who helped him realise it. This does 
not befit man. He must be conscious of benefits derived and eager to repay the debt, or at least, 
eager to avoid causing harm to the person who saved him while in distress. Maanava means "an 
individual without a trace of ignorance." But, man by his pomp and pride, his egoism and conceit 
reveals that he is ignorant of his reality and therefore undeserving of that name. 


Ingratitude does not befit man 


As far as lies in your power, do good to others. Do not sow fear in others' hearts; do not inflict 
pain on others; do not promote anxiety or grief. If you take pleasure in the pain of others, you 
only scotch the divinity in you and bring to light the demonic nature. 
"Ishwarassarvabhoothaanaam"---the Lord resides in all. He is in you as much as in the ‘other’ 
whom you try to harm. Know this and give up all efforts to ruin others. You cannot help another; 
you can only help yourself by that act; you do not harm another, you harm yourself by that 
wicked act. The attachments are different; but the inner reality is the same in you and "other." 
You will understand this when you distinguish values, the value of vishaya indriya aanandam 
and Vtshweshwara Aanandam, that is to say, the joy derivable from senses and objects and the 
joy derivable from the contemplation of the glory and the grace of God. 


Raama strove to uphold Sathya as the main plank of dharma. Whatever the trial, however hard 
the travail, He did not give up Truth. Sathyam is Dharmam. Dharmam 1s Sathyam---the two are 
irrevocably intertwined. Sathyam Vadha, Dharmam Chara, say the Upanishads. Raama will be 
remembered so long as mountains raise their heads and the oceans exist, because of this strict 
adherence to Sathyam and Dharmam. If he had argued, "Why should I be bound by the word of 
my father?" he would not have earned this Immortality. The Immortal had come in the form of 
Raama to show the way to Immortality. 


Seetha too kept up the Dharma of women. She declined to return to Raama on the shoulders of 
Hanumaan for she said, she would not of her own will contact another male; nor would she deny 
Raama the chance of proving his prowess by destroying the wicked person who stealthily carried 
away His Consort. That is the dharma of a pathivratha (chaste woman). These ideals have 
weakened now; women as well as men are tempted to yield to the convenience of the moment; 
they do not attach importance to the deeper springs of righteousness. Tree shade or tent, what we 
want is sleep, they seem to say. The end justifies the means, that is the philosophy. Fair ends 
through foul means, how can this be right? He who has to instal Raama in his heart is sheltering 
a beast therein. What a tragedy! 


Trait which man should learn from Raama 


Kausalya counselled Raama at the start of his exile in the forest, "The dharma which you are so 
scrupulously observing will guard you." That was the farewell she gave, not a banquet of tasty 
dishes. The ten-headed Raavana who held the Gods in chains could not stand up to Raama, who 
had dharma as His sword and shield. Raama was happy when others were happy. He grieved 
when others were in grief. That is the trait which He wanted man to learn. So, while avoiding 
pain from others, be vigilant not to cause pain to others, too. Then, you attract the Grace of the 
Lord, not when you contrive by tricks to harm others, or revel in the misery of others, or 
concentrate on your own happiness and progress, irrespective of the injury you cause to others. 


The grief you cause to others will suffocate you after getting hardened into hatred. It will recoil 
on your own head, with tenfold force. If you are established in Aathmatha-thwam (Reality of 
Self), you need not fear. Of course you must be afraid of wrong, of injustice, of cruelty, of sin. 
But why fear when you have the security granted by Sathyam, Dharmam, Nyaayam and 
Premam---Truth, Righteousness, Justice and Love? 


I had no intention to speak today, but I was pressed to speak for five minutes at least. I have 
spoken for fifty! I shall now give you a chance to sing a few Naamaavalis (divine names). 


Venkatagiri, 10,4-1965 


Darkness and light cannot 

exist at the same time 

and in the same place; 

they cannot continue together, 
Dhanam (riches) and Daivam (God) 
cannot be joint ideals. 

When riches are sought 

God cannot be achieved. 

If both are sought by man 

what he will achieve, 

will be neither Dhanam nor Daivam 
but the Devil. 

SHRI SATHYA SAI 


30. The basic hypocrisy 


This day, as well as yesterday, Pandits spoke to you about Sanaathana Dharma (Eternal 
Religion) and its greatness. I too shall speak only about that, for there is nothing more important 
than that Dharma for material and spiritual happiness. Sanaathana Dharma calls on you to 
revere the Aacharya, for he is seeking to save you from disaster, the flood of birth and death into 
which you are slipping, through ignorance. You have to learn eetha (swimming) to escape from 
the swollen river; Geetha or the Lord's teaching you have to learn to escape form the swirling 
torrent of birth-death. The guru points out the guri (goal) to you; he reveals the Aathma 
thathwam (Reality of Self). A man struggling in a bog cannot be saved by another who is also 
caught in its slime. Only one standing on firm ground can pull him out. So the guru must have a 
secure footing, above and beyond the slush of samsaara (worldly way). 


The rishis or sages struggled with themselves and elevated themselves into the purer regions of 
thought, to discover their own truth. They felt the thrill of that discovery and sang of the freedom 
they gained. These songs serve as sign-posts and all who derive benefit therefrom have to 
acknowledge the debt. How to repay the rishi-rna, the debt of the rishis? By study, by reflection 
on what they have sung of their liberation, by practising the saadhana they adopted, by proving 
them right out of your own experience. 


The three debts to be discharged 


There are also three other Rnas (debts), mentioned in the scriptures---Pithr-rna, Maathr-rna and 
Deva-rna---the debt to the father, to the mother and to the Gods. Once there was a great sage 
named Uddaalaka, famous for his scholarship. He had a son, Shwethakethu, and a daughter 
Sujaatha. Among his disciples was Kaholaka, a young man who was well behaved, virtuous, 
devoted to the teacher and earnest in his studies. But he could not keep pace with the other bright 
lads and so became the target for taunts. The Guru loved him all the more on account of this. 
Sympathy with his lot grew into Grace; Grace resulted in the Guru offering his own daughter in 
marriage to Kaholaka! While Sujaatha was pregnant, Kaholaka recited the Vedhas as laid down 
in the Disciplinary Rules, but within hearing of the child growing in the womb. It heard the 
recitation but, since it was already aware of the correct pronunciation of every syllable, whenever 
Kaholaka spelt a syllable wrong, it squirmed in distress. So, when the baby was born, it had eight 
bends, crooked in eight places, in fact! Naturally, he was named Ashtaavakra. (Eight Bends) 


When Ashtaavakra was still in the womb, Sujaatha had persuaded her husband to seek some 
monetary help from King Janaka to relieve their dire poverty and when Kaholaka went to 
Mithila, in the midst of a big yaaga (ceremonial sacrifice) which the king was celebrating, he had 
to stay on till it was finished; later, he was forced by circumstances to join a competitive 
disputation with a celebrated scholar called Vaanadena, and accept the terms laid down by the 
challenger, namely, whoever gets defeated in argument was to be thrown into the sea. 


Meanwhile, Ashtaavakra, in spite of his physical deformity, became an erudite Pandit full of 
intricate scholarship, even while in his teens. His father's fate was kept from the lad by both 
Sujaatha and Shwethakethu for many years, but, one day, he was taunted by some one as one 
who was ignorant of his father's fate and the sad tale was revealed to the son. Immediately, he 
proceeded to Mithila and sought entrance into the audience-hall of King Janaka. The guards 
laughed when he wanted them to report to the King that a Vedhic scholar eager for disputation 
with the court pandits had come. They slighted him for his tender age, but he said that age was 


no criterion. At last, he pleaded that his deformity, at least, entitled him to hospitality and 
sympathy. 


Parents should encourage their sons by good example 


Janaka was struck by the boy's persistence and courage; he ordered that he should be admitted 
and arranged for the disputation the boy sought! If I start telling you the absurd questions that the 
court pandits teased him with and the replies with which Ashtaavakra sparred them with, it will 
take so much time that perhaps we will have to sit beyond Shivaraathri even! Janaka tried his 
best to dissuade him; he told him that he was too young to risk death in the sea. But, 
Ashtaaavakra argued that Aathmavidya does not take account of the deha thathwam, the physical 
principle of the body. Vaanadena entered the fray with the deformed lad resplendent with 
spiritual scholarship; to the great astonishment of all, the boy gained the upper hand; the aged 
pandit squirmed under the questions; he failed; he had to be thrown into the sea; the deformed 
son of Kaholaka had triumphed over the victor who had consigned his father to the waves. The 
mother was delighted that her son had discharged the debt, and retrieved the honour of the line. 


The father must encourage the son by example more than by precept. Prahlaada told his father 
that only the parent who directs his progeny to God deserves obedience and respect. All others 
are, so far as the sons are concerned, human ogres like Hiranyakashipu. There are some parents 
who are sorry that their sons are coming to Puttaparthi and who dread that they would start doing 
puja or japam or Naarnasmana, and give up the habits of smoking or drinking or gambling, 
which they have learnt from their fathers! Such people do not know the value of sathsanga 
(spiritual company), for peace and happiness. They fail to equip their children or themselves with 
armour against the blows of fate or fortune. 


Dive deep into your own Divinity 


The Gaayathri manthra develops the dheesakthi (power of discrimination) and, so _ its 
consequence will be the giving up of evil company, and the seeking of kindred souls. If sathsang 
is not available, you can keep company with your own higher impulses and noble thoughts. Dive 
deep into your own divinity. The crocodile is happy and unharmed and it is undefeatable, in the 
depths of the lake or river. Once it sprawls on land, it becomes the plaything of man, an easy 
target for death. The depths: they are your refuge; the source of your strength. Do not stray into 
the shallows or the sands. 


You know that the Garuda bird feeds on snakes. Well, once the Garuda went to Mount Kailasa to 
pay respects to Shiva, who wears snakes on His head, arms, wrists, neck, waist and ankles. When 
the snakes saw Garuda, they were unafraid; they even dared put out their forked tongues at 
Garuda and challenged it to come near them. That was the extent of the courage lent to them by 
the place where they had established themselves. So, establish yourselves in the Aathma; no 
worry or grief or pride can harm you then. 


Several types of prema were spoken about today, but all types are based on the 'T' feeling; it is 
like a drama in a film story, a plot within a plot. You must feel that all this is just a passing show, 
that you are the central figure, the only figure, the entire figure. Thathwam asi: That thou art. 
That is this. The external world is fundamentally One, is really Brahmam, appearing as many. 
Thwam is you, yourself. And, what does the experience of all the sages tell him? What is the 
profound discovery embodied in the wisdom of the Vedhas? Thath is thwam, thwam is Thath; 
there is no second, there is only One. 


Play your role as the puppet does 


If you act or feel or talk contrary to your nature you demean yourself; you deny your reality. The 
Brahmathathwam (Reality of Brahmam) is Vimalam, Achalam--.Pure, Unshakable; be pure and 
unshakable. It is thriguna rahitham, devoid of the three qualities: dull, active or balanced; it is 
pure consciousness. You too must not be agitated by the storms of feeling, or the fog of dullness 
and sloth. Play your role, as a puppet does; the unseen Director unfolds the drama, which He has 
willed. 


Once it happened that a village drama, Harishchandra, was put on boards, with Harishchandra 
and his son, Lohithaasya, selected from one of the two rival factions and Chandramathi being 
acted by a man from the other! Lohithaasya fell dead, bitten by a cobra, as required by the drama 
and Chandramathi the mother had to wail. Every one expected the actor to do that very 
realistically; but, since the boy belonged to the rival party, Chandramathi refused to weep! This 
led to a minor riot. The 'puppets' had deluded themselves into attachment. They had failed to 
remember that they were acting 'roles'. This is the basic hypocrisy; claiming to be a character in 
the play, but, not speaking the lines; exhibiting emotions, going through the movements and not 
making the role a success. 


Many pandits claim to be exponents of the Vedhas and Shaastras, but it is not what they teach 
that tells, but how they live. Many sing the glory of the Lord, but, few live in His constant 
Presence and in the constant awareness of that Glory that fills the Universe. Udipi Krishna!, they 
sing; but, they don't make their hearts Udipi, so that Krishna may come and be installed therein. 


Revere all human beings as your Lord 


There are certain special hours when you have to perform Sandhya and repeat Gaayathri. This is 
very good discipline. Just before the Sun rises, the morning rite has to be gone through. 
Jonnalagadda Sathyanaaraayanamurthy described very poetically the calmness, the colour, the 
eloquent silence of those hours, the waking birds and flowers, the earth that thrills to the touch of 
dew---that is the time when you too should acclaim the rising Sun with the Gaayathri. 
Yesterday, one speaker described the Gaayathri as equal to Raama naama, today another 
Shastry said it was the elaboration of Krishna naama and the Bhaagavatha. I ask you to fix your 
mind on any name of the Lord that brings up into your consciousness the Glory and the Grace of 
the Lord. Also, train your hands to do acts that serve the Lord that is shining in every being. All 
men are He; He shaves as the barber, He makes pots as the potter; He starches and irons clothes 
as the dhobi. He prompts, He inspires, He devises, He fulfils. You take a sheet of paper on which 
My Form is printed, as Myself; you revere It; you fall to the ground before It in reverence; why 
cannot you then revere all human beings, believing that I am in each of them, in an even clearer 
Form? 


The Gaayathri is a prayer for the development of your Intellect, so that you might reach this 
Vision. So let Me advise the elders who are here, this. You have brought your sons or grandsons 
or wards for Upanayanam and Gaayathri upadesham here to My presence. You are happy at 
their fortune; but, they will repeat the Manthra only if you too repeat it, sincerely. And it is good 
for you also. Repent, therefore, that you have given up taking that priceless drug; start from 
today the Sandhyaavandanam (worship of Sun God).. Learn it from your son or grandson, 
keeping aside your sense of superiority. When you have the royal road to reach the Goal, why 
scramble through thorny jungle tracks? Do the Sandhya as prescribed, and you will not be 


shaken by any storm. You need not flee to a Himalayan valley; you can make your heart that 
Valley, by the discipline of the Sandhya. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 26-4-1965 


It will surely help you 

to achieve the goal 

Every religion looks for God 
and they look far and wide, 

but man should know 

that God is Omnipresent 

and resides in the heart of man. 


SHRI SATHYA SAI 


31. The wheels: outer and inner 


It is a happy sign that so many thousands of you who are caught up in the noisy waves of worldly 
pursuits in this city, teeming with distractions and amusements that cater to the senses, have 
come here today, to listen to the deliberations of this Prashaanthi Vidwanmahaasabha. This is a 
sea of eager faces that I see before Me. You are eager to spot the lighthouse that will show you 
where the harbour lies, to take refuge from the stormy sea. That light is the Aathmajyothi (light 
of self) which the sages proclaim as existing in every one. Some deep visual defect has hidden 
that light from men and so they struggle in the darkness. 


It is not enough if one has the human form or even the basic human equipment---physical, 
mental and emotional. With the help of the discriminating intellect, one must bring it to 
perfection, as a sculptor does, after the stone is brought to crude shape. Man must be aware of his 
kinship with God, of the Divinity latent in him, of his immense potentiality. This he can know by 
the exercise of his viveka and vairaagya, (discrimination and dispassion). Only he among all the 
animals is capable of this. 


The royal road to this awareness is shown by the Guru; not every one of the five lakhs of 
saadhus claiming this status are entitled to it. For, the word Gu-ru means, he who has no 
darkness in him. (Gu-darkness; ru-without). Most of the Gurus now answer only to the other 
meaning of the word, which implies weight, heaviness. Most of them, by their weight, are a 
burden to the earth; that is all the effect they produce by their existence. They are a burden upon 
their disciples too, for they continuously extend their palms for cash and they have no 
illumination with which to lighten the burden of others. Leave these gurus to themselves and 
concentrate on the task of uplifting yourself. When you are earnest about it, the Lord Himself 
will guide you, either from within or from without, through some one He will send or through 
illumination from within. Do not despair; march bravely on. Try to fill every moment with 
thoughts of God, in some form or other. 


Place the mind completely at God's service 


Repeat Soham (I am He), with every breath: ‘So’ when you take in and ‘ham’, when you exhale, 
‘So' means He and ‘ham,’ means I and when you complete the inhalation and exhalations, feel 
that ‘So’ namely, the Lord, and ‘ham’, namely, 'T'1.e., (you) are One. Later, after long practice, the 
idea of He and I as two separate entities will disappear and there will be no more So and ham. 
Those sounds will be reduced to O and M, that is to say, it will be Om or the Pranava. Repeat 
that sound afterwards with every breath and that will save you from bondage to birth and death, 
for it is the Pranavopaasana (contemplation on Pranava) recommended in the Vedhas. This 
Soham-recitation is a good means of restraining the mind from running away .with you. Let the 
mind be ever attached to the Lord; then, it will not flee, as it fancies, towards all directions. That 
is the meaning of the exhortation of Krishna: "Sharvadharmaan parithyajya maam ekam 
sharanam vraja"---"Giving up all other activities, surrender fully to me." Place the mind 
completely at His service. Then, He will save you from falling. 


Be master of your feelings and impulses 


Do not pay more attention to the outside world than necessary; but, concentrate more on the 
inner springs of joy. In a car, the wheels that are underneath are the outer wheels; pay more 
attention to the wheel inside; the wheel that guides and turns the outer wheels! The driver of the 
car is inside; you, too, must care more for the inner motivator. If you are master of your feelings 


and impulses, you can be anywhere, engaged in any profession. You will have peace. Some one 
visited Kabir in his home and asked him whether the householder's life promoted spiritual 
development. Kabir did not answer. He called out to his wife and asked her to bring a lamp so 
that he may fix a broken piece of yarn. It was about midday and the room was well lit. But, the 
wife did not question or doubt or disobey. She brought the lamp well lit, and held it for Kabir to 
repair the yarn. Then, he asked her to leave. Kabir then turned his questioner and said, "When 
you have a wife like this woman, adhering strictly to her dharma, the householder's life will be 
the best training ground for spiritual development." 


There was a man who had a wife and a son both of whom did not see eye to eye with his 
charitable and hospitable character. One day when he brought a guest and was preparing to feed 
him, the wife and son thought of a strategem. When the master went out to the shop at the corner 
of the street to get a leaf-plate for him, the wife put the guest into great terror saying, "What a 
pity, you of all people fell into his trap today! My husband is daily bringing some poor fellow as 
if for lunch, but, what he does is to give each one a sound thrashing with a stick, just when they 
prepare to eat the meal served by me. He believes this will be compensation for some injustice 
done to him in past births by some one". The guest thought that it was best he ran away from his 
fate; even while he was fleeing around the corner of the street, the man came home with the leaf- 
plate. The wife told him that the guest was a very peculiar man, for he wanted a stick to go to the 
well for washing his feet and before she could bring it to him, he lost his temper and went out in 
a huff. So, the master took hold of a stick and with that in his hand, he pursued the guest and 
called out to him "Stop, Stop." This confirmed the impression of the guest that he was to be 
beaten and so he ran faster and faster and was soon out of sight. Women today do not appreciate 
the goodness of their partners or encourage them in the good life. They prove as obstacles rather 
than helpmates. They should promote Vaasudeva dhyaanam (meditation on Lord Vaasudeva) in 
the family; and, discourage Vasudeva dhyaanam (meditation on Vasu---wealth). 


The mind binds and liberates 


The Minister was telling you to attend the discourse on Geetha but there is no good in that, if you 
lean on to a pillar of the Hall and doze off. It is not the sound but it is the meaning that matters; it 
is not the ear but it is the heart that must drink in the Geetha. He wanted you to seek: and enjoy 
Sathsangam (good company); along with that sangam, there must be self-examination also, how 
much you have succeeded in escaping from the senses and nearing the Lord. Mana eva 
manushyaanaam kaaranam bandha mokshayoh---"the mind binds and the mind liberates". So 
train the mind and win. It is a wild elephant, which can be tamed with the goad of Soham. Do not 
feed it with conceit, hate, envy and greed. Let the name of the Lord echo ever in the ear and it 
will be tamed. 


When this meeting started and for some time later, there was imminent fear of rain, which came 
threatening up to this very place. But, let Me tell you, prayers and Grace combined to drive it off. 
Tomorrow, also, I shall give you the food that will sustain and save. 


Malleswaram, 22-5-1965 


When the heart is pure, the Lord is revealed. 
He is the judge; He cannot be bamboozled. 


The doctor may assure you that you have no fever, but the 
thermometer cannot lie. 


The doctor may say so to save you from panic, but the thermometer 
declares the truth. 


God knows and God will deal with you as you deserve. 
Have the faith. 


Repent for all the wrongs done, and resolve not to repeat the 
mistake; then God will extend His grace. 


SHRI SATHYA SAI 


32. The new year of faith 


The Krodhi year has gone and Vishwaavasu has come; and, people are happy at the New Year. 
Well, how many Krodhis have gone and how many Vishwaavasus have come, since the years 
were named and even before that, how many centuries and millennia have elapsed in the history 
of man! There is no use turning back and watching the road traversed; one's duty is to watch the 
road ahead and march on towards the goal. Krodhi is related to krodha or anger and 
Vishwaavasu is related to vishwaaasa or faith. It is want of faith that causes one to lose temper 
and fly into fits of anger; want of faith in oneself and in others. If you see yourself as really the 
undefeatable Aathma and others as reflections of yourself, as the Shaastras declare them to be, 
then there can be no provocation to get krodha or anger. What you must resolve upon for the 
New Year is to manifest your reality, more and more; that is to say, to reveal your Divinity more 
and more. 


Karma is the seed out of which the individual emanates; the jeevi feels separate and limited, on 
account of the illusion created by karma or activity. As the karma, so the consequence. If it is 
good, the consequence will tend to attract you towards the means of liberation, that is, towards 
saadhana and Sharveshwara chintha (spiritual efforts and Godly thoughts). Just as three younger 
brothers followed the footsteps of the eldest, Raama, so too the other three Purushaarthas (Aims 
of Man) must subserve the demands of the eldest, the first, Dharma. 


Practise what you preach 


The one dharma that subsumes all else is: the deed must be in conformity with the word. Don't 
speak one thing and act another; don't advise others to do a thing which you yourself do not 
practise. Do not start prachaara without aachaara---preaching without practice. There was a 
man called Ranjodh once, who went about expounding the Geetha, extolling it as the authentic 
word of God; at the end of his discourse, he sent round a plate for collecting their contributions 
in cash; suddenly, one man rose from the gathering challenging him and reminding him that the 
Lord has spoken against parigraha, or acceptance of help from others. Yes; the Geetha 
recommends aparigraha, non-acceptance of offerings and those who send round subscription 
lists and donation lists for Geetha discourses or bargain for fees for the same are all behaving 
against the express orders of the Lord whose words they propose to explain! This is hypocrisy, 
indeed. 


Only those who feel that God is the highest have the right to build a temple for Him; if he is a 
servant of the Raaja and if he bows before him and deals with him as his master, he should build 
a temple for the Raaja and not for God, who does not get his full loyalty. First fix your devotion 
exclusively on God; then, think of serving Him. If you collect money from all and sundry and get 
a Minister to open the temple, then, you are only revealing yourself as a worldly man engaged in 
a low worldly trick. Get firm in mind; then, your reason also will not deviate. Without that 
equanimity or shaanthi, you can get no soukhyam (happiness), as saint Thyaagaraaja sang from 
experience. Many people who give Geetha discourses have themselves no shaanthi; they revel in 
controversies and challenge their rivals to come and contest with. them; they parade their 
victories and their titles, they flaunt their triumphs in the face of all possible rivals. It is all so 
egoistic; these people have not mastered even the primer of spiritual saadhana. And yet, they 
expect people to sit at their feet and learn the secret of saving themselves from bondage, these 
weaklings who are themselves bound. 


Let God manifest in and through you 


Whatever else you may or may not do, do at least this: know the Lord that resides in you. 
Recognise Him, let Him manifest Himself in and through you. This is what Vaaranasi 
Subrahmanya Shastri meant when he spoke of punya and dharma---good deeds and right 
conduct. He said that the grihastha (the householder) who is the pillar of society, has forgotten 
his responsibility and his opportunities and so, the entire structure of society has crumbled. Of 
course, his estimate is correct; but, I must add that the fourth Order, the Order of Sanyaasins 
(monks) has deteriorated badly, so badly that the reverence that once was the natural right of the 
sanyaasin has now disappeared. The sanyaasin has to live rigorously and with great self-control; 
but he has fallen from that height and so, has lost respect. Of course there are even now many 
who adhere strictly to the rigorous rules and are models of ascetic life. Only, they have to be 
sought after and discovered. The sanyaasins who seek you and your patronage are more worldly 
minded than yourself! 


Fundamentally, the fault lies in not understanding that this body and all things connected with it 
are not permanent. When Bharthrhari the King was lamenting the death of his queen, and 
weeping over her grace, an old man appeared before him in great distress, weeping as loud as the 
King himself. His tragedy was that a mud pot he had with him for long had broken. Bharthrhari 
told him that there was no use weeping over a broken pot; no quantity of tears would ever make 
it whole. The old man, who was no other than his Chief Minister, said that a person who believed 
that weeping could bring the dead back to life had no right to tell him that his pot would not be 
made whole again. This drove some sense into the King's head and he became sane again! When 
you weep for the dead you are only announcing your colossal ignorance. 


Underlying faith should be in the Unity of all 


You must use your intelligence to discover what is best under the circumstances and in the 
situation, considering the status and the profession which you have won. The barber should not 
treat all things equal and use his razor to peel vegetables, cut pencils and paper, bamboos and 
beards. Each instrument has its own special uses and purposes; each man has some special skills 
and responsibilities. The Raaja has to be treated as a Raaja and the ryot as a ryot. Fish can live 
only in water and not in milk; keep fish in water and do not put them in milk, on the plea that 
milk is thicker and costlier! 


Though in principle all is Brahmam, in dealing with them in the Vyaavahaarik stage (day-to-day 
activity), you cannot follow the adhwaithic line. There should be Bhaava-adhwaitha, not Karma- 
adhwaitha, that is to say, the underlying faith should be in the Unity of all, though the outer 
activity may be different for different entities. The activity must not leave any scar on the faith in 
Unity. There is no scar on the sky, though clouds and stars, the sun and moon, all appear to steak 
across it. So too, let a thousand ideas steak across the mind; but, let it remain unaffected and 
serene. Kabir had no food for three days; he thanked God that he got the coveted chance of 
observing a ritual fast. Raamadas was confined in jail; he thanked God that he got a place where 
he could meditate on God without disturbance. That is the attitude of the saint, the beloved of 
God. Shivaji brought a palanquin for Saint Tukaaraam, but he refused the honour, saying that he 
was not yet ready to be carried on the shoulders of four men! 


Virtues or sadgunaas are like cows yielding health-giving milk. Vices are tigers that fall upon 
the cows and tear them to pieces. If you build a barricade of Naama, a fort with the Name of the 
Lord, the tiger cannot harm you, or your virtues. 


Bangalore is the capital of the Kannada people and Malleswaram is as the head for this city. Here 
this Bhajana Mandali is being run and it is celebrating the functions in connection with the 
Prashaanthi Vidwanmahasabha, Kannada Branch. Make the best use of this chance, all of you. 
Beware of some who use My Name for collecting money and for activities that tarnish their 
claim to be devotees. Do not believe such; where money is asked and offered, I have no place. 


Malleswaram, 23-5-1965 


The harder the circumstances, 

the more trying the environment, 

the stronger are the men 

who come out of those circumstances. 
So welcome all these 

outside troubles and anxieties. 

SHRI SATHYA SAI 


33. Pappu and uppu 


In the Garudapurana, Sri Hari instructs Garuda about the daily decline of human life, and the 
attacks that Death deals on him, with His army of diseases, accidents and natural calamities. You 
have earned this human body by the accumulated merit of may lives as inferior beings and, it is 
indeed very foolish to fritter away this precious opportunity in activities that are natural only to 
those inferior beings. Life moves so quick that people often wonder how they grew so old so 
soon. It appears only yesterday that they were in college or playing in the streets; but they have 
grandchildren playing about them! While life is carrying people forward towards death so fast, 
pride makes them force others to fall before them; humility does not induce them to fall before 
the Almighty! 


Since New Moon, the whole country is celebrating the Festival of Raamajananam and today is 
the actual Raamanavami, the day on which Raama was bor. Raama is Dharma, Dharma is 
Raama. The four ideals of man as laid down in the Vedhas are Dharma, Artha, Kaama and 
Moksha; Dharma is the very base. If that is given up or disregarded, sorrow will persist. Raama 
considered Dharma as all-important. When his brother Bharatha overpowered by grief at his 
father's death, his mother's greed, and his brother's exile, sought him in the forest and, meeting 
him, rolled at his feet in terrible anguish. Raama lifted him gently and asked---What do you think 
he asked?---He asked him, "Are you maintaining Dharma in the Kingdom of Ayodhya, 
respecting the subjects, the poor, the elders, the scholars, the saints and the sages?" Even when 
the direst calamity overtakes man, he should not stray away from the path of morality and 
justice. Raama was wakening Bharatha from the sleep of ignorance; the poor fellow was 
overcome by his own grief, as if the father, mother, brothers, kingdom, power and position--- 
these mattered, as if they were real, eternal. Raama reminded him that they are all but 
instruments one must utilise for the exercise of dharma. 


In spiritual matters, faith is the very essence 


Just as the wild elephant roaming in the forest as the head of the herd is trapped and trained to sit 
on a three-legged stool in the circus ring, the mind of man too has to be trained by systematic 
processes of discipline shama, dhama, uparathi, thithiksha; shraddha and samaadhaana (inner 
and outer sense control, endurance, steady faith, equipoise) so that it may subserve the best 
interests of man. To go before a magistrate and plead, one has to pass the LL.B degree 
examination; to be able to prescribe medicine to a sick man, you must pass the M.B.B.S. degree 
examination. You have to obtain a licence or have your name entered in the Register of Medical 
Practitioners. Everywhere for every profession or post they ask you your qualification. How 
much more is the need for proper qualifications in the spiritual field, for winning the Grace of 
God? You aim high, but, you make no effort to reach that height. 


In spiritual matters, faith is the very essence. Doubt shakes the foundations of saadhana and is 
therefore, to be avoided. Have faith in the wisdom of the ancients; do not pitch your tiny little 
brain against the intuitions of the saints and their discoveries. For example take the question of 
offering food in the fire, on the anniversary days of the death of parents, what is called pinda 
pradaan. Nowadays, smiles of scorn are cast when such rites are mentioned. "How can the food 
placed here reach there? The dead man must have taken birth somewhere long ago and his 
present address is not known. Can a meal given one day in the year satisfy the accumulated 
hunger of 365 days?" they ask. "Let your father sit on the terrace of your house; then place food 
for him on the ground floor. Can he reach the food or can the food rise up to him, however many 


manthraas you repeat?" they laugh. "Why are dead men given food, when living men suffer?" 
they argue. 


There is a science of the spirit 


You post a letter in the box, and it goes straight to the addressee, wherever he is, however far. 
Does it mean that the postmaster is your friend, or that he is so sympathetic to your anxiety to 
correspond with the addressee? If the address is written correct and clear and if the necessary 
postage is paid in stamps that are valid at the time, the letter is carried by men, by car and bus, 
train and plane and steamer, right up to the doorstep of the person whose name is on it. The ritual 
fire is the authorised post box; the fire is the postal authority, the manthraas are the stamps. 
There is a science of the spirit, as there is a science of matter; it has its own categories; its own 
modus operandi; its own experts and authoritative theses. 


Only by saadhana can the secrets of either matter or mind be known, grasped and used for one's 
benefit. In the Vivekachuudaamani, Shankara says, "If the Nikshepa or Treasure that is 
embedded in the bowels of the earth must be brought up, mere calling it up by name will not 
help. You must know exactly where it is, through the advice of experts; you have to excavate the 
spot; you have to move away rock and stone and sand that come in the way; you have to grasp it 
and heave it up to the ground". So, too, the reality of the "self" has to be first learnt by means of 
instruction from a knower of Brahman; then the processes of manana, dhyaana, nididhyaasana 
(refelction, meditation and concentration) have to be gone through; finally when, in a flash, the 
Truth is revealed, the Self must be firmly established in the Aananda of that moment. 


Leave it to Him, let His Will prevail 


The Brahmasuuthra begins with the statement, Athaatho Brahmajijnaasa---"After this the 
consideration of Brahmam". After what? What are the preliminary steps? When does a person 
become entitled to participate in the discussion and study of Brahman? We have two other texts 
which have to be studied earlier, one which says, "Athaatho Karma jijnaasa", "after this 
consideration of Karma, activity", and the next one begins with, Athaatho Dharma jijnaasa - 
"after this, the consideration of Dharma (righteousness)". So, man becomes entitled to the 
knowledge of the Universal Principle that is the very substance of everything since eternity, only 
after his mind is purified by karma and dharma. 


It is only after you place a morsel on your tongue that you discover whether the salt in it is 
enough or whether it has not been salted at all. Pappu (dhal) requires uppu (salt); that is to say, 
the boiled dhal must have salt in it for taste. So too, it is only when you have moved in the world 
and taken a share in its activities according to a moral code, you discover that without the salt of 
jnaana, it does not taste well; take it with a sprinkling of the salt of jnaana, the knowledge that 
you are not the body but the resident of the body, that you are but the witness of the ever- 
changing panorama of Nature and you feel happy and peaceful. Slowly, step by step, confirm 
yourself in the thought of the Unity of the World in Brahman. Then, even without praying and 
pleading, everything worthwhile will be added unto you. That is why Thyaagaraaja sings 
"Adigiukhamulewaranubhavinchiri?"---" Who experienced joy and happiness, by means of 
praying to you?" Leave it to Him, let His Will prevail, do not ask for this or that other thing. He 
knows best. Did Sabari pray for anything? Did Jataayu call out for His Presence? Did Guha 
plead that Raama may come to him? 


Revival of Dharma is close at hand 


Each of you must follow the moral code prescribed for the profession you are engaged in and the 
age and status which you have reached. Once the King of a large State asked a sanyaasin 
whether it is possible for a man to live up to the height of the code. Some time later, the King 
died and, according to custom, they sent the Royal elephant round with a garland to choose the 
successor. The elephant put the garland round the neck of the sanyaasin (monk). But, he was 
resisting the importunities of the people and running towards the forest. He reached the 
innermost recesses and was happy that he was safe from the calamity that had encompassed him! 


These moral codes are given in the Shaastras and the Prashaanthi Vidwanmahaasabha has been 
formed to tell people in simple language their main duties. It is not a limited group of scholars 
with a limited scope; it is every one's right to utilise the scholars and get the result of their 
learning for themselves. There is no other motive behind the formation of the Sabha. It is for you 
all, for all places. It was in connection with the activities of this Sabha that I recently visited 
several places in East and West Godaavari Districts and other areas. It was a triumphal march, 
resounding with the devotion, the faith and the Aananda of the lakhs of people who attended. 
The enthusiasm of the people to listen to the message of Sanaathana Dharma which I carried 
was most inspiring to those who came with Me. The scenes reminded one of the Kritha, Thretha 
and Dwaapara yugas, not the Kali Yuga. The pages of the Bhaagavatha became alive before us. 


A twelve-acre expanse of land was found too small for the gathering that assembled in one place. 
At another place, every tree had many adventurous men clinging to the trunk and branches, even 
the flail "drumstick tree!". These are all signs that the revival of Dharma is close at hand. 


Welcome hardships to realise the Lord 


Only you must have the staunch determination to use this chance to the full. You are near and 
those who are far are so only with reference to space, not with reference to My Prema. To realise 
the Lord, you must welcome hardships, trials, and sufferings. You must dwell on the Name and 
Form steadily and with faith. You must discard all inferior sources of joy. When a son is born, 
worry too is born with him---worry that he should grow up healthy and pure, learned and good, 
famous but humble, bringing a fair name to his parents and elders. As a matter of fact, I would 
advise you to postpone the celebration of the birth of a son until the day when he brings 
sathkeerthi (good fame) to the lineage and the country. So also, celebrate the accumulation of 
wealth when it is spent justly and with love, on beneficial and deserving purposes. A tree is 
justified by fragrant flowers bringing forth sweet fruits. If, on the other hand, its leaves get dry 
and its flowers fade and the fruits refuse to grow, an agriculturist will examine the roots and 
discover that they are eaten up by pests or white ants. So too, the roots of Divinity must have 
been destroyed or harmed if a man's virtues do not blossom and yield sweet fruits. Envy, greed, 
malice---these pests destroy the roots quickly. 


By moderating and modulating habits of eating and drinking, one can lay the foundation for 
spiritual life. One must prefer Saathwick to Raajasik foods. By drinking intoxicating stuff, one 
loses control over the emotions and passions, the impulses and instincts, the speech and 
movements, and one even descends to the level of beasts. By eating flesh one develops violent 
tendencies and animal diseases. The mind becomes more intractable when one indulges in 
Raajasik food; it can never be remoulded if Thamaasik food is consumed with relish. To dwell in 
Raama thathwa (Raama principle) constantly, one has to be vigilant about food and drink 
consumed by both body and mind. 


Raama thathwa is essentially Aananda thatwa. Raama means "He who pleases", "He who fills 
with Aananda", "He who is the spring of Aananda in every heart." So, when you repeat Raama 
naama, you are but touching the very source of Aananda, the Aathmaa-Raama (God as self). Just 
as you have come by various routes from various villages and towns, all persons have to reach 
that Source for, there alone can they get the Aananda without which there is no peace. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam: 19-4-1965, Raamanavami 


Out of the long churning of 
this milk of the world 
comes butter, 

and this butter is God. 

Men of heart get the butter 
and the buttermilk is left 
for the intellectuals. 

SHRI SATHYA SAI 


34. The spring of joy 


This is a sacred day. It is the day when we honour Sage Vyaasa, who gave mankind the precious 
gem of Saguna worship (worship of God with Form) and the hope and assurance that Maanava 
(man) can become Maadhava (God), that Nara can become Narayana, that Jeeva can become 
Brahmam, or rather that Jeeva (individual soul) is Brahmam (Universal soul). The Bhaagavatha 
and the Brahmasuuthra are the great texts which hold forth these valuable doctrines. 


Man is a mixture of two strands of the same substance, maaya and Maadhava, moha and Raama, 
deha and dehi, jada and chith, sareeram and sareeri, jeeva and Brahmam (Divine illusion and 
God, delusion and God, body and soul, inert matter and consciousness, body and the embodied, 
individual soul and the Supreme Soul). Like the two circular stones of the grinding mill, the 
Brahmam one is stable, the Jeeva one is revolving. The stable is the base; the revolving is the 
‘dependent’. The Guru is the Teacher who removes the fundamental ignorance, which hides the 
knowledge of this truth from us. The Pournami or the Full Moon Day has been fixed for revering 
him, for, the effect of the knowledge is to put an end to scorching agony and to shed cool 
comfort instead, on the mind of man. Vyaasa is revered as Naaraayana Himself, for who but God 
can inspire such Illumination? 


If your loyalty is to the family, you are a servant of the family; if it is to God, you are a servant 
of God. But, do not pay heed to the wages He gives. Do not argue and bargain for wages or 
reward. Only hired labourers clamour for wages and declare they are poor. Be a kinsman, a 
member of the family, a scion of God, then it behoves Him to maintain you in comfort. Try to be 
near God, as near as His own kin, do not calculate the number of hours you have spent in serving 
Him, and pine that He has not compensated you. Be ever in His service, that is to say, in doing 
good and being good. 


Connect yourself with God by the cable of Smarana 


Karna knew that death is ever round the corner and so, whenever any one came to him seeking 
some favour, be it however hard, he satisfied them on the spot, without any delay, for, as he said, 
"My mind may change, my life may end." People ask each other when they meet, 
"Kshemamaa?" (Is all well?). The other man repeats automatically, "Quite well, thank you", 
without noting that his life span has become a day shorter. He has no kshema (well-being); he 
has undergone only ksheena (decline). So, arise, and resolve to make the best of your days. 


The guru is the person who discovers that you have fallen into a wrong road that leads to further 
and further darkness. For, he knows the fight road and he is full of love for all who strive to 
escape the travails of the night, without lamps to light their steps. This is a day when the First of 
Gurus is remembered with gratitude. He is called Naaraayana, because Naaraayana is the reality 
and if you do not get a Guru from outside yourself, if you pray, the Naaraayana inside you will 
Himself reveal the road and lead you on. It is always preferable to be prompted by __ that inner 
Guru, because most of those who claim to that status are themselves rolling in objective pleasure 
or are bound by greed, envy or malice. Guru also means ‘heavy’; many have only the 
qualification of physical weight, not of spiritual height! 


If you must bring the power from the power-house to your residence to illumine your place, you 
have to put up poles at regular intervals and connect the house with the power house with cables. 
So too, if you must win the Grace of God, do saadhana at regular timings and connect yourself 
with God by the cable of smarana (remembering the Lord). 


Discover the fountain of joy within 


The charavakas (the materialists) argued that a bird in the hand is worth two in the bush. They 
said that the pleasure you now have should not be given up in the hope of something promised 
later on, if this is given up. But, the happiness of renunciation can be enjoyed here and now, and 
is much more sustaining and inspiring than the happiness derived from grabbing and attachment. 
Besides, there is a certain joy in being the master of the senses, rather than in being their slave. 
Now, you are slaves of the coffee habit. Resolve not to cater to that attachment and stick to that 
resolution for three days continuously. You become the master and the tongue is your slave. 
Coffee cannot hold sway over you any longer. If coffee is capable of conferring joy, all should 
get it equally from that beverage. But, some prefer tea and many find it distasteful. Some delight 
in taking it without sugar and others without milk. So, it is the mind that gives delight, not the 
coffee; it is not the object that caters to the senses. 


The secret is, discover the fountain of joy within; that is a never-failing, ever-full, ever-cool 
fountain, for it rises from God. What is the body? It is but the Aathma encased in five sheaths, 
the Annamaya (the one composed of food), the Praanamaya (the one composed of vitality), the 
Manomaya (the one composed of thought), the Vijnaanamaya (the one composed of intelligence) 
and the Aanandamaya (the one composed of bliss). By a constant contemplation of these sheaths 
or koshas, the saadhaka attains discrimination to recede from the outer to the inner and the more 
real. Thus, step by step, he abandons one kosha after another and is able to dissolve away all of 
them, to achieve the knowledge of his unity with Brahmam. 


Keep Truth and Love as your guides 


Most of you hear me say these things over and over again, year after year. But few take even the 
first step in saadhana. You ask that I should go on speaking and you take down notes of what I 
say for the purpose of reading them again. But, without practice, all this is sheer waste. You may 
talk in a big high-sounding style, but you are judged, not by your tongue, but by your activity 
and attitude. There was a lady who attended a whole series of Bhaagavatha discourses, and 
picked up a few cliches. She became too lazy to draw water and slept on till a late hour. When 
her husband reprimanded her, she quoted a shloka which said that one has in oneself all the holy 
rivers, Ganga, Yamuna, Saraswathi, as the Ida, Pingala and Sushumna naa (the nerve currents to 
the left, right and middle of the spinal column)! The husband was astounded at her impudence 
and pseudospiritual pose. He contrived to feed her on highly salted stuff and he removed all the 
water pots and jugs from the house. When she suffered from acute thirst, and called out for water 
desperately, he quoted the same hymn and wanted her to draw from the Ganga, Yamuna and 
Saraswathi within her! You have no place for hypocrisy and double dealing in spiritual matters; 
there, you must walk along the straight and narrow path, with Truth and Love as your guides and 
companions. 


Young men go out to countries overseas and their aged parents are worried about their reactions 
to the attractions of the strange culture. The father writes to the son pleading with him not to give 
up the family habits of food and drink, of worship and prayer; the son while reading it gets tears 
in the eyes; he presses the letter on to his breast; but, that is all. He yields to the temptation and 
slides away. The paper on which the letter is written is honoured, not the matter for which the 
letter was written. Sacred books are worshipped in the same way; flowers are showered on them; 
even food is sanctified by being offered to them; they are carried in procession with pipers and 


drummers in front, through the streets. But, as to reading them or trying to understand what they 
contain, or practising a bit of what they were written for---that is an impossible task, for most! 


Do not seek to find fault in others 


I shall tell you just one thing which those books teach; one thing which I want you to resolve to 
follow, from this Guru Pournami Day (the full noon day dedicated to the Divine preceptor): "Do 
not seek to find fault in others, give up para dushana and para himsa (maligning and injuring 
others); do not scandalise any one, do not feel envy or malice. Be always sweet in temperament, 
in talk. Fill your conversation with devotion and humility." 


Live with prema, in prema, for prema. Then the Lord who is Premaswaruupa (Divine Love 
personified) will grant you all that you need in spite of your not asking for anything. He knows; 
He is the Mother who does not wait to hear the moan of the child to feed it. His prema is so vast 
and deep; He anticipates every need and rushes with help you must have. You are all waiting 
anxiously to know, from when I am granting you the 'interviews' so that you can place before Me 
the long lists of 'korikas' (wishes), which you have brought. 


These wishes go on multiplying; they never end. The fulfilment of one leads to a new series. 
Strive to arrive at the stage when His Wish alone will count and you are an instrument in His 
Hands. 


There are different types of 'listening' 


The ears relish evil, they do not welcome goodness. They are so warped and perverted. There are 
different types of ‘listening’; the clay type: clay becomes soft when water is added, but, when it 
evaporates, it is rendered as hard as formerly. The mind becomes soft when religious discourses 
are heard. But, when you move away, the effect is lost. Then there is the crow type: however 
much you may teach it to improve its voice and to sing, it does not try nor can it improve; it caws 
and caws as raucously as before. There is the mosquito type’ which goes on harassing you at the 
very moment when you would much rather have an hour of silence. It cannot be shooed off, it 
attacks again and again, taking delight in inflicting harm. Do not cater to such low desires; 
control the listening. The Gopees desired to listen only to Krishna's Glory, Krishna's Charm, 
Krishna's Words, Krishna's Pranks, Plays, Pastimes, Krishna's Achievements, His Attainments. 


When you fill yourselves with love for Krishna (Krishna Prem), you achieve saaruupya and 
saayuujya (likeness of form and absorption into Krishna). Strive for that consummation, not for 
lesser victories. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam; Guru Pournima, 13- 7-1965 


Hardship keeps one always alert and in trim. 


They reveal hidden resources of skill and intelligence; they 
toughten fortitude and deepen the roots of Faith. 


SHRI SATHYA SAI 


35. The first step 


Man is endowed with memory, as well as the faculty to forget. Both these are useful skills. 
Perhaps, the power to forget is even more important, for, otherwise, man will have to lament 
over the loss of millions of parents and kinsmen he had in millions of previous births; man will 
remember and resent the many insults and injuries he has suffered in this birth. Luckily, he 
forgets all that. He remembers only those things that have impressed him as significant, or 
crucial, namely, the date of his marriage, the names of those who have to pay him money, etc. 
The tragedy is, he has forgotten the most significant and crucial thing about his earthly career--- 
the key to happiness and liberation, his real Name and Identity! 


Man cannot afford to forget who he is and for what purpose he has come. He must know the 
answer to the questions' "Kasthwam, koham, kutha aayaathah?" as Shankara said. "Who are you, 
who am I, where am I going, where did I come from, what is the nature and purpose of all this 
movement and change, is there any stable base, any goal or aim, direction or director?"--these 
questions cannot be brushed aside from the mind of man. They come to him and harass him, 
when he is alone with something grand and awe-inspiring in Nature, or with some incident, 
terrible and shocking, in his own experience. It is not wise to forgo these precious moments and 
turn once again to the humdrum of life, without pursuing the inquiry to which one is prompted. 


The disciple must have the yearning 


But, man forgets: he ignores. He mistakes the unreal to be the real. He is deceived by 
appearance; he does not peer behind the veil. He misleads himself and others. He takes sunna as 
venna, (slaked lime as butter), since both are white; but, what a difference in quality and effect? 
The baby sucks its thumb and derives immense satisfaction and joy therefrom; we know that it 
has no taste, no sweetness. But, the baby weeps when the thumb is pulled out. The sweetness in 
the thumb was imposed on it, by the baby itself. So too, the happiness that one derives from the 
world is not the nature of the world; it is subjective; it is only the projection, upon the world, of 
the happiness the Aathma (the self) is capable of deriving, of which it is the source and goal. The 
baby imagines the thumb to be an external object which is providing it with pleasure; but, it is 
only itself. 


The Guru warns ‘and wakens. He reveals the truth and encourages you to progress towards it. 
Unless, you have the yearning, the questioning heart, the seeking intelligence, he cannot do 
much. The hungry can be fed; he who has no hunger will discard food as an infliction. The Guru 
is a gardener, who will tend the plant; but, the sapling must have sprouted before he can take 
charge. He does not add anything new to the plant; he only helps it to grow according to its own 
destiny, quicker perhaps, more fully perhaps, but, not against its inner nature. He removes 
poverty by pointing to the treasure that lies buried in the very habitation of man; he advises the 
method of recovering it, the vigilance needed to use it to the best advantage, etc. 


Money has a fascinating influence 


There was a man once who was afflicted with extreme miserliness. He never parted with cash, on 
any pretext. But, when his father died, he had to get his scalp shaved, in order to satisfy the 
requirements of the Shaastras (scriptures) and public opinion. The barber demanded an 
impossible sum; the miser higgled quite a lot and the fellow's rate was brought down to one 
paisa. The miser did not clinch the bargain at that price; he bargained still and asked that he 
should shave two heads for one paisa! The barber agreed, for, he guessed that since the dead man 


had only one son, there was no second candidate for the razor. But, the miser after the barber had 
finished with him, called out his wife and insisted that she too must be shaved, before payment 
could be made! Money has such a fascinating influence on some foolish individuals. 


One has to practise detachment at every step, or else, greed and miserliness will overpower the 
finer natures of man. That nature is Divine, because, God is the very substance of which man is 
but a name and form. To realise it, one has to possess and develop the discrimination between 
the unchanging and the changing, the permanent and the temporary. Saadhana-Chatushtaya: 
Nithyaanithya Viveka 1.e., knowing that the Universe is constantly subject to change and 
modification and that Brahman alone is unmodified; Jha amuthra-phala-bhoga-viraaga-- 
detachment from the pleasures of this world as well as the pleasures obtainable in Heaven after 
attaining the conviction that they are evanescent and fraught with grief; Sama damaadi-shatka 
sampaththi---attaining the six desirable qualifications' the control of external and internal senses 
and sensory promptings: fortitude in the midst of grief and pain, of joy and victory; uparathi--- 
withdrawal from all activity that brings about consequences that bind; shraddha---firm faith in 
the Teacher and the Texts that he expounds; samaadhaanam---even contemplation on the basic 
Brahmam, without being disturbed by other waves of thought. Though milk is under formation 
throughout the body of the cow, you have to resort to the four teats, in order to get it; so also 
these four saadhanas or teats have to be pressed (into service) if spiritual knowledge is to be 
gained. 


Reform your habits to win Lord's Grace 


This world is 'unreal', in the sense that a dream is unreal. You sleep in the verandah of the 
Mandhir (temple) here and you dream you are in Kasi, bathing in the Ganga. You feel the cool 
comfort, the holy satisfaction. It is very real at the time. But, when did you actually go? And how 
did you transport yourself? The Jnaani (the liberated person), from his more genuine awareness, 
asks the same question about the experiences of your waking state! 


Here, I must tell you one thing. Which dreams are real? Dreams relating to God are real. You see 
Me in the dream, I allow you to do Namaskaaam (prostration), I bless you, I grant Grace...that is 
true; that is due to My will and your saadhana (spiritual practice). If the Lord or your Guru 
appears in dream, it must be the result of sankalpa (His will), not due to any of the other reasons 
which cause dreams. It can never happen as result of your wish. 


Above all, try to win Grace by reforming your habits, reducing your desires, and refining your 
higher nature. One step makes the next one easier; that is the excellence of the spiritual journey. 
At each step, your strength and confidence increase and you get bigger and bigger instalments of 
Grace. There was a wicked man once who heard quite by chance a religious discourse which 
affected him much. He went to a great sage and offered himself as his disciple. He asked him 
how he spent his days. The reply was, "I gamble by day and break into houses for theft at night. I 
revel in falsehood, both day and night." The sage said, "I shall accept you as my disciple, 
provided you give up one of these three; you must make some sacrifice, to deserve this favour". 
The man pondered for some little time: "I cannot give up gambling, I find it so exciting; I cannot 
give up house- breaking, for, that is the only means of earning livelihood that I know; well I shall 
give up telling lies." So, he gave word that he will no longer utter lies and was accepted. The 
Sage was glad that he had fallen into the trap; now he could not escape. 


‘Thief’ appointed Minister for speaking truth 


That night the man decided to break into the palace itself. He dodged the guards and climbed up 
to the terrace and was stealthily creeping along the wall on the edge, when some one accosted 
him, with the question, "Who goes there?" He spoke the truth, "I am a thief; who are you?" The 
man who accosted him was the King himself; he had come out on the terrace, for the breeze was 
pleasant there. He replied, "I am also thief’. So, they decided on joint efforts, dividing the spoils 
half and half. The thief proposed that they break into the palace treasury; the new companion 
said he knew where the keys were; so, he escaped into the darkness and brought the keys. They 
both got into the treasury and divided the loot half and half. But, they found there three big 
diamonds, big and beautiful. The King took one, the thief another and the third was left where it' 
was, with mutual consent, for as the thief said, "Let the unfortunate King who has lost his all 
have at least this one gem as a consolation." Then, they parted, but, not before the thief replied to 
a question from the King. "Where do you live?" The thief, who had given up lying, had to give 
his correct address and he did. 


The next morning, news spread that the treasury had been burgled and the King deputed his 
Chief Minister to proceed to the treasury and take stock. He went and saw the things lying helter- 
skelter amidst open boxes and safes. He found one big fine diamond, which had evidently 
escaped the eyes of the miscreants. He pocketed the precious gem and after a few minutes spent 
there, he came to the Royal presence and described the scene and the loss. The King asked that 
the thieves known to the police be brought before him, including one whose address he himself 
gave. They were brought, but the King interrogated the one whom he had indicated specially. He 
revealed that he and 'another' who had already broken into the palace had shared the loot half and 
half from the treasury the previous night. The King asked him about the diamonds. He said that 
one of the three was left behind; they took only one each. He was pledged to speak the truth. The 
king knew that the Minister must have appropriated the third and so, he ordered a search of the 
minister in open court. Needless to say, it was retrieved from his pocket and the Minister was 
revealed as an unreliable fellow. The King, thereupon, dismissed him on the spot and appointed 
the 'thief as the Minister, instead. 


The Guru should guide the disciple 


Now that he was Minister, the thief gave up stealing, for, there was enough and more, so far as 
means of livelihood were concerned. There was no time to gamble either. He became famous as 
an upright efficient Minister. The Guru was drawn by stories of his efficiency to visit the city 
and, when the Minister saw him, he fell at his feet in gratitude for the way in which he had 
reformed him. 


That is how the first step works. It makes further steps possible with much less effort. The Guru 
must persuade you to take that first step, by describing the shame of standing still or going back 
and by pointing out the pleasures of the journey and the magnificence of the goal. Not all Gurus 
now enjoying that status are capable of this. The disciples rule them and guide them, rather than 
their guiding the disciples. There was a shepherd boy, who was elevated to the position of a 
Guru; he uttered two sounds, always the two, Thurrrr thurrr and Thak thak thak. The disciples 
discovered meanings in those sounds and saved the reputation of the guru. They said that the 
guru was declaring that a life spent in material pursuits is just thurrr, and clays spent in vain 
pastimes without seva (service) of the Lord are to be condemned as thak thak thak! If the guru 
bends and yields to the whims and fancies of the disciples and is afraid to lose their loyalty or is 


anxious to win it, then, he is the servant of the disciple, not his master! The disciple must learn to 
follow the commands of the guru; that is the best way to benefit by his wisdom. 


I command you on this Guru Pournima to do geetha saadhana; that is enough to grant you 
liberation. Many people ask Me, "Swaami! Give me a Naamam (name of God) which I can 
repeat." Take any Naamam you like, any name which appeals to you. All His Names are equally 
sweet. It is only a crooked intellect that will discover difference between one Name and another. 
There is an American lady here who is keen on liberation. The nationality does not matter at all. 
All belong to the State of God. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 14- 7-1965 
Perfect freedom is not given to any man on earth. 
Lesser the number of wants, the greater is the freedom. 
Hence perfect freedom is absolute desirelessness. 


SHRI SATHYA SAI 


36. How far is God? 


It is really unfortunate that the Ashtami and Navamithithis (the eighth and ninth days of the lunar 
fortnight), are held inauspicious in popular belief; for, the facts are quite contrary. Both these 
days mark the auspicious arrival of an Avathaar of God, the advent of the Formless, Nameless, 
Timeless, Locationless Absolute as the Formful, Named, Living, Particular. Shri Krishna was 
born on the eighth day, and Shri Raama on the ninth day of the white half of the lunar fortnight. 
Ignoring the sacredness of these days and imagining them to be fraught with unpredictable 
dangers, if new enterprises are started on those days, is sheer perversity, indeed. 


God takes human form when the Godliness that is inherent in man is submerged, when the moral 
code and the spiritual discipline that have been prescribed by the experience of godly seekers are 
neglected, when man slides into beast from which he rose and becomes a terror to brother man. 
Krishna is a Yogeeshwara (Lord of the Yogis), unattached to the fruits of His labour; God 
appeared as Krishna to charm humanity by His pranks, His play, His song and sweetness, and to 
instruct man by His teaching and Grace. He was born on this Janmaashtami Day in the prison 
where His 'parents' where incarcerated by the very evil forces He had come to exterminate. Shri 
Raama came to lead man into Dharma, and so, He had to be the very embodiment of right, 
justice and integrity. He taught the Dharma that should guide the lives of the son, the brother, the 
friend, the ruler, the husband. 


The stars under which these two Incarnations of God descended on the earth are also significant. 
When Avathaars come, they choose the time and place, clan and the family, and they decide and 
bring the comrades and the co-workers. When Vishnu incarnated as Raama, Sesha, Shankha, 
Chakra (the thousand-headed serpent forming the couch of Vishnu, His conch and discus) and 
other inseparable adjuncts of the Lord also incarnated; the Devas (celestials) also came down, in 
order to taste the sweetness of the Lord's company and service. Rohini, the star under which 
Krishna was born, is related to the attainment of yogic success and the powers that flow from it. 
Punarvasu, the star under which Raama was born, has a mysterious influence on the authority 
which accepts all who submit, the Sharanaagatha-thraana (protector of those who take refuge in 
Him) aspect of Raama's glory. 


Do not ascribe evil to any day or star 


What man has to do on these auspicious days is to dwell on the elevating thoughts centering 
round the two Avathaars and take the first or further steps in saadhana. Use these days as starting 
points for propitiating the Form of Godhead which you have chosen for offering homage, the 
Form which appeals to your innermost yearnings. Do not ascribe evil to any day or star. Every 
day is good when you spend it for God. Every star is good, provided its light guides your feet to 
God. This is my advice to you, this day. 


Men are eager to get happiness and when there is a prospect of earning undiminishable 
happiness, they jump at the idea; but, they are soon tired of the effort. They seek shortcuts, lean 
on others to carry their weight, and aspire for much fruit in return for little cultivation. But, 
rigorous discipline and steady faith are absolutely necessary for success in the spiritual struggle. 
Mere listening to discourses or even delivering discourses will not be of any use. To have that 
discipline, one has to control the senses which drag the mind towards the pleasurable attractions 
of the external world; to have the steady faith, one must control the wayward mind, that paints 
attractive pictures in false colours to lure you on from birth to birth. 


God pays heed to devotee's cry 


Provided your intellect is sharp and free from prejudices and predilections, the Reality will 
reveal itself to you in a flash, for it is quite a simple thing. Only, it must be capable of seeing the 
problem in its basic essence, apart from all the jumble of irrelevancies. Once a very learned 
Pandit was holding forth in a very pedantic manner the story of Gajendramoksha (liberation of 
Elephant King) from the Bhaagavatha, before the Maharaaja in his Durbaar Hall, before a large 
gathering of courtiers. He described how the Lord, on hearing the agonised call for succour from 
the elephant held by the jaws of the monstrous crocodile, hurried from Heaven (Vaikuntha) 
without stopping even to collect His insignia and weapons, without even intimating to His 
consort whither He was bound and on what mission. Suddenly the Maharaaja interrupted him 
with the question, "Tell me, Pandit, how far is this Vaikuntha?" The learned Pandit did not know 
the distance; he was nonplussed. Nor did any of the other scholars in the palace know the 
answer. 


But, the servant, who was fanning the King from behind the throne, offered to furnish the 
answer, if his impertinence was pardoned. The Pandit was shocked at his effrontery, but the 
Maharaaja allowed him to speak. "Your Majesty! Vaikuntha is as far as the cry of the elephant 
could be heard", he said. Yes; when the anguish of a devotee's heart is expressed as a cry or a 
groan or a sigh, the Lord is as far only as that sound could reach; He rushes to the rescue. His ear 
is always on the alert to listen to the cry of His children. His residence, Vaikuntha, is within 
hearing distance of every cry, from every grief-stricken heart. That illiterate servant knew in a 
flash the Omnipresence and the compassion of the Lord. 


Mahaabhaaratha war is happening within every one 


The Lord is devoid of attachment or hatred. He comes on a Mission and is bent only on that task. 
It is His nature to support the right and admonish the wrong. His task is to restore vision to man, 
to turn his footsteps along the path of morality and self-control, so that he may achieve Self- 
knowledge. 


He is Himself the supreme example of the teachings of the Geetha. He reveals Himself in the 
Geetha; the Geetha is the one text wherefrom you can get a complete picture of the nature and 
characteristics of Avathaars. He acts as friend, companion, charioteer, teacher, guide and 
guardian of His devotees. The Mahaabhaaratha War is not a chapter in ancient history; it is 
taking place in every human breast, between the forces of good and evil. He who recognises the 
value of installing the Lord, the Yogeeshwara Krishna, as the Charioteer, is certain to win; others 
fail to foil the forces of evil; they succumb and fall. Accept Him as your Master; surrender all 
activities to Him; dedicate your words and deeds and thoughts to Him, as flowers at His Feet; He 
assures you, 'Vokshayishyaami'--I shall liberate you; He assuages you, ‘Maa suchaah'---Do not 
grieve. 


Devotees who loved Krishna's company 


Arjuna was a qualified candidate for being told the highest truth. He had discrimination, 
renunciation and the aspiration to know. He was aware all the time of the glory that was Krishna; 
he had implicit faith in Krishna's wisdom, power and grace. He belongs to the category of priya 
naamra sakha---a loved and humble friend. Bheeshma, Uddhava, Bheema, Dhroupadhi---all 
belong to this category of devotees. Uddhava was such a close friend that Krishna gave him 


advance information of the destruction and disappearance of the Yaadavas. Bheeshma knew that 
Krishna was the Lord Incarnate; he asserted this in the Kaurava court on many a crucial 
occasion, and he was happy that he got a vision of Krishna in his last moments. Then there are 
some who are priya-sakhas (loved friends), with whom Krishna played and joked and kept joyful 
company. Others were delighted with His darshan, sparshan and sambhaashana (sight, touch 
and conversation) and sought to be in His presence as long as possible. Such were the cowherd 
boys. They are friends. Then, we have a group of suhrids or senior comrades, well-wishers and 
companions, who had a parental affection towards Him, anxious about Him and His 
circumstances, happy when they can fondle Him or serve Him or make Him glad. 


The Gopees, however, are a class of devotees by themselves. They reached the highest peak of 
devotion. They had no consciousness of anything other than the Lord; they had renounced the 
consciousness of the senses and the body. They were attached only to the Principle of Krishna 
that was resident in that body. They were eager to know the "other", not to experience "this". 
When King Pareekshith asked Sage Shuka, who was relating to him the wonderful tale of the 
Gopees and their love towards Krishna, about the nature of that love, Shuka replied that since 
they had no body-consciousness they were always immersed in God-consciousness only; 
therefore there was no touch of the gross or material or physical in their love towards the Lord. It 
is the identification with the body and the slavery to the senses that it breeds that cause all the 
cruelty, injustice and violence that stalk the world. 


There was a court clown once who was discovered by the king searching for some lost thing on 
the top terrace of the palace. The king asked him what he was looking for; he replied that a camel 
had broken loose and it might have climbed up the steps, on to the terrace; so, he had ascended 
the steps to verify. The king laughed at his absurd surmise, but, the clown said, "If you, with all 
that hump of pride and crookedness of belief, can reach Heaven as you believe you can, a camel 
too could reach the terrace, climbing up the five stairs." 


The Gopees knew the secret of spiritual surrender. Their worship was not tainted by any 
bargaining spirit. For those who bargain and crave for profit, reverence is equated with the 
returns; they sell homage at so much per unit of satisfactory response. They are like paid 
servants, clamouring for wages, overtime allowance, bonus, etc. They calculate how much they 
are able to extract for the service rendered. Be, on the other hand, a member of the family, a 
kinsman, a friend. Feel that you are the Lord's own. Then, the work will not tire; it will be done 
much better; it will yield more satisfaction; and, the wages? The master will maintain you in 
bliss. What more can any one aspire for? Leave the rest to Him; He knows best; He is All; the 
joy of having Him is enough reward. This is the secret of human happiness. Live out your lives 
on these lines and you will never come to grief. Na me bhakthaah pranashyathi, says Krishna--- 
"My devotees never suffer sorrow". 


Prashaanthi Nilayam: Gokulaashtami, 19-8-1965 


37. Where the mind ends 


This Prashaanthi Nilayam is the Nilayam of Nithya Shaanthi---of the peace that cannot be 
disturbed---because it is based on deep discrimination and on unshakable renunciation of 
attachment to sense objects (vishaya vaasana). To be here on this sacred day is indeed a great 
piece of good fortune. Thousands of aspirants and seekers have assembled here and those who 
have come into this auspicious company have to make the best use of the chance. Instead of 
celebrating this Dasara Festival in feasting and catering to the frailties of the senses, I am happy 
you have determined to spend it in holy thoughts. 


The Dasara Festival honours the victory of the devas over the asuras---the forces of 
righteousness over the forces of evil. They were able to win, because Paraashakthi (the Dynamic 
Aspect of Divinity) the Power that has elaborated God into all this variety and all this beauty--- 
came to succour them and fight on their behalf. This country also had to meet the invasion by 
unrighteous forces and the same Paraashakthi has saved it from loss and dishonour. Therefore, 
we are celebrating this Festival with added significance. 


Holy company such as this helps to arouse the desire to know oneself, to know the true nature of 
the world around us and to know how best we can discover and experience the Unity of both, 
expressed in the Vedhic dictum (Mahaavaakya), Thath-thwam-asi, "That-thou-art". It is through 
the subtle influence of the company into which they were inducted that Naarada, the son of a 
maid, was transformed into the foremost practitioner and exponent of Bhakthi-maarga; that 
Vaalmeeki, a highway robber, was transmuted into a great sage, the first and foremost among 
poets; that many sinners were shown the path of repentance and redemption. 


India is destined to be a huge Prashaanthi Nilayam 


Bhaarath has been built on the foundation of Dharma (righteousness), laid down by sages like 
Naarada and Vaalmeeki, teaching the people that one should not enthuse over victory or droop 
over defeat, that both are to be welcomed as tests of one's faith in God. This is a land where faith 
in God is imbibed at the mother's breast by every child since millennia,, and, so, it will never 
give way to despair and grief. It will rely on the Lord within and discover inexhaustible 
reinforcements of courage within each heart. The final victory is for those who have faith in the 
invincible Aathman, Reality. Such men will have no hate in their hearts; they will only be sad 
that others are greedy and envious and their prayers will be for the granting of wisdom, humility 
and love to their opponents: "O God, grant them sad-buddhi, discrimination, the power of cool, 
calm judgement." 


All sons and daughters of India pray, since Vedhic times, "Lokaassamasthaah sukhino 
Bhavanthu"---"May all the denizens of all the worlds be happy." That is why India has been the 
Teacher, the Guide, for all humanity. That is why she has survived the onslaughts of alien 
cultures and is ready even today to take up that role. As a matter of fact, India is destined to be, 
India has all the qualifications to be, a huge Prashaanthi Nilayam, from which the message of 
prashaanthi (tranquillity) will radiate over the whole world. 


Desire ceases when God seizes the mind 


But, first, each one of you must make your own heart a Prashaanthi Nilayam. The transformation 
must begin from this very moment. Analyse your words, deeds, and thoughts and get rid of the 
evil ones that harm you and others; then, cultivate instead the sahana (fortitude), shaanthi (firm 


peace), sathya (speaking only the truth), etc. Now, the mind flutters about and squats on all and 
sundry objects in the Universe. It refuses to stay only on one idea, God. Like the fly that sits on 
fair and foul, but denies itself the pleasure of sitting on a hot cinder, the mind too flees from all 
thought of God. The fly will be destroyed, if it sits on fire; the mind too is destroyed, when it 
dwells on God, for, the mind is but a pattern of desire woven with the warp and woof of the same 
material. When Raama enters the mind, kaama has no place therein. Desire ceases, when God 
seizes the mind. In fact, since desire is the very stuff of which the mind is made, it becomes non- 
existent and you are free. This stage is called, mano-nigraha, mano-laya or mano-naashana---the 
death of the mind, the merging of the mind or the killing of the mind. 


Now I am about to hoist the Prashaanthi Flag and I want you to hoist it on your own hearts, at the 
same time. It is the symbol of spiritual discipline and success. It is delineated here, in front of 
this Nilayam, in this Circle. Some of you might have summed that it is here, as a decoration. No; 
that is not My intention. Everything I do serves two purposes; it must be charming and it must be 
educative, elevating. It must convey some meaning to those who seek. 


This Nilayam has no wall around it, since like the heart, it is an expanse; but, it has three gates; 
the outermost one, representing Thamas (through which people enter with waywardness, doubt, 
despondency, etc.); the second one, representing Raajas (crossing this, men are attracted by 
Drsyaananda, Nethraananda and Mano-aananda, (the sights that please the eye and the mind), 
and the third one, leading to the Prayer Hall where people develop the rarer, purer qualities 
called Saathwik. This circle summarises the progress of the aspirant towards realisation, from the 
dreary sands of desire, through the wild hushy patches of anger and hate, on to the green lawn of 
prema (love); gaining the broad region of aananda (bliss) he sits in yogic contemplation, and the 
Kundalini shakthi (dormant spiritual power in man) is awakened, until the lotus of the Heart 
blooms and supreme Flame is kindled, scattering darkness of ajnaana (ignorance). Like the 
pictures in children's books, the circle, with the concrete representation of the symbol on the flag, 
will serve to remind you and teach you the lesson I am emphasising. 


The Mahaarani of Cutch, who is to preside over the Hospital Day this evening, was very much 
agitated whether she could come in time, on account of the disturbed conditions on the border 
with Pakistan, or whether Dasara itself will be cancelled by Me, as so many have done in Mysore 
and elsewhere. But, in spite of all obstacles, the fighting has stopped and news has come that 
peace is restored. This is another instance of the Grace which Prashaanthi Nilayam showers. This 
is the way Mahima (Divine Glory) works. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam: Dasara, 1965:26-9-1965 


38. Well or ill 


The Aarogyanilayam (hospital), whose anniversary we are celebrating today, is superfluous if the 
Aanandanilayam (the abode of bliss) is efficiently utilised by you, for when the mind is 
immersed in Aananda, the body will not suffer from illness. The body is the vehicle which you 
have to use for attaining the state of bliss and so, it has to be kept safe and strong for that high 
purpose. It is an instrument for spiritual effort, which has been earned by the merit of previous 
births. Every moment, it is proceeding towards dissolution and so time should not be wasted in 
vain pursuits. It is even better to think of the body as mean and low, rather than raise it to the 
level of the be-all and end-all of life. Treat it as a wound, which has to be covered by bandage 
(clothes), treated with drugs (food) and washed (drink); you can get rid of this inordinate 
attachment, only by that method. 


You can get real urge and inspiration to serve others only when you get rid of the identification 
with the body. When a man suffers from acute stomach pain, his eyes water. Why? Because, the 
various organs---eye, stomach, etc.---are all of the same body. So too, when one man suffers, 
your eyes must shed tears and you must be urged to alleviate it. This will happen if you know 
that you and he are limbs of the self-same Divine Body. The idea of difference (bheda bhaava), 
arises on account of the ignorance of the Truth. When people get angry, they gnash their teeth, 
but, they take care not to bite the tongue, for the tongue is theirs; if by chance, the tongue is bit, 
they do not knock the teeth out, for the teeth is theirs. So too, the sick man, the poor man, the 
suffering man, the illiterate man, the wicked man, are all limbs of the same body, of which we 
too are parts. The same current activates all. To realise this and to merge in that Unity is the 
purpose of this life in the human body. 


The hall-mark of devotion 


For this consummation, the seeds of vishaya vaasana (attachment to sense-objects) have to be 
scrupulously got rid of. A field may look barren and dead; but the first shower of rain will 
convert it into a green carpet; the seeds of grass in the soil sprout at the touch of dampness. So 
too, at the first contact with temptation, the vishaya vaasana of people sprouts and prevents the 
growth of spiritual discipline. 


To visualise the Lord as resident in all and as responsible for everything (for He is the Director 
of the Play) is the hall-mark of devotion. There was once a devotee who arranged in his house a 
week-long Paaraayana (reading with explanatory elaboration) of the Bhagavad Geetha. Every 
one thanked him for this signal service and complimented him on his devotion. On the second 
day, a cow died in his shed; he stopped the discourse, because he felt that the cow died as a 
consequence of the novel programme he had arranged. Now, what relation can there be between 
the death of the cow and the devotion of the man? The devotee must be free from worldly desire, 
from anxiety to preserve cattle and wealth, through his devotion. It is surrender to the Will of 
God, acceptance of whatever happens, in spite of the fullest utilisation of the faculties man is 
endowed with. 


A devotee who was worshipping the Lord in the form of Shiva, and another, who was revering 
the Vishnu form met once and entered into conversation. The Vishnubhaktha moaned that those 
who worshipped Vishnu lost their properties, money, cattle, lands and houses for some unknown 
reason, through mysterious ways; but, he said, the Shivabhakthas were adding to their wealth, 
their cattle multiplied, their lands developed fast. The Shivabhaktha moaned that Shiva was not 


granting that same boon to His devotees! Those who lose their properties will be free from the 
bother of kinsmen, they can rush to God for succour, unhampered; they have no burden to bear. 


Do not reduce spiritual effort to empty routine 


When a man dies, if he dies indigent, no one would claim kinship with him. But, if he leaves 
behind some property, many will fight over his corpse for the privilege of performing the last 
rites. The giver of the boon knows its use and its benefits. You are not to judge it, for, yours is 
the short term view. He knows the past, the present and the future. 


Spiritual practice must be done sincerely, with a full sense of responsibility. It must not be 
reduced to mere empty routine. There was a Brahmin once who returned from overseas after a 
few years spent there in studies; his father had insisted that he should repeat the holy Gaayathri 
manthra 108 times, both morning and evening, every day, as he used to do before emplaning for 
the West. But, now that spiritual effort had become a hollow ritual for him; his vision got 
blurred, his skills had increased. So just to satisfy his old father, he repeated the Gaayathri once 
and said ditto, ditto, ditto, a hundred and seven times, thereafter! 


You cannot save yourself by tricks; spiritual effort is a hard process. 
Janaka's dream that led to his illumination 


Reality can be grasped in a flash of illumination, as happened to Emperor Janaka. One evening, 
Janaka was in his Durbar Hall, surrounded by his courtiers and a bevy of female musicians; they 
sang sweet melodies and the Emperor enjoyed the music so well he slept off, while on the 
throne. No one had the temerity to awaken him', they all quietly slipped into the inner 
apartments, lest their talk and movements should disturb him. He was left alone with an 
attendant and the queen. At about midnight, he screamed pitiably and awoke at the sound. His 
queen ran towards him; the Emperor asked her, "Is that real? Or is this real?" She could not find 
an answer to this question, for how could she know which was 'that' and which was 'this'? The 
Emperor asked every one the same question; in fact, he spoke no other word. That question was 
continuously on his lips. News spread that Janaka had gone mad; there was mourning 
everywhere. A sage who heard of this came to the palace and was brought to the Imperial 
Presence. He assured Janaka that he will answer his question provided he told him what he saw 
in his dream, while sleeping on the throne and why he screamed so. 


Janaka had a dream. He dreamt that rival kings joined forces and invaded his dominion and 
captured his capital and that to save himself from them he ran into a forest. Fleeing from his foes, 
he had no food for days together. He was too exhausted to move. But, hunger dragged him on. 
When he came to the outskirts of a tribal village, he saw a man washing his plate after taking 
food; he shouted to him asking for a few particles. The man gave him a small morsel, but, as bad 
luck would have it, a crow flew in at that moment and snatched it away! That was the reason 
why he screamed in agony. 


That was why he asked, "Is that real? Or, is this real?" The hunger was as real as the throne; 
ruling over the Empire is as real as the loss of empire was, in the dream. The sage told him, 
"That is unreal; this too is unreal. That was a swapna (dream-state) this is jaagrath (waking- 
state)---both are mithya (illusory); not false, because they are relatively real, though not 
absolutely real; they have temporary reality, a reality that is negatived by subsequent 
investigation and experience. But, you dreamed, you woke, you screamed, you asked; therefore, 
you existed during both stages; so you alone are real. The 'I' that persists in all the three stages--- 


waking, dream, deep sleep--- that 'I' is the only reality: it is the 'I' that appears as all this 
manifested Universe." 


The saadhana that will reveal the Reality 


In the sathya, there is no mithya; but, in the mithya jagath (illusive world) you have to search for 
sathya (truth) and experience it. You can do it if you rid your mind of all modifications and 
modulations. Let it be transformed from its present complex confusion into something like the 
sky, which does not bear any mark though millions of birds fly through it and thousands of 
planes move across it. Be unaffected, untouched, unattached. That is the spiritual discipline 
which will reveal the Reality, and which will ensure both physical and mental equanimity. 


When I heard the Report that was read now, I was not happy. It said that last year, the number of 
out-patients treated was 22,000 but, this year it had increased to 23,000. Illnesses are caused not 
so much by the food people eat or the conditions in which they live, but by mental weakness and 
mental attitudes, prejudices and predilections. Desires, disappointments, despair-- -these also 
cause diseases. For many illnesses, filling the mind with the thought of God is the curative drug. 
For the rest, regimented diet, sleep, pastimes and activities are effective cures. The Shaastras 
(scriptures) taught this regimen and the proper mental attitudes and their teachings are invaluable 
at the present time. 


Welcome inspiration from any quarter 


Give the body the attention it deserves, but not more. Some people advise that you should 
cultivate disgust towards it; but, that is not beneficial. Tend it as an instrument, use it as a boat, 
as a raft. Disgust is not a desirable attitude towards anything in creation. Everything is God's 
handiwork, an example of His Glory, His Majesty. Consider the crow, for example. You dislike 
its cawing but, what does its cry "Kaav, Kaav!" mean? Kaav in Telugu, means "Save, protect". It 
is reminding you to pray to God. It is praying so, itself, all the while. What a great lesson it 
teaches! 


You know the Raamayaana story, of the crow that teased Seetha, that drew upon itself the ire of 
Raama, that flew in terror all round the world to escape His arrow, that finally fell before both 
Raama and Seetha in total surrender (Kaav, Kaav); it was saved thereby. The story says that its 
eye was damaged by the anger of Raama, but it was granted enough compensation. They both, 
Raama and Seetha, fondled it and blessed it, pardoning it for its impudence. The cow too when it 
voices forth "Ambaa! Ambaa!" is calling on the Mother, the Jagadamba---the Mother of the 
Universe as well as its own Mother. Welcome inspiration from any quarter, for your own 
improvement. 


When you cultivate the attitude that you are the body, the body will demand from you more 
food, more variety in food, more attention to appearance and physical comfort. A large portion of 
the food now consumed is superfluous; man can live healthily on much less. A good deal of 
effort and expenditure now spent to cater to taste and to social pomp can be given up, and health 
too will improve thereby. "Mitha thindi, athi haayi"---"Moderate food gives excellent health". 
Gourmets only reveal their Thamoguna (quality of inertia and indolence). Eat to live; do not 
believe that you live in order to eat. 


Methods of avoiding illness 


Another method of avoiding illness is to diminish mental worry. Now, I find people are 
increasing their worries, and getting anxious about things that they do not understand; nor can 


they correct them or reform them. The radio, the newspaper and other means of communication 
or information cause so much fear and discontent, that worry and anxiety are increased and the 
mind of man gets weakened. Parents talk about their anxiety before their children and so, they 
start worrying. 


There was a six-year old boy who came to Me the other day, weeping, because his father was 
involved in debt and was being pestered by his creditors. His father must have lamented before 
the boy, "Poor fellow! How am I to feed you and clothe you and pay your fees and buy books for 
you? I am sunk in debt". The boy said that even in the class room, he was worried about the 
father and his debts. You must not allow the boys to know about all this; their tender minds will 
be harmed by fear and anxiety. Their health also will be affected. 


Fear is the biggest cause for illness. When you have slight temperature, you start imagining that 
it is the beginning of some serious fever. You say to yourself someone whom you knew had also 
a slight increase of temperature, which later became serious and led to complications and so, you 
become more prone to illness than formerly. Think rather of the instances where fever was 
prevented or overcome; think of the Grace of the Lord that restores and saves. 


Resolve that relying on His Grace, you shall be free from illness from this moment. Transfer the 
faith that you have in drugs to God; put your trust, not in medicine, but in Maadhava. I am 
astounded at the number of people resorting to tablets and tonics. Resort to prayer, to saadhana, 
japam and dhyaanam. They are the vitamins you need; they will restore you. No tablet is as 
efficacious as Raamnaam. I shall give you Vibhuthi (sacred ash) and that will cure you. Now, 
you are in two minds, like the man who had to leave his shoes outside the temple. He stood 
before the shrine with folded hands, muttering a sthothra, but his mind was filled with anxiety 
about the safety of the shoes he had to place outside. The hospital is for those who have faith in 
drugs and doctors. But, what can drugs and doctors do without the Grace of God? The day will 
surely come when the hospital will be superfluous, since all will be healthy and free from illness, 
accepting the Saadhana way, the Aananda way, to peace and happiness. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam: Dasara, 26-9-1965 


Love as thought is Truth, 

Love as action is Righteous Conduct, 
Love as feeling is Peace, 

Love as understanding is Non-violence. 
Love is selflessness, 

Selfishness is Lovelessness. 

Love gives and forgives, 

selfishness gets and forgets. 

SHRI SATHYA SAI 


39. Vitamin G 


In the Sharannavarathri Festival, we have here Vedhapaaraayana, yajna and recitation of 
manthras and sthothras. Like radio waves, these carry to all quarters the prayers and praise they 
contain. Just as a yanthra (instrument) is needed to listen to the omnipresent radio programmes, a 
manthra is needed to communicate with the higher regions and their denizens. This journey of 
the word and the voice are far more subtle and significant than the journeys to the moon or 
around the world in space. Man must understand that the journey to his own inner realm and the 
discovery of its treasures are far more important than these engineering feats. That inner journey 
spreads love; this outer journey infects continents with fear. 


Man is now mistaking his illness and running after wrong drugs. Or rather, he is mistaking the 
very nature of his health. He is quite well but he is deluded into the belief that he is unwell and 
that he must quickly acquire the panacea recommended by the most readily available quack, who 
flatters you by giving you just the drug that you desire most. Discovering that there is nothing 
the matter with one, is the illumination one gets, with the dawn of spiritual knowledge. 


Just as there are four stages in the life of everyone---boyhood, youth, middle age and old age--- 
there are four stages in his acquisition of jnaana (knowledge of Supreme Being), 
contemporaneous with these stages. Jnaana is the ripeness of the fruit; which is the 
consummation of a long process, from the first appearance of the flower in the tree. The first 
stage is the apprentice stage: being trained by parents, teachers, elders; being led, guided, 
regulated, warned, reprimanded. The second stage is the junior craftsman stage: eager to 
establish happiness and justice in society, eager to know the world and its worth and values. The 
third is the craftsman stage: pouring out energies to reform, reconstruct, remake the human 
community. The fourth stage is the master stage’ realisation that the world is beyond redemption 
by human effort, that one can at best save oneself by trying to reform the world, that it is all His 
Will, His Handiwork, His World, Himself. 


Let the sense of equality feed all your activity 


Along with this dawn of jnaana, there must also dawn the will to direct all activity in the light of 
that vision. When you realise that He is the innermost Reality of all, you can worship one 
another, with as much fervour as you now employ when you worship an idol. But, since the 
worship of an idol is more feasible, this is recommended; but the attitude must be that He who is 
in the idol is also equally found in all. Have the sense of equality feeding all your activity, but do 
not make all your acts equal with all, and for all. 


A razor cannot be used for shaving a pencil or a beard or a wooden plank, without distinction. 
But a beggar who begs for alms, a King who prays for victory, are both beggars at the footstool 
of God. In order to test whether the King had a correct sense of spiritual values, once both 
Bharthrhari and Gopichand went to the Court and sent word that they were badly in need of 
bread. The King was delighted that these great men had come to his capital city. He sent a 
sizeable quantity of bread; but, when it was handed over to them they fell to fighting for shares. 
This was reported to the King and he declared immediately that the visiting monks could not be 
Bharthrhari and Gopichand. They would have no trace of greed or envy, he said. So the saints 
knew that the King was wise. 


Minimum qualification for God's Grace 


Reading that Krishna advises in the Geetha the giving up of all Dharmas, an enthusiastic devotee 
gave up all obligations and limits, but he had to be told that one obligation still remained and 
could not be given up, if the Grace of God had to be secured: maam ekam sharanam vraja 
"Surrender to Me only". When that surrender is complete and all acts, words and thoughts are 
dedicated to Him, along with all their consequences, then, the Lord has promised that He will 
free you from sin and sorrow. The Aashrama Dharma, the Varna Dharma and the various Kula 
Dharmas (dharma of ascetics, social groups and families) and Deshaachaaras (customs and laws 
of the land)---are all means and methods of fostering this attitude of dedication and surrender. 


Just as you prescribe minimum qualifications for every profession, the minimum qualification 
for Grace is surrender of egoism, control over senses and regulated Aahaara and vihaara (food 
and recreation). A man is made or marred by the company he keeps. A bad fellow who falls into 
good company is able to shed his evil quickly and shine forth in virtue. A good man falling into 
evil company is overcome by the subtle influence and he slides down into evil. The lesser is 
overpowered by the greater. A drop of sour curd tranforms milk, curdling it and separating the 
butter, turns it into whey. Sacred books are also equally valuable for this transmuting process, 
but they have to be read and pondered upon and their lessons have to be put into daily practice. 
The Gaayathri is the Vedhic Manthra whispered in the ear during the ceremony of initiation into 
spiritual life. The Gaayathri is a prayer to the Supreme Intelligence that is immanent in the 
Universe to kindle the intelligence of the supplicant. It is a prayer that can well be spoken with 
yearning by men and women of all creeds and climes in all centuries. But, some people condemn 
it as meaningless jumble of words, and, though initiated, they neglect it. Repetition of this 
manthra will develop the intelligence. 


Illness is caused more by malnutrition of mind 


When the mind of man is unattached to the ups and downs of life, but is able to maintain 
equanimity under all circumstances, then even physical health can be assured. The mental 
firmament must be like the sky, which bears no mark of the passage through it of birds or planes 
or clouds. Illness is caused more by malnutrition of the mind than of the body. Doctors speak of 
vitamin deficiency; I will call it the deficiency of Vitamin G, and I will recommend the repetition 
of the Name of God, with accompanying contemplation of the glory and grace of God. That is 
the Vitamin G. That is the medicine; regulated life and habits are two-thirds of the treatment, 
while the medicine is just one-third only. 


Man must reveal the divine qualities of love, humility, detachment and contentment. If he does 
not, he becomes worse than a beast and more deadly. There was a dog that pleaded with Raama 
for a place in the aerial car in which he returned to Ayodhya. When Raama asked the reason for 
this strange behaviour and request, it said that man had become worse than worms and fleas; he 
had started tormenting dogs, who were loyally serving him! One should so live that no pain is 
caused to other being through one's activities. And, one should be ever grateful for kindness 
received. Kaarthaveerya was treated with lavish hospitality by Sage Jamadagni but the wicked 
man coveted the Kaaamadhenu (wish-fulfilling cow) that made the lavishness possible. 


Bharthrihari, on the death of the queen, was so struck with remorse, that he wept and moaned on 
the cremation ground itself for days on end. Seeing his inconsolable plight, one sage came before 
him, with a mud pot in his hand. Right in front of the bereaved man, the pot slipped from his 
hand, fell on the hard ground and was broken. The sage wept and moaned and was inconsolable. 


Bharthrihari consoled him and' said the broken pot cannot be made whole by any amount of 
lamentation. Suddenly, he realised the absurdity of his own behaviour and stopped crying; this 
was the purpose of the sage's ruse! 


You come to Puttaparthi, listen to these discourses, nod approval and clap hands, in appreciation. 
But, when you pass through the gate on the way home, it all evaporates. Or, you apply the 
lessons you learn in an indiscriminate way and suffer. There was a merchant who used to attend 
discourses and when he heard a speaker say that cows should not be driven off while they are 
feeding, he looked on when a cow entered his shop and ate of a good portion of the grains he had 
kept for sale. Later, he was told that he should not take every bit of advice he received as valid 
for all occasions; and he advised his son, "Look here, you sit on the floor on a towel while 
listening to the discourse, is it not? When the discourse is over and you rise up, do you not wave 
the towel forcibly in the wind to shake off all the sand it collected? Shake off from your mind 
and brain all the ideas and advice you have collected during the discourse and then come home." 
If you do as that merchant advised, what is. the benefit of coming and staying, hearing and being 
exhorted? 


Prashaanthi Nilayam: Dasara, 27-9-1965 


40. Right and left 


The Vedhas and the Shaastras provide illumination to guide the steps of man but, to the blind, it 
is always dark, however bright the illumination; for those who have lost faith, faltering along, 
stumbling and falling is the only course: The Shaastras and the Vedhas point out the means of 
securing the secret of lasting joy; but, man is attempting to earn shadowy joys, fleeting pleasures, 
pleasures fraught with evil and harm. He is trying to draw water with a pot full of holes. The 
senses leak out the joy he draws. They are wild untutored servants who dictate to their master, 
the mind. 


The mind has to be brought under your grip; then, the servants will fawn at your feet. The mind 
is the monarch; the senses or indriyas are the soldiers; the soldiers are now ruling the king, 
because he lends his ears to them and not to buddhi (intellect), who is the Prime Minister. Let 
buddhi take charge; in a moment, the senses will be forced back into camp and the mind can save 
itself. The Aathma is the Sun in the firmament of the Heart. Now, the light of the Sun is 
obstructed by the thick clouds of vishaya-vaasana (desire for sense objects and objective 
pleasure); let the strong wind of paschaath-thaapa (repentance and resolution) scatter the clouds, 
so that the Aathma may shine forth brilliantly. 


Man thinks he is enjoying the pleasures; but really speaking, it is the pleasures that are enjoying 
man, for, they sap his energies, dry up his discrimination, eat up his allotted years, and worm into 
his mind, infesting it with egoism, envy, malice, hate, greed and lust. You should not plunge into 
action spurred by momentary impulse; ponder deeply over the pros and cons; weigh the expected 
benefits against the likely harm; then act so that you escape pain and you do not inflict pain. This 
is true in worldly matters as well as in the spiritual field. A woman heard some one expounding 
Thath-thwam-asi (That thou art); she took it immediately to head and behaved as if she had no 
need to eat and drink and be in society and family thereafter. The truth of Thath-thwam-asi must 
lead to Bhaava Adwaitham (nonduality of self), not Karma Adwaitham (duality of action), for, 
when you come down into the field of karma, duality is inevitable. 


Truth behind two aspects of God 


Saguna and Nirguna (with Form and Formless) aspects of God create the same doubt in the 
minds of saadhak, whether they can both be true. It is like hardened ghee and liquid ghee. Ice 
and water are the same; water takes the form of the vessel which contains it. It is formless. But, 
yet, there is no distinction between ice and water. In saadhana, the saguna worship and the 
nirguna meditation are like the right and left feet for the journey. During the saguna worship, the 
basic nirguna aspect of God has to be sustaining the mind; no description can exhaust the Glory, 
no word can approximate the Majesty. During the nirguna meditation, the faith that God does 
not diminish His Glory or Majesty by being with Form, attributes and name must be the 
sustaining force. The final step, however, must be the right foot, considered auspicious, the 
nirguna step. 


The jeeva (individual soul) is destined to lose its separate Name and Form and merge in the 
formless and the nameless. All must find their ultimate destiny in the nirguna. But, there are 
some who say that since the jeeva is caught up in birth and death, it can never attain the merger 
with the Eternal; it has to be eternally separate and distinct. The jeeva is born in sin, immersed in 
sin, revelling in sin and so it can at best be granted only admission to the presence of the Lord. 


A person who held this opinion once went to a village and gave a discourse on the impossibility 
of man attaining merger with the Absolute and the Universal. One adwaithin (non-dualist) who 
was in the audience got up and said, this declaration is being made by even the most illiterate 
ryot here; why, our washerman will make it. He called the washerman in and asked him "Who 
are you, tell me, truly." The fellow got frightened at this sudden invitation to announce his 
nature. He said, "I am a low mean sinner." Turning to the Pandit on the platform, the adwaithin 
said, "If you can tell us something more than what this washerman can tell us, then, speak on." 
Man must strive to break the bonds, to cleanse the sin, to regain lost glory, to attain to the highest 
majesty. That is the goal worth striving for, with all the equipment he is provided with. 


Remove the weeds in the garden of your heart 


The Vedhas and Shaastras have been teaching one thing; but those who claim to revere them are 
practising another thing. Listening to the teacher at a Vedhic school was one boy, among the 
many, in the class; he was watching a rat making its way into a hole in the wall opposite. 
Suddenly the teacher turned towards him and asked, "Has it gone in?", meaning, "Has this point 
entered your brain?" The boy answered, "The tail is still outside the hole", taking the question to 
be about the rat which he was watching! That is the condition of Hindus today: listening to 
Vedhas and watching the vanities of the world, the petty problems and personalities that strut on 
the world stage for a moment and disappear. The Shaastras lay down steps in saadhana, so that 
man can have peace, contentment and joy. Get acquainted with them, through these Pandits who 
have dedicated their scholarship and their experience for your benefit. The very first step is to 
remove the weeds in the garden of your heart, plucking by the roots the briar and bush of lust and 
greed, of hate and pride and plant in the ground thus cleared the fragrant flower plants of prema 
(love) and the sweet fruit trees of dharma (virtue). 


Prashaanthi Nilayam: Dasara, 28-9-1965 


God is Truth, 

Truth is Goodness, 
Goodness is beauty. 

Truth, Goodness, Beauty, 
Sathyam, Shivam, Sundaram 
is yourself. 

Be yourself. 

SHRI SATHYA SAI 


41. Silence and solitude 


Man is journeying through the stream of life from one act to another; it is one continuous 
activity, marked by karma throughout. But the pity is he does not know the correct technique of 
karma. The fruit depends upon the seed, the soil, the manure, the care, the fence. The fruit of 
karma has to take account of the tendencies and consequences of the activities in previous lives 
also. The potter takes clay and makes pots and pans; they are mrnmaya---of the earth, earthy. The 
potter, Brahma, makes men; they are chinmaya---of the nature of Aananda, Sath and Chith--- 
absolute bliss, existence, consciousness. Note the difference and shape your activity accordingly. 
Act in accordance with what you profess to be; that is the real Dharma. 


There was a consummate actor who went to the Darbaar of a king, in the role of a monk. The 
king honoured him as a great monk and asked him various questions on saadhana and 
philosophy, which he answered using profound vocabulary and appropiate terms. The king was 
very pleased and he ordered his Minister to bring a plate of gold coins as offerings to the saint. 
The monk spurned the gift. He said that as a Sarvasanga parithyaagi---one who has renounced 
all attachment and desire---he cannot even glance at it and left. The next day, the same actor 
came to the palace as a female artiste, a great dancer. Her dance was the most attractive 
exposition of the art, very orthodox and restrained. The king appreciated it highly and the 
Minister brought, forth the plateful of gold coins. The dancer refused to accept it, because it was 
too small a recompense for the skill exhibited! The king suspected from the voice that it was the 
Sanyaasin of the day previous that was standing before him as the female artiste. Finding that his 
surmise was correct, he asked him why he was asking for more today, when he had refused to 
take the same gift the previous day. The actor replied, "Yesterday, I was a Sanyaasin and so, it 
was my dharma to refuse; today, I am a dancer and so it is my dharma to earn as much 
remuneration as I can from my fans". 


Practise meditation in silence and solitude 


Man's dharma is to cultivate his faculties for the great adventure of realising his oneness with the 
basic substance of the Universe, a substance that is attributeless, but, yet is mistaken to have 
attributes like names and forms and functions. This is declared in the Mahaavaakyas (Vedhic 
Dicta) enshrined in the Vedhas and elaborated in the Upanishads. To get the mind and the 
intelligence fixed in that oneness, man must meditate on them in silence and solitude, under the 
guidance of a Guru. If the teacher himself gives the answers for the questions he asks, how can 
the pupil progress? If the pupil is left to himself, he would be helpless. If he is asked to scribble 
whatever he can, he can only doodle. So, the teacher has to hold his hand and train him in the 
movements. The skill of the hand and brain have thus to be reinforced by the guiding hand of 
the Guru. The pupil has to cultivate concentration. When attention flows in all directions, no 
progress can be made. A good teacher must love the pupil and lead him, step by step. 


Practising meditation in silence and solitude, one can in due course establish silence and solitude 
in the heart, even in the busiest thoroughfares. Now, the puja room or domestic shrines are 
invariably found next to the kitchen; there, the smells of cooking attack the nostrils, the sounds 
of frying and boiling attack the ear, the mind is distracted by voices and noises. How can 
concentration grow in such an atmosphere? Silence has to be started with oneself; that is to say, 
one must talk less, and think more deliberately, more discriminatingly. One must try to empty the 
mind of impulses and prejudices and preferences. Thus, man must strive to reach down to his 
real nature or dharma, which is Divine, Dharmaswaruupa (righteousness personified). 


One need not take to asceticism 


This sahaja-swabhaava (innate nature) is to be found in children; at that stage man is untouched 
by the pulls and stresses of the senses. So, he revels in his own reality, that is, in joy, in shaanthi 
and in prema. Make that stage steady, so that you may lead a dharmic life. That is the 
swadharma of Man. This,dharma saves those who rely on it. That is why the Pakistan conflict 
ended, on the 22nd itself. This Navaraathri is the festival when the Mother, Durga, who defeated 
and destroyed the evil forces is propitiated and pleased; so, it was not cancelled here, as some 
people, who did not know that the conflict would end soon, did. 


To discover one's reality and to dwell in that Divine peace, one need not give up the world and 
take to asceticism. There was a guru who advised one seeker to go to the forests and live there. 
"Go," he said. "How can you have peace in the market-square?" To another seeker, he said, "Stay 
where you are". The two seekers, later met and compared notes. "How is it that he gave such 
contradictory advice? Perhaps, we did not hear him correctly", they said and returned to him; 
but, he said, that his advice was based on the attainments of each of them and what was best for 
each. 


Detachment is the crucial gain; one cultivates it either in the jungle or at home. When Shivaji 
came to the presence of Saint Tukaaraam and brought with him a decorated palanquin to take 
him with him to his capital city, Tukaaraam was rendered sad. "Why have you brought this 
stretcher? Which corpse are these men to bear?" he queried, in derision! Tukaaraam knew the 
dharma that a recluse should follow; he knew the dangers of yielding to the temptation for pomp. 


A devotee is more than an emperor 


There is no one higher than a bhaktha whose mind is fixed in the Truth. He is more than an 
emperor. So far as I am concerned, I give consideration to the bhaktha. Still, you may wonder 
why some are being given special seats and places here. You have heard the adage, 
"Yathaaraaja, thathaa praja"---"As the king, so are the subjects". The rulers have to be brought 
here, so that they may see and hear, and know about things that matter, get inspired by the 
bhakthi that fills the air, so that through them it may be shared by the country at large. The laws 
they pass, and the administrative system that they operate are some of the means by which the 
ideals of the nation can be worked in practice. They have been selected by you for this purpose, 
with this end in view; they have your confidence and they have won the approbation of 
thousands of people and so they have to be treated with some consideration. Those thousands 
look upon them with some respect, and so, treating them with care is tantamount to treating those 
thousands with care. It is to give aananda to the bhakthas that I arrange this festival; I have no 
other wish. Do not muddy the pellucid waters of your faith by the slightest trace of doubt. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam: Dasara, 29-9-1965 


42. Pay the price 


Man's mind is so peculiarly constituted that he puts faith in newspapers and bazaar rumours, but 
refuses to believe that Sri Krishna taught the Geetha to Arjuna or that Vyaasa composed the 
Bhaagavatha. This is because the newspaper caters to his senses, to his craze for sensationalism 
and curiosity about other men and their affairs. Man's sense of values is so degraded that he does 
not revere the Geetha, as much as he values and scans the pages of the daily newspaper. This is 
to be attributed to sheer ignorance and perversity, or pitiable fate. People lend their ears and 
mortgage their brains to wicked and vicious men, revelling in sin. They get the admirers they 
deserve, the following that fouls the air as much as they. 


The fear and anxiety that infect humanity today are the results of this degradation of values, this 
ignorance of what is of significance and what is not, this want of faith in what the elders and 
sages have handed down as the wisdom of ages. People prefer what is pleasing to what is 
beneficial. The patient is dictating to the doctor and insisting on the medicine he likes to 
swallow, the regimen he feels will keep him happy. 


Persons who do not know a single thing about the higher values raise silly questions and doubts; 
you, who have inherited the greatest philosophical texts and the most useful texts on spiritual 
discipline, hesitate to place them before those doubters; you do not know what they contain, nor 
have you practised them and experienced their efficacy. There are people now who claim to be 
Indians, but who do not know who Raama is, who refer to his queen as Mrs. Raama since they 
do not know her name. Such men may have as many degrees as I have hairs on my head, but, 
they are unworthy to be called the children of this land. What if a person rolls in wealth, goes 
about in cars, and lives in a multistoreyed mansion? Of what avail is your filling yourself with 
information regarding film-stars and prize-fighters? As Ramana Maharishi used to tell every one 
who went to him, "Know who you are". When asked, "Who are you?" you invariably give the 
name that some one fixed on you as a label. But, who are you, really? Have you tried to know 
that correctly and well? 


Get something divine if you want the Divine 


It is the running after vishaya vaasana---attachment to sense objects---that produces all this 
discontent. That vaasana, that type of desire, has no end. Once you become a slave to the senses, 
they will not leave hold of you until your death. It is an unquenchable thirst. But I call you to Me 
and even grant worldly boom, so that you may turn Godward. No Avathaara has done like this 
before, going among the people, the masses, the millions, and counselling them, guiding them, 
consoling them, uplifting them, directing them along the path of Sathya, Dharma, Shaanthi and 
Prema. You must have wondered way I have prohibited you from bringing flowers and fruits and 
other offerings; you argue that the Geetha requires that you must bring at least these when you 
come to the Lord; that when going to the presence of elders and saints, one should not go empty 
handed. 


Here, in this Prashaanthi Nilayam, pathram, pushpam, phalam and thoyam (leaf, flower, fruit 
and water)---all the four should not be brought by devotees. Of course, I accept your offerings, 
but I take another four: Sathya, Dharma, Shaanthi and Prema (Truth, Virtue, Peace and Love). 
Bring me these or any one of these and I shall most gladly accept the gift. When you demand a 
thing, you must be prepared to pay the price, the price equal to its value. You cannot bargain a 
costly Benares sari for one paisa. Give something divine if you want the Divine. Prema, 


Shaanthi, Dharma and Sathya are Divine. Do not try to get it for a flower that fades, a fruit that 
rots, a leaf that dries, water that evaporates. There are some who write and speak as if they have 
known Me, all that is to be known of Me. Well; I can only say this' they can never know Me and 
My nature, even if they are born and reborn a thousand times. To know Me one has to be like 
Me, rise to this height. Can ants discover the depth of the Ocean? 


God can be won over only by Prema 


My activities and movements will never be altered, whoever may pass whatever opinion on 
them. Meanness may prompt people to remark on My Dress, this gown of colour, or they may 
talk cynically of My Hair, but I shall not be affected a bit. My discourses, My plans for 
Dharmasthaapana (establishment of Dharma), My movements, I shall not modify at all. I have 
stuck to this determination, since 26 years, and I am engaged in the task for which I have come, 
to inculcate the path of Prashaanthi. I shall not stop, nor retract a step. Does a person become 
holier by wearing rags? Of course, this calumny by mean men who cannot endure the brilliance 
of the Sun has been with Me in all the Yugas. A fellow, puffed up with pride and envy, dressed 
himself like Krishna and fixed wooden hands holding Gadha and Chakra; he had the foolish 
bravado of challenging Krishna and finally he paid for this impertinence pretty heavily! How can 
darkness conquer or stand up to light? Krishna is Premaswaruupa and He can be won over only 
by Prema. Audacity cannot approach Him. Actors in films, however correct their accoutrements 
and intonation, can never be the Real. Not even the biggest scientist can understand Me by 
means of the categories to which he is accustomed. I always smile at those who deride Me, and 
even those who praise Me. I am always full of happiness, whatever may happen. Nothing can 
come in the way of My Smile. Derision and calumny only tend to make it grow better and 
happier. 


Do not undermine the faith of others 


That is why I am able to impart joy to you and make your burden lighter. The sambhaashana 
(conversation) with God is said to result in sankata-vimochanam (liberation from the grip of 
grief). Consider the relief that you experience after conversation with Me and dwell upon that 
joy. That is enough to give you peace. It is because I am eager to give you that Joy that, for a ten- 
day festival like this, I myself move about so much and look into every detail of the programmes, 
the arrangements for your stay, etc. Not that there is no one who would do this gladly and well. 


But, watch Me now, I appear as if I am not worried at all, I am without arty care. ! appear as if 
responsibility sits very light on Me or not at all. The Lord is like the Lotus, unaffected by the 
environment where He is; that is the reason why His Eyes, His Face, His Feet, are all compared 
to the Lotus. Do not discard the one Form and one Name---the Form and Name you have 
selected---when some one's tongue wags. Hold fast; and save yourselves. Do not compare and 
cavil at others Ishtadevathas (chosen deities). It is wrong to undermine the faith of another, and 
to disturb your own. Faith is a plant of slow growth; its roots go deep into the heart. Silence is 
the best saadhana, to guard faith; that is why I insist on silence here also, as a first step in 
saadhana for you. 


I am telling you all this, not to inform you about Me, but to strengthen you and render your faith 
firm. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam: Dasara, 30-9-1965 


Establish the status 

of the mother in the home, 
as the upholder of spiritual ideals, 
and, therefore, 

the Guru of the children. 
Every mother 

must share in this effort--- 
the expansion and 

steady manifestations of the 
God-Consciousness 

latent in every child. 

SHRI SATHYA SAI 


43. Discover and decide 


In spite of warnings, admonitions, advice and appeals that he should not submerge himself in the 
trivial and the transitory, man is still drawn towards misery by defects in his understanding. All 
the scriptures that are revered in all lands and climes proclaim that love alone prevails, 
detachment alone is the lasting wealth, unity alone is the truth, God alone is the goal. But, in 
spite of all the reverence and study that these scriptures have received and are receiving, hatred 
and greed are in the ascendant everywhere; factions and fights are rampant in every human 
community; and God is discarded as superfluous or as superstition! Just as when a petromax 
light gets dull, it helps to brighten it when air is pumped vigorously, so too, it is now time to 
invigorate the higher impulses of man, so that he can be saved from calamity. Man has to be 
liberated from the bonds he has woven round himself. 


The scriptures are the records of the thoughts and experiences of pure, unprejudiced, love-filled 
seekers of truth; but men do not believe them: they put their trust in the wayward vicious whims 
of vainglorious individuals. Of course, each one gets the guide he deserves. And, the lamentable 
plight of the world today is proof of its having been led astray by its blind guides. The patient is 
clamouring for the medicines that he can relish, not for the medicine that can cure him according 
to doctors who are experts. The patient chooses the diet and the regimen which are congenial to 
him; he bids adieu to the directions given by the doctor, for, they restrict and regulate. The 
patient has his own categories of judgement, his own doubts and hesitations, created by his own 
fears and foolishness. He does not accept the conclusions of those who know, for, he is afflicted 
with a perverted egoism. 


Derive divine bliss by diving into the depths 


Ice and water are but one in two names and forms; hard ghee and liquid ghee are one and the 
same; so too, the Nirguna (Formless) and the Saguna (with Form) aspects are both the same 
Godhead. But, yet, man uses this simple problem for perpetual argumentation and dispute. He 
talks of the omnipresence of God, but disputes the value of image worship. 


Even about Me, there are some who have had a glimpse of the Truth; there are others who have 
not been able to achieve even that. But, My prema is showered equally on all; I do not reveal or 
refuse; it is for you to discover and decide, derive divine bliss by diving into the depths. How can 
an ant calculate the depth of the sea? How can a man on the ground describe the features of the 
pilot of a plane in the sky? Unless you rise to the heights, by following certain disciplines, you 
cannot experience Godhead. Once you do that, all judgements, all disputations and even sense of 
victory, disappear. 


I know many are puzzled by my practice of listening to your ‘korikas’, (wants, wishes, desires), 
calling you individually and spending long hours with you to satisfy you and to speak to you on 
these ‘earthly’ demands. They say, no avathaara has done this before; it is like catering to 
worldly things; people come with all kinds of worldly desires and every one is welcomed with 
sympathy and love. But, I alone know the basic thirst which expresses itself in these desires and 
wants, the fundamental discontent. 


It is always preferable to approach God for the fulfilment of wants, rather than cringe before 
men, who' themselves are but tools in the hands of God. In his own silent way, God will 
transform the mind and turn it towards saadhana and successful spiritual pilgrimage. He cannot 
allow his children to lose their way and suffer in the jungle. When you approach God and seek 


his help and guidance, you have taken the first step to save yourself. You are then led to accept 
His will as your own. Thus, you achieve shaanthi. 


Come with hands that supplicate, not supply 


You know there is a rule here that you should come with empty hands, without even the 
traditional offerings of pathram, pushpam, phalam, thoyam (leaf, flower, fruit and water). Come 
with clean hands, hands that supplicate, not supply; hands that proclaim that they have renounced 
attachment to riches; then, I fill them with Grace. I must say that I accept certain things before 
giving you that Grace: I demand and take sathya, dharma, shaanthi and prema. | seek the gifts of 
truth, virtue, peace and love. I draw you to me and then re-form and re-shape you. I am a kind of 
smith who repairs broken, leaky damaged hardware. I repair broken hearts and fragile minds, 
warped intellects, feeble resolutions and fading faith 


Do not be under the impression that all these people come to me seeking worldly favours or 
blessings for worldly advancement or fortunes. At least ninety among a hundred of them ask 
from me spiritual guidance only. They do not ask for worldly boons at all. They are eager to be 
directed along the path of japam, dhyaanam, namasmarana or some such saadhana. They are full 
of prema for the Divine Principle and the Divine is full of prema towards them. It is a question of 
Prema responding to prema; Prema which is saturated with sathya, as Vivekaananda was 
saturated with viveka. 


Do not become a puppet in others' hands 


No one has the authority to hate another or condemn him. You have the chance to love him and 
serve him; or, to keep yourself free from him; that is all. If you are attracted when people praise 
you or repelled when they defame you, you become a puppet in their hands. I have been steadily 
fixed on this line since twenty-six years and no amount of calumny or praise will swerve me 
from the path. I do not agree that torn clothes or shaven head or vows of diet or silence mark out 
superior claims for spiritual leadership. People may carp at silken gowns or a crown of hair, but I 
know why I have come and I will not yield. Approach me with prema and I shall reciprocate 
with prema. That has been my nature even in the past ages. In the Dhwaapara age there was a 
vainglorious individual who set up as a 'double', with the same appurtenances and appearance as 
Krishna and challenged him with calumnies and scandals. But, can a film-star who plays the role 
ever become the original itself? Saaruupyam and saayujyam (sameness of form and absorption 
into the diety) are won by love, devotion, faith, humility, wisdom. 


Raama is described as tenderer than the petal of a rose, but, at the same time, harder than 
diamond. He pined for Seetha with extreme tenderness; he sent her to the forest as an exile, with 
a hardness of heart that shocked even Lakshmana. The nature of every Avathaara is such. 
Vasishta and others who were in great sorrow at the fate of Seetha thought of a stratagem to get 
her back to Ayodhya; they persuaded Raama to agree to the performance of an Ashwamedha 
sacrifice; the main performer of this yajna must have a legally wedded wife as an active 
participant and sharer; otherwise, he cannot claim the right to perform the rite! So since Raama 
will never take another wife, they hoped Raama will recall Seetha so that he may perform the 
sacrifice, as agreed upon. But, Raama was too clever for them; he observed the Shaastraic rule 
correctly, by making a golden image of Seetha and allowing it to take the place of the living 
wife, during the ceremony. 


Win Lord's Grace through faith and devotion 


Through a desire to judge or estimate or evaluate, you cannot discover the mystery of God; 
through devotion and faith, you have to win His Grace, which will reveal Him to your 
understanding and experience. Steady faith alone can earn victory. You cannot be changing your 
allegiance as and when you please. Hold fast until the realisation is awarded; when a man is 
suffering from the effects of cobra-bite, they give him chillies to chew; the idea is they will not 
taste "hot" if the poison is still in his system. So too, when the poison of worldly sensualism is 
there, worship, japam, dhyaanam all will taste drab and dismal. 


People may laugh at you for going on pilgrimages or coming to Puttaparthi, especially if you are 
young and have no problems of illness or no crisis in fortune. They cannot appreciate the urge 
for liberation or for everlasting joy; they cannot sympathise with those who long to answer the 
call of the vast magnificence that surrounds them. They try to scotch the beginnings of spiritual 
yearning in children, not knowing that they will grow into a strong armour for them in future 
years. They are afraid their children may become monks in later life and leave their homes. So 
they try to plunge them deeper into pleasures, so that by developing their own type of madness 
they may be cured of divine madness! 


Above all, insist on the senses obeying you, when you command them to desist from dragging 
you. Or else, you are like a horse without a bit in the mouth, a car without a brake. With the 
senses under control, your intelligence will become clear to reflect the Glory of God that 
pervades the Universe. That is the teaching of the Vedhas and of Vedhaantha. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam: Dasara, 1-10-1965 


A man or an institution 

is to be judged by his its integrity, 

whether acts are according to the principles professed 
The mind, the body, the word--- 

all three must work in unison. 

By such disciplined karma 

the senses will be sublimated and prashaanthi won; 
then, out of this prashaanthi will arise 

prakaanthi or the great light, 

and from that will emerge 

Param-jyothi, the suprasplendour of illumination. 
That illumination will reveal 

Param-aathma, the Oversoul, the Universal. 


SHRI SATHYA SAI 


44. Sustained saadhana 


It is an ancient observation---but, it is true even today---that man spends his childhood in pranks 
and play, his boyhood in sport and games, his youth in pleasure and pastimes, his middle age in 
plans and schemes to pile up a fortune, and his old age in hospitals and nursing homes trying to 
bolster up failing health by means of failing wealth. He has no time for anything else; his hands 
are too full. Earning and spending, he fills his time with work and worry. He has no peace, no 
spare time for sitting quiet in one place. 


All appeals to him to pay attention to his essential needs for light and joy are in vain. Of what 
avail is illumination for a blind man.? Of what avail is good counsel for the man who has closed 
his ears for things that really matter? Man is busy with a number of attempts to earn happiness, 
but success is small and short-lived. He does not know the panacea for all his ills, the effort that 
will result in total victory: the control of mind, which is the master of the senses. Every sense is 
an outlet for the energy of man in a direction that binds him to the objective world. The senses 
are induced by the mind to move out and attach themselves to objects. Man must make the mind 
submit to viveka (wisdom), which discriminates between right and wrong and then, the mind will 
help him, instead of harming him. 


Attachment is a disease 


The body is the temple of God; He is resident in the heart; buddhi (intelligence) is the lamp lit in 
that altar; now, every gust of wind that blows through the windows of the senses affects the 
flame of the lamp and dulls its light, threatening even to put it out. So, close the windows; do not 
keep them open for dire attraction from objects. Keep buddhi sharp, so that it may cut the mind 
like a diamond and convert it into a blaze of light, instead of being a dull pebble. Discrimination, 
(Nithyaanithyavasthu viveka), is an important instrument of spiritual progress. The reasoning 
faculty must be employed to distinguish between the limited and the unlimited, the temporary 
and the Eternal. That is its legitimate use. Shankaraachaarya names his work on the principles of 
Adhwaitha as "Viveka-chudaamani", for, he wanted to emphasise the value of Viveka for the 
realisation of the evanescence of life and the Oneness of the Universe. 


Attachment, affection, interest---these will create prejudice, partiality, illusion; they hide the 
Truth; they dull the intelligence. Raaga is roga (attachment is a disease), so far as the enquirer is 
concemed. One does not become a yogi to have raaga (affection); he must be free from 
favourites, fancies and fondness. Once you attach yourself to some person or habit or 
mannerism, it will be difficult for you to shake them off. 


Like the poor villager who jumped into the flood to salvage a bundle of rugs (really speaking, it 
was a bear being carried along by the raging waters), but found that the bundle caught hold of 
him so tight that he could not escape, man too jumps in, to retrieve what he considers a treasure, 
but is himself caught and bound. That is why the saints of this land have been teaching the 
people that they are children of immortality, repositories of peace and joy, of truth and justice, 
and masters of their senses. Of course, man can have some desires, some eagerness to achieve 
comfort, some attempt to earn content---but, it must be like the diseased man craving for 
medicine. 


Hunger is the disease for which food is the medicine; thirst is the illness for which drink is the 
medicine. Food and drink, housing and clothing must be subsidiary to the needs of the spirit, the 
education of the emotions and passions and impulses. They must take the place that salt and 


pepper take on the dining table today; uppu must be subsidiary to pappu; that is, salt must be 
little and dhal must be more; you cannot have more salt than the quantity of dhal, not even as 
much. So too; efforts to achieve health, comfort, etc., must be just enough for the purpose of 
sustaining the saadhana, not more, not less. 


Express purity in your activities 


There are some who always condemn themselves and their lives and aspire for the Grace of God 
to save them. Jeeva and Deva are two separate entities and never can they merge or unite, they 
declare. The obvious is very often untrue. Sin is not the real nature of man; it is acquired and can 
be shed. Man is pure, good, loving, wise. That is why in the Nilayam, I have stopped people 
from reciting shlokas which proclaim man as sinful, born in sin, revelling in sin, etc. Let the 
purity, which you are, get manifested; endeavour to express it in your activities; that is what 
pleases Me and wins My Grace. 


You must expand your love to as wide a circle as possible. That is how kulaabhimaanam, 
mathaabhimaanam and deshaabhimaanam---affection for the community, the religion and the 
country--- becomes desirable and commendable. If, instead of love, these create hatred of other 
communities, other religions and other countries, then, they become poisonous. 


Pray for happiness of all mankind 


Love your religion, so that you may practise it with greater faith; and, when each one practises 
his religion with faith, there can be no hatred in the world, for all religions are built on universal 
love. Love your country, so that it may become strong, happy and prosperous, an arena for the 
exercise of all the higher faculties of man. Feel that Delhi or Calcutta is as much a part of 
yourself as your own town or village; any pain in the toe is as much a matter of concern for you 
as a pain on the top of the head. 


Strive to make India strong and happy so that it may not be a drag on other countries, or even a 
temptation; she was once the Guru of Humanity. Let her assume that role again. Live therefore 
the life that will make you respected and revered as a child of Bhaarath, the life that will be an 
example and inspiration for all. Pray for even those who invade the land out of greed or hate; 
sympathise with their ignorance and pray that their steps may be directed towards truth, justice 
and love. Prayer has great efficacy. The Vedhic seers prayed for the peace and happiness of all 
mankind, of all animate and inanimate things. Cultivate that universal vision. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam: Dasara, 2-10-1965 


Prayer must emanate from heart, where God resides, and not from 
the head where doctrines and doubts clash. 


SHRI SATHYA SAI 


45. Every hair's end 


Naamasmarana saved Prahlaadha from the agony of torture. He was a Raakshasa boy, but, 
somehow, he learnt the sacred name and knew how sweet it was. He repeated it and imbibed its 
nectarine taste. Even when the enraged elephant rushed towards him, he did not cry out, "O 
Father", or "O Mother", to persuade his physical parents to rescue him; he had no consciousness 
of their existence at all; he called on Naaraayana and no one else. Naaraayana is the source of 
strength for the weak and the strong; He is the supreme power; so, elephants turned back from 
the boy, fire could not singe his hair; wind could not lift him; precipices could not fell him; 
poison could not affect him. The Name was his armour, his shield, his breath, his life. Aanjaneya 
too demonstrates the might of the Name. With the Name imprinted on his heart and rolling on his 
tongue, he leaped across the sea; temptations called on him to halt on the way; terrors pleaded 
with him to turn back; but the Name urged him on and carded him forward, through space, to 
distant Lanka where Seetha was. He had no space in his mind for anything other than the Name 
of his master. 


If your thoughts centre round the body, you will have worries about pains and illnesses, real or 
imaginary; if they are centred on riches, you will be worried about profit and loss, tax and 
exemptions, investment and insolvency; if they roam round fame, then, you are bound to suffer 
from the ups and downs of scandal, calumny and jealousy. So, let them centre round the seat of 
power and love which deserve willing submission and let your whole being surrender to it. Then, 
you will be happy for ever. For the sages of the Vedhic culture, the rishis, the Name of the Lord 
was the very breath; they lived on the sustenance, which contemplation of the glory, inherent in 
it, provided. 


Worship to fulfil desires tarnishes the heart 


When the milk-ocean of the Vedhas was churned with Intelligence as the rod and Devotion as the 
rope, the butter of the three great classics---the Raamaayana, the Mahaabhaaratha, the Srimad 
Bhaagavatha emerged, for spreading the message of the Naamasmarana way to peace and joy. It 
is to revive this message and to restore faith in the Name that this Avathaara has come into the 
world, in the Kaliyuga. 


When worship is rendered with a view to fulfil desires and realise wishes, the precious prize will 
be lost. Worship must cleanse the heart, so that the indwelling God may shine in all His Glory; 
but desires tarnish, instead of cleansing. Invite a prince who is yet a child to sit on the throne; he 
will start weeping for, he cannot play on the throne with his toys and pets. The adult sneers at 
this fondness for toys; he calls it childishness. All those who keep away from the throne of the 
"sovereignty over themselves" and prefer to play with the toys and pets of material things and 
men are equally childish, whatever their age or status! 


Naamasmarana is an instrument to realise the Lord. Thyaagaraaja started the Naamajapa of Sri 
Raama in his twentieth year; he recited it ninety-six crores of times, and took twenty-one years 
and fifteen days for the vow to be finished. As a result, he had the darshana (vision) of Sri 
Raama, "the letters of the Name taken shape", he says. The Name signifies the quality of the 
Lord, His guna, and so constant contemplation arouses the same guna in the reciter. 


Rub the Name vigorously and unintermittently 


For Naamasmarana, no expense is involved; no materials are needed; there is no special place or 
time to be provided. No qualification of scholarship or caste or sex has to be proved. When a bit 
of iron is rubbed to and fro on a slab of stone, heat is generated; only, the rubbing has to be 
vigorous and continuous. When you do so at intervals and with poor pressure, the iron will not 
get hot. So, too, in order to get sufficient heat to melt the soft heart of the Lord, rub the name 
Raam Raam Raam Raam vigorously and unintermittently. Then, the Lord will shower His Grace. 
If you devote but two minutes and a half in the morning and another two minutes and a half in 
the evening, the little heat will cool off twice a day and His heart will not melt. 


Gajendra called on Him from a forest lake; Vibheeshana called on Him from the enemy's camp; 
Droupadhi called on Him while herself unclean, but the Lord answered them nevertheless. He is 
the very embodiment of Prema. He can be won only through Love. Study the devotion of the 
Gopees; you will find it constituted wholly of prema---prema that will pardon 'theft,' 'desertion’ 
and downright rejection. They had no boons to ask from Him, no wish to utilise His Grace for 
fulfilment; they knew He was the Lord and they needed no other. They had no consciousness of 
the body or of the world. Their love had but one objective---the Lord in human form. 


Once Rukmini and Sathyabhaama both were taken by surprise by the amount of Grace that 
Krishna bestowed on Droupadhi, the Queen of the Paandavas, whose story was one long series 
of humiliations and calamities. Krishna rescued her from dishonour and distress time after time; 
they were curious to know the nature of the devotion that could draw down on her the Grace of 
God in such a continuous stream. So, Krishna took them both with Him. One day, when He went 
to Indraprastha, Arjuna had gone hunting and Droupadhi was drying her hair after her bath. 
Krishna asked the queens to comb her hair for it had got into too much tangle, as they remarked. 
When they did so, they heard from the end of each hair the sound of Naama Japam (repetition of 
Lord's name), "Krishna, Krishna, Krishna"---that was the extent of her deep devotion to the 
Lord; it had impregnated into each single hair of her head. 


Give the Lord the fruits of your own activities 


Of Hanumaan too it is said, "“oma romamu Raama Namame"---every single hair recited "Raama 
Naama". His tail was a formidable flail, for it was suffused with the might of the Name. He is 
also called Sundara, the charming, the beautiful. Why? Because, he had Raama installed in his 
heart; since the splendour of Raama reflected on his face, he was charming to behold. He was a 
charming companion because he spoke of Raama only, sang of Raama alone. 


I must now tell you something about Me, too, now. It is the custom when you approach the Lord 
to take something with you; this is an act which people do when they go for the fulfilment of 
some desire, the grant of Grace for the realisation of some wish. They take pathram, pushpam, 
phalam, thoyam (leaf, flower, fruit, water), as the Geetha says. The attitude is' "I am jeeva; He is 
Deva". But, this is as bad a trick as some men do: they bring one cow when we ask them for 
milk, and milk another to give us the milk. They give the Lord the leaf, the flower and the fruit 
grown on some tree, and the reward of Grace goes to the tree, not to them. Give the leaf, the 
flower, the fruit that has grown on the tree of your life; the fragrant leaves of your mental 
resolves and plans, the sweet juicy fruits of your own activities and thoughts. 


I know the relative value of these two; I require something that is your very own, not something 
bought in the bazaar or grown on some other tree or produced by some one else's intelligence or 


devotion and steadiness. God has given you "the heart" to use in life; return it to Him as clean 
and as pure as when He gave it, after using it for storing prema, shaanthi, dharma, and sathya, 
and for distributing them to all who come in contact with you. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam: Dasara, 3-10-1965 


Truth, Righteousness, 

Peace and Love--- 

these are the four pillars 

on which the mansion of happiness, 
here and hereafter, 

is built. 

SHRI SATHYA SAI 


46. Have no desh: seek no upadesh 


Raamakrishna Rao spoke of the work being done by the Prashaanthi Vidwanmahaasabha in 
propagating the teachings of the Vedhas and Shaastras among the people and arousing in them 
the Aathma-consciousness, which is the greatest single factor enabling men to have courage and 
confidence in the midst of the travails of life. The discourses of the Pandits during the session of 
the Vidwanmahaasabha are only reminders; they have to kindle the thought-process (vichaarana 
shakthi), in the listeners; then only can they can be considered beneficial. 


In fact, the truth regarding God, man, nature, etc., is so simple that a few minutes of quiet 
contemplation can reveal it to any one of ordinary intelligence. Everyone will admit that 
anything which undergoes change cannot be truth. Truth must remain as truth, in the past, 
present and future. Now the world and all objects of nature are constantly being subjected to 
change---building up or breaking down, evolving or mutating, flowing or festering, growing or 
dying. How then can it be true? The subjective feelings, attitudes, impulses, beliefs instincts, 
intuitions---these too are changing; they are pleasant one moment, unpleasant the next moment; 
the same thing is welcome at one time, repulsive at another time; malaria makes sweet things 
turn bitter; jaundice turns all things yellow. So, there must be something stable and permanent 
and eternal as the background, the base, the foundation, for this changing scene to appear on. 
Appearance is untrue; reality is eternal. 


Have the thirst to know the Creator 


Again, a few minutes of investigation will convince any one that he is not the body which he 
carries about with him, as the snail carries its home; he is not the eye or ear or tongue; he is not 
the mind or intelligence for, he refers to them as "my mind is not in it" etc., meaning that he is 
separate from his mind; "my intelligence failed me", meaning that he is different from his 
intelligence. He is a witness; it is the body that dies; he survives; he is reborn when he takes on a 
new body. Physical beauty is just a matter of health; a couple of days of fever or purging makes 
an angel a scarecrow. Insanity pounces upon a genius some day and reduces his talk to 
unintelligent blabber. When the mind is deranged, the eyes see strange sights that are not there; 
the ears hear eerie noises that never were. 


It is only when man discovers the ultimate unchanging base that he can derive permanent peace; 
until then, he too will have to swing and sway in the changing world, between joy and grief. 


Like Vivekaananda and Naagamahaashaya, people must be urged by the thirst to know the 
Creator behind Creation, the person behind the puppets. Naagamahaashaya started from the 
attitude of Daasoham (I am the servant), and he made himself so small by shrinking his 
individuality that he was able to wriggle out of the shackles of delusion and escape into the 
Universal Eternal Truth. Vivekaananda, on the other hand, started from the attitude of Soham (1 
am He); he made himself so vast and grand, that he broke the shackles and merged with the 
Supreme Sovereign Truth. When you have earned that jnaana of the identity of your reality with 
the reality behind the Universe, Maaya (illusion) cannot affect you. The fly sits on all objects, 
fair and foul; but, it does not sit on fire, for, it will be scorched to death. 


Man does not belong to anywhere except God 


There are many who have stacked libraries in their brains; who have visited and venerated all the 
holy places between the Himaalayas and the Cape; who have sat at the feet of every one of the 


contemporary sages and saints; who have performed all the rites prescribed in the sacred texts, 
but, who do not know the answer to the simple question: "How to bring about the union between 
jeeva and Brahmam, the individual and the Universal?" Or rather, they do not set about the 
practice of what they have heard or learnt. The erection of temples, the installation of images or 
idols, the pomp and show, fireworks and fanfare, processions and pedantries---these are helpless 
in the realm of jnaana. 


When a seeker went to a Guru for some Upadesh (instruction), he inquired what he had read so 
far; when the man said. "I have read the Sundarakaanda of the Raamaayana, the Bhagavad 
Geetha, and the Yogavasishta", the Guru said, "Why then do you want upadesh from me? If Sri 
Krishna speaking through the Geetha has not succeeded in creating faith in you, what can poor I 
do?" and sent him off. When a man has known that he has no desh (native land), why should he 
crave for upadesh? Man does not belong to anywhere except to God. That is the desh. Journey to 
His desh or his native land, is his mission in life. 


The best upadesh (spiritual instruction) is the Pranava, the sacred syllable OM, which 
summarises many principles of theology, philosophy and mysticism. Little children just learning 
to toddle about are given a three-wheeled contraption which they push forward, holding on to the 
cross-bar. The OM is such a 'vehicle' for the spiritual child. The three wheels are a, u and m, the 
three components of the manthra. OM is the primal sound inherent in the lifebreath. 


Every time we breathe, we say Soham; 'so' when we inhale and ‘ham' when we exhale, meaning 
"He-I", instilling into ourselves the conviction that "He" who is all this external world, is "I" who 
is all this internal world, the convinction of Unity. During deep sleep, when the senses, the brain 
and the mind are dormant and defunctionalised, the "He" and the "I" are not cognised as 
separate; the So (He) and the ham (1) both fade and the sound Soham is transformed into OM, 
indicating the merger of the external with the internal into one Truth. OM has also many other 
significances and the meditation on the OM is a valuable saadhana for the seeker of reality. It is 
like the seven colours of the sun's ray merging into one colourless (white) brilliance. 


Egoism breeds greed and hate 


The ego is the enemy number one of spiritual progress. Egoism is the chief executive of the Kali 
Raaja, the sovereign of the Kali (Iron) Age. It is the egoism and its attendant evils that stalk the 
world today. Egoism breeds the scourges of greed and hate. Even leaders of ascetic orders and 
heads of monastic institutions suffer from egoism and indulge in the pastime of competition and 
conflict with other orders and institutions. Some of them wear elaborate outward symbols of 
spiritual splendour, especially when the camera is aimed. There is a popular adage which says 
that a saadhaka must eat like a dog and wander about like a fox, meaning that he must be content 
with whatever he is able to get and rest wherever he can. 


Man is but an instrument in God's hands; his plans can win through only when they are in line 
with His. And, what are His plans? His commands? They are declared in the scriptures, which 
are revelations of His plan made to the purified intellects of saints. They are also declared by His 
Avathaaras, who appear in human form so that they may speak to men in their own language to 
win their confidence and lead them and teach them. 


Be in the world, but lessen your attachment to it 


Man has to become Divine, the Divine from which he has come. So, he has to lessen his 
attachment to the world, not by cutting himself off, but, by being in it as an instrument in His 


hands; by subduing all tendencies towards egoism that raise their heads in him; by single-minded 
attention to the dictates of God called Dharma. Edison the scientist concentrated so much on the 
solution of the problems that worried him that he left untouched for days together the food and 
drink that was pushed in through the doors of his laboratory. You must have the same 
concentration and shraddha, while engaged in saadhana. 


The best saadhana is to discover your Aathmic reality and to recognise your kinship in the 
Aathmic fold with all others. The body has to be kept trim until this is achieved; its purpose too is 
just this. Keep it light and bright. It is a boat which can take you across the sea of illusion, of 
false multiplicity. Don't add to its weight by attachment to things and others; then, it is in danger 
of sinking during the voyage. 


Naamasmarana is the most effective saadhana. Remember with each name the glory behind the 
name. Escape from the clutches of anger, jealousy, hatred, malice and greed. Do not seek to 
discover other's defects; do not gloat over them; when others point out your defects, be thankful; 
or keep quiet as Buddha did. 


Treat both praise and blame with indifference 


Now that I mentioned it, I shall explain that incident in some detail. Buddha was seated alone 
one day, and later, some men gathered around him. One among them who did not like his 
teachings and the effect they had on the people got up and started a tirade in very vulgar terms 
against him. Buddha sat smiling, listening to all that calumny, without a single gesture of 
disapproval. The man got frothy in the mouth through rage, his vocabulary was fast getting 
exhausted, his tongue began to show signs of overwork, but Buddha only asked him with a smile 
"Brother, have you finished?" The man said, "You have no sense of shame; you do not show any 
trace of resentment." 


Then Buddha said, "If a kinsman comes to your door from a far distant place, and when you see 
him, if you so much as say, "Hello," he will enter in, deposit his things in the house, and stay on 
as your guest; but, if you do not notice him, if you ignore his arrival, he will return along the 
road that brought him and you are rid of him, isn't it? So, too I shall take no notice of this tirade; 
let it go the way it came". Praise and blame are but twists of verbiage, the magic of words in the 
clever hands of flatterers or traducers. Treat both with a grand indifference; then, your real worth 
will become patent. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam: Dasara, 4-10-1965 


Silence is the first step in Saadhana: 

By loud talk you undermine your own 
peace and disturb others. 

Do not cause more noise than necessary. 


SHRI SATHYA SAI 


47. Effective armour 


A thing must have Form and Substance, both, in order to be genuine; an apple made out of 
plastic, however realistic and enticing by its correctness of Form, cannot be valued as genuine, 
for it has no substance. The swaruupa (form) must be saturated with the swabhaava (its own 
quality) too. Fire is no genuine fire, if it does not burn; nor can water be called so, if it does not 
wet. It is a misnomer to name a person as man, if he does not evince the qualities of humanity. 
Such persons are cheats, for, by their appearance they induce others to believe that they are good, 
kind, honest and harmless; they draw others into their company and inflict untold injury, by their 
very nature. 


The Governor was telling us in his speech just now that our country is faced with great dangers 
today and he exhorted you to use the time profitably, in productive pursuits. Make the country 
strong and great, he said. The dangers that face this country are part of the malady that affects all 
human values at the present time---the decline in humanity among men. While speaking about 
the impression produced in him when he went round the exhibition of pictures, drawings and 
photographs depicting the Message emanating from Prashaanthi Nilayam, he emphasised the 
importance of your practising these great truths. That message makes men realise that they are 
inheritors of a precious mission---the mission to reveal themselves as immortals. It calls upon all 
to give up pettiness and paltriness and rise to the height of this great adventure. The petty 
cravings for wealth and fame multiply hate and envy; the paltry desire for sensual pleasure 
produces a harvest of factions. They reduce man to the level of beasts and even worse. 


Dharma means certain obligations and duties 


It is this pettiness and paltriness that promote internal factions in this country, even when the 
enemies are marching towards our boundaries. People affected by these are rendered blind to 
their own grandeur and their country's grandeur. 


"Dharmo rakshathi rakshithah"" Dharma guards those that guard dharma. Dharma means 
certain obligations and duties and regulations over actions, words and behaviour. Elders have 
certain obligations towards younger people as young men have towards elders; neighbours have 
mutual duties and rights. Even war has to be carried on, under some rules of decency and 
humanity. The mighty should not grab the possessions of the weak; the pledged word has to be 
honoured. If India sticks to these principles of dharma, tha dharma alone will serve as effective 
armour against all the foes. 


If mathi (intellect) is reformed, that is to say, if one's impulses are transmuted, then one's matha 
(religion) is praise-worthy. Otherwise, if one obeys the whims of an untutored mind, his religion 
is bound to be a source of evil. We have to pay attention to the plans that intelligence dictates, 
not the external signs of orthodoxy. A person may appear strictly orthodox, but his heart may be 
filled with the poison of hatred and envy. Has he realised that God is the God of all, that He is 
present in every being---Sahasraseersha-sahas-raaksha-sahasrapaad---(thousand-headed, 
thousand-eyed, thousand-legged), as He is? This Vedhic description means that God is 
Omnipresent, not that He has just a thousand heads only. In that case, He should have had two 
thousand eyes and two thousand legs, at the rate of two per head. The statement is not as 
mathematical as all that; it is intended to convey the truth of God being immanent and 
transcendent at the same time. God is the unseen ever-present immanent energy in all things; this 


has to be realised by every aspirant, or else, his aspiration can never be fulfilled. Reasoning by 
itself will lead one to this conclusion of the unity of all matter and of all energy. 


Vedhaantha alone can assure peace and happiness 


Today, the Governor is honouring some Pandits who are members of the Central Committee of 
the Prashaanthi Vidwanmahaasabha. That Sabha is engaged in spreading this teaching of the 
Vedhaantha in every village of this land; the Vedhaantha alone can assure shaanthi and 
santhosha (peace and happiness) and as a consequence soubhaagyam (plenty) to the millions of 
people who belong to India. 


The Pandits have mastered the texts and are also striving to share the knowledge with their 
brothers and sisters. They will be thankful if you but listen to their exposition, and be glad and 
grateful that they are available with them. I know that they do not seek to be honoured, but I am 
asking the Governor to put on their hands these golden kankans, which are the traditional 
insignia of scholarship in this land. Recognition of their talents in this manner by the Head of this 
State is an encouragement to them, as well as to others who pursue Vedhic studies under very 
difficult conditions. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, Dasara, 5-10-1965 


48. The Poet's role 


Today we heard these poets reading out and explaining their compositions to us; it is a profitable 
experience to listen to them, for the poet is able to discover more than the ordinary thinker. The 
poet is called in the scriptures, Kavi, a word which also means, Manthradrishta---he who is able 
to visualise essential spiritual formulae in his intuitive moments. The Bhagavad Geetha describes 
the Lord as Kavi. The kavi or poet is aware of the past, the present and the future (thri-kaala- 
jnaani); he transcends time; he can dip into the past, roam in the present and peep into the future, 
for he has sharper vision than ordinary men. Hence he is called sarvajna, the all-knowing; 
kraantha-darsi, he who sees the step which has to be taken next, he who is always in advance of 
current opinion or attitudes. 


The Lord is the poet and His poem is all this. Poets share the divine quality of knowing and 
recognising the next step. The Lord as Kavi is also puraana, (ancient, primeval). He is 
characterised also as anushasithara, the law-giver who lays down lines and limits. The 
responsibility of poets is very great, proportionate to the status given to them in the scriptures 
and in the Geetha. But instead of being sarvajna and puraana and anushasithara, they are 
satisfied with a scrap of knowledge, a superficial polish and the convenient and profitable role of 
tamely following the whims of the people. 


The great poets of the past harped on the spiritual disciplines and the heights of spiritual 
realisation to which they led. They elevated and inspired spiritual adventure. Pichayya Shastri 
spoke in his poem on this aspect of Bhaaratheeya culture, this stream of spiritual aspiration that 
flows from the Vedhas and the Upanishads, down the Puraanas, the Bhaagavatha, Raamaayana 
and Mahaabhaaratha, in order to fertilise the divine urge in man. 


Eternal problems that arouse man's enthusiasm 


It was mentioned by some speakers that the western scholars revealed the grandeur and glory of 
the Upanishads to us. I do not appreciate our relying on scholars, however eminent, to explain to 
us the meaning and significance of our sacred scriptures; for, what can scholars know of the bliss 
of practising them? There is no use blaming the long years of rule by the West for the neglect of 
Sanaathana Dharma, as some others do. We must accept responsibilty for this ourselves. The 
rulers did not induce us to give up our dharma. We did it out of our own false sense of values, 
out of our own weak faith. 


Poems that deal with the fundamental problems of life and death, truth and delusion, virtue and 
vice will last for centuries and will help man in all climes; for, they harness man and harass man 
at all times. Problems of exterior living change and get changed. So when poems deal with them, 
they are short lived. Prakrithi and Paramaathma (creation and creator), are like the two halves of 
a bean; and seedling sprouts from between them. 


The problems of adjustment that man has to make, when he struggles with creation to discover 
the creator, are also eternal problems that arouse the enthusiasm of man. External nature can be 
inhibited, negatived; it ceases at a certain stage of saadhana, though no one can say when it 
began. It ,has no basic reality, though it has validity up to a certain stage. So, it cannot be 
dismissed from attention; nor can it be accepted as eternally valid. So it is neither true (sathya) 
nor false (asathya); hence, it is called mithya, something that is partly true (sath) and partly false 
(asath). 


Poets are the pioneers who mark out the road for human progress along the lines of love and 
unity---love which binds them with all creation and unity of all beings in God. 


Poets must regain their own health 


One pernicious disease has now begun to infect writers and poets in all countries---the disease 
which scorns all that is ancient and well-tested by time, which carps and criticises all that is 
revered by others. Flimsy foppery, fiery cynicism---these are held to be 'modern' and modish. 
That is the literary fashion now. But,-it is doing great harm to the rising generation, for it 
perverts their tastes and degrades their ideals. He who adores the past is considered a coward, 
who has no courage to chalk out a new path for himself; he who indulges in some new antic is 
acclaimed as a genius. He gets a whole host of imitators. He who throws mud on established 
beliefs is a hero; he who tries to support them is a poltroon. Poets must try to escape from this 
disease. They must regain their own health and give health-giving stuff to the people. 


They must not infect the people with their agitation and worry, their fears and doubts, their 
anxieties and superstitions. They must rid themselves of at least anger, for, writings steeped in 
anger are bound to be false and fear-creating. 


Vishwaamithra was upset that, inspite of years of asceticism, his great rival, Vasishta, addressed 
him only as Raajarishi, and not by the coveted appellation, Brahmarishi; so, he crouched 
stealthily behind the seat of Vasishta one moonlight night, when he was teaching a group of 
disciples, determined to kill him with the sharp sword he had taken with him. He sat unseen 
amidst the bushes for a moment to listen to what Vasishta was telling them. What was his 
surprise when he heard Vasishta describing the charming moonlight and comparing it to the heart 
of Vishwaamithra, cool, bright, curative, heavenly, universal, all-pleasing! The sword fell from 
his grasp. He ran forward and prostrating at the feet of his rival, he held the feet. Vasishta 
recognised Vishwaamithra and accosting him, "O Brahmarishi, rise up", he lifted him on to his 
own seat. 


A guide must free himself from hate and malice 


Vasishta explained that be could not be styled Brahmarishi, so long as the ego persisted in him. 
When the swelling of the head disappeared and he fell at the feet of his rival, he became entitled 
for the honour he no longer coveted, and so deserved. He who aspires to be a guide of the people 
must first free himself of selfish propensities, of hate and malice. His words must be sweet to the 
ear and food to the spirit. They must be valued by all men as the panacea they need. If one is not 
capable of this high poetry, one must try to reach that height by purifying one's nature and 
clarifying one's outlook on this world and the next. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam: Dasara, 6-10-1965 


Do not contemplate on death; it is just an incident in life. 
Contemplate on God, who is the master of all life; beware of Him 
all through life. 


SHRI SATHYA SAI 


49. The lamp at the door 


The human being is a composite of man and beast and God, and in the inevitable struggle among 
the three for ascendency, you must ensure that God wins, suppressing the merely human and the 
lowly beast. This festival of Deepaavali is to express gratitude at the defeat of the naraka 
(demonic) tendencies in man, which drag him down from Divinity. Naraka is the name for hell, 
and the asura whose death at the hands of Krishna is celebrated today is called Narakaasura, the 
personification of all the traits of character that obstruct the upward impulses of man. 


He is said to be the son of Bhumi (the Earth) and he is also called Bhauma. This is very 
appropriate, for the earth and all attachments for things earthy lead us down into the regions of 
pain and grief. Earthly domain, earthly riches are powerless before spiritual domain over the 
senses, spiritual riches of self-knowledge and self-confidence. Man goes out into space with his 
rockets and space ships and sputniks, only to acquire superior striking power over his rivals on 
earth. Man must know the Universe as basically Brahmam and so as fundamentally knowledge 
and love and peace. He and the Universe are one; they are subsumed in the same unique entity. 


The cosmic vision can be acquired either by watching the Universe or one's own inner Cosmos. 
Man has only to discover himself. In the citadel of the body, there is the lotus temple of the heart, 
with subtle aakaasha (space) within. In it are contained heaven and earth, fire and air, sun and 
moon, stars and planets---all that is in the visible world and all that sustains it and all into which 
it submerges. Instead of rotating round the earth in the higher realms of space and planning to 
land on the moon or Mars, if only man plans and prepares himself to travel into his own inner 
realm, what sublime joy and peace he can attain! His attainments at present in the vast silence of 
outer space are all prompted by fear and spread only further fear. 


Occasions to be celebrated as festivals 


Victory won through weapons and guarded by armour is not something to be glad about; it is 
flimsy and fragile. It is fraught with danger and may topple at the lightest gust. But, victory won 
through love and sympathy transforms the defeated and makes him a willing collaborator for 
ever. Nara (man) falls into Nara-ka (hell), through over-indulgence in '/ca' or intelligence; '/ca' 
generally runs wild and like a raging flood, it spells destruction and grief. 'Ka' has to be subdued 
by humility and devotion, to the source of all intelligence, the Lord. 


What is a festive occasion? It is when great men are born or when wicked men end their careers 
of vice. Deepavali celebrates the death of Narakaasura; and, how did he meet his end? He died at 
the hands of Krishna, with the Lord standing before his fading eyes. That is a consummation to 
be wished for. When virtues grow and vice is given up, man has to make it a festival. When your 
son evinces a desire to go to a temple or a math to worship or to offer homage to the Swaami, do 
not scorch that tender shoot of devotion; do not tell him that there is time enough for devotion 
when he reaches old age; encourage him, be happy that you have such a son; celebrate the day. 
Teach him the value of prayer and contrition; or, learn from him the lesson of yearning for God. 


Honesty is always the best policy 


When young men realise that God is omnipresent and resident in one's own heart, then, they will 
certainly follow the Vedhic injunction, Sathyam Vadha, Dharmam Chara (speak truth, practise 
virtue). They will always speak the truth only; they will practise only moral justice. Some say 
that since this is Kali yuga, falsehood alone can succeed. But, in spite of all appearances, honesty 


is still the best policy. One lie has to be buttressed by a hundred others; whereas truth is the 
easiest, simplest and safest line of behaviour. Be what you profess to be; speak what you intend 
to do; utter what you have experienced; no more, no less. 


There was a thief once who broke into a house at night; the master of the house woke up when he 
heard some noise and when he shouted, "who is there?", the man thought of a ruse to escape his 
attention. He mewed like a cat, from the room where the iron safe was; the master said, "O, it is 
only a cat", and bolted that room from outside, shutting out all possibility of the thief escaping 
from the room into which he had gone! He heard the master tell his wife, "Let it be there the rest 
of the night. At dawn we shall open the door and if it is a real cat, we shall let it go its way". A 
mew will not help, if it is not truly yours. 


It is a hard job to maintain a false stand and so, it is always safe to be straight and honest. Do not 
take the first false step and then be led, on and on, to perdition. Truth is one's real nature and 
when you are yourself, there comes a great flood of joy welling up within you. When you deny 
yourself and deceive yourself, shame darkens your mind and breeds fear. You take the path of 
falsehood because of the Raajasik passions of lust, greed, hate and pride. Contentment, humility, 
detachment---these keep you on the path of Truth. 


A street-hawker had on his head a basket full of empty bottles, as he walked along to the bazaar. 
He hoped to sell the lot at a profit of ten rupees and, in ten days, he calculated his earnings would 
have accumulated to a hundred rupees. With that as capital, he planned to switch on to more 
profitable deals, so that he imagined he could make a pile of a lakh of rupees in a few months 
and build a bungalow with a lovely garden tended by a regiment of servants, beaming all round 
the house. There, he saw himself on a sofa in the greenery playing with his grandchildren. He 
was engrossed in that charming scene; suddenly he saw among his grandchildren, the children of 
one of the servants; he got angry at this unwanted intrusion. Believing his fantasy to be a reality, 
he suddenly grabbed the child and gave it a swift hefty push, only to find that the basket of 
bottles had fallen on the road and all hopes of even the ten rupees lost! That was the end of a 
dream built on the slender basis of greed. 


Steady faith wins true wisdom 


Truth will always triumph; do not doubt that in the least. There are two eight-lettered axioms in 
the Geetha, which support the Vedhic dictum: ‘Sathvam eva jayathe na anrtham' (Truth only 
wins, not falsehood): They are, "Samshayaathma vinashyathi" (He who doubts is destroyed), and 
"Shraddaavaan labhathe jnaanam" (Steady faith wins true wisdom). If people are slaves of 
doubt, how can they save themselves? 


Believe that the Name is the Boat, which will take you over the sea of worldly life. The Name is 
more efficacious than the contemplation of the Form. Droupadhi did not send a chariot to bring 
Krishna to her rescue; she uttered the Name in her agony and Krishna responded, and saved her 
from imminent dishonour. In the Threthaa yuga, when the Raamaayana story was gone through, 
Nala and his monkeys were building a bridge over the sea to Lanka; the boulders on which they 
inscribed the sacred name Raama, floated on the waters, but, they found that the boulders floated 
away due to wind and wave. They did not form a continuous bridge for the army to pass over. 
Some ingenious person gave a suggestion to write RAA on one boulder and MA on another and 
they found that the two stuck hard together. The name will serve as a float for you too; it will 
keep you attached to God and bring on you His Grace. 


Spiritual renunciation gives strength and courage 


With the Name as the very breath of your life, you can engage in all life's activities, with no fear 
of a fall. Meera quaffed the cup of poison with the Name on her tongue and it turned into nectar. 
Bharthrihari bewailed his lot, "Lord, these pleasures are eating me up; they don't allow me to be 
myself; no; I will liberate myself from their clutches. I shall take refuge in the undiminishable 
Bliss, the Reservoir of Joy, the Lord. I shall not crave for padaartha (objects); I shall yearn for 
Parartha (the Highest Good)". Devotion and faith ensure the gift of knowledge of the Spirit---the 
great prize for the great adventure of birth, life and death. When the mind weds pravrithi 
(worldly activity), the progeny is bondage; when it weds nivrithi (spiritual renunciation), the 
progeny is freedom. 


Nivrithi confers fearlessness, even while you accept a little of it. It gives strength and courage, 
for, it is desire that weakens man and makes him cringe before those in authority and with 
influence. Detachment endows you with selfrespect, and the capacity to stand up to slander and 
calumny. There are some who weep at the slightest sign of defeat or disappointment. This is 
despicable behaviour. Why should you have fear or sorrow, with the Lord installed in the altar of 
your heart? Do you not know He is there, guarding you and guiding you? He is in all beings, at 
all times. Endeavour to remember this fact whatever you may be doing, whoever you may be 
contacting, in whatever manner. You will succeed in this, provided you do not give up the 
recitation of His Name. 


The genuine Festival of Lamps 


The griha (home) where the Name of the Lord is not heard is a guha (cave), and nothing more. 
As you enter it, as you leave it, while you are in it, perfume it, illumine it, purify it, with the 
Name. Light it as a lamp at dusk, welcome it at dawn, as you welcome the sun. That is the 
genuine Deepavali, the Festival of Lamps. 


The three basic beliefs of Sanaathana Dharma are: (i) the inevitability of karma in life; (ii) the 
fact of re-birth and (ii1) Divine Incarnations. If one has no faith in all these three, he cannot claim 
to be a Hindu; whoever believes in them can be reckoned as a Bhaaratheeya, child of Bhaarath. 
Mention was made of Krishna avathaar and of the Kaliya episode. The inner meaning of that 
episode is this: The serpent Kaliya and its minions are the desires that lurk in the depths of the 
human heart; into that depth, the Lord jumps, or rather showers His Grace and so, the poison is 
expelled and the place made safe and pure. When Krishna dances on the hoods, the serpents are 
tamed and rendered harmless. Without the extinction of desire, man cannot become Divine. Of 
what avail is it to repeat Shivoham, Shivoham, when you have not endeavoured to equip yourself 
with the qualities of Shiva? Why assert that you are Shiva and draw blasphemy on your head? 


Do not get elated at the riches, status, authority, intelligence, etc., which you may have. Consider 
that they have been given to you on trust, so that you may benefit others. They are all signs of 
His Grace, opportunities of service, symbols of responsibility. Never seek to exult over others' 
faults; deal sympathetically with the errors and mistakes of others. Seek the good in others; hear 
only good tidings about them; do not give ear to scandal. On this Deepavali Day, resolve to light 
the lamp of Naamasmarana and place it at your doorstep, the lips. Feed it with the oil of 
devotion; have steadiness as the wick. Let the lamp illumine every minute of your life. The 
splendour of the Name will drive away darkness from outside you as well as from inside you. 
You will spread joy and peace among all who come near you. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, Deepavali: 24-10-1965 


The absence of modesty 

makes life for a woman, 

however rich in other accomplishments, 
a waste and vaccum. 

Modesty lifts her to the 

heights of sublime holiness. 

The modesty of woman wields authority 
in the home and outside, 

in community as well as in the world. 


SHRI SATHYA SAI 


50. In ants and men 


The pitch darkness of the New Moon night has given place, on account of the death of 
Narakaasura at the hands of God, to the brightness of the white half of the month. Daivathwam 
and daanavathwam (Divinity and devilishness) compete for the possession of the mind of man 
and pursue him as Light and Darkness. Daanavathwam piles upon man misery after misery, 
while Daivathwam warns him against yielding to despair on that account. They have to be 
welcomed as beneficial, for misery is the crucible in which the dross is removed and the pure 
gold separated from alloys. The daanava forces are aflame in every person as lust and greed, as 
hate and envy, as pride and pompousness. 


The traits of Raavana's lust, of Sisupaala's pride, of Kamsa's hate, of Hiranyaaksha's envy are 
tainting every human heart. Only the discipline of the spirit through japam and dhyaanam can 
quench the flames and scotch the conflagration. Today, we celebrate the destruction of those 
traits, collectively personified as Narakaasura, for, they, by their collective effect, lead man into 
hell or Naraka. 


Those traits are the wild weeds that smother the seedlings of love and truth, of sympathy and 
service, of reverence and renunciation, which man seeks to cultivate in his heart. The 
Upanishads lay down the means and measure of this inner culture; the thorny bushes that have to 
be uprooted, the ploughing and levelling, the formation of bunds, the filling of the fields with the 
waters of love, the seeds, the pests, the fence, the manure and all the other items of this strange 
new agriculture. The spiritual aspirant is but a ryot who has determined not to allow his inner 
faculties to lie fallow. He has become aware of the precious harvest of happiness that he can earn 
and he allows no moment to go waste, without being used for this high purpose. 


Three types of spiritual aspirants 


Naagayya, who has acted the roles of great devotees like Pothana, Thyaagayya and Raamadas, 
spoke just now of three types of saadhakas and bhakthas: (1) Those who desire liberation from 
birth and merging with the Universal and Eternal Supreme Sovereign; (2) those who dedicate 
everything they experience and act, to the Lord, without getting attached to their consequences; 
and (3) those who worship the Lord for the benefits He confers, here and hereafter. He confessed 
with some hesitation that he still belonged to the third category! But, certainly, no one need feel 
small because he is asking the Lord for worldly benefits. It is to be appreciated that, instead of 
cringing before man, a person has the good sense and the confidence to fall at the feet of the 
Lord and ask Him for favours. 


Pothana refused to dedicate his work to Singabhupathi, though that ruler himself asked for that 
distinction, for, he declared that he knew no master other than the Lord. Thyaagayya spurned the 
offer of substantial gifts from the Raaja of Tanjore, who was anxious to reward him for his 
devotion and his musical talents. He said, 'The bliss of nearness to Raama is more pleasing to me 
than all the treasures man can give". Thyaagaraja was really a raaja (king) among the detached. 


Bhakthi or devotion to God is not to be judged or measured by rosaries or candles, daubings on 
the forehead or matted hair or jingles on the ankles; purity of motives and intentions is essential, 
so that prema which is the one component of bhakthi does not leak out of the heart. The genuine 
outer signs of bhakthi are three' faith, humility and apprehension. Faith in the ultimate victory of 
truth and love; humility before elders and the wise; apprehension in the presence of evil, fear to 


mix with bad company, to enter into evil designs, to act counter to the whisperings of 
conscience. 


Be an indefatigable enquirer of Truth 


Bhakthi cannot come into man from outside him; it has to be grown from within by an effort to 
cleanse the mind, to know the nature and origin of man and the universe, to grasp the relation of 
man with all the external objects which now fascinate and foil him. Janaka was such an 
indefatigable enquirer. Though the ruler of a vast kingdom, he held court mostly to be in the 
midst of scholars and sages and learn from their discussions the many facets of Truth. He 
confronted every scholar who came to him with the question, (which he put to Yaajnavalkya, for 
instance), "With what object have you come? Desiring some cattle, or, some questions for subtle 
decisions?" And, most of them answered like Yaajnavalkya, "Both, indeed O Emperor". 


The Brihadaaranya Upanishad devotes many sections to these discussions in Janaka's court and 
to the part played by Yaajnavalkya in clarifying many philosophical issues by his mastery of 
spiritual science, in theory as well as practice. Once Janaka performed a sacrifice during which 
he gave away a large number of gifts. He had set apart a thousand cows, with gold jewels on the 
horns and hooves, as a special prize for the person acclaimed by the assembly of scholars as the 
most learned, the greatest scholar in the science of Brahmam. As soon as he came to know of 
this, Yaajnavalkya who was singularly conscious of his unbeatable scholarship, asked his pupil, 
"Drive these cows home, my son". The Brahmins were enraged at this impudence and they 
challenged him to answer the questions they showered on him, in order to justify his driving 
away the cows. 


Faith can grow only on conviction 


The priest in charge of the sacrifice asked him about the effects of Yajna. Questions were asked 
about the sense organs and objects and the relationship between them; some scholars like Bhujyu 
tried to puzzle him and overpower him by suggesting a superhuman source for knowledge. 
Others moved on to the subject of the Aathma, as Sarvaantharyaamin. The most formidable of 
the intelocutors was a woman, Gaargi who had a plentiful sheaf of arrows to let go at 
Yaajnavalkya. At last she rose from her seat and declared: "I shall now ask him two questions. If 
he answers those two satisfactorily, then none of us can ever defeat him in expounding 
Brahmam." 


"What is it that pervades like the warp and the woof, that which is above heaven and below the 
earth, that which is heaven and earth, and between them both, that which was, is and will be?" 
Gargi asked and Yaajnavalkya answered, "Aakaasha". Gaargi appreciated the answer. Then, she 
asked again, "What pervades the Aaakaasha as warp and woof?" And Yaajnavalkya replied, "It 
is the Akshara, neither sthu/a nor anu, neither short nor long, neither air nor ether, without eyes 
or ears, with neither exterior nor interior. It is never seen, but it is the Seer; it is never thought, 
but it is the Thinker; it is never known, but, it is the Knower." And, Gaargi accepted that he was 
supreme and undefeatable. Janaka grew wise as a result of such deliberations and discussions in 
his court. Faith can grow only on conviction and one can be convinced only when doubts are 
dissolved by discussions. 


You are moulded by the company you relish. When you make friends with the blacksmith, you 
are bound to collect black dust on your clothes and skin. That is why sangam (association) is 
held to be so crucial in spiritual life. 


Parents must correct their wards on the spot 


You must have a separate room or corner where you do japa or dhyaana every day, so that the 
spiritual fragrance might infuse higher thoughts during the process. If the place is changed, it 
will be like changing the company; the cumulative effect of association will be squandered. 
Parents and elders must see that their sons and wards are corrected on the spot, whenever they 
forget or deviate from the path. 


Premchand, the Hindi writer, was once proceeding from Lucknow to Allahabad and he had 
written to his two sons to meet him at the railway station, The younger boy touched the feet of 
the father on seeing him, but the elder did not. Premchand was enraged at this; his wife tried to 
quieten him, saying "Poets and writers try to read too much meaning even in slight events." But, 
Premchand said that the behaviour of the fellow was an indication of ingratitude, a bad strain in 
his character which will grow into cruelty and hard-heartedness later. 


You may boast that you have been visiting Puttaparthi since twenty years or that you have made 
the place your permanent residence; but, unless you follow the lessons I emphasise, that boast is 
mere empty vanity. If you develop love for all beings, in the faith that God resides in all, you 
may be anywhere else, but your prayers would reach me and my grace will reach you. While in 
my previous body, I told Naanaasaheb that I am in ants, insects and animals, besides all men. 
When a dog ate off offerings intended for Baba, it was declared to have reached Baba, for he had 
eaten it in that form: "Naanaa says he is giving me food; but when I go in the form of a dog he 
drives me off’. 


Be always saturated with prema; do not use poisonous words against any one, for, words wound 
more fatally than even arrows. Speak soft and sweet; sympathise with suffering and loss and 
ignorance; try your best to apply the salve of soothing word and timely succour. Do not damage 
the faith of any one in virtue and divinity. Encourage others to have that faith by demonstrating 
in your own life that virtue is its own reward, that divinity is all-pervasive and all-powerful. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam: Deepavali, 25-10-1965 


TO believe that God is manifest 

only in one place or location, 

and to journey thither is a 

superstition much to be deplored. 

He is everywhere, in everyone, at all times. 

He is the energy that filled space and time and he is 
the energy that manifests as causation. 


SHRI SATHYA SAI 


51. The daily diet 


Rotarians in India have a greater responsibility than in other countries for, this country is from 
very ancient times striving to become a Karmabhumi, a Yogabhumi and a Thyaagabhumi. It has 
been endeavouring to justify its description by sages and seers as the land of dedicated activity, 
of self-control and self-knowledge, and of renunciation. In fact, thousands of years ago, the 
Rishis instructed the people of this land that Immortality can be won not by the cultivation of 
scholarship, or the fulfilling of the obligations of a householder's life, or by the accumulation of 
wealth as a means of a pleasure-filled life, but only by renunciation (thyaaga). 


It is said in the scriptures that even gods are anxious to get born in this land so that they may 
engage in acts of beneficence. That is why it is called Karmabhumi. The science of mind-control 
called Yoga has been developed here, since ancient times, and thousands in every age have 
practised it with success, until they have achieved its fruit, self-realisation. One result of this self- 
realisation has been the recognition of every one else as but the reflection of oneself---the true 
basis of the Unity of mankind. 


Living in such an ancient land, in the midst of a people whose minds are suffused with these 
ideals and aspirations, Rotarians will find their activities welcomed here more than anywhere 
else. The lesson that Sanaathana Dharma has been holding forth is "the unity of all created 
beings, of all sections of the human community, in One Cosmic Body which is God." 
(Ishaavaasyamidham Sarvam, Vaasudevassarvamidam) , The query, "Who belongs to whom?" is 
alien to Indian thought. Each belongs to all, all belong to ONE---this has been the daily diet of 
India since the beginning of Time. 


The world is the temple of God 


When someone suffers from acute stomach pain, his eyes exude tears! For, there is one 
consciousness pervading and activating all parts of the body, and producing appropriate reactions 
everywhere. Similarly, the world too is just one body and pain anywhere naturally affects other 
parts. No single part can rejoice when another part, however distant, however insignificant, is in 
pain. 


I find that you use the word ‘Antharjatheeya' for indicating that there is an inter-national body. 
Anthar or Inter shows that yours is an inter-connection, an anthar or inner link, a wire that 
supplies current to all, an inner motivator which operates and oversees every part or limb, not 
only in the body---the dwelling place of the individual---but in the world which is the temple of 
God. The Lord has declared in the Geetha that He is Sarvabhuutha-antharaathma---"the Inner 
Reality of all beings." Try to be ever in the awareness of this Unity in God; this is the one truth 
that has to be seen, experienced and announced; this is the soundest basis for individual and 
social life. This will serve as an unshakable foundation for your international outlook. 


I asked your president what the ideal of Rotary International was and he told me that it was, in 
one word, paropakaaram---"Doing good to others." For this ideal, India is a very congenial 
country, since you will find willing co-operation from the people and plentiful opportunities for 
exercising the talent, the skill and the urge for doing good to others and helping others. But I 
would like to remind you that there are no para (others) to receive the upakaaram (favour) from 
you; the ‘para’ persons are your own. your very selves. All are waves heaving and falling, rolling 
and receding, on the ocean of which they are integral parts. Therefore, who can help whom? 
Who does whom a favour? Whose is the helping hand? All help is to oneself, from oneself. 


The pain that another suffers from, which you seek to assuage, is really your own pain; when you 
stop his pain, it is your pain that stops. Service can be effective only when the feelings of 'I' and 
'Mine' give place to 'God' and 'God's'. It is only when your attention is monopolised by the body 
and its needs, that egoism will grow in strength. When you direct your attention to the Anthar- 
aathma (Inner-self) which is God, then, you find the same God in all and a flood of reverence 
fills you and fertilises every act of yours. Saadhana is needed for redirecting the attention from 
the deha to the dehi---body to the soul. 


Non-dual attitude will make service more fruitful 


All beings are as flowers that bloom and fade before the day is over; but, like this garland you 
offered Me when I came amidst you, they are strung on one eternal indestructible thread, the 
Suuthra that is called Brahmam. Establish this Bhaava-adwaitham (non-dual attitude) in your 
mind; it will render your service more enjoyable, more fruitful, more sweet and pleasant to the 
recipient. Without that attitude, paropakaaram becomes help, doled out to lesser men and poorer 
folk, by superior persons. All such help will be suspected and resented; it is contaminated at the 
source as well as at destination. Of course, one should not treat all equally, have the same 
prescription for all. Serve each according to the specific need and capacity to benefit by the help. 
The Antharaathma is the same in all, but, you should not give a knife into the hands of a mad 
man, or a gold necklace to a child. The child will cast it away; the man may gash some one's 
throat. 


Feel the sorrow of others as your own 


The most precious possession is mental equanimity; and it is the one thing you cannot give, even 
if you have it. Each has to acquire it the hard way. But you can enlighten people on the 
disciplines through which mental equanimity can be gained, and shaanthi can be won. It cannot 
be earned through a higher standard of life, bush shirts, transistors, sofas, air-conditioners, etc. It 
cannot be got through riches, through the acquisition of power and authority, through developing 
physical strength and endurance. When you plan for service, remember this estimate of 
comparative values. The rich, the healthy, the strong, the powerful, the influential---all are 
afflicted with discontent, worry, fear and anxiety. They have no peace of mind. 


Shaanthi comes from within; contentment is a mental condition. Do not feed the roots of 
attachment to worldly comforts more than is absolutely necessary. They lead only to anxiety and 
fear; they can never satisfy the innermost craving of man. Lead them into the path of devotion 
and dedication; for them that will be the path of contentment and joy. Emphasise the universal 
Aathma_ thathwam---essential nature of the Self; encourage prayer, meditation, quiet 
contemplation of the grandeur and glory of God, reflected in Nature; repetition of the Name of 
the Lord; encourage silence and solitude, for the sake of introspection and contact with the 
springs of joy inherent in man. 


You are all educated persons, experienced in many fields of activity, equipped with many skills 
and capabilities; you are animated by genuine enthusiasm to help others; you are encouraged by 
the example of other Clubs to take up many schemes which will benefit the community. These 
are great assets. Heart has to meet heart, so that service may succeed. Speak soft and sweet; be 
soft and sweet. Speak with sympathy and with no pretence, no artificiality. Keep away from 
impure listening, impure acts, impure words, impure thoughts---everything that contaminates the 
will to serve, and the skill to serve. 


I am glad you gave Me this chance to share with you your Aanandam; I am glad I got this chance 
to share My Aanandam with you. I hope and bless that you will feel the sorrow of others as your 
own and strive to diminish it; I hope and bless that you will feel the happiness of others as your 
own and strive to share it and increase it. 


Hindupur: Rotary Club, 4-11-1965 


Everything is held together by God's strength. 
God is present everywhere. 

You are only a means through which 

God is seeing every one in this world. 

You are only imagining 

that you are seeing with your eyes, 

but you are, in fact, seeing with God's eyes. 
First thing to do is to find who you are. 
SHRI SATHYA SAI 


52. The steady stream 


I am glad I came to this newly established College and saw these students who are the builders of 
India in the coming years. Virtue is the fragrance of the flowers which the tree of life puts forth. 
Educated people must be identified in society by their strict adherence to virtue, not by more 
skilled methods of escaping the consequences of vice. Education is now sought after, more for 
securing a means of livelihood. The attempt of many parents and their children is to learn some 
skill which will give them a good job, in a factory or business establishment or bank, on a decent 
salary. Of course, man must live and live comfortably. So, it is necessary that some useful skill is 
mastered. But, man needs things much more satisfying, much more essential, than comfort. He 
must have faith in himself, so that he may respect himself. This Aathma vishwasa (trust in the 
Self) lies at the very root of joy. 


In India, the education that leads to the knowledge of the Aathma and faith in the Aathma has 
been perfected since ages. That education teaches a proper sense of values; giving the Vishayas 
(the objective, world), relative importance for temporary periods, for transient ends and 
encouraging man to hold fast to disciplines that confer inner peace. The Aathma thathwa 
(principle of the Self) grants Amritha (Immortality). The deha thathwa (principle of the body) is 
anritha (invalid), and so, cannot give absolute Bliss. Man is not an improved type of monkey; he 
is a child of this Immortal Entity. That is why he refuses to accept that death is his end. That is 
why he strives to perpetuate himself for ever. The hunger for escaping death is strong in man; he 
does not believe that he is a bubble, that can be pricked out of existence by chance. 


Teach youth the fundamentals of Indian culture 


The system of education has to be recast in order to allow the children of this land to grow up as 
the seers and sages of this land, to hand over to the sons and daughters of Bhaarathamaatha the 
precious heritage, which the world too is anxious to share. The significance of yajna, dama and 
thapas (sacrifice, self-control and penance); of sahana, saadhana, samyama (forbearance, 
spiritual discipline and sense restraint); of the great Mahaavaakyas (Vedhic dicta) enshrined in 
the Vedhas; of the three Yogas---bhakthi, karma and jnaana---as elaborated in the Geetha; of the 
Daivi and Asuri (godly and demonic) natures---all these and many more of the fundamentals of 
Indian culture have to be taught to the children in schools and colleges. They must be 
encouraged to practise them, for their own as well as for the country's good. 


The Principal requested Me to bless all the candidates who have appeared for the examinations 
so that all of them may pass. My blessings are with them; but, I do not consider passing the 
examinations as so profoundly important. This College is started on the basis of a big donation of 
a lakh of rupees, by a merchant of this place. Show by your discipline, character, sacrifice and 
other traits that he has not donated that amount in vain. Let him be happy that, from the 
institution he founded, the country is getting a steady stream of honest, efficient, reliable 
workers, who will enhance the glory of India in the spiritual field as well. 


Become worthy children of your Motherland 


This is the land where the Upanishads called upon the students to adhere to truth, to follow 
dharma, and to revere parents and teachers. If you learnt those great lessons, then, certainly there 
would be no anxiety and grief; but, now, parents are neglected and even disowned. How can a 
nation that does not revere those deserving to be revered, be revered in its turn? If the teacher is 
not listened to with the respect due to his age and attainments, how can the student learn from 


him the ideals on which he should plan his own life? Sathya and dharma are the two rails on 
which the locomotive of the nation runs; when sathya is given up, chaos prevails; when dharma 
is discarded, might becomes right. 


So, whether you have it in the curriculum or not, learn the underlying principles of Sanaathana 
Dharma from elders and teachers; practise at least the very first steps in spiritual discipline, like 
silence, reciting the Name of God, reading of the scriptures, etc. Avoid wasteful and harmful 
forms of recreation; maintain your health by moderation; become worthy sons and daughters of 
your Motherland.. 


Hindupur College, 14-11-1965 


Sorrow and pain are caused by desire. 
The cure is to use the same desire, 
and turn it to God, to desire God. 
SHRI SATHYA SAI 


53. Let students master 


It is a rare type of Festival, this Diamond Jubilee of a school; I am glad you have asked Me to 
inaugurate the Celebrations. To illumine a place with the lamp of knowledge for sixty years, to 
have trained up for life hundreds and thousands of persons, is no ordinary achievement. I am 
glad you have as a part of the programme, the expression of gratitude for the Headmasters and 
Teachers who toiled at this School to make it a successful training centre in this region. It is now 
twenty-five years since I last came to this place, which is so near geographically to Puttaparthi. 
People in America, Europe and Africa, in Hongkong and Australia are establishing Sathya Sai 
Bhaktha Mandalis and Study Circles; they are having Telugu Classes, so that they may listen to 
Me and learn things directly from Me. But, places near Puttaparthi take long to derive the 
benefit. As for Me, I have no 'near' and 'far’; all are near to Me, except those who keep afar. Even 
they are close to Me, if only they dedicate themselves to God, under whatever Name and Form. 


Considering the system of education sixty years ago when this school began and the system 
prevalent now after many experiments and modifications, one has to say that a great many 
valuable characteristics of the old system have been lost. Numbers have increased; but, quality 
has suffered. More information is forced in; less knowledge to meet the fortunes of life is 
imparted. Skills are added but virtues are subtracted. Respect for the great scriptures and sacred 
texts has diminished; how then can patriotism strike root? Love for India springs from reverence 
for her role in the history of the world, in the upliftment of man. 


Students are not told how the sages and seers of India saw the highest truths that man can ever 
hope to visualise; they decry their forefathers as fools, and their elders as old-fashioned. They 
have other lands and other cultures as their ideals, for, they are carried away by material victories 
like space ships and rockets to the moon. They have no idea of the utter danger which these 
adventures into space denote and of the vastly grander adventures into the soul which Indian 
sages have achieved. 


Recast the mind as an instrument for Liberation 


The Jubilee which has to be celebrated by every individual is not the Diamond, but, the “Die- 
mind", the occasion when through saadhana, the mind is mastered. Modern civilisation is based 
on competition in which the interests of the individual precede the interests of society. Therefore, 
fear haunts men wherever they turn, fear of poverty, fear of loss, fear of death and destruction of 
property. The mind urges the senses to seek and secure softness, sweetness, fragrance, melody 
and beauty, not in God whose heart is soft as butter, whose story is sweet as nectar, whose 
renown is fragrant as the jasmine, whose praise is melodious to the ear, whose Form is the 
embodiment of perfect beauty, but, in the shoddy contraptions of material things. So, the mind 
has to die, so that it may be recast as an instrument for liberation, through fulfilment. 


Sixty years ago, and until recently, in some primary schools, Sumathisathaka and the verses of 
Vemana were passed on to the children and they implanted in the tender minds the seeds of 
Sanaathana Dharma. Today, they have given place to Nursery Rhymes, like "Who killed Cock 
Robin?", "Jack and Jill went up the Hill", rhymes that cannot grow into goodness or virtue. 


The neglect of the study of the Sanskrit language and literature is denying our students the spring 
of wisdom, from which generations have imbibed courage and confidence to face life. Consider 
first things first---that is the message of the Shaastras. The true culture of India can be 


experienced only then. Bhaarath is the only country where the process of exploiting the mine of 
Aananda lying in the inner consciousness of man has been systematically explored. 


Basis of the Indian ideal of Ahimsa 


India has always laid down disciplines to cultivate Universal Love; the yajnas and yaagas 
(Vedhic sacrifices and worship) which are recommended in the Vedhas are for Loka kalyaana 
and Loka sangraha---the welfare and security of all mankind. That is why India is as the engine 
which drags the wagons along, all wagons that are coupled with it. The wagons are the different 
nations. Lokaassamasthaah sukhino bhavanthu---" May all the denizens of all the worlds be 
happy"---is the prayer that rises from the children of this land, since thousands of years. God is 
omnipresent; He is immanent in every being in equal measure. So, man must visualise Him 
equally in himself and in others. That is to say, he sees only God in all. So, how can he injure 
others or fear that he will come to harm through others? This is the basis of the Indian ideal of 
Ahimsa. We have such world-transforming truths embedded in the ancient texts, but having them 
there or even inside the heads does not help; they have to be put into practice, steadily and with 
faith, 


You are happy when you have a watch; you are happy when you have a transistor radio hanging 
round your neck; the happiness is due to the fact that you have them and that others have no right 
over them. The sense of possession, the sense of 'mine' (mamaakara), that is at the root of the 
joy. The thing by itself is powerless to evoke joy; for, if the thing itself was the source, every one 
having it must derive the same quantity of joy. When a neighbour gets a transistor, you do not 
feel happy at all; you might even feel it a nuisance. Analysis will show that all joy is in us, for us 
and from us. And it is but a reflection of the boundless joy that the Aathman is. So, instead of 
scattering attention in many directions, man must endeavour to attain that Aathmic joy while 
here, with body. The moon that shines in the waters of a million lakes is one; the shine in the 
lakes is due to the reflections; look up and know the truth. Do not be deluded that inside each 
lake, there is a distinct moon. The bodies are many but God is reflected in every one of them. 


Establish contact with that Almighty Power, that Omniscience, that Omnipresent Entity and all 
things will be added unto you---power, wisdom, vision, liberation. The way in which schools are 
now attempting to shape the tender minds of children is full of defects. They are not given the 
sustaining food of Vedhaanthic truths; they are not trained to grow straight and strong, breathing 
the bracing air of virtue. They are not allowed to grow in an atmosphere of love and endurance. 
The hatreds and factions, which elders indulge in are their examples and inspirations now. Their 
energies and enthusiasms are not canalised by means of restrictions and directions, precept and 
example, into beneficial activities. 


Efforts in these directions, however elementary, will, If persisted in, yield good results. Begin 
this day this task of rousing in these students the keenness to become masters of their senses and 
the tasters of lasting joy. 


Hindupur Municipal High School Diamond Jubilee: 14-11-1965 


54. The Badge: a call to saadhana 


Seeing these volunteer badges that I have brought for distribution, you feel happy that you are 
soon to be decorated, and perhaps you hope, by means of this badge, to exercise authority over 
others and escape heavy work, during this Birthday Festival. I am not giving these badges to 
endow you with authority, or confer leisure on you or because it is customary on such occasions 
to have some women and men moving about with badges. This will impose heavier work on you, 
but, if you look upon it as work, then you have no right to receive these badges. It entitles you to 
welcome and serve your kith and kin who are arriving at this place from all parts of the world. 
The badge should not burden you with the weight of conceit; it should not make you feel 
superior, as if yours is the upper hand and the recipient of your service has the lower hand. It is 
not a boon that you drop into his hand but an offering that you dedicate at his feet. It is the 
expression of kinship between your nature and the nature of those whom you serve. In the 
Principle of the Self (Aathma thathwa), he and you are the same; he and you are but two waves 
of the selfsame sea. 


Take this badge as a call to saadhana, as an introduction to a spiritual adventure, an exercise in 
the practice of prema. The Vedhas teach you that which deserves to be learnt; the Shaastras lay 
down disciplines that help shape man into Maadhava, saadhana brings into you the awareness of 
that which will give a new and truer meaning to every act of yours. I am eager that you must all 
get to know this and so, I am leading you into the saadhana. A mother cannot ignore the health 
and progress of the children. Though they may neglect her advice, she will be eager to correct 
them and lead them into proper habits. 


Volunteers have to forgo their comforts 


The main plank of the programme of saadhana is the overcoming of the ego, the feeling of "I" 
and "Mine". That, in a nutshell, is Aathma vidya. Now, you as volunteers have to forgo your 
comforts and even chances to have darshan and to listen to My discourses, when service calls 
you somewhere else. This thyaaga or renunciation gladly undertaken is a very important 
qualification for the saadhaka. If you feel the urge, "My need first, the other person's later" then, 
what you perform is not seva, it is strategy. Give up your seat to someone who is older or infirm, 
or more deserving, that is seva; not sticking to it, when such people are desperate for 
accommodation. 


"You will earn my Grace more by such service and sacrifice than by sitting in the front line and 
nodding to whatever I say. Do not push or pull people; speak softly and sweetly; tell the old and 
the infirm that you will take them to more comfortable vantage positions and they will be 
extremely grateful to you. See that they are not exposed to the scorching sunlight, for they may 
suffer from blood pressure and other handicaps and they may be affected. Seek them out from 
among the gathering and offer to rescue them. Handle them as you would handle a rare flower or 
a costly fruit. 


I have known many volunteers who reel off the excuse, "They won't obey, Swaami, if we speak 
soft; they are accustomed to rough treatment only". I will never pardon such volunteers. The 
fault is always in their manner of speaking, the way in which they explain their actions, the 
temper, the attitude, the approach. Have you reflected on the responsibility which is now being 
endowed on you? What is it that is about to separate you from the thousands who have come 
here? Not this badge, surely. 


Needs of guests should take precedence 


You are being invested as Prashaanthi Nilayam Representatives, you are being entrusted with the 
traditional duty of hospitality towards the kinsmen who are arriving. So, you must have 
Prashaanthi in your hearts; you should not be agitated or worried or angry or upset. Behave in 
keeping with the dignity conferred on you. When guests come, does the wife tell the husband, 
"We shall feed them after we have eaten"? Their needs take precedence, they are to be attended 
to with care and consideration. So, too here, the men and women who have come are to be met 
with love and care, irrespective of your convenience and comfort. That is the way to please Me 
and win My grace. 


The best way to show respect to them is to treat them as reasonable, devoted, nice, respectable 
people. If any of them talks loud, not knowing that he must not disturb the silence of the place, 
do not rush to him and hiss, or place your palm across his mouth. Go near him and whisper in his 
ear the rules and discipline of this Place, the fact that many are here engaged in meditation, 
japam and quiet study, the value of silence as a check on the passions and impulses. Then he is 
certain to co-operate and recruit others too, into the forces of silence. He will also realise the 
value of the discipline and perhaps decide to practise it even after he leaves the Nilayam. 


Volunteership should not be a temporary role assumed by you for this one week. It should not be 
like the role of Harischandra in the drama, played by the champion liar of the town. Harischandra 
never wavered from the path of truth, whatever the milieu that served as background for life' the 
palace, the jungle, the cremation ground. 


The volunteer is a candidate for Grace 


Some feel that the disciplines of the Prashaanthi Nilayam are limited to the geographical bounds 
of this area and so they can be ignored when one is beyond the gates. They smoke and swear, 
shout and swagger, fight and frighten, talk loose and light, indulge in slander and scandals, in the 
coffee houses beyond the gate, where they lounge and loll. It is shameful behaviour for any self- 
respecting human; it is reprehensible for pilgrims to holy places, who must yearn to soak 
themselves in spiritual joy; it is ruinous for a volunteer, for, here, a volunteer is also a candidate 
for Grace and an aspirant for Bliss. For you, the whole world must appear as a Prashaanthi 
Nilayam (abode of Supreme peace), not simply this stone and cement structure. As a matter of 
fact, the world is, fundamentally, a Prashaanthi Nilayam; only, man, by his ignorance and 
perversity, has fouled it into a snake-pit of crime and hate. 


I want that each one of you must so transform yourself during this period that you will carry with 
you the atmosphere of the Prashaanthi Nilayam wherever you go, for, you cannot live happily in 
any surrounding that is not fragrant with love and humility, discipline and control. You will 
naturally endeavour to make the place where you are and the men among whom you move, a bit 
more spiritual than before. 


You must have not merely enthusiasm to serve, but the intelligence and the skill; then only can 
you be efficient and useful. Enthusiasm without efficiency is often a source of loss and grief. 
There were two friends once who had to sit for an examination. The duller among the two 
wanted the other chap to supply him in the hall with the answers to the questions asked; but their 
seats were too far to permit whisperings to be heard; so, their problem was, how to cheat the 
invigilator and communicate with each other without being noticed and expelled. The sharper 


one was at one end of the hall and the duller one at the other. So, they hatched a plan, which they 
felt was fool-proof. 


Service must be done intelligently 


The school had a cat which used to roam freely in all the halls. The answers were to be tied to the 
tail of the cat and then, the dull fellow will place some sweets under his bench, which will attract 
the cat to his side. When the cat eats the sweets and licks the floor where they were kept, he 
could loosen the paper tied to its tail and spread it before him on the desk. The plan went 
through, up to a point; the answers were tied. But, the cat was so distracted by the thing on its tail 
that it scampered round and round in terrific excitement. It attracted the attention of the 
invigilator and that was the end of the story. You must not be so foolish as to believe in the 
possibility of such a stratagem. The seva that is entrusted to you, you must do intelligently and to 
a successful finish. It does not matter if the recipient is not fully satisfied; you must have done 
your best, without hesitation or favour. 


What is the good of hurrying along the ranks of persons who are sitting for meals with a basket 
of laddus, shouting, "Laddus, laddus. Who wants laddus?" without stopping and serving even 
one /addu on the plate of a single person? The diners have the benefit of the name, but not of the 
substance. Nowadays, service has become more talk and less deed. But, the Lord cannot be 
deceived; He is vigilant and all-knowing. 


Once, Parameshwara and Paarathi were going along the sky over Vaaranaasi, on a Shivaraathri 
Day. There were millions of pilgrims crowding the ghats and narrow lanes of the Holy City. The 
precints of the Vishweshwara Temple were filled with devoted men and women singing the 
praise of Shiva. 


Purity and Truth alone can open the gates of Bliss 


Paarvathi turned to her Lord and asked, "Look at these millions of human beings; they are all 
certain to win Heaven, for they are full of devotion and they are here on this sacred day; I 
wonder if heaven can accommodate all of them." Shiva laughed at her innocence. He said, "If 
every one who comes to Vaaranasi on Shivaraathri Day can secure heaven, then, Vaaranaasi will 
be heaven. No. We both are in heaven because we have no egoistic desire, no selfish 
attachments. These people are all so saturated with selfish desire that no one of them can ever 
hope to have access to heaven. Can a thief who steals and purchases a ticket to Vaaranaasi with 
the stolen money climb to heaven? Purity, love and truth alone can open the gates of Bliss. Come 
on, I shall prove my thesis that very few of these can ever enter heaven. Let us go into this city as 
an old decrepit beggar pair." 


And, in one of the lanes that led to the temple, in full sight of the hundreds who filed along, with 
the holy Ganga water in their hands, for being poured ceremonially on the Linga in the 
Vishweshwara Temple, the bony centenarian lay on the lap of his aged wife, lolling his tongue in 
the agony of extreme thirst, and the woman was appealing piteously for water to her dying 
husband. "Water, water; give this man a mouthful and save him for me", was the cry. No one of 
the devout came near to relieve his distress. Many cursed her for her shrill importunity; some 
asked her to keep off the road; a few said they will give him water after finishing worship in the 
temple; a large number swore that beggary must be made a crime and the police must clear the 
lanes of this nuisance; one or two people laughed and remarked that the lady was putting up a 
good show to attract attention. No heart melted at the woes of the old helpless pair. 


At last, one man came near them, moved by sympathy. He was a pickpocket who had come to 
Vaaranaasi's ghats to ply his wicked trade; he knelt by the side of the old man and pulled out a 
dried gourd full of water; that was his water bottle. But, Paarvathi wanted to test whether he had 
other virtues too. So, she said, "Thank you, dear brother. But, my husband will drink the water 
you give only when you describe some good deed you have done so far, while pouring the water 
into his parched mouth. He is about to die, so, tell him of some good deed you have done in your 
life and offer the merit of that to him when you give him the water". The hardened thief replied, 
"No; I have done no good deed so far; this is the first time my heart has melted at another's 
misery. Let the Lord of Vaaranaasi, Vishweshwara in the temple yonder, be my witness", he said 
and poured the precious water. At that, the Lord appeared in His real Form and Paarvathi too 
rose as the Goddess; they blessed him as the only person entitled to Heaven out of that motley 
throng of millions of empty hearts. Truth and Love won for him the Grace of God. 


Seek out opportunities to be of service 


The heart of the volunteer must melt in sympathy with the ignorant, the poor, the hungry and 
thirsty, the children separated from the parents in the rush, the parents searching for missing 
children, the sick, the infirm and all other cases of distress. Be on the look out for suspicious 
characters who also come during festivals to ply their trade of theft; warn the pilgrims of such 
persons and help them to guard their things when they have to leave the places where they have 
deposited them. Help spread a sense of security and safety. 


Seek out opportunities to be of service; do not be under the impression that you have certain 
limits for service and that you should not overstep them. When the buses come and the people 
alight, there is always confusion while they secure their luggage from the top; see that you 
provide them help and attention. Also, guide them lovingly to the places where accommodation 
is available. Do not look on from a distance, because you have not been assigned that particular 
work. They are coming to your place and they deserve a hearty welcome and kind attention. 


Volunteers have no limits for service 


Treat the guests as you would like to be treated, if you were in their place, visiting the Nilayam 
after years of yearning and months of preparation and anticipation of joy. The driver and 
conductor of the vehicles can leave them and move off; but, if in the confusion the visitors lose 
any article, it tells upon your vigilance. If you are there to help them, they will say "O, some 
good friend helped us to recover our things, he spoke so reassuringly to us, as soon as we 
reached the place; every one there is more full of prema towards us than our own kith and kin. 
That is the one place where we can be certain of kind and sympathetic and intelligent service 
suffused with love, which knows no distinction of caste, creed, status or wealth". 


Observe Me; what benefit can I derive from all My activity, I who assign all benefits to all 
activities according to what they deserve? But yet, you will find Me busy from dawn to dusk, 
from dusk to dawn. I finish My lunch or dinner within minutes so that I can teach you the value 
of time; I attend to the smallest detail of all the various items of work, for I try to set an example 
for you, in meticulous attention to, and careful anticipation of, all contingencies. I know many of 
you idle away hours on end, wasting precious hours in idle gossip, purposeless talk and debate. 
When you practise the attitude that God is everywhere as the witness of every act of yours, that 
God is in every being you meet and serve, then, you will certainly be rewarded by a Vision of the 
Lord. 


Do not let go the chance to do seva 


When you have the brilliant chance, do not let it go, through ignorance or negligence; grasp the 
opportunity and advance! The best way to win Grace is to obey instructions, to follow the advice, 
and to submit to the control exercised with lot of Love. I am worried that people are not 
benefitting from Me as much as I would like to confer. In the lotus pond there are many frogs; 
the bees that come from afar are not able to convince the frogs of the nectar in the lotus bloom. 


Seva done lovingly and well to the people who gather here to have darshan and to listen to the 
discourses is a great opportunity for you to acquire discrimination and non-attachment, to widen 
and deepen your bhakthi, and to realise how Sai is the inner motivator of all beings. I wish you 
well. Be humble, be sweet, be sincere. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam: Birthday Festival, 22-11-1965 


Bhakthi merges in Jnaana 

and becomes identified with it. 
Bhakthi ripens into Jnaana, 

so do not speak of them as different. 
At one stage, it is called Bhakthi, 

at a later stage, 

we refer it to as Jnaana. 

Once it is cane, later it is sugar. 
SHRI SATHYA SAI 


55. Pilgrimage to the throne 


The search for truth must become your daily spiritual discipline; every moment must be used for 
this primary duty. Truth can reflect itself in your intelligence only when it is cleaned by thapas. 
Thapas means all acts undertaken with higher motives; all acts indicating yearning for the spirit; 
repenting for past blunders; staunch determination to adhere to virtue, self-control; unyielding 
adherence to equanimity in the face of success or failure. Thaapam means heat, burning, 
intensity, earnestness of endeavour. It is thapas (penance or religious austerity) that fosters 
renunciation and discipline. 


This discipline is essential when, as at present, the temptations to deviate are so many. In this 
iron age, when darkness is enveloping the mind of man, any little lamp that can light the steps is 
most welcome. That is why I advise you to resort to sath-karma, sad-aachaara and sath- 
pravarthana (good deeds, good conduct and good attitudes and outlook), so that you may be 
established in the constant presence of the Lord. You must also strive to "hear" (shravana) 
elevating words, to ruminate on these promptings of the spirit (manana) and then, when the 
validity is recognised, to meditate on it in profound reverence (nididhyaasana). All other activity 
is secondary; this alone is edifying, this alone is beneficial. 


This day, there is a Solar eclipse and many people wondered whether the Birthday festival will 
be celebrated or postponed. The shadow of the moon falling upon the sun is not the calamity that 
people should fear; the shadow of maaya falling upon the intelligence is the eclipse that has to be 
treated as a bad omen, as inauspicious. The mind is the moon, the intelligence is the sun; see that 
they do not suffer from eclipse. Then, you are safe. Do not worry when something happens in the 
outer sky; worry when the shadow of some dark desire, some foul passion, some monstrous 
emotion, some fell intention casts its evil gloom over your inner sky. See that the splendour of 
the Lord, the cool rays of His Grace are not dimmed in the recesses of your heart. 


The emblem of Prashaanthi Nilayam 


I find that some one has upset the usual seating arrangements; the women are on the left and the 
men on the right. That is to say, the women have most of the scorching sun and the men are 
under the shade of the tree. So, I shall not keep you longer. I shall unfurl the flag, which is the 
symbol of Prashaanthi, the higher equanimity when all dualities are superceded and man gains 
the supreme joy of calm balance, unaffected by ups and downs, pain or pleasure, when the waves 
are stilled and the storms rage no more. The flag contains the picture of the emblem that is 
represented in concrete shape in front of the porch here; it is the summary of the progress of the 
pilgrim to the throne of the Lord in the altar of his heart. 


The pilgrim must traverse and overstep the vast wastes of worldly desires (kaama) and overcome 
the thick slushy growths of anger and hate (krodha) and negotiate the cliffs of hatred and malice 
(dwesha), so that he might relax on the green pastures of concord and love (prema). Having thus 
become master of his inner foes, he has to rest in the silence of his own heart, as a Yogi, with all 
the agitations of his inner realm stilled. That is the meaning of the six-ringed pillar in the centre 
of the circle here; the six rings are the six chakras (centres of energy) of yogic discipline in the 
central spinal naadi (nerve current) of man. 


Fixed in the undisturbed calm of his deepest consciousness, man finds that the lotus of the heart 
blooms into a thousand petals and then, the flame of awakening into the truth lights itself, as 
Prashaanthi. That moment, the seeker knows that he and all else are One, that the One is 


Brahmam. This progress that every one has to make, today or tomorrow, in this life or in the 
next, is outlined as a clear picture in the symbol on the flag; so, when it flutters above this 
Prashaanthi Nilayam, resolve to hoist it on your heart too. Take the first step today, in this long 
pilgrimage. Give up, in order to gain; restrain, in order to receive; become blind (to the external 
view), in order to see more clearly (the inner vision). 


Prashaanthi Nilayam: Birthday Festival, 23-11-1965 


Anger, malice, greed and envy---all these are obstacles in the path 
of love and co-operation. They lower man from the Divine to the 
animal level. 


SHRI SATHYA SAI 


56. The rules of the game 


Every man is engaged in searching for something lost. Life is the chance afforded to him to 
recover the peace and the joy that he had lost, when last he was here. If he recovers them now, he 
need not come again. But, he loses them through ignorance of their value and of the means of 
retaining them. If only he would stay in the consciousness of Shivoham---"T am Shiva; I am 
immortal, I am the source and spring of Bliss"---he would be supremely content; but, instead of 
this correct evaluation of himself, this recognition of his innate reality, man goes about weeping 
at his helplessness, his inadequacy, his poverty, his evanescence. This is the tragic fate from 
which man has to be rescued. 


The deer is trapped, the elephant is drawn into the kheddah (the trap), and the serpent is 
charmed---all by taking advantage of their slavery to the senses. Man must demonstrate his 
superiority over the animal, by conquest over the senses. He must wriggle out of his animal 
shackles and assert his "humanity", which is essentially "divinity". When Emperor Bharthrihari 
gave up his throne and went into a hermitage in the forest, the subordinate rulers who were his 
tributaries laughed at the stupid step and asked him how he got the idea and what he gained. 
Bharthrihari replied, "I have now gained a vaster empire, a richer and more peaceful empire; I 
gave in exchange a poor barren torn empire; see what profit I have made." 


Sacrifice the animality and bestial lust in you 


Sacrifice, so that you may be saved. You have to sacrifice, not a bleating sheep or a horse or 
cow, but your animality, the bestial lust and greed, hate and malice. Sacrifice these and you earn 
the heaven of unflinching peace. Killing a sheep is a cheap trick, which will not deceive any one; 
for, you are asked to kill the sheep inside you, the cowardly beast that revels in the mass and 
perpetrates mob fury in blind anger. Gauthama Buddha saw sheep being driven to be slaughtered 
at a sacrifice (vajna); he tenderly lifted a sweet little lamb on his shoulder and followed the 
sheep to the special enclosure where the ruler of the State was performing the yajna. On being 
told that the ceremonial killing of the lamb will bring great good to the ruler and the state, 
Buddha said, "Of course you must admit that a man, a prince, a monk is much more valuable 
than a tiny trivial lamb. Kill me and win merit a hundredfold", and advised him about the inner 
weaknesses and vices that are symbolised by the victims of the yajna. 


Buddha argued him out of his false attachment to the paltry benefits promised for ritual 
correctitude. He told him that the prayer that rose from every Indian at sunrise and at sunset was 
"Sarve janaah sukhino bhavanthu"---"Let all beings attain happiness." "The sacrifice of a living 
being to secure happiness here or hereafter though accompanied by the recitation of all the 
appropriate ritual formulae was a selfish act and so, it deserves discouragement. To kill, so that 
you may live longer and with fuller joy is a reprehensible act, Buddha declared. It is comparable 
to the disgraceful pride of those who swagger like bullies because they have the atom bomb 
which can reduce to ashes entire states and vast cities. They make mankind cower in fear, just as 
the sacrificer in the yajnas makes the victims shiver in terror. 


Only those who base their actions on the universal principle of God that dwells in every being 
and prompts every deed, word and thought, can deserve the gratitude of mankind. All beings are 
flowers strung on the selfsame string to make a multicoloured garland for the Lord. You talk of 
international understanding, but it can come only when the idea of difference and separateness 
inherent in the word "nation" disappears and when man sees the Lord in all men. When a thorn 


pricks your foot, you get tears in the eye. For, they are of the same body; so too, when a worm is 
crushed, your heart must react to its pain. This must be cultivated as a saadhana and practised 
until it becomes one's nature. 


God is forgotten when self-interest demurs 


A parrot taught to utter Raam Raam Raam was caught by a cat and when the cat dug its teeth into 
it, it forgot Raam Raam Raam, it screeched like any parrot when it is in great pain. Raam Raam 
Raam was forgotten! So too, all talk of the unity of mankind, of the immanence of God and the 
pervasiveness of the Divine is forgotten, when self-interest demurs! 


There was a Sultan once who had a daughter always immersed in the meditation of God. She was 
so pious and pure that the father decided to give her in marriage only to a person who was 
equally busy in spiritual activities and study, and equally determined in spiritual practices. The 
Prince of the neighbouring State asked for her hand and pleaded for it so tenaciously that the 
problem of her marriage had to be faced quick. 


While searching for a suitable groom, the Sultan one evening saw a young fakir, lost in 
meditation, in a corner of the mosque, his face lit with the glow of inexpressible inward joy. He 
watched him silently for hours and when at last, he came into consciousness of the surroundings, 
he asked him whether he was married, and when he heard he was net he was greatly pleased. He 
introduced himself and offered his daughter to him. The fakir argued that he was far too poor to 
maintain a princess as his wife, but, the Sultan described her saadhana and put his mind to rest, 
on that score. The fakir agreed, but the Sultan was to spend for the wedding ceremony only three 
paise, one for betel-nut, one for jaggery and one for incense. The conditions were accepted and 
the princess was sent to live with him in the caravanserai. 


Have faith in God's capacity 


A few days later, she discovered tied in a corner of his garment a small piece of bread; she asked 
him how it happened to be there. He replied, "I retained it for the morning." The princess said 
that by this act, he had declared himself to be an unworthy fakir, to be a non-believer. For, he 
had, by that act, doubted God's love and God's capacity to feed His children. He had no 
confidence in God and His Mercy. So saying, she returned to her father and continued her 
spiritual practices undisturbed. He who has planted the tender seedling .will fulfil his 
responsibility and water it into a sturdy plant. Have faith; do not simply profess and deny in 
practice. 


God is no partial benefactor; he gives the fruit from every tree, according to the seed. You have 
planted the sour mango, hoping to use the fruit for pickles; then, why lament that the fruit is not 
sweet to the tongue? Do good and aspire to get the fruit of goodness---that is pardonable. It is not 
as bad as doing bad and blaming God that He has given you the meed for evil deeds. Once when 
the Guru of Naanak accosted him, he was writing something with rapt attention. So, Naanak did 
not answer. When later he was asked why, he said, "My heart was transcribing on my brain 
(paper) with the pen of God-centred thought using the ink got by burning all sense-pursuits." The 
fate of the country will depend on the character of its people and character is elevated and 
purified by saadhana, the hard way of regulation of behaviour and the control of desire. God is 
the guardian, and as guardian, He has to warn and punish to wean people away from harmful 
habits. If it is necessary, the guardian will resort to the infliction of pain too, as a curative and 
corrective treatment. 


Rules of behaviour must be observed by all 


Limit, control, regulate, set bounds and bunds; that is the way to succeed. If people let loose their 
thoughts, words and deeds, calamity will be the consequence. Shaastra means that which ‘lays 
down limits'; interest in the art of living is created by these rules. Imagine a game of football 
which has no rules, the ball is never 'out', there is no foul, no corner, no offside, no hands, 
nothing by which you can decide who plays well or ill, who wins or loses. The game will lose all 
zest; it will be pandemonium, a free fight. Rules of behaviour must be observed by politicians, 
rulers, subjects, monks, who are leaders of the community and heads of monasteries, scholars 
and others, for they are exemplars and guides and their responsibilities are greater. 


People talk grandly of Adhwaitha, of the one-ness of all, but, they are the very persons who 
exaggerate every difference and emphasise every distinction. People boast that they have been 
coming to Puttaparthi since 20, 15 or 10 years, as if we have some grades of senior or junior 
according to the years during which they have contacted Puttaparthi; but really speaking, one has 
to value only the beneficial changes brought about by that contact in the character and conduct of 
the individual. How much have you imbibed, the lessons learnt from here? How much have you 
succeeded in stopping the leaks which, as outer-faced senses, were draining y our discrimination 
and drying up the fountain of inner joy? 


The eye scatters your vision in a hundred directions; the ear drags your mind to many false 
melodies; the hands hanker after hundred flimsy acts. They degrade and demolish man. Man 
being divine must have the divine all around him all the time, in order to be alive; like fish, he 
must have the water of divine joy all around him. Instead, he is now seeking to keep himself 
alive by artificial respiration and borrowed blood. He is himself Amritha-swaruupa and 
Aananda-swaruupa (Immortal and Bliss personified). So, why should he strive to get aananda 
from outside? 


Man must have divine joy all around him 


Above all, recognise this truth: Sai is in all. When you hate another, you are hating Sai; when 
you hate Sai, you are hating yourself. When you inflict pain on another, remember that the other 
is yourself, in another form, with another name. Envy causes pain on those who are envied. 
When another's fortune is green, why should your eyes be red? Why get wild when another eats 
his fill? Give up this vice of envy; be happy when another is happy. That is more pleasing to the 
Lord than all the manthras you recite, or all the flowers you heap on his picture or image, or 
even the hours you spend in japam or dhyaanam. 


India is the home of many religions and philosophies; but, no one of them is observed 
reverentially by its adherents. They are used only as labels to identify persons or communities, or 
as uniforms for certain purposes on certain occasions. Persons take pride when they resort to 
clubs or gambling places; but, they are ashamed to go to a temple or a spiritual guide. People live 
beyond their earnings and enter recklessly into debt, since they are eager to gather all the insignia 
of high life, like transistors, bush coats, refrigerators and the like. Love of pomp, desire to beat 
others in standard of living, eagerness to appear superior to the rest---these make men fall into 
discontent and deceit. Be simple in your method of living, have saathwik food and saathwik 
recreations; let your mind be fixed on the ideals of service; let your thoughts be guided by 
sathya, dharma, shaanthi and prema. That is the blessing I confer on you today. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam: Birthday Festival, 23-11-1965 


The proof of the rain is the wetness of the ground. Likewise, the 
proof of true devotion is in the peace of mind, that the aspirant has 
been able to attain, the peace which protects him against the 
onslaught of failures, the peace in which he is unruffled by loss 
and dishonour. 


SHRI SATHYA SAI 


57. The call and the response 


An aspirant after spiritual realisation went off into a jungle and was plodding across the infested 
region, through the thick undergrowth, when he heard the angry roar of a lion; he climbed a tree 
to escape from the beast, but the lion saw him among the branches and roamed round and round 
the trunk in terrific rage. On the tree, he was attacked by a bear and so, he slid down the roots 
that descended from one of the branches of that banyan tree. Luckily, there were two roots 
hanging from the branch, so that he could hang on in mid air clinging to them, one in each hand. 
Just then, he saw two rats, one white and the other black which were gnawing at the base of the 
roots, endangering his life with every bite. While in this perilous state, a honeycomb which was 
full of sweet nectar situated on one of the top branches leaked a few drops which fell his way; so, 
the unfortunate man put out his tongue to catch a drop so that he may taste the delicious honey, 
But, no drop reached his tongue. In despair and terror, he called on his Guru, "O Guruji come 
and save me." The Guru who was passing by heard his appeal. He sped to the rescue; he brought 
bow and arrows and slew the lion and bear, frightened off the rats and saved the disciple from 
the fear of death. Then, he led the man to his own Aashram and taught him the path of liberation. 


The Guru appears when you call out in all sincerity 


This is the story of every one of you. This world is the jungle in which you roam; fear is the lion, 
which drives you up the tree of samsaara---worldly activities. Anxiety is the bear that terrifies 
you and dogs your steps in samsaara; so, you slide down into attachments and binding deeds, 
through the twin roots of hope and despair. The two rats are day and night, which eat away the 
span of life. Meanwhile, you try to snatch a little joy from the sweet drops of egoism and 'mine- 
feeling'. Finding at last that the drops are trivial and out of reach, you shout in the agony of the 
renunciation, calling on the Guru; the Guru appears, whether from within or without, and saves 
you from fear and anxiety. 


When you call out in all sincerity, the response will certainly come. Give up all low desire and 
call from the anguished heart. Do not pray from the lips, as you do now, from the puja room 
which is but a corner of the kitchen. You worship the Lord with an eye on the dishes cooking on 
the oven, with a nose inhaling hungrily the smells of boiling curries. Your thoughts of God are 
vitiated by vishaya-vaasana---the attachment to sensory objects. There is a vast gap between 
what you say and what you do, what you are capable of and what you accomplish. You have 
heard of Uttharakumaara, who was a poltroom, in fact, but who boasted that he could overwhelm 
the enemy forces in a trice. He could hold forth for hours on the theory of battles, but, as to 
practice he had no iota of it. 


The inner motive which prompts the deed---that is what the Lord seeks to weigh. Abdullah was 
sleeping in a corner of a mosque in Mecca, when he was awakened by the conversation of two 
angels above his head. They were preparing a list of the Blessed and one angel was telling the 
other that a certain Mahbub of Sikandar city deserved to be ranked first, even though he had not 
come on pilgrimage to the Holy City. Hearing this, Abdullah went to Sikander City and found 
that he was a cobbler, repairing the shoes of people. He was famished and poor, for his earnings 
barely sufficed to keep flesh and bones together. He had by severe sacrifice piled up a few 
coppers during the course of years; one day, he spent the entire treasure to prepare a special dish 
which he proposed to place before his pregnant wife as a surprise gift. When he was proceeding 
home with the gift he heard the cry of a starving beggar who seemed to be in the throes of 
extreme hunger. Mahbub could not proceed any further; he gave the pot containing the costly 


delicacy to the man and sat by his side, enjoying the blossoming of satisfaction on his haggard 
face. That act gave him a place of honour in. the register of the Blessed, a place which pilgrims 
to Mecca who spent millions of dinars in charity could not secure. The Lord cares for the feeling 
behind the act, not the fanfare and the fuss. 


The Lord cares for the feeling behind the act 


There was a small temple of Shrinath in the town of Govardhana, some centuries ago. A poor 
Brahmin of that place had an only son, a little boy of six, who was always exulting in the stories 
and legends of Krishna and who delighted only in listening to the /ee/as of the Lord. One day, he 
went out into the meadows with the cattle and when he saw the temple and the image of Krishna. 
inside the shrine, he took it to be the Lord himself. He called out very piteously asking Krishna 
to come out and play with him in the moonlight. Though the doors were locked by the priest as 
he went out at noon, the Lord came and, hand in hand, the two walked along the fields in the 
cool silver light. Krishna had the flute and He sat on a boulder and played on it to the extreme 
delight of the Brahmin lad. After a few hours, He returned with the friend, whom He called 
‘brother’ and, quite unnoticed, He disappeared into the temple shrine, where the idol could be 
seen through a slit in the door. 


The boy could not bear the pangs of separation from his Divine playmate; he spent the night and 
the morning crying outside the door and he was discovered there by his parents and the priest. 
The parents beat the boy for giving them so much trouble, but the priest found the idol bleeding 
as a result of the blow. If you call on him as a little brother, He responds and becomes rollicking 
playmate for you. Call on him as a Guru; He will instruct and inspire. He never fails those who 
call on Him sincerely and in faith. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam: Birthday Festival, 24-11-1965 


Women are makers of the home, 
the nation and the world. 

You are the mothers 

who shape the generation. 

So you must enshrine in your heart 
the spiritual urge toward 

Light and Love, 

Wisdom and Bliss. 

SHRI SATHYA SAI 


58. Mother and Motherland 


I am happy I have come to this place to see so many thousands from this and surrounding 
villages. Externally as well as internally, there is so much of festivity today, so much of joy and 
cool content. Cultivate this atmosphere of love and co- operation, and you can ensure joy for 
ever more. Do not seek arguments to keep away from others; seek rather ways of working 
together for the common good. Ahamkaaram and Mamakaaram---the sense of I and Mine--- 
these scotch love and co-operation. Reduce them to the minimum and then start serving the 
needy and the distressed. 


Service is best built on the strong foundation of Thath-thwam-asi---That and This are the same; 
That is This; This is That. There is no Other; there is only One. Kites fly high; but all are lifted 
and kept high by the same air, the same wind. The kites have no separate wills. The pots of water 
in which the Sun is reflected may be many, but the Sun is One and unaffected, when the pots 
break or the water is dried up. All help you give is therefore help given to yourself; all service is 
to the Self alone. When another is poor, you cannot be rich; when another is in distress, you 
cannot have joy. The same current runs through and activates all. Isaavaasyam idam sarvam--- 
all this is God; Vaasudevassarvam idam---all this is Vaasudeva (God), nothing more, nothing 
less. 


Revere your mother and Motherland 


This is the lesson that Bhaarath has been teaching her children, since ages. The Vedhas say, 
Maathru devo bhava: Revere your Mother as God. This applies to the country which gave birth 
to you, also. So, you must revere the country and follow its culture. You must also revere your 
mother, who has brought you up with love, care and sacrifice. However famous a man may be, if 
he does not revere his mother, he does not deserve respect. A person whose heart is so hard that 
it does not melt at the pleadings of the mother deserves nothing but ridicule. 


We have won freedom; the land has become free from those who ruled it for more than a 
century. But, though the rulers went, their influence still persists. The attitudes and habits of the 
West still dominate the mind of the educated and the leaders. We are still enamoured of the 
fashions current in the West, in dress, in language, in opinion, and in conduct. The dependence 
still continues, though we style ourselves as independent. The Sanaathana Dharma (Eternal 
Religion), which is a diamond necklace on the breast of the Mother, is discarded and a plastic 
necklace sought to be substituted. The authorities of this School and members of the Committee 
must resolve to see that the children passing out realise the efficacy of Sanaathana Dharma, to 
grant them peace, joy and courage. 


We see missionaries inspired by Christ moving thousands of miles away from their homes into 
lands with alien cultures, strange habits of food, drink, and dress, speaking unfamiliar languages 
and starting schools and hospitals to propagate their Dharma. They come to this country too, 
from far off lands. But, children of this ancient Dharma ignore, neglect and discard it, losing the 
valuable heritage left to us by the sages. 


Children in schools learn to recite, "Baa, baa, black sheep! Have you any wool?" in sheep-like 
imitation of English children. They are denied the chance to recite the sthothras (prayers) which 
the village schools of old encouraged children to sing. The sthothras were permanent possessions 
from which solace and strength could be drawn throughout life. "Baa baa, black sheep" is a 
ridiculous ditty, which has to be given up, as the child grows. 


The source of strength is in yourself, the Aathman 


This does not mean that you should cultivate a dislike towards any language. While you should 
revere your own mother-tongue and learn to use it well, you should not develop hatred against 
the language of others. Protect your mother-tongue and Motherland with all your energy. Make 
yourselves fit for this, by making the best use of the opportunities in the school. Progress as 
much as you can, without hesitation. Develop character as well as intelligence and health. The 
most reliable source of strength is in you, not in money, or kinsmen, or physical acumen, but, in 
yourself, the Aathman. Know it; delve into it; draw sustenance from it; see it in all; serve it in all. 


This is the stage when you should learn the value of discipline. You can be disciplined only 
when the teachers, the parents, the leaders of society, all are disciplined. The entire nation must 
learn to control the wild nature of passions and emotions; yielding to them brings only ruin in its 
wake. Discipline, self-control, desire to serve---these are the weapons with which Pakistan and 
its ally, China, can be overpowered. This is the time for humility and prayer. In the altars of your 
homes, of the temples in your villages, of your own hearts, pray to the Almighty Lord to rescue 
and protect. That is a weapon that even the weakest can handle; that can defeat even the strongest 
enemy. I assure you nothing can bring harm to this ancient and noble mother of Sanaathana 
Dharma. 


Dharmaavaram: Zilla Parishad High School Day, 27-11-1965 


Love should not be rationed, on the basis of caste, creed or 
economic status, or intellectual attainment of the recipient. 


It should flow full and free, regardless of consequence, for, it is 
one's nature of love, to seek out the dry dreary wastes which love 
can water and make fertile. 


SHRI SATHYA SAI 


