Sathya Sai Speaks 


Sathya Sai Speaks 

But, who among us do listen 

and plant them in well-ploughed: hearts? 

And when they cleave the cold, and greenly grow 
who among us shed tears of joy? 

His words are for the inner ear; 

they have drummed us, along the valleys of night 
and led us, through smiles and sobs, into the shore of the vastness, basking in His love, 
Sathya Sai Speaks 

And, Lo!. the deaf awaken to the call; 

for, His words resound relentless, within. 

Refuse; they stay; report; they sound sweeter; 
forget; they sprout; deny; they persist; 

for, they are the words we heard 

from the Mother's breast and the Father's lips, 
words, echoing in the ego cave, 

since we were worm and weevil 

fish and fowl, caterpillar, cat, 

until we shaped ourselves, through wanton history 
Into man, machine and monster! 

Sathya Sai Speaks 

He speaks pleasing profoundity, 

sweet, sustaining Reality. 

He is we and We are He and all are only ONE 
Sathya Sai Speaks 

until the last of us, the least of us, 


Rest and run like rivers unto their Source 


-N. KASTURI 


1. Dedicated for defence 


INDIA is a land dedicated to Truth, Right Action, Peace and Love; you are dedicated to the 
service of the Motherland, to defend her and preserve her independence. This is in accordance 
with the ancient injunction, Maathru Dhevo Bhava---Revere the Mother as you would revere 
God. You are ready and prepared to sacrifice even your lives in her service, whatever others may 
do or may not do. I am glad your devotion is so strong and so sincere. Truth, Right Action, Peace 
and Love---these are the four. pillars on which the mansion of happiness, here and hereafter, is 
built. India too must build her happiness on these columns only. They are the real supports of 
India, of India's security, prosperity, and glory. We have forgotten this truth; we have neglected 
the foundation; hence all this suffering today. 


God will always be with you in your struggle for the defence of this land. From within you, He 
will be guiding and inspiring you, to discharge your duty. Truth is God, and work is worship. By 
unselfish service, strict adherence to duty, and dedication to the cause of peace you are 
promoting the welfare of India and of all humanity. The Mahaabhaaratha War is a good example 
of the guidance that God grants when virtue defends itself against the forces of evil. Krishna was 
the very heart of the Paandava body; Dharmaraaja, the eldest of the five brothers was the Head; 
Bheema, the second brother, was the Stomach; Arjuna, the third, was the Arms. Nakula and 
Sahadheva, the twins, were the Legs---and Krishna was the Heart. God will not merely speak and 
guide from the heart; He will Himself be the Heart, provided you pray to Him to bless you so. 


Be ever aware of God who is the real 'you' 


We achieve Peace and Joy, only through sacrifice. Giving yields more joy and grasping. Since 
you are all prepared for the highest sacrifice, you are genuine sons of Bhaarath. Many do not 
realise the joy that can be derived from unselfishness;, they waste their years and their lives in 
the pursuit of selfish ends. They are so conceited that they do not revere parents, elders, the 
saints and the sages. They do not invoke the Grace of God through prayer. As a result, India is 
leaving off its age-old traditions and taking on new fashions and ,patterns of behaviour, thus 
landing people in misery. 


The body is referred to in the Geetha as kshethram, that is to say, a holy place where God is 
installed. Kaashi is a kshethram, Bhadhraachalam is a kshethram. The body-kshethram is 
Dharmakshethram as well as Kurukshethram, the abode, of virtue and of Activity. God in the 
Kshethram is the Kshethrajna (divine knower), the Shivam (eternally good) without whom the 
body is but shavam (corpse). Therefore, be ever aware of the God who is the real . ‘you,’ and seek 
solace, sustenance, and guidance from Him through prayer. 


Bangalore, 5-1-1973 


2. Pretenders 


WHEN the Buddha sat under the Bodhi Tree in Bodhgaya, after the illumination that revealed to 
him the Four Noble Truths, gangs of disbelievers gathered around him and poured ridicule and 
abuse on him. His disciples were enraged; they prayed to the Buddha, "Lord, Give us leave; we 
shall beat this insolence and .ignorance out of these traducers." But, Buddha only smiled at their 
anger. He said, "Dear ones, know you not how much joy they derive from this exercise? You 
derive joy worshipping me. They derive joy pelting me with abuse. You pour reverence; they 
pour ridicule, and receive equal satisfaction. Control yourselves; do not hate any one, that is the 
teaching. This is the ancient ordinance." 


Some people cannot tolerate glory in others; some are filled with the venom of envy; some are 
demonic in nature and cannot tolerate holiness and divinity; some are perverted by 
disappointment and cast the blame on God; such people will indulge in abuse. If you associate 
with such people and their followers, you will only be contaminating your mind. Even ordinary 
men will feel ashamed to cast aspersions on the great, but, these expose themselves by their 
tactics as lower than the lowest. 


God is above and beyond dualities 


You might say, we are the ordinary kind; when the Form we adore is traduced how can we bear 
it silently? Suppose some one sends you a letter by a registered post. When you sign and take it, 
you become aware of its contents, though you may not accept the contents. If you do not sign, 
the letter goes back to the person who sent it and his purpose in making you aware of the 
contents is defeated. So too, don't give ear to the abuse; keep cool and uninterested; then, the 
foulness goes back to the sender, and cannot affect you at all. It will affect him as a re-sound, 
reaction and reflection. Instead of harming you, it will only recoil on him. 


Look into the Bhaagavatham. What was the fate of Jaraasandha, Kamsa, Shishupaala? 
Shishupaala ridiculed Krishna and his hatred reacted on him alone. The Lord is not affected by 
either praise or blame. He is above and beyond the dualities that agitate man. He has neither 
favourites nor foes. Your goodness yields good to you; your badness brings about bad for you. 
Your virtue is your shield; your vice is the weapon that inflicts wounds on you. Happiness and 
misery are but the reflections of the good and bad which fill your heart and shape your activities. 


In the Bhaagavatham, there is mention of a certain Poundraka, who sought to become a passable 
‘imitation’, of Kaishna. He added unto his name the name of Krishna, viz., Waasudheva. He 
announced himself as Poundraka Vaasudheva. He got made an imitation Conch and an imitation 
Wheel (out of wood) and carried them about, in his two artificial extra hands. He discovered the 
style which Krishna adopted while wearing his yellow silken robe and he scrupulously followed 
the same. He skilfully imitated the gait and gestures of Krishna. Some fools gathered round him, 
mistaking him to be the Lord they were seeking. His insanity finally brought about his downfall 
and humiliation. 


Nature is the best preacher 


In this Kali Yuga also such imitations are cropping up just as Poundraka shaped himself into a 
Vaasudheva. We have today even Sathya Sai Babas. They get the same type of robe stitched, 
they strain themselves to cultivate the crown of hair, they study photographs and hold their hands 
up very nearly like I do and make themselves ridiculous by frantic attempts to imitate Me. They 


forget that "Imitation is only human; but, Creation is Divine." Those who attempt to become 
Sathya Sai Babas by this ludicrous process of imitation only destroy whatever faith some people 
have placed in the Divine. They are poisonous pests which injure the peace and harmony of 
society. They collect around themselves insects of like nature. For only birds of the same feather 
can flock together. These 'pretenders' fall into ruin themselves and bring ruin on the society 
where they operate, as the proverbial horde of monkeys that ruin themselves and bring ruin on 
the forest which they inhabit. 


Let Me tell you this' There is no need for you to follow this person or that person in the search 
for a Guru. The heart full of compassion is the altar of God. Nature is the best preacher. Life is 
the best teacher. Fill yourselves with awe and reverence at the handiwork of God, the 
manifestation of His Power and Glory that is called the World. This is enough Instruction and 
enough Inspiration for you. 


Brindhaavan, 14-1-1973 


Undigested food brings about illness in the body; similarly 
undigested knowledge imparted by the present day educational 
system has brought several illnesses in the social organism and the 
body politic. The disease is promoting contrary feelings that are 
expressed in mutual conflicts. 


The educated are reacting with envious emotions towards those 
who have secured jobs; when they are unable to get jobs, they 
impute, motives of nepotism, etc. and develop resentment, anger 
and hatred. 


The system of education is the root cause of the prevalent 
discontent and resentment. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


3. The fruit and the tree 


BHAARATH is the most ancient of all the centres of civilisation that is surviving today with her 
heritage intact. But, out of a false sense of values, the leaders and the youth of the land are 
ignoring the traditions of this precious culture, and are adopting the ideas and ideals of the West. 
Therefore, they identify themselves with the body they spend their energies and skills in catering 
to its needs and whims, and they believe that the material world is the only field 'for study and 
subjugation.' The result has been here as everywhere else, as even, in the most advanced Western 
Countries, fear, anxiety violence, corruption and pollution. Physical comfort, individual 
advancement, personal progress, these are held to be desirable. 


However, though each person might declare that he cares for himself only, no one can live in 
isolation. Persons, sleeping on the same cot are caught having different dreams; each one has an 
inner life of his own, his own path and speed. But ask him why he is engaged in work, what he is 
bringing from the shop, why he looks worried. The reply would be that he was engaged in 
building a house for his family, that he was purchasing clothes for his children, that he was 
worried about his wife. So he is living, not for himself, but for others whom he is attached to, 
who are his near and dear ones. Man is under an inescapable obligation to shape his activities 
and attitudes in consonance with those of others, amidst whom he is placed. He is given parents 
to revere and obey; brothers and sisters to love and learn with; playmates to mix and move with; 
society to be changed by and to change. His affection and attachment are attracted by others, and 
his reactions are determined by others. 


Man has to expand his knowledge 


He might be sitting at a table, before his plate on which dinner has been served; if some one 
rushes in to tell him that his child has been injured in an accident on the road, he runs out of the 
room and on to the road, without caring for the hunger and the plate. The call of the one he is 
attached to is louder and stronger than any call from within. In spite of such experience, man still 
believes in his ego, in an exclusive type of individuality. The family is essential for the 
blossoming of human personality; how can the helpless baby grow and learn, talk and move 
forward without the home? The home needs the community around it to keep it safe and happy. 
Even a bird in the bush cannot survive isolation from its kind. Man has to expand his knowledge, 
his emotions, his sympathies, his love. Expansion is life, expansion is love. When the community 
or the safe-guarding, sustaining Society is rendered weak, the family too tends to disintegrate and 
the individual suffers. 


Loyalty to society is essential for man 


The individual's fulfilment, in the joy of liberation, is undoubtedly, the fruit of the tree of 
humanity. But, when you yearn for the fruit, you cannot neglect the roots, the trunk, the 
branches, the leaves, the buds and the blossoms of the tree; they all help the fruit to manifest and 
to be filled with sweetness. When Pakisthan invaded India last year, their armies did not attack 
Madras; but, yet did you not rush forward to teach them a good lesson? Attachment to the nation, 
affection to the language, reverence to religion and loyalty to Society are all essential. They are 
all facets of the overwhelming sense of gratitude one feels for all that has shaped one. Each such 
loyalty, instead of running counter to another, must feed and foster all the rest. Then they are 
most desirable. 


Patriotism prompts man to understand the ideals of the past and the teachings of one's 
forefathers, based on their deeper experiences; it urges him to live for those ideals and gain 
experience for himself on the paths laid down by the sages of one's country. But, there are in 
India people who call themselves patriots, though they are neglecting and even harming those 
ideals and ridiculing those experiences and those paths. Adhering to one's own likes and dislikes, 
however harmful it may be to the interest of the culture of the country, is very injurious to both. 
When the hand is amputated, it is not merely the limb that suffers, a great quantity of blood also 
flows out from the rest of the body and makes the system weak and exhausted. So too, when one 
separates himself from the Society or Nation and insists on a path that is not part of the culture 
and traditions, not only does he lose support, he harms the nation too. 


Love is the secret source of all sympathy 


The world is one vast Society. Every individual in it is part of this Society, bound to it by the 
love that draws man to man, to be kith and kin. This love is there, deep in the heart of man. Only, 
it is unrecognised, ignored, doubted, denied, argued away. It is the secret source of all sympathy, 
and Service; it creates the urge to live in and for Society.. It is the Vishwa-Prema, that flows 
from One spark of the Divine to all sparks. When the eyes shine illumined by the highest 
wisdom, Jnaana, they see all as the One. Man realises that Sarvam Brahmamayam (A\l is 
pervaded by Brahman) Jagath (all that is apparently changing and transforming and moving). To 
have this One revealed as in All, one has to develop faith and discipline the mind. The mind has 
to shed its fancies and foibles; the Truth has to be known and experienced. Learning things by 
heart will result in only heartache. Learning shlokas or verses can only help you from not being 
engaged in anything worse during that time. They cannot take you an inch nearer the goal. How 
can mastery of the map equal the joy of the journey? 


Faith is an individual asset; it is acquired and preserved by one's own efforts. Maanikkavasagar, 
the Thamil sage, used to say, "You have the freedom to say No; I have the right to say Yes." 
What he meant was, when one denies or asserts a thing, it is the outcome of his experience. How 
can any one dispute the experience of another? God may not exist in the horizon of your 
experience, but he has already risen in mine---that is what the thiest tells the atheist. The time 
indicated by the watch on his own wrist is the correct time for him and he asserts so, though 
others might not agree. And, he has the freedom to do so. Have faith; do not allow it to shake, 
because some one else has no faith. 


Until you realise that you are Divine, that God is your Core and Reality, you will have to 
undergo these entrances and exists; the same newspaper should not be pored over again and 
again, day after day; one life must be enough to know the mystery. So, at least, recognise that 
there is a mystery, search for the secret, and unravel it for yourself. 


Yearn for the ecstasy of Divine Mother's vision 


Raamakrishna used to cry in agony at the loss of another day, without the vision of the Divine 
Mother. Have that yearning; feel that sense of urgency: Seek to know now, yearn for that ecstasy 
this moment. Do not postpone or spend time in discussing others. Trying to satisfy the sense is a 
dreary desert path. Do not imitate other nations, and compete with other cultures in external 
pomp. Yours is a mind, intelligence, ear and eye shaped by Indian tradition and culture, Indian 
history and Sanaathana Dharma (eternal religion). Move along those lines and success is certain. 


You may have only a picture of Sai Baba before you, or an image in metal or an idol in stone. 
But, if you have the faith that He is alive and present in it, and that He is in your heart and the 
hearts of all beings, then, you can get the ecstasy of that knowledge, the knowledge that He is 
omnipresent, omniscient and omnipotent. While meditating, first imagine and feel that you are in 
the Light, then, gradually, you can feel the Light is in you, not outside you; and finally, you will 
realise the Truth, that You and the Light are One and will ever be One. 


The Divine is a wine, that would intoxicate you. It is produced by the nectar that the Name of the 
Lord is saturated in. Taste it and you forget everything else; you are transformed. Man is, they 
say, a monkey that has lost its tail; well, he must lose many more attributes of the monkey before 
he is entitled to call himself man. He must dedicate his thoughts, words and deeds to God, and 
surrender to His Will. Then only is this animal entitled to become a Man, in whom the Divine is 
enshrined. 


Madras, 4-2-1973 


There is a distinctive type of devotion by which you worship God 
with a good, clean mind and good conduct. This has been given the 
name of Paraa Bhakthi. 


By worshipping God always with puuja (ritual homage) and 
flowers, the saadhaka (seeker) will remain stationary in his place. 


This is good in a way but to remain in one place all the time and 
failing to rise to a higher position is not good. 


It is a superior type of worship---to worship God through good 
qualities, good conduct, good thoughts and good company. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


4. Teacher of teachers 


SHIVARAATHRI observed every month, on the fourteenth night of the dark half of the Moon, 
which is the presiding deity of the human Mind, has only just one night more to be a non-entity; 
with no influence on the agitations of the Mind. In the month of Magha, the fourteenth night is 
named Malina (Great) Shivaraathri, for, it is sacred for another reason too. It is the day on which 
Shiva (Supreme God) takes the Linga Form, for the benefit of seekers. Shiva is revered as the 
Form to be adored for the acquisition of Jnaana (Supreme Wisdom). Jnaanam Maheshwaraath 
Iccheth, as the Vedhas advise.(Pray to Shiva for enlightenment, through Wisdom). So, do not 
treat this Day lightly, and reduce the disciplines prescribed by the sages for its celebration, such 
as fast and vigil and uninterrupted recital of the Name of God, into a routine ritual, or a chance 
for picnic, revelry, rivalry or factious fun. Contemplate this day and this night, on the Aathma 
Linga (elliptical idol which emanates from Shiva as His symbol), the Jyothir Linga (Symbol of 
the Supreme Light of Wisdom), and be convinced that Shiva is in every one of you. Let that 
Vision illumine your inner consciousness. 


Feed the mind with good thoughts and Godly acts 


A fence is necessary to protect growing crops; but, when no crop is growing, why spend time 
and money on a fence? The orange is covered by a find which is not very tasty, in order to 
protect it from too early consumption. Outer ritual is prescribed to shelter the inner message from 
being tampered with. Shivaraathri too like all other holy days in the Hindhu and other religious 
calendars has many such outer ceremonial observances and a deep core of inner significance. 
But, human nature prefers the easier path of outer formality to the path of inner discipline and 
direct experience. 


Visiting Shiva shrines, arranging for worship through priests of Shiva Lingams, pouring 
sanctified waters, potfuls of them over consecrated idols, fasting, vigil and such other activities 
are resorted to on this Day. But, these are not quite relevant to the real purpose of the festival. To 
fulfil these rites and vows, one need not wait one full year and consult the astrologer and his 
calendar of holy days. When man takes in food four times a day, in order that his body may keep 
functioning, efficiently, is it too much to ask him to feed the mind with good thoughts and godly 
acts, at least once every day? The mind too needs clean and sustaining food." 


Eeshwara, a Name of Shiva, means that He has all the glory that is associated with Godhead. 
Shamkara, another name of Shiva, 'means that He causes by His Grace, Sham, that is, Aanandha 
(bliss) at the supremest level. Shiva is the embodiment of Aanandha; hence the Thaandava 
Dance, which He enjoys so much, with the Cosmos as His stage. To set apart just one day among 
the 365 for the worship of this Universal Omnipresence is an insult to His Majesty and Mystery. 


Consider the significance of the Form that Shiva has assumed for human adoration: In His throat, 
He has the holocaust-producing poison, Haalahaala, that can destroy all life in a trice. On His 
head, He has the sacred Ganga river, whose waters can cure all ills, here and hereafter. On His 
forehead, He has the eye of Fire. On His head, He has the cool comforting Moon. On His wrists, 
ankles, shoulders and neck He wears deadly cobras, which live in life-giving breath of air. Shiva 
lives in the burial ground and the burning ghat, the Rudhrabhuumi, as it is called---the land of 
Shiva or Rudhra. The place, is no area of dread; it is an auspicious area, for all have to end their 
lives there, at the close of this life or a few more lives. Shiva is teaching you that death cannot be 
shunned or frightened away. It has to be gladly and bravely met. 


Linga is the Form in which all forms merge 


Shiva, again, is said to go about with a begging bowl. He teaches that renunciation, detachment, 
indifference to good fortune or bad, are the paths to attain Him. Shiva is known as Mrthyunjaya 
(He who vanquishes death). And, He is also the Kaamaari (the destroyer of Desire). These two 
Names show that he who destroys desire can conquer Death, for desire breeds activity, activity 
breeds consequence, consequence breeds bondage, bondage results in birth and birth involves 
death. 


Eeshwara is also symbolised in the Linga Form. Linga is derived from the Sanskrit root, Li, 
which means Leeyathe, 'merges'; it is the Form in which all forms merge. Shiva is the God who 
blesses beings with the most desirable gift of meaning in the Universe. That is the end, beyond 
death, which one should strive for, the end which Shiva can vouchsafe. Realise the God in you 
first; then, if you involve yourself with the material world, no harm can come to you, for you will 
recognise the objective world as but the body of God. But, if you try to involve yourself with the 
objective world first, and then try to discover God, you will see the material world only. Again, 
you can direct your spiritual efforts in either of two ways: Follow the commands of God, and He 
will be pleased to raise you up. Follow the path of inquiry and discover where He resides, and 
realise Him there. You can follow either means. But, reaching Him is the inescapable task of 
man. 


Shiva is all Graciousness, ever Auspicious 


Shiva means, Graciousness, Auspiciousness, Mangalam. He is all Graciousness, ever 
Auspicious, Sarva Mangalam. That is the reason why the epithet, Shri, which indicates these 
qualities, is not added to the name Shiva, Shankara, Eeshwara etc. It is added to the number of 
Avathaars (divine incarnations), for they have taken on perishable bodies for a specific purpose. 
They have to be distinguished from other humans, by the epithet, but Shiva is eternally gracious, 
auspicious, mangala and so the. epithet is superfluous. Shiva is adored as the Teacher of 
Teachers, Dakshinamuurthi. The Form of Shiva is itself a great lesson in tolerance and 
forbearance. 


The Haalahaala poison is hidden by Him in His throat; the beneficient Moon which all 
welcome, He has worn on His head. This is a lesson for man to keep away from others all 
harmful tendencies and to use for their benefit all useful tendencies that he can command. If one 
uses his skills for his own advance, and his evil propensities for putting down others, he is only 
taking the road to ruin. 


Man is inherently Divine; he ought therefore demonstrate in thought, word and deed the Divine 
attributes of love, tolerance, compassion and humanity. God is Truth; man too must live in Truth. 
God is Love; man too must live in Love, eschewing anger. Master hatred through Love; master 
anger through sweet Tolerance. There are many who bargain with God, and offer Him gifts, of 
money or articles if He would confer Grace. If one believes that God can be mollified by the gift 
of a coconut or a purse of 116 rupees, I wonder what kind of God he has in his mind? Is his 
conception of God so mean, so contemptible? Those who plan to have their desires granted 
through riches can never deserve the name, Devotee. Those who encourage the payment of 
money for spiritual gains or for gaining Divine favour are also to be condemned. This is the 
reason why the Geetha lays down that God will be pleased by offering leaf, flower or fruit or 
even a drop of water. But even these four articles are materials. 


How can men give to God what is not theirs? 


The Geetha does not intend that you should pluck a leaf or flower or a fruit from some plant or 
tree and place it before God. Nor does it ask you to bring water from a well or river or the 
roadside tap. The Leaf is your own body, which like the leaf, sprouts green, fades, and finally 
falls off from the branch. The Flower is the heart freed from the insect pests of lust, anger, greed, 
attachment, pride, hate, etc. The Fruit is the mind, the consequence of its yearnings, which have 
to be dedicated to God. The Water is the stream of tears that flow from the eyes when one is in 
ecstatic Bliss at the contemplation of God's Glory. Giving these four is the real act of surrender, 
Sharanaagathi (total surrender). The offering of leaves or flowers or fruits or river water is at 
best a way of helping the plant or tree or river to secure a little merit. 


There are some who declare glibly, "O, I have surrendered my body, mind, intellect, my 
everything to God." These people have no control over their minds and the emotions and 
passions they are filled with. They have no mastery over their reason. They are not even able to 
regulate their bodies. So, it is indeed ridiculous for them to claim that they have offered them to 
God. How can they give to God what is not theirs? What right have they? How can any one 
accept the gift of something which does not belong to the giver? 


In fact, you need not surrender anything at all. Love all beings---that is enough. Love with no 
expectation of return; love for the sake of love; love because your very nature is Love; Love 
because that is the form of Worship you know and like. When others are happy, be happy 
likewise. When others are in misery, try to alleviate their lot to the best of your ability. Practise 
Love through Seva (selfless service). By this means, you will realise Unity and get rid of the ego 
that harms. 


Brindhaavan, 5-3-1973 


We should not aspire for acclaim and praise from those around us, 
but do service only to secure the grace of God and not for any 
other reward from anyone. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


5. Valour of the Spirit 


I AM very happy to be in the Punjaab Region, which has earned the respect and gratitude of the 
entire nation, by its heroism and sacrifice, for defending the country. It is a sacred land and, 
though my visit to this place was planned long ago, the time has at last ripened, and I am here. A 
fruit takes a long time to ripen and fill itself with sweet juice. 


This nation has sown the seeds of tolerance and friendship among all the peoples of the world for 
centuries. It has led the world both in materials and spiritual progress. It has been emphasising 
the fundamental need of man---to understand himself, before he attempts to understand others. 
When you do not know your position in the Universe, your fate and your future, of what use is it 
to wander about in space? Let me tell you what the true nature of man is, so that you may make 
an all out effort to guard it and develop it. Truth is man's nature; to be untrue is to be false to 
one's nature. Dharma (right action) is the practical application in real life of the ideal of Truth. 
Shaanthi (peace) is the result of Dharma and Prema (love) is the effulgence of Shaanthi. 


Devotion should not be confined to the four walls of the shrine-room, or the few minutes you 
perform Dhyaanaa (meditation). It is a fulltime Saadhana (spiritual discipline). Your devotion 
has to be expressed as worship of every one, as a living embodiment of Divinity. See God in 
every one, even in persons whom you regard as your enemies. Practise that broad, inclusive type 
of Love. How can you derive happiness by showing love and reverence to a stone idol, that does 
not respond or reflect the feelings? Living beings will return appreciation and gratitude and wish 
you well. You can see joy growing in their faces. That will confer satisfaction on' you. If you 
cannot educate yourself to love your fellow man, how can you follow the path of dedication to 
God? 


Share your joys and sorrows with others 


Find out the difficulties and troubles burdening others and help them, to the extent you can, to 
tide over them, and, to lead their lives so that they may not recur. Learn to live with other men; 
share your joys and sorrows with others; be forbearing, not overbearing. When you live together 
in amity, the village will be happy and safe; and, when the villages are well-knit and strong, the 
State too will be strong and impregnable. Jealousy, anger, hatred and greed will disintegrate the 
State and make it fall into disorder and distress. 


Drive away the divisive forces that keep man away from man, and prevent hearty co-operation 
and mutual help. Punjaab has won special fame in our country, because of the valour of its 
people. I desire and bless that it should become equally famous for Adhyaathmic (spiritual) 
valour. Inculcate discipline in the field of Saadhana also and insist on people performing their 
duty to themselves and to their destiny. Devotion is like the head; duty is the trunk; discipline is 
the feet. Let devotion be linked with duty and led by discipline; then, success is certain. 


The life of man should not be a wasteful round of eating, drinking and sleeping; man has the 
Aathma (soul) as his reality and so, he must learn to become aware of that unfailing source of 
Bliss. By the proper use of his intelligence, man can tap that spring and be supremely blissful. 
Happiness can be won only by proceeding towards God, not by following the urges of the senses. 


Essential requisites to earn God's Grace 


This day, happiness also rose with the dawn and sunrise in this town. The depth of your devotion 
can be clearly gauged from your faces. You have been waiting for many long hours for the joy of 


this moment; that is itself proof that matters of the spirit are more attractive to you than material 
things and comforts. 


Of the twenty four hours that are available to you each day let Me advise you to devote a small 
fraction to meditation or prayers or reading the scriptures or listening to discourses on the /ee/as 
(divine sport) of the Lord. Think of God, and the gratitude you owe to Him for the human life He 
has gifted you and the various material, moral and intellectual talents He has endowed you with; 
do this before you commence any task or piece of work. You will certainly experience great 
benefit, and you will have peace, joy and success in your endeavours through Divine Grace. 


Do not get disheartened, if you do not progress in meditation. Utter the Name of the Lord, 
dwelling on the Glory and the Grace; that is equally effective. No one particular Name is 
necessary; all names denote only the One. The steadiness, the faith, the love that you cultivate in 
the heart and express through your words, deeds and thoughts are the essential requisites for 
earning the Grace of God. 


Mogha (Punjab), 16-3-1973 


Perform your bhajans (group singing), perform your puujas 
(external worship), but when you enter society, recognise society 
as a form of God, recognise what exists as Omnipresence in 
society and thereby acquire good qualities in serving society. 


Forget the agitations in the world. Then you can have peace, joy 
and bliss. 


If you develop an idea that God, who is Omnipresent and is in the 
entire creation and the universe, is confined in a picture which is 


three inches by four inches,' you are narrowing your conception of 
God. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


6. The prescription 


THERE is only one path to God that will satisfy the aspirations of the Jeeva thathwa (essential 
nature of individual entity). That is the path of Bhakthi (devotion), of dedication of all activity to 
God and surrendering to His Will. This is called the Bhakthi maarga (path of devotion). But, 
Bhakthi has to be built on conviction, not on blind unreasoning belief. That is why, I always 
emphasise the role of intelligence. Intelligence is a special gift from God to man; it confers the 
power of discrimination between right and wrong. Peace or happiness depends on the choice of 
the right means and this is a matter to be decided by the Intelligence. Prosperity too depends on 
the intelligent exploitation of the resources available, human and other. The wavering 
‘intelligence’ of man, that has lost its one-pointedness and purity is responsible for all the 
conflicts and quarrels that are prevalent today. 


So, I would ask you to pray to God to grant you the capacity to think straight and right, and to 
stick to the correct decision once decided on, without being affected by egoism, greed or hatred. 
Pray for a balanced mind unaffected by prejudices and passions. 


Attempt to acquire knowledge of yourself 


Man has to pay attention to three basic duties in his quest for happiness: (1) He should forget 
what he has to forget, namely, the world around him and its tantalising pleasures. (2) He has to 
reach where he has to reach, namely, the goal of the Divine, the Presence of the Almighty and 
(3) He has to give up what he has to give up, namely, material desires and pursuits. The Vedhic 
prayer Asatho maa sath gamaya, Thamaso maa jyothir gamaya, Mruthyor maa amritham 
gamaya (Lead me from untruth to truth, lead me from darkness to light, lead me from death to 
immortality) summarises these aspirations very nicely. 


Strive to move away from untruth towards truth; attempt to acquire knowledge of yourself and of 
the origin of all Selves and thus shed your fundamental ignorance. Move away front thoughts 
and anxieties about this body, subject to decay and death and become aware of the Immortal 
Soul, which you really are. 


This garland can teach you a great spiritual lesson. This one thread has strung all these different 
flowers together in beautiful harmony. It is called Suuthra (connecting thread) in Samskrith. So 
also, there is the Brahma Suuthra, the Universal Brahma Principle which passes in and through 
every jeevi (individual) and binds them all in the aathmic bond. All the children of this 
motherland, all sons and daughters of this country are bound into one inter-independent group by 
the thread of Divinity that passes through them. 


Embodiments of the Divine Aathma as you are do not be afraid of sorrows and losses that might 
come in your way. An orange is enveloped in bitter skin. You have to remove the skin and eat 
the sweet fruit that it has protected so long. The sweet fruit, that is, your life, is enveloped in the 
bitter skin of lust, anger, greed, arrogance, attachment and jealousy. Remove the skin and throw 
it away, so that the sweetness can be tasted. 


God is present only where good pervades 


Be always devoted to good and self-less activities. See that by your word, deed or thought, you 
do not hurt others, physically or mentally. When you see injustice and wickedness in others, 
examine your conduct and character first; for, what you see in others might be the result of what 
is in your own self. Wear the eyeglasses of Prema (Love); the whole world will be filled with 


Prema. God is present where only good pervades and prevails. If you examine the present 
behaviour of men, you will find that the vision is bad, listening is-bad, thoughts are impure, and 
.so, even the human nature in you is being besmirched and made bestial, if not worse. When God 
enters the vision, the things listened to, and the subjects thought of, your lives will be rendered 
happy and useful. 


Control the mind and regulate the impulses emanating from it by means of a clarified 
intelligence. These are primary requisites for a happy life. Keep the name of God ever on the 
tongue and the Glory of God ever in the memory; seek the company of the good and the godly. 
These prescriptions, if you follow, you can be free from anxiety, fear and falsehood. 


Mogha, 17-3-1973 


7. Restore the balance 


MAN is a pilgrim set on a long journey; he has started from the stone, moved on to the vegetable 
and the animal, and has now come to the human stage. He has still a long way to go, to reach the 
Divine,: and so, he should not tarry. Every moment is precious; every step must take him further 
and nearer. Those born in Bhaarath are really fortunate, for here, millions have gone along that 
road, and there are available many kind guides who can lead you along the easiest and the 
shortest paths. They tell you the address of the place where from you have come; for, you have 
forgotten it and so, you are helpless when asked about it. They tell you also the goal which you 
ought to reach, when the toil of travel is over, and of the enticing attractions on the way, which 
you must avoid. 


Man is the synthesis of all the feelings, emotions and reactions that arise in his mind. The mind is 
the seat of all urges, desires and thoughts. When the mind is clean, the world cognised by it will 
also be clean. When the mind is turbid and fiddled with fear, the world will appear miserable and 
depressing. Many people blame the world, without knowing that the fault lies in themselves. 
Their thinking is crooked; their thoughts are not wholesome; their minds are restless, because 
they are too full of unfulfilled desires. Rich or poor, educated or uneducated, high or low, they 
see the world through the glasses of their own prejudices and predilections and they condemn or 
extol it in order to please themselves! 


Money comes and goes, morality comes and grows 


The proper study of mankind is man. For, man is the centre of things. And, in man, the mind has 
to be studied and controlled and regulated. His thoughts originate in the mind, they express 
themselves through words and are materialised through deeds. These three have to be properly 
co-ordinated by the Intellect; or else, life becomes a tragedy. The mind has to be trained to 
develop a taste for the good and the godly; not, for money and material gains. Money comes and 
goes; but, morality comes and grows. 


Man, in his ignorance, asserts that he lives for himself only, eats and drinks to appease his 
hunger and thirst, looks after his health and comforts only. Two persons may be sleeping on the 
same cot, but, each has dreams that stroll independently into strange regions of its own. But, the 
truth is quite different! This selfish attitude which curbs and curtails his interests to himself and 
his aggrandizement is really 'death.' Contraction is extinction. Expansion is life. Man has to feel 
himself a limb of the society into which he has been born and which has fostered him and fed 
him with ideals and ideas. Spiritual life is not isolated existence. Man has to sow the seeds of 
love in his heart and harvest peace. He should share that peace with all. Bhoomaa eva sukham, 
say the Vedhas. There is happiness only in the vast, the limitless, the huge; not in the little, the 
small, the limited. Love leads to expansion; hatred leads to contraction and death. This is the 
basic teaching of the scriptures of Sanaathana Dharma. 


Peace has to emerge within 


But, seeing the advances made in science and technology, you have lost balance. Man has learnt 
to walk on the moon, to live in the depths of the ocean, to penetrate into the deepest crusts of 
earth, but, alas, it is a pity, he has not learnt how to live on the earth and let other men too to live 
on the surface of the earth. How can man achieve happiness and peace of mind, flying high or 
swimming deep? He has to carry his troubles and worries, fears and failings, with him to those 


places also. Unless he rids himself of these burdens, he cannot feel light and loveable. Peace has 
to emerge within; it cannot be added from without. 


Science has its vision, directed outside, towards gadgets and machinery providing external 
comfort and convenience. The scientist examines the objective world of matter; he tries to excel 
in external vision. The one who examines the soul and develops the internal vision is the Saint; 
the Scientist plans machines, the Saint relies on manthra (sacred formula). The balance can be 
restored only by cultivating the Inner Vision. This has to be done even in schools and colleges. 
They have neglected this aspect far too long. 


If you examine the nature of mind, you will find that it is very much akin to the lens of a camera. 
The body is the camera, the mind is the lens, the heart is the photographic plate, the thought is 
the flash, and the intelligence, the switch. Turn the lens towards the source of happiness, not, to 
the seat of anxiety and fear; then, you will be-rewarded with a fine picture imprinted on your 
heart. It is difficult, nay, well nigh impossible, to turn the lens to the direction we are told by 
saints and seers; for, the mind is very truly characterised as a monkey! Why, it is even more 
wayward then a monkey for it jumps from one perch to another that is miles away in space and 
centuries away in time, in less time than a wink! The mind jumps from one desire to another, and 
entangles us in it coils. Reduce desire, evict the ego, eject anger, and the mind will be your slave, 
instead of being your master. 


Duty without Love is deplorable 


Prema is the master key which can achieve all this. That is' why, I say, "Start the day with Love; 
Spend the day with Love' fill the day with Love; end the day with Love; this is the way to God." 
On this path, you will not be waylaid by anger, lust or greed. You will have only the company of 
the good and proper facilities for speedy progress. Do your duty. with Love, as if you are 
‘thereby adoring God. Many leaders are today clamouring for freedom to follow Sweccha, that is, 
swa-iccha, one's own inclinations. But, real freedom is gained only when you are free of the 
pernicious influence of passions like lust, envy, pride, greed and hate. Swa-iccha does not mean 
any and every, desire that arises in your mind; it means the inclination of your true self towards 
God. If you incline towards God, the passions that enslave you will be rendered powerless. Then, 
you will do your 'duty' as sweccha, for you will love it with all your heart. Duty without love is 
deplorable; duty with love is desirable; Love, without Duty, is Divine. 


Sweccha means, the best interests of the individual, the purest thought that emerges from within 
him, for his own best. That means, all imitation is barred. Follow the dictates of your own clear 
conscience. Do not copy wishes and resolutions from some one; that is what the blind man does; 
but, very often he follows an equally blind man. God is enshrined in your heart; He is ever ready 
to guide you. He does not appreciate external pomp and exhibitionistic behaviour. He does not 
calculate the number of hours you did bhajan (congregational music) or japam (repetition of 
Lord's Name), or the number of miles you walked during Nagarasankeerthan (street singing of 
spirituals). He examines the purity of your heart, as evident from your words and deeds. 


Do not preach; practise. In politics, in the field of administration, in schools and colleges, in 
spiritual institutions, everywhere, we have a surfeit of preachers but a famine in practitioners. 
Heroes on platforms prove themselves zeros when they descend to the ground. Therefore, 
demonstrate in your own lives, how Love can confer peace and joy, how all faiths lead to the 
same goal, how all men are brothers of one another. The only message, the only lesson I can 
impart to you today is to remind you of the great traditions of Bhaarath and ask you to spread 


Love throughout the length and breath of this great land. Then, India can again be the spiritual 
leader of humanity and fill the whole world with Divine Love. 


Simla, 17-3-1973 


8. Bypass the bylane 


I OFTEN tell young college students that they may worship a picture as God, but, should not 
worship God as a picture. They can entertain the concept that a carved stone is God, or that a 
piece of wood is God. For, in that process, they are raising that substance into that high status. 
But, I also warn them that they should not degrade God into the status of paper, wood or stone. 
Of course, God is immanent in every atom and cell of the Universe and if-you are able to 
recognise Him and adore Him therein, you are indeed blessed. 


Do not move towards God, through the world around you. Confirm in your faith that you are the 
Aathma, which is the Divine Spark in you, and then, move into the world as heroes whom 
success cannot spoil or defeat cannot dishearten. It is not my intention to turn men towards God; 
for they have already God residing in them. There is no need to proceed towards Him, or call on 
Him to come from somewhere outside you. Become aware of Him, as your inner motivator (the 
Antharyaamin---that is enough. Travel outward, with the conviction that you are the Aathma; 
then, you will adore the world and not exploit it. 


You are bound inextricably with all others 


You must realise by constant contemplation that the world is the Body of God. And, you are a 
cell, in that Body. The prosperity of the world is your prosperity; feel so, act in that spirit; think 
in those terms. That is real spirituality. The Saadhak (spiritual aspirant) cannot cut himself away 
from the world and escape into solitude, for, the world will follow him into the deepest cave or 
the darkest forest. The Saadhak can claim progress only when he has established in himself faith 
in the one-ness of humanity. Jshwarah sarvabhoothaanaam hriddhese, Arjuna, thishthathi, says 
the Geetha---"O Arjuna, the Lord is seated in the heart of all beings ." 


Ishaavashyam idham sarvam---"All this is enveloped in God." Everything and every being are 
but waves on the surface of the vast unbounded timeless ocean, which is God. Waves belong to 
the ocean and depend on it for their individual existence; but, the ocean has no need of waves. 
Therefore, you are bound inextricably with all else and all others. The world will inevitably 
react on you; it will reflect your thoughts and plans: it will resound with your cries and creeds. 
Your thoughts, words and deeds will shape others, and theirs, will shape you. It is your duty to 
be good, do good, and see good. That is the way to make the world good, and be yourself good. 


These ideas and directions are 'the principal constituents of Indian Culture; but, they are 
honoured today only in the letters. Acts unworthy and damaging the fair name of Indian culture 
are done with pride, by the very sons and daughters of Bhaarath. Temples are neglected; places 
of pilgrimage are deserted; the very idea of holiness is ridiculed. Elementary rules of social 
conduct and individual behaviour, like revering parents and elders, revering teachers and guests, 
speaking the truth and treading the righteous path are disregarded as unnecessary restrictions on 
individual freedom. 


People obey the whims of the moment 


Uncontrolled living habits, unrestrained social behaviour---these are extolled as signs of 
freedom. It is only freedom to slide into the animal from which man has risen. The education 
system has not cared to instil the elevating ideas and ideals that fed Indian Culture for ages and 
so, youth is being guided into the bylanes of sensuous licence. People obey the whims and 
caprices of the moment; they do not delay to discriminate. When the ideals of detachment and 


simplicity were held forth as valid and valuable, India was really strong and happy; but, now, 
character has lost priority in the educational system. Animals have their seasons and reasons for 
behaviour; but, man does not pay heed to these. What has happened to the knowledge that has 
been accumulated by our sages and saints? What has happened to the wisdom enshrined in our 
scriptures? What has happened to the noble examples of the 'great men and women of the epics 
and puraanas? Since they are ignored, life has become dry, barren and miserable. Restore them 
in the estimation of the people, and follow their teachings; life will again become useful and 
purposeful. 


Today, we have factions everywhere---at home, between husband and wife, in the school, 
between teacher and pupil, in society, between group and group. This is deterioration indeed! 
Peace and harmony between members of the same family are the foundation for peace in the 
land. The individual must be at peace with himself. Just as the coordinated effort of all the 
organs of the body is essential for healthy life, coordination between village and village is 
essential; so too, between State and State and nation and nation. But, the Truth, if only you open 
your inner eye and visualise, is---there is only one nation, the nation called 'humanity'; there is 
only one religion, the religion of Love. 


Divinity is inherent in every human being 


Feel happy that this is your mother-country; love of the country is the basis on which you can 
build love for the world community. Love expands; it does not limit itself to boundaries. Love 
your mother-tongue; then, you will discover that all languages are as sweet as yours, for, a 
language is as sweet .as the tongues of the speakers. 


I want you to recognise that the human body has been gifted to you, so that you may use it for 
the good of the country where you first saw light and tasted love; and, for the good of the culture 
that your country has treasured for ages so that you may grow in its shade. If you neglect the 
roots, how can you harvest the fruits? Consider, what is it that gives us safety and security in this 
enormous structure, this Vijnaana Bhavan? We pay attention now only to superficial items like 
the seats, the cushions, the balcony, the sound systems etc. But, the foundation hidden in the 
ground, we pass over as out of sight. So too, the culture of Bhaarath is the basis of our 
prosperity, peace and progress. 


The whole world is One Single Tree; the different countries are its branches; its root is God, 
human beings are the flowers. Happiness is the fruit and the Bliss of Self-realisation is the sweet 
juice therein. 


How then can any one justify his anger against another man, or be jealous on account of another? 
All are fed by the same sap; all share the same Sun; all are Divine. Divinity is not something 
separate and isolated, which has to be earned by toil. It is inherent in every man, woman and 
child. By means of some simple practices, and through some little effort, you can tap the springs 
of Divinity in your hearts. 


Some people have asked Me whether Saadhana (spiritual discipline) has to supplement study 
and enquiry. Read the necessary texts, perform the prescribed exercises in logic---are these not 
enough, they ask! It is like asking, we have laid cables to bring electric current to every part of 
Vijnaana Bhavan; is that not enough? Why bulbs, tubes, and fans? Saadhana is the bulb, the 
switch, the fan! Insulin injection for the diabetic patient is the 'inquiry'; restriction in dietary 


habits is the ‘saadhana'. Both inquiry and saadhana are needed to discover the Divinity latent in 
you and to manifest it. 


This means that you must devote some time every day, regularly, for study, and for Saadhana. 
Now, you are wasting time till late at night, in clubs and frivolous company. A portion of that 
time, if spent with. God, can confer valuable results. This mother-land has given you a culture 
that is attracting, distracted people from. all parts of the world. Be grateful; study the culture; 
practise the disciplines it lays down. Serve the poor and the helpless, and those who eke out their 
livelihood by hard work. 


New Delhi, 22-3-1973 


9. The year named Aanandha 


IN every country today, men have become power-mad and they resort without any compunction 
to self-praise, and dry declamation. They develop hatred against others, foster envy and feed 
their fatal egos. They plunge the society to which they belong in fear, anxiety and disorder. They 
do not know that if elevating ideals are adhered to and practised, they could gain eternal fame; 
they are content with cheap applause and shortlived publicity. 


You have gathered here today, since this is Yugaadhi Festival day, the day reckoned by you as 
the day that ushers in a new year with a new Name. This day in New Year Day only because you 
have decided to call it so; it is not astronomically or climatically or meteorologically different 
from yesterday or tomorrow. Even as New Year Day, many hundreds of thousands of such Days 
have happened on this globe and many thousands have been celebrated as Festival Days too. So 
too, this day has come and this too will be gone. If the New Year Day is used by any one to 
begin a new way of life, a new step towards self-realisation or self-enlargement through service, 
then the Celebration has a meaning and significance. Otherwise, it is devoid of value. The red 
letter on the calendar, which indicates this Day as separate from others is a warning and a 
reminder of this duty that you owe to yourselves. 


Do not anticipate anything, leave it to Him 


The Name of the New Year that begins today is inspiring and auspicious. It is called Aanandha-- 
-Spiritual Bliss, inner joy, unshakable calm. That name is a clarion call, which must ring in your 
ears all the 365 days of the New Year---earn Aanandha, be Aanandha, become Aanandha. 
Cleanse your instruments of Consciousness, devote yourselves to Service so that you might 
weaken the forces of Ego and strengthen the forces of Social Unity and cultivate Japa and 
Dhyaana (repetition of Lord's Name and meditation) so that you might rise towards Godhood--- 
these are the steps by which you can earn and establish yourselves in Aanandha. 


Engage yourselves in your duties as intelligently and as devotedly as you can; but, carry out your 
duties as if they are acts of worship offered to God, leaving the fruit of those acts to His Will, His 
Grace, His Compassion. Do not be affected when the results you anticipate are not produced; do 
not anticipate at all, but, leave it to Him. He gave you the time, the space, the cause, the material, 
the idea, the skill, the chance, the fortune, and you did but little of your own. So, why should you 
feel as if you are the doer? Do your duty, as a sincere Saadhana. Aanandha is the name of the 
year and you are happy it is so. But, what is in a name except what you put into it or extract from 
it. A man named Raama must be inspired by that Name to manifest in himself the qualities that 
led Raama into the immortality which his Name attained. If a person carries about with him the 
name Dharmaputhra (son of Righteousness), it is only a shameful burden unless he justifies the 
burden by being as righteous as Dharmaputhra of Mahaabhaaratha was. Or at least, by 
endeavouring his best to manifest dharma (virtue) in his life. 


Man has to earn just enough for his upkeep 


Man cannot reap the full fruits of his life here below if he only gathers riches, or collects popular 
votes, or loads his head with tons of tomes. He has to cultivate and practise virtues too. He has to 
adhere to Dharma. The Shruthis (sacred texts) direct that man has to earn just enough for his 
upkeep by honest means and use the rest of his time and skill for the general good, Dharma- 
artha. Earn artha (wealth) through Dharma (right conduct). Then, he will certainly have plenty 
of Divine Grace. Dhritharaashtra, the father of the 100 Kuru Brothers who fought against the five 


Paandava Cousins---legitimate claimants to a share of the ancestral patrimony---had neither of 
these two, though he had abundant riches, superior armies and greater military skill and strategy. 
So, Dhritharaashtra had to witness the total extinction of his dynasty and kingdom. Most men 
like Dhritharaashtra pursue falsehoods and ignore Truth; they amass the trivial and ignore the 
crucial. 


They do not realise that Death is stalking silently behind them; they do not notice the quick paces 
of Time.; they do not know how precious is the chance that the human body, the human intellect, 
the human society and the heritage that it has accumulated for him has brought him, here and 
now. They are unaware that the same spark of Divinity that illumines every thought, word and 
deed in them is activating every other being too, in the Universe. They do not sense the 
brotherhood, they are not thrilled by the feeling of universal kinship. 


Man has to be above brutes and beasts 


They are sprawling in the slime of self-praiser they are slaves of their egos. And, consequently, 
they are never free from fear or anxiety. They also spread scandal about others, and so, they bog 
themselves in sin. Though they claim the respect of others, they are objects of ridicule and 
hatred. They seek faults in others and so, their eyes revel only in faults. They cannot see good in 
any; so, they are consumed by envy and greed. Do not try to master others; master your own self, 
your Own senses, your own mind. That is the real victory; they are the real enemies. 


Do not waste time in unprofitable talk. Do not change your beliefs in accordance with changing 
loyalties, and changing surroundings. While accusing others of time-serving, be careful that you 
do not fall into the same evil. God is inherent in everything, in every being. You can find Him in 
and through all that. you see or do. In the golden chalice of your heart, He is the Wisdom that 
fulfils. Closing your eyes to this fact, you are spreading your hands outwards to snatch it. You 
may be compassionate, but, that emotion must be regulated and .pure. A compassionate man 
once brought home a fish he found struggling on the bank of a river in full flood; he placed it 
between the folds of a warm blanket and poured hot coffee down its throat. He thought it was 
suffering from a fit of cold. The hot coffee killed the poor thing. He could have saved it by 
throwing it back into the floods. He lacked the intelligence which would tell him what to do. 


Many leaders at the present time have compassion, but, possess no intelligence. They do not 
know how to solve the distress that they see and sympathise with. They talk of the need to 
establish peace at home and prosperity abroad; but, their acts betray their ignorance of the means 
by which they could succeed. How can they succeed, if they promote hatred and dishonesty? 
Any success won by adopting wrong means will only be trivial and temporary. Peaceful means 
alone, means that are wrought out of Love alone can ensure lasting benefits and real Peace. Fear 
not; frighten not. That is the message of God to man. Brutes fear; beasts frighten. Man has to be 
above both the weaknesses. Have faith in Truth and be fixed in Morality. You need not fear any 
one, for God will be on your side. You will not frighten, for all will be seen by you as Divine. 


"IT am the Witness of activity, not a Participant" 


Talking of names, let me mention this too. Some persons who do not care for truth or 
righteousness might adopt the name Sathya Sai, raise institutions in that name; they crave only 
the outer shell of fame and fortune; but you must know that they are unconnected with Me and 
are engaged in acts which I have not authorised. In fact, I am the Witness of activity, not a 
participant. I am like the electric fan; 'switch it on, it gives cool breeze. Switch it off, it allows 


you to swelter in the heat. I have no likes or dislikes. Those who talk ill of Me are also 
remembering My name and deriving joy therefrom and perhaps earning a few paise thereby. 
They are happy when they write falsehood; you are happy singing the truth. I am unconcerned 
with either. I have come on a task which I imposed on Myself. That task will go on, from victory 
to victory, irrespective of praise or blame. It can neither be halted or hindered. 


Truth knows no defeat, nor fear 


No trace of fear can tarnish the purity of the heart that is shining in the splendour of Truth. I am 
Sathya Sai. Sathya Sai means---(like the name Sesha Sai meaning, He who is based on, who 
reclines on the massive coils of the poisonous snake Sesha or the massive coils of objective 
desires)---He who is based on Truth, who reclines on Truth, which the massive coils of objective 
desires cannot entangle. Truth knows no defeat, Truth knows no fear. It marches on heedless of 
acclamation or declamation. 


Do not attach yourselves too much with the world, for, it is ever changing fast and furiously. Be 
ever ready to fall into the hands of Death, gladly and gracefully, with .gratitude for the chances 
afforded while alive. Never grieve, for God is resident in you as your Truth. Later, in the last 
stages of your life, when you look back upon your failures and successes, you will have to say, 
as Purandharadhaasa said, "Alas, we do not find Joy in this life as man." Do not spend your days 
in such manner. Be warned now itself. Use the days allotted to journey towards Love, Joy and 
Peace. 


The New Year Day is called in this part of the country, Yugaadhi--the Inaugural Day of the Age, 
as if a new big epoch is opening today. This is an opportunity to contemplate on the vastness of 
time, of its speed, of the short span of time which we share, in this life of yours, and which has to 
be put to the best use. Contemplate on the beginning of things, of nature, of life, of man, of the 
heart---all emanating from God and journeying towards God. Dwell on the grandeur of this 
procession from birth to Liberation, through life after life. Become aware that you, Nature and all 
that is, was and will be, are God. 


To attain this awareness, Love is the surest means. Do not inflict pain on any one, through word 
and deed. Control your passions, emotions and impulses, especially, anger, envy and greed. They 
thrive on the ego and make it a dangerous weapon. When you are enslaved by your passions, 
how can you stand forth and claim respect? Only cowards yield to their senses or passions. Brave 
men face up to them and win. The hero is he who overrules his mind and curbs his impulses; the 
zero 1s he who is overruled by them. Stand fast, like a rock, when the waves beat. Have faith in 
your ideals, in God. Do not allow faith to falter when failure comes into your door. Meet it as a 
new challenge, and triumph. Your Vishwaas (Faith) must not be like your Swaas (Breath); for 
swaas comes in and goes out, it is now in and now out. Let your vishwaas be firm, with no 
alternations of entrances and exits. If faith is one full continuous stream, Grace too will be 
showered on you in one full continuous stream. 


Brindhaavan, 24-3-1973 


The four goals laid down by Sai, are in fact those laid down by the 
Vedhas. They are Sathya, Dharma, Shaanthi and Prema. Mankind 
has to understand the importance of these four goals, accept them, 


adore them, and practise them in daily life. Only then can the 
Divinity latent in man shine forth in all its glory. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


10. Sabko sanmathi 


YOU are citizens of no mean land; Bhaarath is indeed a Dhivya Bhoomi---a land saturated since 
ages with devotion and dedication to God. The path to God was sought for, by even the common 
folk. Spiritual discipline permeated every activity of life and every detail of daily life. You are 
the inheritors of a great culture, which has survived the onslaughts of alien rule and political 
suppression. 


This culture has upheld strength of mind and purity of thought, which are translated into 
beneficial resolutions and desires, as the essential requisites of a progressive human being. The 
mystery and splendour of God can be grasped only by a pure mind and a clear vision. That is 
why the Lord granted a new eye to Arjuna in order that he might not be confounded by His 
Glory. A resolution adopted by the mind is like a stone thrown into a Sarovara or lake. It 
produces ripples that affect the entire face and unsettles equanimity. A good sankalpa 
(resolution) sets up a series of such thoughts, each contributing its quota to the process of 
purification and strengthening. Bhaaratheeya culture insists on purity of Sankalpa because, like a 
flagrant flower in the hand, it will spread its beneficial influence on others and through others, on 
the society and community, in which the individual operates. A bad thought desecrates the 
individual as well as the community. Misery too is infectious; your impurity can pollute too. 
When the Mind acts in subordination to the Intellect or Discriminating Reason, it will help the 
Realisation of the Inner Truth. When it yields to the pull of the senses, then, it will tighten the 
bonds. 


Be equipped with humility to win God's Grace 


Good ideas have to be accepted and bad ones eschewed. Each idea has to be judged in the 
Supreme Court of Viveka (Wisdom). And, the 'ruling has to be treated as inviolable. It is in this 
context that we have to remind ourselves of the prayer of Gandhiji, Sabko san mathi dhe 
bhagwaan--"O God, Bestow right under- standing on all." 


Again, the individual born in the lake of Society must swim and float in the calm waters, and 
joining the river of Progress, merge in the Ocean of Grace. Man has to move from the stance of 
"I" to the position of "WE;" this day, we see only the wild dance of ego-stricken individuals, who 
hate society and behave most unsocially. 


Water flows from a higher, level to the lower levels. God's Grace too is like that. It flows down 
to those who are bent with humility. So, give up the ego, overcome jealousy, and cultivate love. 
How can man be truly at peace with himself and with others, if he does not endeavour to win the 
Grace of God? While trying to get the best out of Nature's Gifts, you must first be equipped with 
humility and simplicity; otherwise, you will only be dragged along into ruin, through many 
unfulfilled desires. Raavana desired Nature (Seetha, who was found as a child in a furrow of 
ploughed land); but, he was not chastened by the effort to win the Grace of God; and so, he met 
his downfall. Desire leads to anger, when it is foiled; and anger weakens the body. It impairs the 
digestive system and chases him fast into old age. 


Remember, when Prema (Divine selfless Love) is installed in the heart, jealousy, hatred and 
untruth will find no place there. Live in Prema, live with Prema, move with Prema, speak with 
Prema, think with Prema, and act with Prema. This is the best and the most fruitful Saadhana 
(spiritual effort). Do not want Prema from others, while yourself refusing Prema to others. This 
is not a one way traffic. 


Love for all should spontaneously flow from your heart, and sweeten all your words. 


Chembur, 30-3-1973 


The Divine Prema is not easily comprehensible. So, My emphasis 
is not generally understood in its full significance. Prema is God. 
God is Prema. TO consider it as a method of speech, an attitude of 
mind or as physical behaviour is to sorely demean it. Prema has 
no trace of selfishness; it is not bound by motives. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


11. Drastic overhaul 


BUILDERS of Future India, Patrons and Well-wishers of Educational Institutions! In this holy 
land of ours education is straying today into wrong directions, and encouraging wrong notions 
and patterns of behaviour. You are all aware of this trend, and its consequences. The sooner we 
set things right, the beter for all concerned. For, whether the students master the curricula or not, 
whether they understand, appreciate and assimilate the culture of India or not, the years roll by 
inexorably; time rushes past with no possibility of return; the span of life allotted to each is 
undergoing subtraction, every minute. Therefore, delay in this matter of reform is unpardonable. 


The years spent by these persons as students in schools and colleges are the most crucial years of 
their lives. The heart of youth is pure, clean, full of enthusiasm and optimism. They are eager to 
achieve happiness to enter upon an adventure and earnest to serve others. It does not involve 
much effort to direct them along beneficent channels. Of course with equal ease, they can be 
directed along maleficent channels too. 


The educational system must decide to direct them to the achievement of the Divinity latent in 
each one. Striving towards such a goal is an essential step, for ensuring social, national and 
world peace and prosperity. 


Student life must be filled with cooperative activity 


Humanity is like a train full of passengers, moving in one direction. Some alight at the little halt, 
some get off the station after that. Some alight a little further off. But, young persons travel 
longest. So, intensive care must be accorded to the problem of their education. Their lives must 
be made happier, more full of activity and contentment, more useful to the human community 
and this can happen only when the Divinity in them is allowed to blossom. The nation is-looking 
forward to these young men and women to realise its dreams of unity, integrity and prosperity; 
these bright young people have to confer confidence and courage, joy and enthusiasm. But, 
judging from the nature of the students today and from the patterns into which they are being 
moulded, one feels that the hope of the nation might not be realised. The coming years might 
witness the decline of the fine ideals of Indian culture, cherished through the millenia. 


Beautiful, fruitful ideals must be planted in the tender hearts of the youth. They are lovely 
creepers which can yield clusters of fragrant flowers, spreading the fragrance of truth and virtue. 
They have to be fostered with love and care, by parents, teachers and all those interested-in the 
progress of the nation. It is a sacred responsibility which cannot be by-passed. 


The years of student-life must be saturated with cooperative activity, social service, eager search 
for truth and readiness to sacrifice one's interests for the good of those who are less fortunate. 
Moral and spiritual values have to be honoured as much as, if not more than, economic and 
material values. Life must be a harmonious blend of these values with emphasis on moral 
strength. 


Education must fill students with self-confidence 


Students, Embodiments of the Divine Aathma (soul)! There is a great and urgent need that you 
should delve into the problem---who exactly you are, and realise that you are Divine, so that you 
can raise yourselves to that level, instead of remaining merely human or degrading. yourselves 
into the lower level of animality. What exactly are the degrees which you earn now, after such 
elaborate and exhausting studies.? The degrees are only begging bowls, which you can hold 


while presenting yourselves in front of office after office, seeking jobs. Education does not fill 
you with self-confidence, self-reliance and self-knowledge. How can even parents, teachers and 
the elders give you these, when they are themselves suffering from their absence? Since they do 
not have these qualities, the country is in the throes of poverty, faction and sloth. 


Imbibe knowledge in schools and colleges with your minds, fully engaged in the task, with your 
hearts welcoming the acquisition and with your souls fully concentrated. Do not try to achieve 
distinction, through expenditure of money. How can money bring you knowledge? Yet the 
temples of the Goddess of Learning (namely the schools and colleges) have become this day 
temples where the Goddess of Riches is worshipped. Saraswathi, the Goddess of Learning is 
described in the Puraanas (ancient legends) as the rival of Lakshmi, the Goddess of Riches. 
They are both as unfriendly as the proverbial mother-in-law and daughter-in-law. How can they 
be together in the same home? So, Saraswathi has been practically driven out of her temple and 
Lakshmi has installed herself therein. Money is demanded and being paid, for admitting a child 
to the school, for testifying that he has attended the required number of classes, for accepting his 
application to sit for the examination, for declaring him to have passed it, and to certify that he 
has secured the desired number of marks. The entire field of education has been thus degraded 
and disorganised, with incalculable harm to the country's prospects in the coming years. 


Students have their minds polluted by hatred 


The emotions that spring from the minds of youth have to be canalised and sublimated, now, 
while they are yet elementary and in the nascent stage; this is their primary duty. When you 
neglect it, youth runs amok and ruins its own destiny. At the present time, youth is exploding and 
running into extreme actions of arson and acts of disorder. The blame lies at the door of those 
who incite them and inflame them, letting them loose on society. Many lament the injury to life 
and property that these acts. result in. But the more dangerous results are not so clearly 
recognised. The students, for example, are injuring themselves their careers and their usefulness 
to the community even more lastingly. They waste a great deal of hard-earned money; they waste 
something that cannot be recovered later, namely, Time; they have their minds polluted by 
hatred. 


Politicians are to be blamed and avoided, for they inject hatred and prejudice in the minds of 
youth, in order to use them as instruments for their own aggrandizement. Students must keep 
themselves away from them. Their first duty is to spend the time for study; after completing the 
present task of acquiring knowledge they can take part in political activities, and distinguish 
themselves as leaders and pleaders. Now, they have to acquire skills, insight, balance and the 
spirit of service. They have to revere their parents, teachers and the elders. They have to 
understand the ideals of their country's culture and learn to mould their daily lives in accordance 
with them. 


Students must learn discipline and reverence 


Of course, the system requires drastic overhaul. For, the sons and daughters of this land have to 
know the standards set by our scriptures and sacred texts, the story of the origin and development 
of our ancient culture,-and' the life-giving ‘principles of law and justice that took root on this soil. 


Another point. Young persons have to join school, or college, not merely for getting instruction 
in the classes, or studying some books with the help of teachers, for if that were so they could as 
well sit in their own homes, and the instruction can be imparted to them while they reside there. 


They have to join the institutions so that they may learn to live and move with persons of their 
age but from different social and economic backgrounds with different intellectual equipments 
and emotional peculiarities, so that they may learn discipline and reverence, tolerance and co- 
operation. Some years at school and college will train them to react properly to society and to the 
outer world. 


What happens at the present time is the result of the undue importance attached by parents and 
society to a pass in the examination. Students cram their hardest just a few days prior to the date 
of the examination; then they start to vomit the whole lot on to the answer papers, and return 
home, with a vacant head; for the knowledge gained has not affected their behaviour or opinions 
or attitude in the least. Education is not to be taken as a process of filling an empty sack and 
pouring out its contents, making the sack empty again. It is not the head that has to be filled 
through education. It is the heart that has to be cleansed, expanded and illumined. Education is 
for 'life', not, for a ‘living’. 


The sign of the educated man is humility that he has not been able to know the vast unknown 
that still remains to be explored. The educated man must realise that he has more obligations 
than privileges, more duties than fights. He has to serve the society amidst which he is placed 
and the heritage that has been handed down to him by his forefathers. He should be delighted to 
serve, and not desire to dominate. For service is divine; service makes life worthwhile; service is 
the best way to use one's skills, intelligence, strength and resources. 


Nature is the best teacher 


I must tell you of the paramount importance of Love. Love is God; Live in Love; God is the 
embodiment of perfect Love; so, He can be known and realised, and won, only through Love. 
You can see the Moon only with the help of Moonlight. You can see God only through the rays 
of Love, the one Quality of Love, expresses itself as attachment to things, affection towards kith 
and kin, desire for objects, love in human relations, reverence towards the great, and devotion to 
God. Cultivate Love and all its aspects will be fed and fostered. 


Through education, you have to interpret (in the light of the principles of Indian Culture) the 
knowledge of Nature and its components, and the knowledge of man and his various victories 
and failures. Of course, Nature is the best teacher; so be vigilant to imbibe useful and lasting 
lessons from Her. 


This college is the result of the generosity of many donors, specially, the Raajamaatha of 
Nawanagar. You must rejoice that a lady of such magnanimity is associated with your college. 
Be grateful to her; show your gratitude, by bringing into your daily lives, the ideals of spiritual 
progress, moral elevation and intellectual attainment which she holds before you. Develop the 
faith and the steadfast persistence needed to rise to her expectations. 


I bless this Institution, so that from its portals may emerge brilliant young persons ready and able 
to serve the Motherland and to add lustre to Her Glory. I love students and educational 
institutions very much. I bless that each one of you may reach high attainment in education and 
earn good marks (not bad remarks), give your parents who have toiled long for your up-keep, the 
happiness they are hoping for and reward the Raajamaatha and other elders who are watching 
over your studies and upbringing, with such great affection, presenting them the fame you earn 
by goodness and scholarship. 


Rajkot (Gujarat), 1-4-1973 


We can be successful leader, only if we are disciplined follower, 
who do not issue command, to other, but rather set an. example of 


service in our actions. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


12. Bhaarathi-Bhaaratham 


KARMA (activity) is primarily movement, motion. Movement results in energy and matter is but 
condensed energy. Ether, air, fire, land, water---all are the cause as well as the consequence of 
this incessant movement. All things that move are active, engaged in karma. To live is to change, 
to move; you may not move the entire body or any of its parts, but still, movement is taking 
place in you. Food is being digested, blood is being circulated, air is being drawn in, analysed, 
absorbed and exhaled, impressions are welcomed or resisted and conveyed or rejected. Life is 
karma; the Body is a karma-kshethra (abode of activity). All living things are engaged in karma 
offering themselves in sacrificial rite of ceaseless activity. The fruit of that Sacrifice is Self- 
realisation. 


When you have your eyes open, you see thousands here; when you close them, they are not here! 
Or, if your sight is impaired, you don't see them. You cannot therefore say, they are non-existent. 
Since your sight is impaired by doubt, pride, or prejudice you don't see God, who is in you as 
well as outside you. You long for a thing that is not; you ignore the treasure that is within your 
grasp. You swear you have no bird in your hand; you struggle for the birds, that you believe, are 
waiting for you in the bush. The bird in the bush is only the image of the bird you have in your 
hand but you are unaware of this truth. 


You have faith in the senses and the knowledge they garner; you have faith in the fancies and 
fantasies of your mind; you have faith in the syllogisms of your reason; but you have no faith in 
God who cannot be bound or found by these. So, you fear, you grieve, you doubt. 


It is wrong to cast blame on others 


Have the curtain of "Thought of God" all around you; then, the deadly mosquitoes of desire and 
distrust cannot harm you. That curtain will confer health on you, through immunity from disease. 
You will have undisturbed ease, with nothing to pine for, nothing to fear from. You will love all 
God's creation, you will welcome opportunities to serve and assuage the pain of others. 


This morning, while conversing with a group of persons, the problem of suffering was analysed; 
it was ascribed to one's own past deeds and one's own mental tendencies. It' is wrong to cast the 
blame on others. But, some one pointed out that God was the originator of both joy and grief, 
that without His Will no blade of grass .can waver in the wind. Yes. If that Truth be firmly 
established in the heart, one gets the unique bliss of liberation. God gives everything, whatever 
we get is His Grace. You have no right to judge whether what you get is good or bad. 


In order to get God so firmly installed, worship of idols or pictures, meditation on His Glory, 
recitation of His Name are all useful as preliminary Saadhana (spiritual effort). I won't say that 
temples or houses of worship, altars-and shrines where God is invoked and adored are wrong or 
wasteful. Until the letters are learnt, illustrations are necessary in the primers. The letter A is 
learnt in association with the Apple of which a picture is printed above it. On that account, you 
cannot be constrained to remember that Apple whenever you have to think of A. 


Be in perpetual contact with God 


I am always emphasising the value of Service as a Saadhana for realising the one-ness of all in 
God and the one-ness of one-self with God. I do not recommend the giving up of karma; for it is 
not possible. What is generally meant by Karma-Sanyaas (renunciation of activity) is the giving 
up of rites and rituals prescribed by the Scriptures. I call upon you to adhere to a new rite, Seva 


(selfless service), a new yagna, sacrifice of the ego, a new ritual of worship, Sharanaagathi (total 
loving surrender), dedication of all thoughts, words and 'deeds at the Lotus Feet of the Lord and 
acceptance of all that happens as Gifts of Grace from Him. 


Be in perpetual contact with God---let the pipe that leads into the tap which is you be connected 
with the reservoir of His Grace. Then your life will be full of unruffled content. Without that 
awareness of the constant presence, any service that you do to others will be dry and barren. Be 
aware of it; then any little act of service will yield plentiful fruit. Sarvathaah paani paadham: 
"God's hands and feet are everywhere." Sarvathokshi Shiro mukham: "God's eyes, head and face 
are everywhere." Sarvathaah Sruthimalloke: "God's ears are all over the Universe." Sarvam 
aavruthya thishtathi: "He remains, enveloping all." 


When you pray for the Vision of the Feet, you are rewarded with it. When you cry out in agony 
and call on Him to listen to your woe, His ears are there to respond. When you plead with Him 
sincerely to come, He comes, to give; He gives. But, the best Saadhana is to behave as you do, 
when you get a parcel of books by post. To get at the books you unwrap the parcel, and throw off 
the material used to pack the books. Now, take the prayer that is the deepest and the most 
significant---"Naaku Shaanthi Kaavaali"---"I require Peace". Unwrap it of the "I" (the ego) and 
of the "require" (desire); get hold of Shaanthi, in the core of the packet. When you are burdened 
with egoism and desire, how can you attain Shaanthi? So, throw away the packing and hold on 
to the thing packed and protected. 


There are three stages in Spiritual Life 


Man is Divinity humanised; in him is concentrated vast power, awaiting manifestation. But, man 
condemns himself into poverty, disease and despair. He begs for alms from all and sundry and 
debases the Lord within. He tells himself that God is far away, in an unreachable Heaven. He 
exiles himself from the Kingdom which is his legitimate heritage. He deludes-himself into the 
belief that it is he who feels, thinks, speaks, and acts. He curses himself as a fool or as a victim of 
fate, committing wrong with every such imprecation! Examine, each of you, your own minds 
and avoid this cowardice which denies your birthright. 


Some years are spent in studies and apprenticeship; then one reaches the years of active 
participation in the building or upkeep of social progress through a job; later, in the evening of 
life, one lives on earned income, pension, rent or interest. So, too; there are three stages in 
Spiritual Life---first as a Jijnaasu---the seeker, curious, inquisitive, earnest, thirsty, enthusiastic. 
Then as a Mumukshu---the Saadhak steady, straight, adventurous, hardy. Finally the Abhimukha- 
--the realised person, face to face with Reality, strong, intelligent, good, showering Love on all. 
The dull inert temper leads man to sloth and slavery; the passionate temper entices him to 
faction, competition, conflict; the balanced unruffled equable temper leads man to peace, justice, 
love and truth. Overcoming the tempers by the development of Saadhana, one must discover the 
Truth of oneself and others, namely, God. 


Be happy when grief strikes you 


Yan na Bhaarathi than na Bhaaratham: “What is not Indian is not knowledge; all knowledge is 
the domain of the Indian intellect." And all knowledge is synthesised, harmonised and 
summarised into the highest Wisdom, here, so that its alchemy can be experienced. And what is 
that Wisdom? Every individual is a spark of the effulgence of God; God is dancing in every cell 
of every being’. Do not doubt this, or ignore this, or dispute this. This is the Truth; this is the 


entire Truth; this is the only Truth. The Universe is God. (Loka is Lokesha). All this is He, His 
Body. 


To run away from the place which you have been assigned is cowardice, it is foolish, it is 
fruitless. Don't honour such men as heroes. You can be engaged in any profession, employed in 
any job,--for all professions are His, all jobs are His. He is the Universal Master, the Universal 
Provider. And when troubles pile up or disappointment confronts you, be thankful for the 
toughening it gives to your character for the trial which you are privileged to face. You 
overcome the distress of the heat by resorting to a cooler; you overcome the distress of freezing 
cold by resorting to joy. Be happy when grief strikes you. Be calm when anger tries to inflame 
you. How can you put down fire with fire? Reason out and convince yourself that tolerance, 
forbearance, love and sweetness can alone ensure peace for yourself and for society. 


Hyderabad, 4-4-1973 


The touchstone for virtue in a person is his keenness to give up, to 
sacrifice, to develop detachment. I exhort students on many 
occasions to associate with good and Godly people only so that the 
precious aspect of divinity in them can manifest. 


Many of them are humble and subdued and disciplined as long as 
they are in hostel and college, but once they enter the outer world, 
they resume the routine and ruin themselves. This should not 
happen. 


Once Truth is accepted as an article of faith, one should sacrifice 
one's entire life to its practice. Or else, man degrades himself 
below the level of birds and beasts. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


13. Know the Knower 


MEN everywhere are frittering away the precious years allotted to them on earth, in three vain 
pursuits: praising oneself, thrusting one's interests forward, aggrandizement at all costs; 
defaming others, blackening the reputations of others, scandalising the good and fawning upon 
the bad; talking frivolously, or irresponsibly, stoking the fires of hatred or slinging mud, helter 
skelter, with no care for the injury done. 


Men try to know everything about everybody else; but, they do not try to know about 
themselves! The attempt to know about the knower is called saadhana; knowledge about the 
knower is Aathma Vidhya. It is only through that knowledge that man can live in peace 
anywhere. For, when you know that you are but a spark of the Divine and that all else are the 
same Divine sparks, you look upon all with reverence and true Love; your heart is filled with 
supreme joy; and the assertions of the ego are rendered ineffective. Man seeks joy in far places 
and peace in quiet spots; but, the spring of joy is in his heart, the haven of peace is in himself. 
Even when he walks on the moon, man has to take with him, his fears, his anxieties, his 
prejudices and his pet aversions. Have faith in God, and in the correctness of moral living. Then, 
you can have peace and joy, whatever may be the fare that fortune offers you. 


Love alone confers lasting happiness and peace 


Goodness, compassion, tolerance---through these three paths, one can see the Divinity in oneself 
and others. Softness of heart is condemned by people today as weakness, cowardice and want of 
intelligence. The heart has to be hardened, they say, against pity and charity. But, that way lies 
war, destruction, downfall. Love alone confers lasting happiness and peace. Sharing alone can 
reduce grief and multiply joy. Man is born to share, to serve, to give and not to grab. When you 
instal faith in God as a .precious truth in the altar of your heart, you will welcome with equal’ 
alacrity the blows and blossoms of fortune. 


Man can have the highest joy and can share that joy with others; but he is now having only grief 
and sharing that grief with others. A king once granted a woodcutter in the forest an extensive 
sandal wood plantation as inaam (gift), in return for an act of hospitality that he had the chance 
to offer him. The fellow did not realise the value of the wood nor did he investigate the meaning 
and mode of the fragrance that emanated from the wood; he cut all the trees in a short time and 
burnt them for selling as charcoal. Most men waste their lives; they make charcoal out of 
sandalwood and are happy at the few chips, they get in exchange! 


By means of prayer you can win the Grace of God; prayer saves you from slavery to the senses; 
when you extol God and feel that you are activated by His Will, you will become free from 
anger, anxiety, prejudice and envy; these passions ruin physical and mental health. Whenever 
you feel greed or resentment, try to control the emotion. Treat it as you would treat an illness; 
find the cure and master it. A monk was going along a. jungle track when he was followed by a 
gang of tribals who showered abuse on him. He sat down on rock before the edge of the forest 
was reached; and encouraged them to do their worst for, he said, there he would be met by a 
group of his devotees who might beat them off enraged at their behaviour. 


Discipline is the mark of intelligent living 


Man is basically love, peace, joy and truth. He is the embodiment of all these, that is to say, of 
Divinity. He ought to behave only in accordance with his basic traits; but he overlays upon them 


the false traits of I and mine, and tarnishes his own personality. How to get rid of this tarnish is 
the problem of religion, everywhere. Bhajan (group singing of devotional songs) and 
Naamasmaran (remembering God's Name) are fine cleansing processes. Only, the mind must 
dwell on the sweetness of each name, and become sweet as a consequence. They must be done as 
a regular discipline, with the awareness that they will yield good results. They should not 
degenerate into mere mechanical routine items of a crowded schedule. 


Discipline is the mark of intelligent living. Parents should not allow children to fall away from 
their control, and wander about without compass or anchor. Many parents feed and fondle their 
children, and then, in the name of freedom, leave them to find their own friends and pleasures. 
They take them to films regardless of the impression they create on their tender minds. They 
entertain the friends of their children, but, do not inquire their antecedents or habits. They even 
encourage their children to smoke and drink, not knowing they will one day have to rue their 
action. They thus declare by their actions that they are the enemies of their own progeny! 


The path of life has both ups and downs 


I like children; I take great care of them; I pay them great attention. I give, and advise parents to 
give them, proper advice at the proper time. I insist on discipline, on reverent obedience to 
parents, on regulated food and play, on rigorous allocation of time for study, bhajan, meditation, 
etc. I also recommend some items of service, like nursing the sick. I condemn frivolous talk, 
luxurious living, deleterious habits, addiction to films, horror-comics, pen-friends, exotic dress, 
outlandish coiffures designed to draw attention to oneself etc. By these means, boys and girls are 
slowly drawn into unrighteous and immoral ways. 


Discipline trains you to put up with disappointments; you will know that the path of life has both 
ups and downs, that every rose has: its thorn. Now, people want roses without thorns, life has to 
be one saga of sensual pleasure, a picnic all the time. When this does not happen, you turn wild 
and start blaming others. If each one cares for his own pleasures how can society progress? How 
can the weak survive? Mine, not thine, this sense of greed is the root of all evil. This distinction 
is applied even to God!--my God, not yours! Your God, not mine! 


I am indeed very happy today that I could spend some time with you, children of the Remand 
Home. To spend some time in Divine Presence is a fortune which is the reward of past merit. 
You are here going through sentences from coups for delinquencies. Let me tell you that all men 
are undergoing sentences for long or .short periods, with simple or hard labour, to atone for 
misdemeanours and crimes done by them in past lives. Every fall makes a dent; every fault has to 
be corrected; every sin has to be-cleansed. Every one is a prisoner. 


Learn the Golden Rule of Life 


For, wherever he goes, two officers accompany them, and watch each action. It is only when one 
can go alone, that one can be said to be free. But, now, I as well as Mine, do not leave men 
alone; they walk on each side exercising their subtle influence over each step. I insist that you are 
the body, the mind, the senses, and the intelligence. It encourages you to care for the strengthe- 
ning of the body and its beautification; to cater to the fancies that attract the mind, to pursue the 
fleeting pleasures of the tongue and eye; it tells you that reason is the only instrument for 
measuring truth, and decries intuition, and experience. Mind teaches you to grab, acquire, and 
possess, merely for the joy of possession, and the joy of depriving others of things of value. But, 


the mind can also be used for liberation from these two shackles: I and Mine. Let it be fixed on 
God; they will both disappear. 


You must examine every act to find out. whether it will cause pain to others; if it does, withdraw 
from it. Don't do to others what you do not like to do unto you. This is called the Golden Rule. 
Yes, It is the best test for. distinguishing right from wrong. If another person has with him what 
you like to have, do not make him miserable by snatching it from him. Would you like 
something you like to be snatched away from you by another? 


Learn to serve people to the extent of your capacity. Learn to revere your parents, teachers and 
elders; they have your progress always in view. When you go back to your villages, join the Seva 
Samithis (service organisations) there and engage yourselves in bhajan, service programmes and 
study with the members there. 


Hyderabad, April, 1973 


This is Sai's Message to you all. May you all develop this Divine 
Love and stand out as the harbingers of a new age free from 
selfishness, greed, hatred and violence. Let each of you be light 
unto himself or herself and thereby be a light unto others. 


There should be no differences among devotees in the Sai 
Organisations. There should be no scramble for power or position. 


What matters is the purity, intensity and sincerity of the devotion 
and the spirit of selfless sacrifice in which each devotee renders 
service to the needy and the suffering. 


Sri Sathya Sai 
14. 


14. Your image in His eye 


MAN preens himself that he knows everything; but when asked about himself he hangs down his 
head in shame. Man knows the news of every land but he is ignorant of the nuisance that he 
himself is to himself and others. He is moving in darkness, but, yearning for aanandha (bliss). 
He does not know the means of securing aanandha prayer, seva (selfless service), study of 
spiritual texts, meditation, silence. He has no faith that he is aanandha and that aanandha is his 
own nature. He is blown off by calamity; for he has no strength to withstand the blow. Faith in 
the God within is the toughest shield against the thrusts of fate. Nests laboriously built by birds 
are torn away by storms; the fragrant petals of flowers are felled by rain. Defeat and victory are 
the obverse and reverse of the same coin; when you welcome one, you have willy-nilly to 
welcome the other too. Forbearance, compassion and incorruptible virtue are the three pillars of a 
happy life. Only such a life can be called civilised; the rest is barbarian existence. 


This meeting began with a Prayer. Good. But, prayer for some benefit or gain should not be 
addressed to God. For, it means that God waits until He is asked! Surrender to Him; He will deal 
with you as He feels best and it would be the best for you. God does not dole out Grace in 
proportion to the praise He receives! When you pray for a thing from God, you run the risk of 
condemning Him, if for some reason the prayer is not answered the way you wanted it to be, or 
as quickly as you wanted it to be. This contingency arises because you feel that God is an 
outsider, staying in some heaven, or holy spot, far away from you. God is in you, God is in every 
word of yours, every deed and thought. Speak, do and think as befits Him. Do the duty that He 
has allotted to the best of your ability, and to the satisfaction of your conscience. That is the most 
rewarding puuja (ritualistic worship). 


Inner cleanliness is Godliness 


When you stand before another, his image is in your eye, and your image is in his; haven't you 
observed this? You are in me, I am in you, that is the truth this phenomenon proclaims. When 
you have faith in this, and when you cultivate love, humility, reverence for life, and tolerance, 
you are on the right path. When you are not on this path, that is to say, when you are travelling 
left, you are certainly left out, when it is a question of sharing Divine Grace. 


The body is the temple of God, isn't it? Well. What does the priest do in the temple every day? 
First, he cleans the utensils and sacred vessels in the shrine. He sweeps the room and washes the 
altar. The senses are the utensils for the puuja of the God within; they have to be cleaned and 
assiduously kept free from dirt. Inner cleanliness is Godliness. That is possible only through 
sense-control, and mind-control; or what amounts to the same saadhana, dedication of all desires 
and activities to God. There are various habits which can be learnt in order to ensure equanimity. 
When some one insults you or defames you or ignores you, accept it with a smile; this is the way 
of the world; it is basically ungrateful, ill-mannered, they are doing me a good turn, my strength 
is under trial, I should not yield to anger or resentment, tell yourself such invigorating things, and 
be quiet, with a smile of triumph on your lips. There was a sanyaasin (mendicant) once who was 
roundly abused by a gang of mischievous young men. He said, “Carry on! Enjoy yourselves! I 
see that you are very happy at the chance. This is exactly what I desire for you." When you do 
not accept the insult some one casts on you, it goes back to the person who indulged in it first; a 
registered letter that is not accepted returns to the sender. Do not damage your mental peace, by 
receiving the letter and reading the contents. Refuse to receive it. You have a chance of 


correcting the wrong-doers too; accept it and you join the gang of mischief- makers. So, be 
warned! 


Perform duty as an act of worship 


When God is recognised as dwelling within, every one will perform his duty. as an act of 
worship. Children have to revere their parents, that is their duty. Parents have to bring up their 
children as bright and willing citizens capable of earning their own food and helping others in 
distress; if they shirk this duty, they have failed in their worship. They should not also spoil them 
by allowing them too much of freedom and catering to their fancies. I know many parents who 
dote on their children, 


and admire them when they learn the bad habits of gambling or drinking! They do not curb them, 
when they swagger about in the bazaars, teasing and bullying those who pass by. They do not 
instil into the young minds the attitude of reverence towards property belonging to others. As a 
consequence, their children land themselves in trouble, and then, the parents repent and curse 
themselves for their unpardonable foolishness. 


Lean on your own strength and skill 


There is also another responsibility that devolves upon the parent. He must live the householder's 
life, as laid down in the Dharma Shaasthras (Scriptures on Righteousness), so that a picture of a 
pure happy life may be imprinted on the young mind. If the parent is a drunkard; a gambler, and 
a cheat, no amount of textbook ethics can cure the son. I like children and the young innocents. I 
will not allow them to be blamed. The fault lies wholly on the shoulders of the elders, the parents 
the leaders who shape the norms which they imbibe. Dhritharaashtra, the blind father, 
encouraged his hundred sons in their nefarious plots to bring about the destruction of the five 
Paandava cousins and thus paved the way for their own total annihilation. He did not teach them 
by precept and example, the lessons of love, sacrifice and contentment. 


Do not lean upon others; lean on your own strength and skill. Live on your own earnings, your 
own resources. Self-reliance is the best food for growing young men. It is best to live with 
honour for just a day than with dishonour for many decades; better a short lived hamsa (swan) 
than a century-lived crow. The hamsa is adored by all; the crow is detested and stoned off. Do 
not crave for the property of others or for things that can be got by trickery or dishonourable 
means. Earn by the sweat of your brow, then, you can be proud and happy, when you spend it. 


Life is a mosaic of pleasure and pain 


Then again, I will advise children not to read horror comics, books on crime and sex, and novels 
of vice and wickedness. Avoid also films, for though they may be advertised as very educative 
and inspiring, the producers, in their greed for profits, smuggle in low vulgar debasing scenes in 
order to please raw untrained minds. Don't allow the virus of vice to infect your brains. If that 
happens you descend to levels worse than the beasts. Do not imagine that it will be possible for 
you to live happily, without any anxiety or bother. Do not build castles in the air, and hope to 
live in them. Life is a mosaic of pleasure and pain; grief is an interval between two moments of 
joy, peace is the interlude between two wars. You have no rose, without a thorn; the diligent 
picker will avoid the pricks, and gather the flower. There is no bee without the sting; cleverness 
consists in gathering the honey nevertheless. Troubles and travail will haunt you, but you must 
not allow them to deflect you from the path of duty and dedication. When you go back after 
some years here to your villages, seek out the Sathya Sai Seva Samithi or Bhajana Mandaii, in 


the place; join that Sathsang (good company). Share the Aanandha (bliss) of the seva (voluntary 
service) that they do---visit the patients in the hospitals, read nice story books sitting by the side 
of the patients in the beds, write letters for them, and generally be kind and friendly to them in 
their loneliness and pain. Go to the slum areas, move like lighted lamps full of love and 
sympathy, and help the people there to get things done which will improve their health, add to 
their income, and advance their education. When the sugar of Divine thoughts is added to the 
routine tasteless water of daily life, it becomes sherbet, and delightful to drink. So, do so yourself 
and help others to do so. 


Man is the image of God; when you injure His image, when you discard him, or dishonour him, 
or keep him at arm's length, how can God confer Grace on you? "Mine is mine, yours in yours"-- 
if you declare, God too will keep you beyond the reach of His love. Annie Besant said once that 
more than man seeking God, it is truer to say that God is ever seeking man, a man who loves and 
serves His Children, and treats them as endearingly as He does. 


Look out for chances to serve others 


Many are dispirited at their poverty, or misfortune; they hang their heads and fold their arms, and 
blame God for their plight. It is like the magnet and the piece of iron. The iron weeps that the 
magnet does not draw it. "I have no legs to walk, no wings to fly, no muscles to crawl or creep! 
How can I reach the magnet?" it wails. The magnet replies, "you are encrusted with rest, dust, 
and layers of mud; get rid of them and automatically, without any other ado, you can contact me 
and be with me for ever." It is sheer audacity to say, with all the rust and dust on, that God has no 
power to grant Grace; nor is it a sign of intelligence to say that God has no compassion in Him. 
Examine yourselves, purify the heart and fill it with love towards all men and God will be with 
you. 


God is not somewhere away from you, some one distinct from you. He is in you, before you, 
behind you, beckoning, guiding, guarding, warning, prompting, the Inner Voice speaking ever 
with you. You need not seek Him, He is there ready to respond to the call from the heart. Call on 
Me and I am always by your side. Prizes were given today only to a few boys; I wish to give 
prizes to all of you, when next I come. So behave that the Grace is deserved. Look out for 
chances to serve others, speak soft and sweet, revere your teachers and all elders, study well to 
the best of your abilities, do not waste a single moment in idle talk or pastimes. That is the 
message I leave with you today. 


The world is a huge house of correction 


Dear Children, Embodiments of Purity and Holiness, I am glad I am able to meet you again and 
spend some time with you. Bhagavantham said that this day is My birthday, being the Monday of 
the month Kaarthik, the day according to the Hindhu Calendar Celebrations at Puttaparthi and 
elsewhere are done on the 23rd of November, since that is the date according to English 
Calendar. But, Bhagavantham said that you must congratulate yourselves on this coincidence. 


Four days are said to be days of luck; man must be congratulated if he gets this luck. The first is 
the day on which brothers and sisters, kith and kin are sitting around and attending a domestic 
festival showering joy on all. The second is the day on which one gets the chance to feed the 
hungry, the distressed and the defectives who cannot earn the wherewithal for livelihood. The 
third is the occasion when one gets the atmosphere and the opportunity to meditate on God. The 
fourth is the day on which a great person comes to us and instructs and inspires towards the 


higher life of the spirit. They feed the mind with aanandha (divine bliss) and teach us to 
overcome the obstacles towards God-realisation. You have today the great good fortune of being 
in the Divine presence, a gift which is the most precious man can acquire. 


Chance circumstances have brought you into this remand home; but, do not get disheartened. 
The others who consider themselves free are also in jail, for, the world is a huge house of 
correction. When a prisoner is transferred from one place of confinement to another, say, from 
Raajamundhry to Waarangal, he will have a police constable on each side of him, isn't? 
Whenever he moves about, these two will be with him. When he can journey without these two, 
all alone, then, he is free. All men have two constables ever with them; they are the symbols of 
his sentence of imprisonment. They are abhimaan and mamakaar---the egoistic feeling and the 
pride of possession. 


You can ever be free from worries and fears 


Man is a prisoner of his senses so long as these two keep him under guard. Man strays away into 
misery and pain, because he loses the sense of value, and runs after the temporary and the trivial. 
He ignores the voice of God that warns and guides from within, and pays the penalty for the 
transgression. Life is to be dedicated not for mere food and drink, or mere catering to the 
cravings of the senses. It has to be devoted to the attainment of the aanandha that God alone can 
confer. Of course, worries and fears there will always be, along the road that you take from birth 
to death. But, you can ever be free from both, provided you have as the Giver of Light, the name, 
Sai Raam. At least from now on, recite the name and dear children, you will have joy and peace. 
Never care for the obstacles that may come your way; the name will clear the path. 


The Gopees (milkmaids) of Brindhaavan were chastised and punished by their parents, parents- 
in-law and even husbands for taking the name of Krishna, but, they had the name printed on their 
hearts, just like the pictures in the books you read, and they could not remove the Name, just as 
you would find it impossible to remove the picture from the paper! When you have the Name in 
your heart and on your tongue, you will never go astray, your hand will be clean, your eyes will 
be bright, your face will beam with courage and self-confidence. Man has been endowed with 
jnaana (spiritual knowledge), the capacity to distinguish what is good and bad, for himself, for 
the family into which he is born and for which he is indebted for bringing him up until adulthood 
when he was a helpless dependent stripling, for the village where he first saw light, for the 
country which gave him the rich heritage of culture, and for humanity of whom he is a valuable, 
a significant member. 


God will never desert His obligation 


Every culture has a body of customs and conventions laid down by the sages, to maintain peace 
and prosperity in the community. They are tested in the crucible of experience, and they are often 
grouped under the word, Dharma (duties). Or, they are known as neethi (ethics). To go against 
them-is to break the rule which binds man to man, and man to God. When you have not grown 
enough and understood how hard it is to work and earn the fruits of work, it strikes you as easy 
to take hold of some one else's book or pencil or money and derive satisfaction therefrom. This 
tendency leads you to trouble, and to this place. Resist that temptation; be bold; tell yourselves 
that it is wrong, it will disgrace your parents, the reputation of your family, of your village, of 
your country and its ancient culture. If you feel you must have something to be happy, pray to 
God; "God! You have the responsibility to keep me healthy, happy, good and intelligent; give me 


this thing, which I believe is necessary for my happiness; but, if you think, I am wrong, give me 
whatever you think best." God will never desert His obligation; He will feed you and foster you. 


Once a sanyaasin (ascetic) was proceeding to the forest for austerities, so that he may win the 
Grace of God. He saw a cow being led by a villager; drops of milk were shedding from its udder! 
He asked the villager, why? The reply was, "She is about to calve; this is the indication; the milk 
is already flowing so that the calf may have its milk, as soon as it is born." The sanyaasin then 
realised that God will give him, too, wherever he was, the thing most needed for his progress; He 
knows best, He is all-knowing, He is compassion itself, he felt; so, he turned back and contented 
himself with prayers and the constant contemplation of God as Providence. 


Food got by foul means will injure you 


Have patience; do not in your hurry to enjoy cheap joys fall into error and unrighteous deeds. 
Have faith that God will add unto you all joys that you desire for and deserve. People ask of men 
for favours; they extend their hands towards others and plead dhehi (give). But, dhehi also 
means, "He who dwells in the dheha (body), that is to say, God!" So, don't humiliate that Dhehi 
by calling out dhehi before others. Ask Him; say dhehi to the Dhehi; He will respond generously, 
graciously. 


Food got by foul means, clothing procured through falsehood, these will only injure you. Do not 
think that ease and comfort are the main things in life. Disappointment, disease, distress are the 
lot of all, rich and poor, educated and uneducated, young and old. They are the common lot of 
all. Let not your pure, immaculate hearts be rendered dirty by falsehood and wrong. Do not soil 
your tongue using it for uttering dirty words. Utter the name of God; it acts like a spark which 
can burn into ash a big hill of cotton! All evil thoughts, and wicked plans and plots will 
disappear like fog before the Sun when the Name of God is remembered sincerely. As soon as 
you are back in your villages, join the nearest Seva Samithi (service unit) and share in their seva 
saadhana (effort of service) and spend your days in sathsang (holy company), so that you 
become good and useful sons of the land. 


God is the refuge of the forlorn. This day, some devotees came to Me and impressed Me to spend 
some time with them. But, it is your call that I answered. I have spent more than an hour and half 
with you; but, I am not satisfied. I am sorry a good deal of time was spent in reaching this place; 
that could well have been spent with you. You are fortunate to keep Me so long with you. 
Remember the directions given to you, and start the saadhana of Naamasmarana (spiritual 
discipline of remembering God's Name) this very moment. 


Hyderabad, April, 1973 


Of course, you can and do announce, “I surrender my mind, my 
thoughts, my feelings and imaginings, to God." But your monkey- 
mind escapes from your hold; how, then, can you capture it and 
claim it and surrender it to God? What authority do you possess to 
offer something you are not master of?. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


15. Love is the key 


MAN is so designed that he can derive aanandha and maintain it only through association with 
his kind. To divest oneself of all contacts with others, and tread a lonely path is a sign of 
weakness, of fear---not of courage. Lively association alone produces morality, justice, 
compassion, sympathy, love, tolerance, equanimity and many other qualities that toughen and 
train character, and mould the personality of man. Culture is the consequence of the co-mingling 
of hearts and heads. A group of individuals, who are charged with hatred or contempt of each 
other, cannot produce any beneficial effect on any of its components; a common outlook, or 
rather, a common inlook, is the essential factor, Sama-chintha---the sameness of beliefs, opinions 
and attitudes---is the prime factor. This Sama-chintha must result in a flood of aanandha (divine 
bliss) that envelops and enthuses the entire group. If the individual knows he is Divine and that 
all else are equally so, that consciousness is the best bond for Society, that aanandha is the best 
atmosphere to sustain the Society. How can a person who knows that all are Divine keep away 
from the God He recognises? "I am he, he is I, both I and He are kith and kin in Him." This 
awareness is so thrilling, so satisfying, so uplifting, that such Society is the noblest Sathsang 
(holy company) man can ever come into. 


This Universe is enveloped in God 


Shutting yourself in a room and offering incense and flowers to a picture or image of God, 
singing or reciting His glory are very poor substitutes for the discipline that will liberate you 
from ignorance. All beings are images of God; all men are His pictures; then, why shut 
yourselves in? All creation is marching on a pilgrimage to Him; why then behave as if you are 
trekking it alone? You believe that the time spent in church or temple or the domestic shrine in 
adoration and in ritual worship is devoted to God and the rest is spent for other purposes. But, 
you cannot demarcate and delimit the realms of God and man like that. God is ever with you 
everywhere. Vasudhevassarvamidham---"All this is God." 


Society is the school where this lesson is taught to those who earnestly seek. The sages of this 
land resorted to the hermitages in the forests, and mixed with the steadfast seekers there is 
scholastic discussion and disciplinary practices. They drew inspiration and instruction from each 
other, and learnt the Truth, [shaavaasyam idham jagath---"This Universe is enveloped in God"--- 
that God is the string on which the worlds are strung. When man gives up his conceit and 
becomes nature's pupil, rather than its tyrannical master, he can hear her voice advising, 
admonishing, and illuminating. 


Man has-all the resources he needs in himself. He can tap them by identifying them and 
manifesting them, and by sharing them with others. He is Sath, Chith and Aanandha (Being, 
Awareness, Bliss Absolute); He is Shiva-Shakthi Swaruup (Form of divine-energy). When man 
extols himself, he is extolling God. Do not cultivate the conviction that you are mere men; be 
assured that you are destined for Divinity. When Divinity takes on the human form as described 
in the Raamaayana, the Mahaabhaaratha, and the Bhaagavatha, one has to interpret the actions as 
providing examples and lessons, and not as human stories enacted for entertainment. 


Mind of man has to be a garden of flowers 


The five Paandava brothers are five qualities in human character, all observing the norms set by 
the eldest, which is the noblest and the most righteous. Raama is the example of the 
uncompromising adherent of the principle of righteousness, whatever be the temptation to bypass 


it. Raama was charged with a love that transcended all considerations of advantage, of caste or 
creed, and extended to animals and birds, human beings. Love is the key to open the doors 
locked by egoism and greed. 


If you allow your behaviour towards others to be contaminated by contempt, scorn, cynicism or 
hatred, then, you are spoiling the fair name of India, its culture and tradition will not tolerate it. It 
has proclaimed that God is One, and that He is known and can be known through various names 
and forms. It has declared that God is installed in the heart of every being. Look at the emblem 
of the Sathya Sai Organisation! It tells you that the Hindhu, the Muslim, the Paarsi, the Buddhist 
and the Christian are all adoring the same God for the same consummation. The mind of man has 
to be a garden of many-coloured flowers, a Nandhanavana. Krishna will certainly delight in 
dancing there, and playing on the enchanting Flute in the bowers of that garden. 


A heart saturated with love of God can never entertain thoughts of violence. It is sheer hypocrisy, 
to kneel before God and, then, force men to kneel before you. God is love, God is peace: God is 
strength. How can a person be in contact with God, and yet, be proud and acrimonious? Agitated 
and angry? Weak and vacillating? His claim to be in contact with God is only a laughable foible; 
it cannot be true. A tree is judged by its fruit. Leaders of peoples have to develop this universal 
feeling of love, not limited to political boundaries which change from decade to decade, or 
religious labels which are affixed and erased to suit temporary needs. The prayer that rose from 
millions in this country from all its temples, yajnasaalas, theerthas, holy seafronts, shrines and 
altars for centuries, has been Sarve janaah sukhino bhavanthu---"Let all the 'peoples of the world 
be happy and prosperous;" samastha lokaah sukhino bhavanthu---"May all the worlds have 
peace and prosperity." So, pray for all humanity, for the welfare and happiness, the peace and 
progress of Russia, China, Africa, Pakistan, all countries of the world, and all beings everywhere. 


Hyderabad, April 1973 


Love as thought is Truth. Love as action is Right living. Love as 
feeling is Peace. Love as understanding is Non-violence. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


16. The garden of God 


MAN has to recognise his indebtedness to society and his duty towards it; this is the best way to 
solve the troubles of the day. Attention is paid only to arguments and counter-arguments, 
propositions and oppositions, plans and programmes; the aim of the egocentred is more to win a 
verbal victory than achieve a valid target. No attempt is made to foster the social virtues of 
honesty, tolerance and cordiality. 


Society is the expression of Divinity into manifold phases, with its love, its ardour, its eagerness 
to comfort and console. A chance conglomeration of humans does not become a society. It has to 
be welded into a unity by the consciousness of kinship of God, by the sharing of each other's joys 
and sorrows, and the cultivation of Samarasa (empathy). The individual has to manifest through 
word and deed, the Aanandha (Divine bliss) inherent in him and in society. 


Turning the beads of a rosary between the fingers or sitting erect contemplating the tip of the 
nose are only harmless ways of spending time; active participation in society in a spirit of 
dedication and surrender, conceiving all acts as acts of worship, all men as embodiments of the 
Supreme, is a more beneficial form of saadhana (spiritual discipline). For, there is no spot where 
He is not, no object which is not He. For, as the Shruthi (holy scripture) declares, He willed that 
He become all this! Worship, adoration, and pilgrimage cannot be the end-all! The goal is the 
realization of "I am He, He is I." That alone can fill the heart will Bliss. 


Dharma fosters those who foster it 


When you separate yourself as an individual, envy, resentment, jealousy and pride start defiling 
you. Love alone can weld you into kinship with all. You are Shivashakthi---the \atent-patent, 
positive-negative, inert-alert principle. Be ever cognisant of this secret truth about yourself. 


Dhivaakarla Venkataavadhaani recited verses welcoming Me, in which he piled praise on praise. 
Of course, the style was sweet and the sentiment, sincere. When once you transcend the human 
scale, and reach out to. the Divine, the eagerness to adore will drop off. You can evoke the 
Divine in you by adherence to dhama (righteousness); that is the message of the Mahaa- 
bhaaratha. Weighed down by sorrow, Arjuna one day laid all the blame on his eldest brother 
Dharmaraaja. He said, "On account of you our dear mother is separated from us, our wife is 
disgraced in the open court, my only son is slaughtered by our wolfish cousins, our dynasty is 
forced into exile and our heritage is stolen before our very eyes." Dharmaraaja replied, "When 
you blame me, remember you are blaming dharma; no one can ever suffer through dharma. 
Dharma fosters those who foster it. The pain which Dharma inflicts is a blessing, it is a shower 
of joy. Since we have stuck to Dharma God will fight our battle and win victory for us." 


To attain God, Love is enough 


God is the embodiment of compassion. He watches for a grain of goodness or humility so that 
He can reward it with tons of Grace. In a certain temple for Shiva, the priest had silver basin with 
a hole in its base for water to drip continuously. He filled it with water and hung it over the 
Lingam (the idol of Shiva) so that the God who swallowed the poison which would have 
destroyed the Universe could be cooled and comforted! Even at night when the doors of the 
shrine were locked by the priest as he went home, the silver basin of water, was in its position. 
So, a thief broke into the sacred apartment; his eyes were on the silver: he could not reach the 


rope that kept the basin in position; so, he climbed on the Lingam itself in order to take the costly 
booty down. Even as he was standing on the holy idol Shiva manifested Himself in all His glory 
before him, saying, "Son! I appreciate your surrender; you have cast on me your entire burdan!" 
The thief prayed that Shiva may help him to secure the silver;-there was no ladder or bench or 
any other article on which he could climb. So, the Lingam was his only refuge.. 


Once a Guru sent a pupil for further guidance to a mendicant in a Shiva temple. When he 
reached the temple, he found the fellow reclining in the central shrine with both his legs resting 
on the sacred Lingam. The pupil was naturally enraged at the man's insolence; when he spoke 
angrily against the behaviour, the man said, "Please lift my legs and place them where the 
Lingam is not." When he did so, there was a Lingam under the feet in the new position. 
Wherever he deposited the man's legs, a Lingam rose to give them rest! That was the lesson the 
beggar taught him--God is everywhere; only win the vision to see Him so. 


To attain God, feats of hard Saadhana are superfluous. Love is enough; avoid hating, envying or 
even disliking anyone. Put love into practice, through seva (selfless service). When the loveliness 
of the seed blooms, you have the flower. And God is the loveliness which blooms as mani In the 
Geetha the Lord has announced, "I am the Seed of all Beings"---"Beejam maam sarva 
bhoothaanaam." When the seed is immortality, the tree too is immortal, the flower and the fruit 
are immortal. When He is rasa (juice), sweetness and love, all His manifestations are sweet and 
loving. When He is light, nothing can be dark. When He is Chaithanya, Chith (Supreme, 
Awareness), nothing can be Jada (insentient), without awareness or intelligence or 
consciousness. 


The Universe is a pleasant garden 


You may pride yourselves on being God-minded and Godward-bound; but your pride proclaims 
that God is only on the circumference of your activity. You must be humble; you must not limit 
God to any particular Name and Form. How can you fix a label on God and compel Him to 
conform to your specifications.:' Study the emblem of the Sathya Sai Organisation; it declares 
that all faiths feed the heart with aanandha, all faiths cleanse the mind of littleness, all faiths 
confer courage on the weak and the vacillating. 


The Universe around you is a pleasant garden full of charming patches of many-hued flowers 
filled with fragrance and nectarine elixir---each flower-bed being a Religion, which attracts the 
loyalty of millions of seekers. The garden too is God; God dances in that garden at His own 
handiwork, gladdening the flowers with the magic melody of the flute. Be full of joy and love; 
share that joy and love with all. If you utter "God, God," and inflict pain on man, you will be 
spumed as a cheat. You need not cry out God, God! But, if you confer joy on brother man, God 
will respond with His presence, though uninvited. There are, however, many in positions of 
authority-and influence who adore God and, at the same time, abhor mani They behave as if their 
God is a person of very limited intelligence who-can be easily deceived, who will. take their 
words at their face value and never look behind them for the motive and the. intention. 


Believe that God resides in all beings; speak such words, as would spread goodness, truth and 
beauty; do such acts as would promote the happiness and prosperity of all; pray that. all worlds 
have peace. Expand yourselves; do not contract into your own tiny individuality. Expand into 
Universal love, unshaken equanimity, and ever-active virtue. That is the Path which will bring 
out the Divinity in you to the fullest. 


Hyderabad, April, 1973 


Swaami is always with you, in you and around you. When all 
differences are eradicated and devotees in Sai Organisations 
conduct themselves with selfless devotion, you will all realise that 
Swaami and you are one. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


17. The ladder and the steps 


INDIA was the nursery of heroes who adventured into the realms of the spirit, and achieved 
victories against the forces of evil; they opened up the paths to God that are described in the texts 
of Sanaathana Dharma (Eternal Universal Religion). India is the sacred land from where the 
Voice of the Vedhas (sacred scriptures) rang over the world. It is the land which still retains the 
splendour of Yoga (Divine communion), and the glory of Renunciation. But, every Indian has 
now to question himself whether he is aware of this fact and whether he is helping by his acts, 
words and thoughts to promote that glory and that splendour. One has to admit that the glory is 
being dimmed, the splendour is fast fading out. The Gaayathri Manthra (Vedhic prayer to 
illuminate the intellect), enjoined on all, because it is the crucial manthra (sacred formula) of the 
Vedhas, has become a ritual of holding the nose while mumbling illegible sounds. 
Praanaayaama (breath-control) and its later stage of Prathyaahaara (the control of the senses 
and of their listless pursuit of external pleasure) are discoverable only in dictionaries. Yama and 
Niyama (abstention from evil doing and various observances of devotion to God)---the first steps 
in spiritual discipline are not practised at all, even by those who claim to teach and guide. 
Members of the monastic order, who have vowed to detach themselves completely from worldly 
involvements and attachments are running about frantically; accumulating and investing money, 
with even greater fanaticism than householders. One wonders whether this is the same land that 
one reads about, the land that held high the ideals of the spirit. 


Shankara's mission to revitalise Hindhu Dharma 


With the return of Krishna to His abode after the incarnation interlude, the Age of Kali darkened 
the world. Many preceptors', saints and sages tried subsequently to remind the people of their 
heritage and guide them along the ancient path. Of these, Shankara, who realised the weakness of 
a dualistic interpretation of the Universe---and the need for a unifying philosophy, was the most 
effective. He was born in the village of Kaaladi, situated in the Kerala State. Initiated into the 
Gaayathri Manthra in his fifth year he mastered the Vedhas and their supplementary texts on 
grammar, logic, prosody, astrology, etc., and in his fourteenth year itself, he ventured forth on his 
mission of counteracting the forces of doubt, dissent and denial and establishing faith, wisdom 
and devotion throughout the land. He encountered many scholars reputed for their dialectical 
skill and convinced them of the validity of the non-dualistic basis of the subjective and objective 
worlds. He wrote commentaries on the Upanishaths (metaphysical scriptures), the Bhagavath 
Geetha (The Song-teaching of Lord Krishna) and the Brahma Suuthras (aphorisms on Supreme 
Spirit)---generally accepted as the authentic texts of the Hindhu faith. He dedicated his short life 
of 32 years to the revitalisation of the Sanaathana Dharma (Eternal Universal Religion). 


The weapon to destroy the delusion 


When Shankara was residing at Vaaraanasi (Benares City) on the banks of river Ganga with his 
pupils, he used to visit the Pandiths in their own houses, and draw them into beneficial 
conversation on themes of philosophy. One day, when he went to a Pandith, he found him 
immersed in complicated rules of grammar. When asked why he had taken up the intensive study 
of grammar, he replied that it would easily fetch him a few pieces of silver. "If I am designed a 
Pandith, I can go to the home of some big Zamindaars, and hope to receive alms and offerings 
from them, for the upkeep of my large family," he said. Shankara advised him in appropriate 
terms, and charged him with self-confidence and courage. 


Returning to his hermitage, Shankara wrote a verse summarising the advice he gave the poor 
struggling Brahmin householder: 


Bhaja Govindham, Bhaja Govindham, 
Bhaja Govindham, Mooda Mathe, 
Sampraapthe Sannihitthe Kaale 

Nahi Nahi Rakshathi Dukrn karane. 


"Praise God, Praise God, Praise God, you fool, When death does knock at door, rules of 
grammar cannot save.” 


Shankara exhorted his pupils to disseminate the ideal of this verse, and they too, responded with 
verses on the same lines, each of the 14 contributing one verse. Shankara added another twelve 
of his own, as well as four more verses about the transformation that the teaching would confer. 
Thus, there are 31 verses in all, in the text called Bhaja Govindham or Moha Mudgaram. The 
latter name means, "The weapon with which delusion can be destroyed." Each one is a step in the 
ladder which lifts man into God. 


The study of these verses and the inspiration derived from them will promote discrimination and 
detachment, and thus, prepare the mind for the vision of the Supreme. You have to be initiated 
into these disciplines now itself, when you are young and entering on the adventure of living, and 
so, I have decided to expound to you one verse a day, during this Summer Course. 


"Those who deny the Aathma are fools" says Shankara 


Shankara addressed these verses to "mooda mathi" (The foolish person). Now, who are these 
fools? He has given the answer in another context: 'Naasthiko mooda uchyathe'---"Those who 
deny the aathma are fools." Those who assert and believe that "I am not this perishable body; I 
am not this feeble intellect; I am the undying, everlasting, all-knowing, all-inclusive Aathma" are 
few indeed. The vast majority assert and believe that "I am the moulder of my destiny, I am the 
captain of my ship. I choose my likes and dislikes, I fulfil my desires through my own efforts." 
These are the fools. 


But, even this vast majority pay taxes in ordinary life for the water they use, the electricity they 
consume, the houses they live in, and the professions they are engaged in. Now, what tax are 
they paying to Him who provides them with the essential requisites for mere living---the Sun, the 
Moon, Fire, Water, Air, Space, etc? Those who do not recognise the giver, the provider, the 
principle, the person, they are the fools. 


Scientists can weigh, measure, and analyse materials that already exist. They can, by means of 
permutations and combinations, put into currency strange forms and shapes from out of existing 
matter. But, they cannot create oxygen or hydrogen or any other thing anew. That can happen 
only through the Will of God. Without any matter originally supplied, no scientist can deal with 
things from the very beginning. They are helpless in the realm beyond earth, water, fire, air and 
space, the subject matter of the senses. Their activities are confined to nature, which is but the 
part-manifestation of the Divine. 


The verse with which Shankara started off the Moha Mudgaram speaks of the moment of the 
approach of the end of life. This indicates that of all the fears of man, the fear of death is the 
fiercest as well as the most foolish. For, none can escape death, having committed the error of 


birth. To get rid of the wheel of birth and death, awareness of the undying unborn Aathma which 
is one's Reality is the only method available to man. 


So, Shankara advises man to pray to Govindha. He refers to God as Govindha. Govindha means, 
"He who is the Cowherd." Man is both an animal and divine being. He has risen from the animal 
level and is on the way to reveal his divinity. He should be vigilant that he does not slide into 
animal again. Man .alone can rise into Godhood, for, he is equipped with the endowment needed 
for the achievement. 


Brindhaavan, 21-5-1973 


18. Friends you need 


WHILE in this transient world, wading through joy and grief, man has sore need of some one of 
his kind to whom he can communicate his feelings, with whom he can share his discoveries and 
depressions, his moments of bliss and sorrow, to be by his side while trekking the hard road to 
truth and peace, encouraging and enthusing him towards the goal. 


Who is one's true friend? Who is one's false, fake friend? It is clear that, as understood today, 
friendship and friends are far off the mark, of the ideal. Friends who can confer real counsel, 
comfort and consolation are precious gifts, rarely found today. 


A friendship knit by monetary bonds is disrupted as soon as you ask the loan to be repaid. So, 
when you oblige your friend with a loan, the friendship too is broken at that very moment. How 
can friendship be cemented by words or by coins? Heart must understand heart, heart must be 
drawn to heart, if friendship must last. Friendship must bind two hearts and affect both of them 
beneficially, whatever may happen to either---loss or gain, pain or pleasure, good fortune or bad. 
The bond must survive all the blows of fate, and be unaffected by time, place and circumstance. 


Each must correct the other; for each knows that they come from sympathy and love. Each must 
be vigilant that the other does not slide from the ideal, cultivate habits that are deleterious, or 
hide thoughts and plans that are productive of evil. The honour of each is in the safe keeping of 
the other. Each trusts the other and places reliance on the other's watchful love. Only those 
deserve the name "friends"---who help in uplifting life, cleansing ideals, elevating emotions and 
strengthening resolves. Those who drag you into pomp, pedantry, paltry entertainment and petty 
pranks are enemies, not friends. Friends cannot be got by social status, financial squandermania, 
outer scintillation and verbal assertions. See into the very soul, the. inner motives and motivator, 
the deeper aspirations and achievements, and then, yield your loyalty to such. 


The friendship between Kuchela and Krishna 


You might have heard of the friendship between Kuchela and his 'class-mate' Krishna. How 
could the friendship between these two survive the immense gap between their worldly positions 
and their spiritual status. Krishna was God Incarnate. Kuchela was a mere man. Krishna was a 
ruler, a king-maker, an unsurpassed hero, monarch, and preceptor. Kuchela was so poor that he 
was ever at his wit's end to procure his next meal. They had studied together for a few years at 
the hermitage of the sage Sandeepani. That had sown the seed of friendship. 


So, his wife sent him to Krishna, assuring him that he would not be turned from the door. 
Kuchela agreed to proceed but he hesitated long to send word that he had come, even when the 
guardsmen enquired why he had come and who he was. How could he, a broken, bent, befogged 
beggar dare stand before the Lord in His palatial Hall with its jewelled throne, and announce 
himself as a 'friend'? He was aghast at his own audacity. 


God only can be the true friend of man 


But, all his fears melted away, when Krishna recognised hint and came forward to receive him 
warmly and with evident joy. Krishna filled him with supreme bliss by His words. His acts of 
hospitality and His attitude of hearty welcome. Krishna also blessed his wife with enormous 
wealth and comfort, peace, prosperity, in quantity much more than ever she hoped for or prayed 
for. No one asked Hint for it; but, His love took that shape, His Grace awarded them the 
happiness. But, Kuchela was ever content with the friendship of Krishna; he never desired 


anything other than that. He was overwhelmed with delight when he experienced the compassion 
and love of the Lord. 


The feeling of friendship must activate every nerve, permeate every blood-cell, and purify every 
emotional wave; it has no place for the slightest trace of egotism. You cannot elevate the 
companionship which seeks to exploit or fleece for personal benefit into the noble quality of 
friendship. Perhaps, the only friend who can pass this rigorous test, is God. 


To understand and practise this noble emotion, the Bhagavath Geetha is an invaluable guide. 
When Arjuna was dispirited and dejected, Krishna injected courage and a high sense of duty into 
him and helped him avoid disgraceful defeat. And, Arjuna, too like a good friend, took the 
advice in good spirit, with the full confidence that Krishna meant well by him. Why, we know 
how confident he was of the wisdom and power inherent in Krishna. When Krishna gave him the 
choice, "To help you in battle, you can have either my entire army or myself alone, unarmed and 
determined not to fight in spite of any provocation." And, Arjuna did not hesitate to decide 
which of these two he wanted. He chose the unarmed Krishna, and prayed that He might be his 
charioteer, during the days when he rode into the field. 


Friends who stand witness for ages 


Long ago, there was a person who had three friends. Quite by accident,, he was charged for some 
crime and a warrant was issued against him by the Court. He. approached one friend and asked 
him to bear witness to his innocence. He said, "I will not move out of this house; I can help you 
only from within this." The second friend said, "I can come only upto the porch of the Court. I 
will not enter the witness box." The third friend said, "Come, I shall speak for you, wherever you 
want me to." The first friend is the 'property and possessions’ which can bear witness only from 
within the house. The second is 'the kinsmen, the members of the family, who come as far as the 
cemetery but would not accompany the person to the Judgement Seat. The third, friend is the fair 
name earned by one's-"virtues and service," which persist even after the death and burial; they 
stand witness for ages, and announce the innocence and greatness of the individual. They decide 
the nature of the next birth too. 


Young as you are, you must make efforts to acquire good friends and keep them. Do not 
postpone this task, listening to some elders who advise that the path of spirituality can well be 
trodden later when you have retired from active life. They say that you can take on hand the 
Bhagavath Geetha, when you have grown old. But, that advice is like telling a nation that it can 
afford to wait till war is declared, to train an army to counter the enemy. Long years of 
preparation are needed to have an army that can meet any ‘contingency; otherwise, if arms are 
distributed to the untrained, it spells disaster even to the persons wielding the arms. 


Have God as your unfailing guide and friend 


The good deeds and thoughts that one welcomes and entertains during the years of life will stand 
in good stead, firm, like a good friend, when one is nearing the end. So, you, young men and 
women, must resolve to engage yourselves in acts that promote your peace and progress and the 
peace and progress of all mankind. Do not damage your future by pursuing temporary benefits 
and selfish aggrandizement. Yearn for and earn good friends, who will keep you on an even keel. 
Have above all, God, as your unfailing guide and friend. The heart of the Gopees had struck deep 
roots in the love of Krishna and when Akrura came to Gokul to take Krishna with him to 
Mathura, the Gopees struggled heroically, to keep Him with themselves. They held on to the 


steeds of the chariot; they gripped the wheels and sought to prevent them from moving. 
Friendship is the expression of unshakeable love, love that is noble, pure, free from desire or 
egoism. I bless you that you may have such friendship from others and that you too make others 
happy by granting this holy type of friendship. 


Brindhaavan, 24-5-1973 


19. Light on lights 


SOME days in the year are marked out as Holy days, in the calendars of all human communities. 
They are distinguished by greater attention being paid for worshipping deities, propitiating the 
deceased, praying to the forces of nature and similar elevating spiritual exercise. They are 
occasions to remind man of the God without and the God within. Such holy days are prescribed 
and observed in India also, along with other festival days. One such festival is Dheepaavali, the 
Festival of Lights, which people are celebrating today. Dheepaavali means a garland or festoon 
of lights, the most characteristic way in which the festival is observed by all. 


Illumination, such as is done today, is a sign of victory, or triumph over some foe or some 
obstacle to happy living. It is a way of expressing one's joy and attracting the attention of others 
to one's achievement of unexpected happiness. Festivals of which illumination is a part are found 
among the Parsis, the Christians and the Muslims. They are celebrated in Malaysia, Nepal, Japan 
and a host of other countries. 


There are countless legends which seek to explain the origins of Dheepaavali. In Northern India, 
it is believed to be the Day when Sri Raama was crowned Emperor after his return from exile. In 
Kerala, it is believed to be the day when Emperor Bali, who was allowed to visit the erstwile 
kingdom just for one day in the year, is welcomed by his grateful subjects. The Lord had 
trampled him down into the nether regions, as a punishment for his egoistic expansive 
programme of conquest; but, He melted a little when he pleaded for mercy, and allowed him to 
return to earth for just one day out of three hundred and sixty-five days. On that day his subjects 
could welcome him, with illumination and fire-works. 


Discard worn-out prejudices on Dheepavali Day 


The most widely current among the legends refers to the demon Naraka whom Lord Krishna, 
accompanied by His Consort, Sathyabhaama or Sathya, destroyed in battle, this day. Naraka was 
the son of Mother Earth, as the story goes, of Bhoomaatha. She asked for a boon from the Lord, 
that the Day should be observed, in his memory, as a day of light or joy and the sharing of joy by 
one and all. 


Therefore, hundreds of tiny lamps are lit this evening and kept in rows before and within every 
home in India; but, few are the lamps that are lit in the cavity of the heart to destroy the darkness 
that lies thick within. Deepaavali is the day when old clothes are discarded and new ones worn; 
when. the home and its precincts are swept clean, given a new look, and made to appear fresh 
and fine. Flowers are arranged in lovely designs in each room and in the courtyard; festoons of 
green add charm to every door. But, even while doing all this, attention has to be paid to the 
discarding of worn-out prejudices, the adoption of new habits of love and mutual respect, the 
freshening of one's attitude towards one's kith and kin, brothers and sisters of all creeds and 
castes, the hanging of festoons of friendship and fraternity over the door sill of the heart. This 
will make the Festival really meaningful and fruitful; it will be saved from the calumny of being 
an occasion for only pomp and barren hilarity. 


Profound meaning of Narakaasura Legend 


Who exactly is this Naraka, the demon Naraka-asura, let us inquire. He is described as a tyrant, 
who had no reverence towards elders and saints, who was afflicted with a severe type of land- 
hunger, who looted and plundered unchecked, who carried away princesses and damsels by the 


hundred and threw them into prison without any compunction, and who never repented for any 
of his crimes and sins. When the good men of the world appealed to Lord Krishna for succour, 
He invaded his kingdom, laid siege to his capital City, and overwhelming his forces, allowed His 
Queen, Sathya, to slay him on the battlefield. 


This legend has a profound under-current of meaning, which you should not miss. Naraka is an 
a-sura (a demonic person). His City is named, Praak-jyothhisha-pura---praak means, the 
previous, jyothi means, light; and sha means, forgetting and ignoring. So the City's name means: 
the city of those who have laid aside the previous or ancient light. That is to say, the city of those 
who are ignorant of Aathmic splendour. No wonder they are demons. No wonder they were 
lustful, full of hatred, greed, envy and egotism. They had become so lost in their sins that Lord 
Krishna did not vouchsafe to give them the honour of being killed by his Hands. He directed 
Sathya to destroy them. Yes. Ignorance so fundamental and so deep can be destroyed only by the 
sword of Sathya (Truth). 


The lamp is also the symbol of the Aathma 


Egoism is of earth, earthy; not of heaven, heavenly. So Naraka is the son of Earth. And, he is 
called Naraka, Nara means, man, who knows his manas (mind), who practises manana 
(discrimination of reflection on what he has heard and what he has been taught). But Naraka 
which means hell, is the name appropriate to one who believes he is the body and toils to cater to 
its needs and its clamour. When man grows in physical strength, economic power, mental 
alacrity, intellectual scholarship and political authority and does not grow in spiritual riches, he 
becomes a danger to society and a calamity to himself. He is a Naraka to his neighbours and his 
kin. He sees only the many, not the One; he is drawn by the scintillating manifold into the 
downward path of perdition. 


A-suras (demons) have another name in Samskrith Nakthancharas---those who move about in 
the dark. This is a fair description of their pathetic condition. They have no light to guide them; 
they do not recognise that they are in the dark; they do not call out for light; they are unaware of 
the light. Their intellect has become the bondslave of their passions and their senses, instead of 
establishing itself as their master. When at last, truth appears before them and overwhelms them, 
they recognise the One and merge happily in it. 


The lamp is not merely the symbol of the knowledge to Truth. It is also the symbol of the One, 
the Aathma that shines in and through all this multiplicity. Just as with one lamp, a thousand 
lamps can be lit and the One is as bright as ever in spite of the thousands deriving light from it, 
so too, the Aathma (soul-spirit) illumines the jeeva (individual self) and shines in and through 
them, without undergoing any diminution in its splendour. The Aathma is the cause; all else are 
effects. 


The lesson that Dheepavali teaches man 


Naraka sought to act freely, as his emotions and passions dictated. But,. the Samskrith word used 
for this kind of license has another and deeper meaning: Sva-iccah, one's desire, means, the 
desire, if at all, only for merger absorbing the sparks that have emanated from it, the waves that 
play upon its surface. The Upanishaths call upon man to roam about in the ‘jungle of life as the 
King of Beasts, the Lion, and not as panic-stricken cowardly sheep ashamed to lift its head. Face 
the six foes that are ferociously gnawing the heart of man - lust, anger, attachment, pride, hatred, 


greed---and be Man, Nara, not Naraka, who cringes before these foes and tries to propitiate them 
by yielding to their demands, That is the lesson that Dheepaavali teaches. 


The Vedhic Prayer is, "Thamaso maa jyothir Gamaya,"---"From darkness lead me, O Lord, into 
light." Lead me from the blindness of ignorance into the vision of the truth. Cleanse the mind and 
the Truth will be reflected therein. This is not as difficult as some people imagine. The tiny ant 
can travel hundred miles, if only it puts its legs forward and starts. Faith and steadiness will 
achieve the rest of the journey. But, if an aeroplane that can fly faster than sound does not rise 
from the tarmac, it can only be where it is. Each one must first decide on what is worth living for 
and striving for. For this, one has to meet and converse with elders who have travelled along the 
same route; one has to taste the bliss of realisation that their lives express. And, inspired by their 
example, one must practise what they prescribe, with single-minded confidence. 


Lesson taught by careers of Naraka and Bali 


When man fails to use his attainments for the welfare of others he becomes a narakaasura 
(hellish demon). But, when in a competitive race for individual glory, he spends billions on 
getting to the Moon and bringing rocks from its crust, instead of feeding millions who starve 
down below and promoting the prosperity of backward nations, he is only condemning himself. 
Even the best of things can be misused by men. Raavana, Shisupaala, Kamsa, and other 
demonish persons mentioned in the Indian puraanas (ancient legends) and epics had vast 
scholarship, enormous economic and military power and even immense yogic and occult skills 
won by years of austerity, and disciplined living. But, they could not earn one skill, the skill to 
suppress the ego, and so, they became too obstinate, too obstructive and too dangerous to be 
allowed to live and prosper. The lesson taught by the careers of Naraka and of Bali is that man 
should be master of his ego if he is to succeed in the art of successful living. 


Dheepaavali is also a Day dedicated to the Goddess of Riches, called, Dhanalakshmi. They 
celebrate the day as Dhanalakshmi Puuja day in many States of India. Newspapers highlight the 
celebrations with big headlines. But, riches when one comes by them, have to be revered as 
something given on trust, and must be used for the amelioration of the wants of society, and not 
for personal aggrandizement. When people use it for parading their wealth, they become 
ludicrous specimens of humanity. How can wealth and scholarship shine, except against the 
background of virtue and humility? Riches may come or riches may go; scholarship may be 
acquired or may not be acquired; even joy may come and go. Whatever happens, man must be 
unmoved, he must not swerve from the path that he has chosen towards the goal. 


Sai's message on Festival of Lights 


There was a merchant once, who, while walking through the streets of Benares, was suddenly 
confronted by two sisters who were frantically quarelling over the issue, who was fairer. They 
were none other than Dhanalakshmi and her famous sister Dharidhralakshmi, the Goddess of 
poverty. They stopped the merchant and compelled hint to agree to be the judge; they pressed 
him to pronounce who was the fairer of the two. The merchant feared to say that Dhanalakshmi 
was fairer, for then, the Goddess of Poverty might inflict her boons on him; he feared to declare 
that Dhanalakshmi was the fairer, for then her sister, Dhanalakshmi might deprive him of her 
favour. So he devised a strategem, to save his skin. He asked that the sisters walk a few steps, 
forward and backward, in front of him; he stood silent for a while watching their slow deliberate 
comings and goings, and then, he asked them to come near him, in order to hear his judgement. 


He said, "Dhanalakshmi is fairer when she comes towards me; Dharidhralakshmi looks fairer 
when she goes away from me; How then can I give a definite verdict?" 


This was a clever reply, framed to escape punishment. But you should not change the face of 
truth to please people; utter what you have in mind, act according to the words you utter. That is 
the safest, the easiest and the most correct procedure. That is how a self-respecting man should 
behave. Nothing is more right than truth. Do not play false to the God in your being and led into 
evil through fear or greed. March along, straight, never deviating towards falsehood or trickery. 
Do not be attached by the glamour of name and form; seek the Aathma, with one-pointed zeal. 
This is the Message I give you on this festival of lights. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 25-10-1973 


You should recognise the truth that man's life should consist of 
making the journey from the position of 'I' to the position of 'We'. 
If all the time you simply stay, sit in the place of 'I' you will remain 
where you are. 


This creation is like the bridge which connects man with God. 'I" is 
one hill. 'God' is another hill. The bridge between the two is the 
aspect of creation. If you break and destroy the bridge, you can 
never reach the destination. 


I am hoping that you plunge into society and do service to society 
and thereby use the bridge to reach God. 


Sri Sathya Sai 
20. 


20. Body without heart 


THE Ocean is a vast mystery. It is boundless and as old as time. It has, in its womb, chaotic 
whirlpools, raging currents, and it has a face with furious moods. No one can hope to sail over it 
from one shore to another land-bank, without a sturdy reliable boat. So too, man requires the 
sturdy boat of Divine Grace to cross the raging ocean of this samsaara (ever-changing, ever 
agitated flow of life). This Ocean too is vast and full of mystery. It has its unplumbed depths! It 
tosses man about from birth to death and again from death to birth; it inflicts on him many 
uprisings and downfalls, many illnesses and morbidities; in it roll the waves of desires and 
resolutions; it frightens man by its monstrous denizens, greed; it draws the reason of man into the 
whirlpools of doubt. 


To equip oneself with the Ocean-worthy boat of Grace, one has to develop in himself the 
qualities of faith and discipline. One has to clarify and purify the chiththa (past impressions). 
Time is the gift that God has blessed man with, for this purpose. So, man should use it as an 
instrument for the clarification and the purification. Contemplating the glories of God, 
discovering His presence in beauty, goodness and truth seen anywhere, meditating on His Form, 
repeating His Name---by these means the process can be made successful. Of course, these are 
not possible without virtuous living and kindness towards all beings. Thus, the mind will be 
rendered harmless, beneficent and even of great help in one's spiritual pilgrimage. Through the 
purified mind, one can transmute himself into the divine. Maanava (human) can become 
Maadhava (God) Himself. For, it is the destiny and the fight of every human to attain that status 
and immerse himself in the limitless Aanandha (Divine Bliss) that it confers. 


Path of devotion will cleanse the mind 


All the religions emphasise the importance of devotion and dedication to the Supreme Sovereign. 
The means of reaching that stage may be different; the description of the ecstasy that one can 
experience in the final stage and all along the path may be different; for it is beyond all attempts 
at description. Bhakthi maarga (path of devotion to attain liberation), which is only another name 
for this devotion and dedication, will certainly cleanse the mind. And, the mind will be illumined 
into divinity. 

Man has fallen into ignorance, egoism, and greed, because he has forgotten his real nature, which 
is unaffected by loss or grief. In truth, man is the embodiment of all the great virtues---love, 
peace, righteousness and truth. He has not realised this; he runs after low vulgarising pleasures, 
and so, entangles himself in falsehood, injustice, and violence. He has to cure himself of these by 
the remedies of thyaaga (voluntary sacrifice) and yoga (renunciation and self-control). And, 
along with these remedies, he must regulate his ways of living and follow the regimen of faith 
and devotion. 


As butter is inherent in milk, God is immanent in the Universe. When it is churned, the butter 
separates itself and becomes cognisable. So too, by means of love and the discipline of the 
recitation of the name, God can be concretised. Temples in villages are the places where such 
concretisation has been effected. The temple is for the village as the heart is for the body. In fact, 
the temple is conceived on the basis of the body, being the temple man carries about him. A body 
with no heart, a village with no temple and a tank with no water are all three without function or 
value. So you must maintain and foster the temple in your village as carefully and as constantly 
as you attend to your own heart and its condition. 


When you belch, you get the taste of the food you have eaten; the quality of the bread depends 
upon the quality of the flour; as the steadfastness in faith is, so is the devotion; as the devotion is, 
so is the realisation. As your saadhana (spiritual effort) is, so will be the truth revealed to you. 


Brindhaavan, 15-11-1973 


Religion is three-fourths character. Only those who preserve 
character can be pronounced truly religious. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


21. Choose your God 


THE times have gone awry. Relations between man and man, man and God, man and the human 
community; and man and those entrusted to rule over groups of men are getting tainted by hatred 
and anger. The people of this land are accepting wrong as right, and discarding right as wrong; 
they are journeying blindly along wrong roads. And, they are proud of this too; they believe they 
are progressing! 


Happiness and misery are the consequences of the attributes one cultivates and foster---the three 
chief ones being Saathwik (selfless equanimous and tolerant), the raajasik (marked by activity, 
ambition, passion, emotion) and the thaamasik (marked by indolence, ignorance, inactivity, 
sloth, dullness). When Saathwik predominates, one is happy; when Raajasik predominates, one is 
discontented. When Thaamasik qualities are supreme, there can be no joy and no happiness. 
When the attributes pursue the path of attachment and pleasure, man is bound to the wheels of 
pain-joy, death-life. If they seek liberation and simplicity, they lead him to love, light and 
freedom from the birth-death wheel. Man is today caught in doubt and deviation; he does not 
know which road to follow, and with what preparation. He loses his precious heritage, degrades 
himself, and denies his Nature which is really Divine. 


Mind has to be regulated and controlled by reason 


People determine the nature of the Divine through the categories of logic and dialectics. But, 
intellect cannot grasp it; reason cannot delve into it. For, both are shaped by one's prejudices and 
predispositions. We appreciate only what we like; we see only what we would like to see. "When 
prayer is answered and one gets what one desires, God is real; when they are not answered, God 
is a fake, a figment of the imagination!" Arjuna acclaimed Krishna as the omnipotent, 
omnipresent, omniscient God, when the foe was defeated, day after day. But when his son 
Abhimanyu was killed in the conflict, he raved in his grief that Krishna had not guided him 
properly and guarded him efficiently. His mind wavered with every wind of fortune. To many, 
the mind is master of the intellect also. One must be vigilant and preserve the impartiality of the 
instrument called reason or intellect. Clarify reason; then it will reveal God everywhere, even in 
you. Once you accept God as the core of the Universe and yourself have that faith strong and 
steady. 


Of course, it is difficult in the atmosphere of "faithlessness" to light the lamp in one's heart and 
keep it burning, straight and sturdy, without falter or flicker. Today, the wife has no faith in her 
husband, the husband has no faith in his wife; sons doubt the father; father suspects the sons; 
students have no faith in the teachers, teachers cannot rely on their students; so, how can faith 
grow in one field only, the field of religion? This calamity .has happened since man has allowed 
his reasoning faculty to be blunted by passion and prejudice. Krishna says in the Geetha, "I am 
Buddhi (intellect) among the faculties." "I shall confer the discipline of Buddhi on you," He tells 
those devoted to Him. Reason is the instrument by which the mind has to be regulated and 
controlled; it should not be subordinated to the whims of the mind. 


Reasons for God's incarnations 


Talking of the Geetha, I shall mention one problem that might confront you therein. Krishna 
declares, "Samoham Sarvabhuutheshu" .... "J am equal in all beings. I behave equally with all. I 
have no love or hate, no partiality or prejudice. Joy and grief are brought on by you on 


yourselves, not by me on you, through attachment or want of it." When such is His declaration a 
doubt may arise in your minds' Why did He also announce that He would be incarnating in every 
age, in order to foster the good and punish the wicked? How is it that He talks of good and bad 
men? Does it not mean that He likes some and dislikes others? Are not all parts of Him? Are not 
the waves parts of the ocean? 


Yes. All are parts of Him. The hand is yours; the fingers are yours; the nails are yours. Why then 
do you pare and trim the nails? Urine and faeces are in you, of you, but yet you have to get rid of 
them, to maintain health. Under certain circumstances, one has to cut off a limb in order to save 
the body. In fact, the Kauravas were dangerous viruses that had caused a spreading wound; 
Krishna had to operate them off, through major surgery, with Arjuna as His ‘assistant operator,' 
in order to save the ‘body politic’ of Bhaarath. 


When one is sunk in the slime of 'desire' one cannot distinguish with clarity between 'good' and 
'bad.' In order to achieve this, the intellect has to be pure and clear, sharp and straight. There 
should not be the slightest trace of egotism, envy or greed in the make-up of man; for these will 
drag the arguments at a tangent. Vacillating minds, wandering eyes---these cannot help the 
intellect to decide correctly. 


Give importance to ideals of tolerance and love 


When one chooses a life-partner now-a-days, the first consideration is paid to external beauty 
and charm. Next, the economic position is taken as the basis. How rich is he or she? How much 
does he or she earn? Questions like, how far they are educated, what is the social status of the 
families to which they belong are asked later. Carried off by mere external frills and foppery, 
people enter into wedlock, and get entangled in misery or a destructive ‘family life. The family 
cannot be stable if it is built on such slender foundation. Prime importance has to be paid to the 
fundamental requisites of a good character, high ideals of tolerance and forbearance, love and 
service. When beauty fades or wealth wanes, the bond too becomes less strong. 


It is same with the God whom you choose, adore, and yearn to live with. You should not choose 
God for the benefits He can shower on you Do not expect God to satisfy your worldly or 
materials ambitions; and when they are not realised, do not desert the Path towards God. "Baba, 
appear in my dream this night," you demand, and if it does not happen He is not Sai Baba, he is 
Rai Baba (stone Baba) and you go in search of some other God who will be at your beck and 
call. You must hold on. to your faith, whatever might happen, success or failure, appointment or 
disappointment. When God is your very core, irremovably fixed in your consciousness, there 
will be no room for elation or dejection. God is bliss, and when God is the undying spring in you, 
you will have bliss forever. 


The two paths of Bhakthi Yoga 


Man has to engage himself in activity, for his upkeep, as well as for the sake of happiness. But he 
has to choose his activity intelligently and without over-involvement in its consequences. Use the 
activity to earn what is really good. Seek something supreme, something of the highest value, 
something that is beyond diminution and decline--that is true bhakthi (devotion). Bhakthi is the 
love and longing directed to the attainment of such a-goal. The means adopted for this are Karma 
(activity). They are known as Karma Yoga; for Karma becomes Karma Yoga, when activity is 
disciplined, dedicated and demarcated with skill. True love directed towards God can reveal His 
reality, and grant the highest Jnaana (Supreme Wisdom). 


A tree has a trunk and the trunk branches far and wide, into boughs, with leaves and flowers. 
Karma Yoga is the trunk for the tree of life; the branches, leaves and. the fragrant flowers 
symbolise the Bhakthi Yoga; and the ripe fruit and the sweetness, therein, is the Jnaana Yoga, 
the Wisdom. If the tree yields no fruit and if the fruit is not sweet, then, it could as well not grow 
at all. 


Bhakthi can flow along two paths- Saguna Bhakthi and Nirguna Bhakthi. When' you feel that 
God is far away, far higher, far beyond you and when you plead for mercy, petition for Grace, 
and pray for boons, it is Saguna---vou adore Him as Lord and Master, as Guardian and Saviour; 
you go through the ceremonials of praise, propitiation and prostration, submission and service. 
But when you practise the discipline of seeing Him in all beings, as the core of every cell or 
atom, alive and aware, and experience Unity with all Creation (for Creation is but His body and 
you are also in it and of it) then, it is Nirguna. The Nirguna is the contemplation on the sugar; the 
Saguna is the adoration of some one sugar doll, which has caught your fancy and attracted your 
love and loyalty. Among the ceremonials we have the yajna (sacrificial rite), the chief feature 
described in the Vedhas. 


Meaning of rites performed in Yajna 


An important rite in the Vedhic Yajna is called soma-pa. In order to grasp the tuner significance 
of the Vedhic or other ceremonials, one has to spend some thought on symbolism. For example, 
let us take this Soma-pa itself. Pa means 'drinking' and the rite is generally supposed to indicate 
the drinking of a juice called soma. 


No! Soma means the Moon; and the Moon cannot be swallowed or drunk by man. It also means 
the 'mind' ---"the changing mind that waxes and wanes, is never the same for long," That is why 
the Vedhas say that the mind was mothered by the Moon. So, drinking the Moon means the 
process by which the mind is controlled, made defunct and harmless. That is the purpose of the 
Yajna---the sacrifice of the whims of the mind for gaining the realm of the Universal Eternal 
Truth. With the mind left intact, no Yajna is fruitful, for it has a thousand tricks by which it can 
drag you into perdition. 


Fix the mind on the name (the sound symbol) of the Lord; then, it cannot wander away. The 
Divine is the flame of the lamp ever burning in the altar, namely the body. Keep the flame safe 
from the guffs of wind, namely the gusts of passion and desire, that blow from all quarters. Sit in 
a quiet place, away from crowded groups of men or sensations or thoughts that distract. When 
you have reached the stage when you can be wholly engrossed in the Name and the Form it 
represents, isolating yourself from distraction is not required. But, that does not mean that you 
can parade your spiritual practices in the market place as some crazy people do now. Do not 
yearn for approbation and appreciation from the public. Pray that God may approve, accept and 
appreciate your toddle and your prattle. 


Soak every moment in Love, in God 


Cleanse your emotions, passions, impulses, attitudes, reactions. That is the essence of spiritual 
discipline, as laid down in all 'faiths. Examine your mind, your thoughts; do not seek the fault- 
ridden person. See only purity. Speak ill of none; and if, you slip into slander, repent and resolve 
not to give vent to the habit another time. Do not humiliate any one; respect persons for the good 
in them. Their grief at your behaviour will haunt you during your last moments. 


Let every act of yours stand as your credential when you quit the world. Let no single act be a 
drag, or a debit. Soak every moment in Love, that is to say, in God. Of what avail is it to spend 
hours in dhyaan (meditation), if, when you rise and move amongst men, you spread anger, inflict 
resentment by your words and deeds? The Geetha asks you to be ‘sathatham yoginah'---"ever 
controlled, ever restrained, ever yoked with the Divine." So, be vigilant, be steady, be earnest. 
The steady person earns wisdom. By the absence of careful tending, a spark can be nursed into a 
huge conflagration; by vigilant care, even a conflagration can be reduced to a splutter. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 23-11-1973 


22. Gurus---not teachers 


EDUCATION confers humility; endows one with an authority to command that will entitle one 
to affluence. With the help of this affluence, charity and compassion can be made fruitful, and by 
this means, happiness in this world and peace in the next can be won. Education is thus a great 
constructive force for mankind. But, reformers and reconstructionists have tinkered--so much 
with the process of education that it has now been reduced to a caricature of itself. The 
effectiveness of the educational system, and the boons it could confer on man have been ignored 
and neglected; the name is now given to the art 'of collecting information of the objective world. 
The far more important task of transforming the nature of man into the divine is given up, as 
beyond its ken. 


The difference between the ancient ideals of education and .the modern practices is appalling. 
Today, the educational process is denied to the aspirant, if he fails to pay his fees; the teacher too 
feels that he has no duty to teach, if in a certain month he is not paid his salary. Students pay for 
being taught; teachers are paid for the teaching they do. Money decides what is taught and how it 
is learnt. "Pay and receive; be paid and give." That is the bond between the teacher and the 
taught. "Love, reverence, affection"---these have no place in the transaction. How then can 
education be fruitful? Gokak said just now that when teachers love the children, they will be 
rewarded by the love of the children who sit around them. Now they are loved for the sake of the 
money they bring, and so, the relationship is artificial and without roots in the heart. 


Heirs to the richest cultural heritage 


The teacher and the pupil will both be immersed in joy only when Love that does not calculate 
the reward binds them together. When material gain is the goal, the joy based is on matter and 
does not thrill the mind. It cannot be pure, steady and sincere. 


As teachers of the Baala Vikaas classes throughout the country, you do not look forward to 
monetary or material benefits, and so, you have ample opportunity to make the child's heart and 
intellect blossom, through the rays of Love. Let Me tell you that most teachers today have 
specialised in western types of training, and so, they have lost their moorings in our own culture, 
and so are unaware of the deeper springs of the spirit. 


They have been rendered materialistic, worldly, and egoistic. They are caught up in the pursuit of 
sensual pleasure and in the earning of money. They do not know that real education consists in 
helping the child to manifest the Divinity latent in him. Remember that the children who come to 
you are all heirs to the richest cultural heritage that the world can give. They are the 'Children of 
Immortality’ extolled as such in the ancient texts by sages and scholars of this land. Do not turn 
them into experts in mathematics, unable to add up a simple domestic bill; scholars in the 
geography of America, but, unable to direct a pilgrim who desires to know in which direction 
Kaashi lies; prodigies in algebra who are helpless when asked to define the area of their own 
rooms; past masters in drill and gymnastics, but, all at sea, when requested to sit in the 
Padhmaasana posture; proficient in Botany, but, ignorant of the uses of the common Thulsi 
plant, found in the courtyard of every Indian home! They can draw realistic pictures of dogs and 
foxes, but, their hand-writing remains an illegible scribble. How can we expect that Indian 
culture will be preserved and fostered by these products of our educational system? The teachers 
who have brought them to this pass, and the educational administrators who divised the system 
are both equally to blame. 


Be aware of the high purpose of education 


Correction of these faults must start with the teachers; they must become aware of the high 
purpose of education, and the goal to which it must guide the children of the land. 


I know that great enthusiasm prevails today among both the pupils and teachers of our Baala 
Vikaas classes, for the spiritual ideals cherished in this land since ages. Nevertheless, I must say 
that there is a great and urgent need for you teachers to receive training in the methods of child 
education. For example, when teaching the recitation of bhajans or poems or hymns, you have to 
pay attention to the correct enunciation of each sound, the correct pronunciation of each letter; 
for, otherwise, the meaning is liable to be warped out of recognition. 


The three R's are most neglected to-day 


In olden times, teachers took particular care to explain to the pupils the origins and roots of each 
new word, even of words like Sah and Thwam. They taught, not only the meaning of the word, 
but, delved into its roots, and opened up before the pupil a vast vista of related words and a huge 
expanse of meaningful vocabulary. Since words in Indian languages get transformed when 
written or pronounced in conjunction with other words, there is a duty cast on you to teach how 
they are to be separately recognised and identified. Boys may write Raamunithoka pivarudu 
itlaniye (meaning, "Raama's tail, Pivara spoke thus," (which is absurd), instead of Ramunitho 
kapivaarudu itlaniye, meaning, "With Raama, the Lord of monkeys spoke thus," (which is quite 
correct). 


The word, santha pakodeelu, which I once used to indicate the error involved when people desert 
the true path and pursue degrading objective pleasures, which I compared to the pakodeelu 
(savouries) sold in santha (village markets during fairs and festivals), for they attract by their 
colour, have ruinous components and destroy health. Kasturi who did not know much Thelugu, 
divided the word into santhapa and kodilu, making the meaning absurd, for kodilu means fowls, 
and shanthapa, like pivarudu, has no meaning at all, being a mere jumble of sounds! Unless 
training is given in reading aloud, with concurrent attention to the meaning of the words and 
phrases, such mistakes are bound to recur, The three R's are the skills most neglected today. 


Writing has also to be taught well, for the knowledge of the correct form of each letter has to be 
mastered by all. Or else, even here, a tiny slip might change a sublime idea into ridiculous 
jargon. Rishikoti, when written wrongly in Thelugu, as a consequence of the omission of a single 
upward curve was once mis-shaped into 'bushcoat' and the whole sentence was rendered 
ridiculous thereby! Scrupulous care and steady attention alone can make the pupils avoid such 
errors. 


Study of books that is worthwhile for children 


One point I have to emphasise here is, that you should be careful, while handling some books 
being published for school use by so-called scholars, at the present time. They cast doubts on the 
truth of great epics like the Raamaayana, and assert that Dhasharatha and Raavana did not exist 
in authentic history. They characterise them as representatives or symbols of opposing Cultures, 
the Aryan and. the non-Aryan, and sow the seeds of factionalism and hatred. By such writings, 
children begin to doubt the very foundations of goodness, truth and beauty; they are confused 
while deciding on fight conduct and behaviour, right ideals and ways of living. 


You must examine every story or account that you place before the children from the point of 
view of individual faith and social harmony. Does this lead the child to a better, more harmonius, 
a more God-oriented life? That is the question you should ask yourself. Prahlaadha has 
beautifully summed up this principle, in the verse he utters, in the Bhaagavatha, while advising 
his playmates on the disciplines that should be welcomed. "The study of books that describe the 
Glory of God is the study that is worth-while. The preceptor who tells us about the Glory of God 
is the preceptor to be sought after and revered. The father who directs you to approach God is the 
father who deserves the reverence and obedience of the children, not the others." 


Hills and mountains are overlaid with rock and boulder, the sculptor gathers them, and shapes 
each of them into something useful and beautiful, depending upon the nature and characteristics 
of the stone. Out of one boulder, the artisan might carve a huge mortar and pestle to be kept in 
the corner of the kitchen of a populous home. Out of another the sculptor might produce a rough 
hewn gargoyle being incorporated into a building as an eerie object to ward off the evil eye! A 
third stone might get transformed into a charming little danseuse to embellish the shelf of a 
museum. Another stone, catching the eye and attention of a skilled sculptor might be elevated 
into the idol of a Divine Manifestation, fit to be installed in a temple where it receives the 
adoration of millions for generations. 


Parents have important roles in children's education 


Though they were the progeny of one peak, each has a different destiny, depending upon the care 
and consecration bestowed on it by the sculptor. Teachers are the sculptors who shape the rocks 
into things of beauty and significance, of utility and inspiration. They study the pupils, their 
nature and equipment, and decide on their roles in society, their paths and the stages in their 
progress. 


But, it must be pointed out that the sculptor or teacher is not the only factor, to be reckoned with, 
in the process of education. The mother and father of the child too have important roles in the 
process. The positive and the negative must both meet in order to produce the electric current; 
even God needs the yearning and the endeavour of the devotee to fulfil His Will to save him 
from perdition. You may have flowers, and a length of string and a needle too; but, without the 
garland-maker, how can the flowers be strung on the string? You may have a lamp, oil and wick; 
but you can get light only when someone strikes a flame and lights the lamp. So too, the teacher 
and the pupil have to be brought to each other and encouraged to learn and teach, to share 
lovingly their knowledge and experience, by the parents, so that education might proceed and the 
child inherit the heritage left by its forefathers. 


The teacher must win the reverence of the pupil by showering on him his Love; the pupil must 
win the Love of the teacher by showering on him reverence and affection. It is a mutual 
transaction, a sharing of the emotions of the heart. How can a proper congenial atmosphere for 
study and teaching be built on a foundation of doubt and hatred? Nowadays, the atmosphere is 
polluted by the teachers' fear and suspicion, and the hostility and audacity of the students. There 
is no Love to lubricate the relations between the teacher and the taught. 


The Guru is equal to God Himself 


We have heard the Guru being praised as equal to God Himself. Gokak quoted the shlokha 
(verse) where the Guru is referred to reverentially as Brahma, the first of the Trinity entrusted 
with Creation; as Vishnu, the second of the Trinity entrusted with the preservation and protection 


of Creation; and as Maheshwara, the last of the Trinity, charged with destruction and dissolution. 
This description is symbolically correct, as we can see when we analyse the work which the 
Teacher or Guru is expected to carry out. The Guru sows the seeds of virtue, of wisdom, and of 
faith in the heart of the pupil. He is, therefore, Brahma, of the nature of the Creator. He is like 
the farmer who plants saplings in the well-prepared soil of his field. But the farmer does not sit 
with folded hands there-after. He takes incessant care to see that the saplings grow vigorously 
and well, and he is vigilant to water the growing crops and feed them with fertilisers at the 
appropriate stages of growth. This is the role of Vishnu so far as education and the educator are 
concerned. The Guru cannot sit back and silently watch the fate of the pupil, after the first few 
lessons. He has to guide the pupil at every step, foster and encourage good habits, sound 
reasoning and valid emotions, and act as Vishnu, the second- of the Trinity. 


Teachers must inspire high qualities in their pupils 


The Guru has also the duty cast on him, to watch every step of the pupil, and warn him off, when 
he takes false step, or develops a bad habit, or entertains a deleterious doubt. Like the farmer 
who has to be vigilant against the growth of weeds or the upsurge of pests, the Guru too must be 
ever alert to destroy the pests of vice and the weeds of sloth and unsteadiness. The word 'teacher' 
cannot denote these high roles; it can mean only those, who transmit information, and train in 
skills. I direct that Baala Vikaas teachers should hereafter be known by the vastly more 
appropriate name of Guru, so that you may be conscious always of the spiritual role which you 
have taken on, and its responsibilities and value. You are the lamps from which their tender 
hearts must receive Light and Love. By your adherence to truth, righteousness, peace and love, 
you have to inspire these qualities in the children that come to you and the homes from where 
they come. 


There are many who shiver at the prospect, when they contemplate the future of this great 
country. You should never entertain such doubts and fears, for you are the builders of that future 
and you know that it will be glorious. The Baala Vikaas children whom you are guiding and 
inspiring, will be the leaders of tomorrow in this land. The virtues you implant in them, the 
counsel you are providing them and the examples you place before them will remain carved in 
their memories and transform their outlook and behaviour in the days to come. Ask any one 
assembled here whether they can bring back to memory the book that he read this morning; 
ninety five per cent of this vast gathering will fail in this test. But ask them to repeat from 
memory some one sthothra (hymn or moral verse) that their grandfather or grandmother taught 
them when they were little children sitting on their knees, and I am sure most of you will be able 
to recite the shlokha or sthothra. The things learnt during those early years stick in the memory 
and act subtly and silently on the growing mind to modify and purify the conduct of later years. 


Spiritual education must start early in life 


Some short-sighted critics declare that spiritual matters should not be communicated to children, 
for they are too young and inexperienced to benefit by the instruction. But, if a thing deserves to 
be done, the sooner we set about it the better. The slogan, "Start early, drive slowly, reach safely" 
applies not merely to journeys by road or rail; it applies also to the journey from Untruth to 
Truth, from Darkness towards Light and from Death to Immortality. The unrest, anxiety, fear and 
hatred that torment the world now is largely due to the neglect which kept off from the growing 
child the disciplines that can regulate the passions and emotions of man. 


We postpone this essential task of education at our peril; for, when children are equipped with 
the discipline to secure balance, equanimity, harmony and peace, they can no more be drawn into 
wild adventures and barren activities. You have to learn spiritual disciplines along with the 
information-giving subjects of the curriculum. You have to earn the high Diploma which the 
Upanishaths offer you, namely, Amruthasya Puthrah (Child of Immortality), along with the 
degrees M.A., B.Sc., etc., which help you eke out a livelihood, up to a certain stage of life. 


Everyone must learn the secret of happiness 


But, remember you cannot take up the threads of Saadhana (spiritual discipline) all of a sudden 
after retiring from active service! You cannot learn spiritual Saadhana, when you are physically 
debilitated and overwhelmed by the approach of death. How can a man think of God, his 
Saviour, when he himself is overcome by sorrow at the need to depart from this world and when 
all his kith and kin are weeping and wailing loud and long? 


No. Every one must learn the secret of happiness which consists in refusing to shed tears for 
anything less than God. You have won this human body, this human life, as the reward for many 
lives spent in acquiring merit. You have won this chance, this unique good fortune of being able 
to get Dharshan (sight or audience) of Sai. Plunging deep into the waters of this tumultuous 
ocean of Samsaara (worldly life), you have heroically emerged from its depths, with this rare 
Pearl in your hands---the Grace of Sai. Do not allow it to slip from-your clasp and fall into the 
depths again. Hold on firmly to it. Pray that you may have It for ever and be filled with the joy 
that It confers. That is the way by which you can render this life fruitful. 


Instruct the children of the Baala Vikaas to revere their parents. This is the first thing to do. It is a 
simple act of gratitude, for those who endowed them with the material instrument for life. But, 
mere possession of the human body, however wonderful it may be, is not enough, for one's peace 
and joy. One must know how to unravel its mysteries and how to regulate one's own impulses 
and hungers. This process is accomplished by the Guru, and so the pupils must be instructed and 
encouraged to revere the Guru, in gratitude for the service he renders. Education must aim at 
providing the child, not livelihood, but, a life worth living. For this, the acquisition of skills in 
doing or reasoning is not enough. Faith in one-self and in the Divinity of one-self are absolutely 
essential. That is the precious treasure of wisdom, stored in our ancient scriptures and in the 
experience of the Saints and Sages of all countries and faiths. 


There is only one religion, the Religion of Love 


There is one more point, which I wish to emphasise. Some teachers have asked Me whether the 
Baala Vikaas classes, can serve children of all faiths or whether they can admit only children of 
the Hindhu faith. The question has arisen because the questioners do not know the very 
fundamentals of the Hindhu Faith. There is only one religion, remember, and that is the Religion 
of Love; there is only one caste, and that is the Caste of Humanity. You must be careful not to 
encourage or entertain the slightest trace of ‘difference’ on the basis of religion, caste, creed or 
colour, in the Baala Vikaas classes. 


Do not tarnish the spotlessly clean minds of the children by infecting them with a sense of 
distinction between one child and another. Impart instructions and inspiration equally to all. 
Select stories from the scriptures of all faiths to interest the children in the values of good life. 
Speak to them of the moral heroes of all lands, the Saints of all faiths. For, they are all of the 
same stamp. No scripture enjoins violence or lays down untruth as a way of life. All religions 


extol Truth, Righteousness, Peace and Brotherhood, and Love. All saints are embodiments of 
service, compassion and renunciation. 


Do not compare the various manifestations of the Divine and pronounce judgement, declaring 
that Raama is greater than Krishna or Shiva superior to Vishnu. This line of thought is poisonous 
and harmful to the devout aspirant. You do not know your own self; but, yet, how dare you 
pronounce judgement on personalities and powers you have never experienced or understood. 
Raama is as unknown to you as Christ, and so, it is best to keep silent, and revere both with equal 
ardour. For, all are manifestations of the same Divine Effulgence. 


I bless you that you succeed in the great task you have imposed on yourself, and that you will be 
able to light the way for the children of this land into the glorious region of Everlasting Joy. 


Raajahmundhry, 3-1-74 


Those who seek to acquire steadiness of faith must first acquire the 
strength to bear grief and pain, insult and injury. The succession of 
joy and grief must help confirm the faith and make it immovable. 
That alone can evidence true devotion. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


23. Nearer and nearer 


EMBODIMENTS of the Supreme Aathma! Look at the condition of the people of this ancient 
land, Bhaarath, today. Afflicted by multiplying wants, with no faith in experience beyond the 
sensual, scorning the sacred scriptures of their forefathers, weakened by fear, anxiety, and lack of 
confidence in the capacity to overcome these, having no knowledge of the Source of Strength 
and even denying the' existence of a Source which can be tapped in prayer---they are revelling in 
untruth, injustice, and unrest. Tossed in restlessness themselves, they do not allow others any rest 
or peace. Here, in days gone by; Karmakshethra was Dharmakshethra; the Field of Action was 
also the Field of Righteousness. But, now, declaring that Action and Righteousness cannot 
coexist, these people are bringing disgrace on the very name of Bhaarath. 


Of course, many lovers of the glory that was India are trying to revive it through means and 
methods their mental and intellectual resources indicate. But, unless one removes the disease 
from the root, no amount of care bestowed on branch, leaf and flower can save the tree. The 
pests are to be found deep down, inside the roots. They have attacked and impaired the two tap- 
roots of Indian Culture---Braahmanyam and Brahmacharyam. We must also have again in this 
land the Braahmin, so known because he is set on the path of Brahman, the Supreme Absolute. 
We must also have the revival of the ideal student life earnest, humble, celibate, concentrated 
study. This Navabhaarath Gurukul, where we have assembled for this Conference is an example 
of student life, sought to be set on proper lines. The seekers of Brahman and the scholars of the 
texts on Brahman have lost their status and honour, because they did not live according to the 
truths they expounded. 


The two classifications of Dhaiva 


Character, conduct, daily behaviour, attitude towards others---these are all-important, for 
Dharma (righteousness) is essentially Social Morality. The Shruthi (holy scripture) says, 
Dharmo Vishwaasya Jagathah Prathishtah---"on Dharma, the World is installed." Dharma 
endows man with joy and keeps away grief. Every being in the world, whether it is aware of it or 
not, is dependent on Dharma, for peace and happiness. All triumphs, whether acknowledged so 
or not, are earned only through Dharma. 


Dharma is classified as general and special by the sages: general, including the virtues of truth, 
love, charity, etc., which every one has to cultivate and cherish; special, meaning those duties 
that are incumbent on one, as a result of his social obligations, professional status, etc., like the 
special Dharma of the Braahmin house-holder to maintain the Sacred Fire through ritually 
prescribed ceremonials. The Vedhas lay down the ceremonies; they speak of the intimacy 
between the Braahmin and the rites of fire worship. 


Individuals are limbs of the Society 


You are aware that, at the present day, both in India and outside, there is a wave of spiritual 
discontent surging in thousands of hearts and, as a consequence, we have eager groups who give 
up everything worldly and seek God and Godly preceptors. But, many do believe that this search 
concerns only the individual and that society need not get involved in their yearning or their 
endeavours. This is as foolish as saying that one need not worry about the darkness prevailing 
outside the walls of his residence. The individual and society are intertwined inextricably. There 
must be illumination, for both. Aanandha (divine bliss) must surge out of the individual and fill 
the lake of society, and from thence, stream into the Ocean of Grace. Society is just a name for a 


group of individuals; but, it has no corporeal body. Individuals are the limbs, that nourish and 
support the 'corpus' called society. 


Society shapes the individual, provides the arena for his development and sets the ideals he 
should plant before himself. When the individual is stronger, more intelligent, more service 
minded, and more efficient as a worker, society benefits; when society is more aware of its role 
and of the need to cleanse that role with humility and wisdom, the individual benefits. 


Sai has resolved to transform the individual and society by promoting this mutual regeneration, 
by the action of one on the other; hence, the formation of this Organisation, and the 
establishment of its Units in all countries, for the sublimation of the human into the Divine. 


I have however to tell you that the units of this Organisation have not advanced much in the task 
that is expected. You must identify the reasons for this and infuse into yourselves the needed 
enthusiasm and effort. Lay your hands on the true situation and discover the remedies for curing 
the malady that is diagnosed. Whatever is considered by you as good when done by others in 
your case, endeavour to do them in the case of those others yourselves. Do not advise, exhort and 
direct others, without yourself following that advice. Again, many of you get discouraged when 
you meet with cynicism or criticism. 


Getting involved in Sai Organisation will induce faith 


One person came to Me some days ago and asked, "Swaami! Are all the many thousands who 
are concerned with this Organisation imbued with devotion and dedication, with full faith in the 
Vedhas and Shaasthras (spiritual sciences), in the efficacy of righteousness and the Glory and 
Grace of God?" I told him that the very process of sharing in the activities of the Organisation 
and getting involved in its activities will induce faith and bolster devotion and dedication, and 
make them better and more useful citizens and happier and more peaceful individuals. Then, I 
asked him, to which organisation he belonged. When he mentioned that he was from a political 
organisation that had a membership of about 5 million, I asked him, "Is every one of them a true 
patriot? Do they all tread the path without deviation? Are they dedicated to the Nation? Or to 
Power? Or to places of Profit? Why, I find that though you wear homespun as per the rules of 
your organisation, you have as underwear, a banian manufactured in a foreign land? Your 
loyalty to the ideals of the organisation which you serve is mere superficial show." 


Bear calumny and criticism with courage 


Sathya Sai Seva Organisation has to be unique, in this sense, that it is free from the slightest taint 
of hypocrisy, and the attempt to rationalise faults and failings. In the name of Social Service, 
many institutions and organisations thrive in this land but, consider, for a moment, the social 
service that is rendered by the Sathya Sai Seva Units in this East Godhaavari District. 
Spontaneously, members have come forward in thousands to this place where the Conference 
was arranged and, offered their services freely, sincerely and efficiently, to such an extent that 
the Organisers have not spent a paisa as wages for all this work---clearing this vast area, erecting 
these imposing sheds, laying down cables and pipes, and a host of other exhausting and 
expensive undertakings, so that the thousands of delegates that have come from all the States of 
India can have comfortable lodgings and satisfying boarding. They engaged themselves in this 
Seva with no desire for publicity; they simply followed a spiritual urge to do Saadhana in this 
form. 


This is the genuine Karmayoga (path of dedicated action). Karma motivated thus will cleanse the 
mind, faster and better than other Saadhanas; the cleansed mind can reflect more clearly the 
Light of Wisdom; the Light of Wisdom will reveal the Truth and man will be saved from the 
consequences of the ignorance haunting him. Selfless, sincere service is therefore to be 
welcomed and practised. Each act of service is a step toward the Goal of Liberation. 


The Objectives, Rules and Regulations that the Organisation has laid down have to be 
scrupulously observed by you all, whatever be the difficulties whatever be the reaction of others. 
Bear calumny, criticism and neglect with courage; do not allow these to affect your equanimity. 


The good that you do will guard you; have that faith rooted in your mind. Do not exult when 
your desire is fulfilled; do not be dejected when it is not realised. Faith must be built on stronger 
foundations. Believing one moment and doubting the next, is like living and dying alternately. 
Faith is the very breath of Seva; doubt is death. One who wavers is as useless as a living corpse. 


You have a duty to uphold and foster Dharma 


When you join the Seva Samithi (Sai Organisation) and share in its activities, you are doing so 
not for the sake of Swaami, nor for the sake of the people, but the sake of the Dharma which you 
have a duty to uphold and foster. Attachment to Dharma, practice of Dharma and its varied 
manifestations of Seva (Service) and Prema (Love), can alone help transform Maanava (human) 
into Maadhava (God). The destruction of the insidious poison of egoism is essential for the 
restoration of health and happiness of the mind. Unless you tap the inner spring of joy in your 
own Sath-chidh-aanandha (Being, Awareness, Bliss) principle you cannot be established in 
Aanandha (Divine Bliss). This is the best way for you to offer the highest possible Seva to the 
Motherland. For, India is since millennia the Yogabhuumi (the land of Divine communion), 
Thyaagabhuumi (the land of Detachment) and Karmabhuumi (the land of Godward-leading 
Activity). 


Vivekaanandha asked Max Mueller in London, when he met him at a Dinner given in his honour 
by that great Savant of Oriental Scholarship, "When do you propose to visit India?" And, the 
answer was, "How can I ever think of returning from India, once I reach that holy land? I would 
rather leave my ashes there, than come back. In the whole world, India is the only Heaven." He 
declared, "What is not in India is nowhere" by which he meant that what India does not teach is 
not worth learning. When those who have delved deep into the sacred scriptures of our land 
adore it like this German Scholar, how foolish are the sons and daughters of our Motherland to 
decry in their blindness her Glory and the Grandeur! 


Duty, Discipline and Devotion are essential for everyone 


I find that even you, who have come here as delegates selected by the members, do not strictly 
observe the disciplines enjoined on you. What shall' we then say of the rest? Remember, Duty, 
Discipline and Devotion, all three, are absolutely essential for every one in our Organisation. 
You may have Devotion, you may discharge the Duty entrusted to you. But, unless you are 
saturated in Discipline, the other two are useless. Many of you rushed forward when I walked 
along the passage this morning and tried to reach out your hands for touching My Feet, falling 
over others while so doing. This is definitely an instance of devotion outrunning discipline. 
Discipline must regulate and control, not only your activities as members of the Organisation 
but, every activity of your life. 


I have been telling you since years "Duty is God." Work is Worship. But, it is clear that you have 
not as yet taken this to heart; you have only received into the ear. Duty involves loyal adherence 
to the rules and regulations framed for the efficient working of the Organisation. Look upon 
them with a pure vision, a steady mind, and an attitude of reverence in the heart. 


Do not talk ill of any one with contempt, do not think of any one as low or mean. Christ 
declared, "All are One; be alike to everyone." Hating an individual, or institution, or a religion is 
a low act. The Aathma (Soul) is immanent in every one; it is the spark of Divinity which gives 
him light, love and joy. 


Do not be content by addressing gatherings from platforms, "Brothers and Sisters" that becomes 
merely histrionics, unless you feel the Brotherhood of man and the Fatherhood of God. When 
you have not felt in your heart the Aanandha of realising that Ishaavaasyamidham Sarvam (All 
this is enveloped in God), /shwarah sarvabhoo-thanaam---(God is installed in the heart of all 
beings), or Vaasudhevas sarvaamidham (All this is God), you do not deserve to speak those 
words, while addressing others. 


With every Conference you must arrive nearer the goal 


You long. to receive from others gratitude, love and respect; but, when the occasion arises for 
you to offer these, you hesitate or refuse. This is wrong. For, this is no one way traffic! Give and 
take. That is the rule. Assess in this Conference how far you have put into practice the rules 
framed in the Fifth All India Conference; examine where you have failed or succeeded only 
partially, and why. Unless this is done, gathering in Conferences like this is a mere waste of 
time, energy and money. The money could be spent to greater advantage in feeding the poor or 
helping them in some other way. With every Conference, you must arrive nearer and nearer the 
Goal or else, it becomes misuse of time, money and energy. 


All over the land, we have now Bhajan Mandalis (Spiritual Congregations), Study Circles, 
Mahila Vibhaaghs (Women's Sections), Seva Dhal and Seva Samithis (Service Corps and 
Organisations) besides Schools, Libraries etc., studding the entire area. Certain of these who 
have strayed away into wrong lines, regardless of the ideals placed before them, have to be 
guided back into the Path. More than everything else, Baala Vikaas (Child Development) classes 
have to be multiplied so that the children may be saved and trained, to shine as true inheritors of 
Bhaaratheeya Culture. May the Culture of India which is fast going dry in the land of its origin 
be restored to its pristine power and purity through your loving and loyal efforts. I bless you that 
you may be endowed with success. 


Raajahmundry, 4-1-1974 


Karma is the sincere discharge of one's duty, as laid down in the 
scriptures and as beneficial to our standard and status. 


Through karma done for some benefit in view, man progresses 
towards karma with no benefit in view, so that he does it as a 
rightful obligation, undeterred by defeat or unaffected by success. 


He does karma, regulated by dharma (virtue). Then, his 
consciousness is purified and elevated and can help him to become 


aware of his Reality as the Self which includes all, Brahman 
(Omniself). 


Sri Sathya Sai 


24. The five-year child 


THE mind of man is a bundle of desires, always in agitation, ever on the run, in pursuit of 
objects and sensations. When man submits to Its whims, he falls. But he can master it, tame it 
and forge it as an instrument for achieving even Liberation from bondage to objects and 
sensations! It is said that-the mind is the cause for both liberation and bondage. When I see a 
person helplessly enslaved to his mind, I get a picture of a dressed up doll squeaking and 
speaking through a talking disc attached and operated He acts mechanically; as the strings are 
pulled by dominant desire; he' talks as directed by that master; he thinks on lines that desire lays 
down. Therefore, there is a great deal of artificiality and insincerity. 


We know that the pictures in a film projected on the screen are each in its true nature, stationary. 
But, since they are projected fast in a series through a lamp, they appear as if the men and 
women are walking or fighting. The sound tracks supply the appropriate voices and noises at the 
appropriate time and so, it appears as if the men and women talk and sing. Though one knows 
that the pictures are projected on the screen in this manner, but when one sees the film, one is 
moved into grief or joy, hatred or sympathy. 


Joy and grief are modifications of the mind 


The mind is agitated and so, you too are led into passions and emotions. When the plank on 
which you sit moves, you too move; when the train runs fast with you sitting in the compartment, 
you feel that the trees too move with you. On the other hand, the mind makes you feel stationary, 
on the earth, though the earth revolves fast on its own axis and also around the Sun. These are all 
tricks of the mind, hiding the truth and imposing its own illusions on your experience. Real truth 
is different from the picture of truth that the mind presents. 


To ascribe the joys and griefs that one passes through in life to the nature of the Individual Soul 
is an act of ignorance. One has to dissociate one from the other. Elation and depression, pleasure 
and pain, joy and grief are modifications of the mind, not of the jeevi (the individual soul). It is 
the mind that reacts to external objects and events and pronounces them as desirable and 
undesirable, good and bad. This explains why the control of the waywardness of the mind is to 
be achieved. 


He who masters the mind can direct his life straight and steadily on the path of Truth, Right 
Action, Peace and Universal Love. He can become an Amrutha-puthrah (child of immortality). 
Becoming immortal does not imply that one can avoid death and continue living in the physical 
body for all time. It means only that his Name and Fame will shine in the memories of people, 
when his character and achievements are noble and beneficial. When your deeds are holy, 
coming generations would emulate them and offer gratitude for the example. But, if they are 
harmful, even your contemporaries will condemn you, and wish that you were never born. 


In the Sathya Sai Seva Organisation, you have all the chances you need and all the direction and 
encouragement you want, to make your names cherished by generations. For, the Organisation 
strives to establish World Peace and Prosperity, promote mutual service in Society and cultivate 
selfless love in the individual. You have only to share in its various tasks, gladly and with perfect 
humility. 


This Universe stands on the foundation of Truth 


What is the 'highest objective’ for man? What is his most precious ideal? The Vedhas decalre, 
Sathyaannaasthi paro dharmah---There is no rule higher than Truth. This Mansion named 
Universe stands on the foundation of Truth, Sathya. 


You are all members of the 'Sathya' Sai Seva Organisation; remember that ‘Sathya’ is My Name. 
It is the first and foremost ideal that has to shape and sustain all the activities of the Organisation, 
as well as every one of its members. Give Sathya the first place in your thought, word and deed. 


There was a King called Sathyavratha, in ancient times. He was named so, because Truth was his 
way of life, his goal and his guide. He derived great joy through the strict adherence to Truth. 
One day, a few hours before dawn, during Brahma muhuurtha (the time dedicated for meditation 
on God), he proceeded alone through the Lion Gate of his Fort, in order to have a holy dip in the 
Sea, for the day was a holy one marked out in the calendar as sacred for such ceremonial baths. 


Only Truth sustains charity, riches and good relations 


While he was passing through the Gate, he saw a fair maiden with a halo of splendour going out; 
curious to know who she was and why she was making her exit at that early hour, he accosted 
her. She replied that she was the Goddess of riches, Dhanalakshmi. "I have been long here, now, 
I desire a change. I do not stay in one place long." Sathyavratha told her, "Go! Go! I do not 
object, or obstruct." Presently, a charming masculine figure was seen quietly going out through 
the Lion Gate. The King asked him who he was and what errand was on which he was leaving. 
He replied, "I am charity; when Dhanalakshmi has left, what do I stay here for?" The King 
allowed him to leave, and he moved on. 


Within a few moments, another charming person was going through. The. King found that he 
was Sadhaachaara, representing goodness in social behaviour. "How can good social relations be 
sustained without riches and the quality of generosity?" he asked. "I am leaving, because the two 
are here no more," he explained. The king agreed; and he moved on. So too, the next emigrant, 
Fame, lamented the disappearance of the other three and himself wanted to go. The King let him 
go. He said, "How can fame survive the absence of riches, charity and happy social life?" and the 
King felt he was right. 


Meanwhile, a person with overwhelming splendour came into the gate from the Fort, with 
intention to leave the city. When asked who he was, he said, "I am Truth." At this, the King 
pleaded with him to stay in the city, the Kingdom, the Palace and the homes of the people. He 
said that if he leaves, the loss would be irreparable, and life would not be worthwhile. At this, 
Truth decided to stay. 


And, Fame returned to the fort in a trice, for Truth is enough basis for fame to flourish. And, 
Sadhaachaara returned and grew. So too charity and riches came back and established 
themselves in the kingdom. All the others were delighted to share the glory of Sathya (Truth). 


Dedicate your lives to the Good and to God 


You too must take delight in sharing the Glory of This SATHYA: that is MYSELF. You are 
members of the Organisation beating My Name and, so, you have to live every minute in the 
consciousness of that responsibility. Bearing a 'High Class' name, you should not live in a ‘low 
class' way. Rise into Divinity, do not fall into bestiality. Many rise only to get a better view of 


the lowly earth, as vultures do, when they fly high to get a wider view of the spots where carrion 
lies. 


Maanava (human) must achieve the status of Maadhava (God). And, who is God? Truth is God, 
Love is God, Peace is God. Develop truth, cultivate love, establish yourselves in peace--you are 
on the road of divinity. 


Become water, so that you can merge with water; if you remain oil, you cannot merge! So, 
develop Divine characteristics. You are now in His hands, in God's care, but, you do not realise 
it; this kerchief is held by Me; if my hand does not hold it, it falls. So too, if God does not hold 
you, you fall. Whatever you do, wherever you are placed, believe that God has put you there for 
that work. Then, it becomes an education and a saadhana (spiritual practice). In this Conference, 
learn this lesson: take up the work allotted to you gladly, and carry it out to the best of your 
ability, for the greater glory of God. Do not dedicate your lives to material goods, dedicate them 
to the Good and to God. 


When the petromax lamp grows dim, you clean it with a pin; when it starts giving trouble, you 
pump vigorously, don't you? When that is done, it shines bright and gives good light. Consider 
the State Conferences held at more frequent intervals as the treatment with the pin and the All 
India Conference, such as this, as the vigorous pumping process. 


The objects of both these Conferences are the same: the establishment of peace and harmony in 
the world, through the Organisation. For the lamp that this Organisation is, the oil is Love; you 
know that, to light that lamp, you have to use a little methylated spirit. Well, Jnaana (Supreme 
Wisdom) is the 'spirit'. A little quantity of that is needed for Love to be steady and Universal. 
And, there must be plenty of the oil of Love. Good company, good acts, good thoughts---these 
are of great help. 


This is the Sixth All India Conference. Five Conferences have met and resolved on various plans 
and rules. What has been the progress? I must say we are very much in the same place---no 
advance at all. It is pardonable if a five-year child plays about and is drawn hither and thither by 
the five senses. The Sixth year (the Shashthi-abdha) warns you that you must now transcend the 
trammels of five senses and become free from both pride and depression, carrying out your tasks 
boldly, with faith and devotion. Every day, with every act, every thought, every word, you must 
approach nearer and nearer God. That will give you the supermost bliss. That will confer true 
liberation. 


Raajahmundry, 4-1-1974 


25. A programme for college teachers 


EMBODIMENTS of the Divine Aathma! Open your eyes and look around with some 
circumspection. Ponder over the heights we had attained in ancient times and the present pitiable 
predicament of mankind. What an abysmal descent! Isn't our situation very much like that of a 
man who has tumbled down from a mountain peak to the depths below? We had, by observing 
and upholding Dharma (virtue), reached the pinnacle of perfection in every sphere, spiritual, 
material, scientific, economic. We followed with great veneration the principles and guidelines 
laid down in the Shruthi (sacred scriptures), and the smrithi (body of traditional law), which 
embody the commands of God Himself, and as a result, we were bound together by mutual love 
and affection, and our culture shone with supreme excellence. 


But, today, we are in quite a terrible situation---the very opposite of the glory of the past. 
Wherever we look, we find men sunk in utterly low moral and material conditions. The 
Dhaarmic duties prescribed by the Lord in the Shruthi and Smrithi in order to save mankind from 
these very evils have been discarded. Infected by mutual animosity and distrust, we are spouting 
the fire of violence and cruelty and jeopardising World Peace. Violation of the laws ordained by 
God is the chief factor, responsible for the absence of abiding peace in the world. 


It is our paramount duty to restore Divine Dharma 


Is not the transgression of Dharma (which is another name for the Commands of God to man) 
the sole cause for the poverty, the despondency, the despair, and the lack of spiritual knowledge 
and effort, that are so rampant at the present time throughout the world? It is heartening for us all 
to note that a few people, at least now, have discovered the reason for the crisis, through a study 
of the sequence and the negation, and are striving to resuscitate Dharma which alone can confer 
prosperity and peace on the world. If the annihilation of something is causing injury to 
something else, then, the only method for the regeneration of the latter is the revival of the 
former. Isn't this principle universally acceptable and applicable? We are noticing that the 
decline of Dharma has caused the destruction of world peace. When we plan to bring about 
prosperity and peace to the world, isn't it our paramount duty to restore this Divine Dharma? 


Teachers! It is your imperative duty to wake up and strive at least now, without further delay, for 
the preservation and fostering of Dharma. For, today, some persons are endeavouring to destroy 
Bhaaratheeya Dharma (Indian morality code), attacking it and plucking it by its very roots. If we 
fail to resist their attempts, Dharma is in danger of being completely uprooted. 


Some persons enamoured of modern civilisation and bearing the respected designation of social 
reformers and reconstructors, are trying in manifold deceptive attractive ways to pollute Society 
itself, by depriving it of Dharma. 


Bhagavaan will be your unfailing support 


The Dharma, for upholding which we have been all along willing and ready to sacrifice wealth, 
honour and even lives, is the Dharma named Sanaathana Dharma. Sanaathana means 'eternal', 
existing and effective for all time. Wake up. Get Ready. The moment has arrived, when you have 
to demonstrate your indomitable valour and irrepressible heroism. 


You are born in the ever-effulgent land of Bhaarath. You are the valiant and invincible 
descendents of heroic Hindhu warriors, who were worthy embodiments of courage, fortitude, 


valour and moral integrity. You are scions of the holy and lofty lineage of Rishis like Bhaargava, 
Kaushika, Vashishtha, Bharadwaaja and Kashyapa who forced even the 'three worlds' to tremble 
in fear, at their spiritual might and majesty, won through severe penance. You will be unworthy 
of such great ancestry if you remain indifferent, slothful and apathetic like cowards, when the 
Dharma which is as essential as the very breath to our lives is being undermined. Resolve to 
engage yourself in the task of promoting the welfare of the world; be assured that Bhagavaan 
will be your unfailing support. 


As days pass by, the process of reshaping and reforming affects each field. Naturally, it is being 
applied to the educational system also. In former times, children were initiated in the spiritual 
path at the proper age and their studies began thereafter, under the Guru (preceptor). In course of 
time, when Westerners became the rulers, many were lured to the study of their language, for, 
thereby they could secure the 'second' of the four goals of man, namely, riches. Thus they were 
transformed into supporters of the Western system of education. 


In the past, teachers saw to it that the pupils were' equipped with devotion to God in addition to 
the curricular training. So, the students were well versed in spiritual discipline and knowledge; 
every act of theirs was motivated by the yearning for salvation and spiritual joy. 


Teachers and students lack spiritual awareness 


Boys and girls were instructed by Gurus who had full knowledge of the Country--its history,’ and 
traditions--and the principles of religion and culture. Now, since the teachers' are themselves 
woefully ignorant of what culture means, what spirituality consists of, and what the significance 
of religion is, the pupils are deprived of the wisdom that alone can confer peace and joy to their 
hearts. 


The propaganda for atheism, the declaration that the Vedhas have no historical validity, and the 
teaching through history that Hindhuism is destroyed---these are the activities of the teachers 
who suffer from the mania for Western culture and civilisation. Can we call such a system of 
instruction, education? Can we call those who instruct these things, Gurus? Vidhya (education) is 
the communication of the knowledge of the divine power, and the inner Reality of the Aathma. 
This alone justifies the claim to be educated. 


Since they have no spiritual awareness, students are taking part in disorders and disturbances; 
they become easy targets to mob violence, unworthy of the educated; they descend to levels 
lower than the blind in their ignorance and draw down upon themselves the ridicule of the 
observers. They disfigure the educational institutions and bring disgrace upon them. 


Teachers! We have to inculcate in our College lofty ideals and take up highly noble projects. I 
am now communicating to you My feelings and plans, because I know that you are enthusiastic, 
inspired by spiritual ideals, and worthy of Sai's love and affection. 


1. Mere formal teaching of the prescribed lessons in the College will not raise the students to the 
stature we desire. By mere planting, a sapling does not become a tree. It has to be fostered by the 
provision of the appropriate security, care, and periodical attention. 


2. To shape the simple innocent students from the villages into votaries of the English language, 
devoid of the virtues of humility and fidelity, politeness and faith, which are so necessary for 
happy living, is not a task which will promote the welfare either of the student or of the country. 
By the mere acquisition of an academic qualification which will assure them a job, they cannot 
progress either in morality or straightforwardness. Proper activities must be devised and adopted 


to make them useful to their parents. They must be able to serve them skilfully and gladly and 
thus earn their blessings. 


3. There are 200 students coming to our College from villages around. We should group them 
into batches of 20 or 30; one teacher should accept the responsibility for guiding each group. 
When they find a student backward in any subject, they should encourage him, by special 
teaching in that subject; they should pay attention to the conditions and circumstances of each 
student and keep in touch with the parents too; they should help the students to cultivate and 
develop the high ideals that they have in their minds and the noble plans to which they wish to 
dedicate themselves. 


Establish a Spiritual Centre in each village 


4. Proper steps must be undertaken to put an end to the evil habits, the evil thoughts and evil talk 
that are rampant in these small villages. It is only then that the educated 'rural student’ can 
maintain and develop his virtues. Or else, his attainments in virtue will be evident only as long as 
he is studying. As soon as he returns to his village, the behaviour, the way of speaking, the habits 
of life that the villagers practise will become natural for him also. Therefore, through each one of 
the students of our College belonging to a village, we must establish a Spiritual Centre in that 
village; the Centre must guard against the spread of parties and factions in that village and should 
not observe or honour any distinction between the villagers, on the basis of caste, creed, or 
family status. This will bring about a great change in the methods and message of education. 


5. One day in each week or fortnight, teachers should gather the students and instruct them in 
certain lofty ideals of life; they should go to the villages of those students, and devote themselves 
to some programme of welfare activity in the village. This is very advisable. If you do the spade 
work and make the preliminary arrangements I shall come (I am returning to Brindhaavan in 
February) and in the months of February and March, all of us can go to one village, one after 
another, and establish these Spiritual Centres. We shall transform them into ideal villages. It is 
only then that the value of education can be demonstrated, expanded and sanctified. 


6. For each one of these objectives to be realised, it is necessary that teachers must be idealistic 
and enthusiastic. Then only will students .follow their guidance. Our College must become the 
pioneer leader in translating these high ideals. This is essential, not only for the individual, but, 
in equal measure, for all mankind. 


Students should acquire the virtue of humility 


7. Consult the students, group by group, and find out who among them are interested in 
establishing such Spiritual Centres in their own villages; if they make proper arrangements in 
their villages, then I shall myself come and inaugurate the Centre and confer on the people of the 
village necessary enthusiasm and adequate facilities. 


We shall start in this way, in a small measure; we can thus rescue the villages from the chaotic 
influence spread by politics, and, make them wholly loving and helpful filled with Saathwik 
(good and noble) ideals; this is the fruit of real education. 


8. When the students of our College coming from villages see a village or two, developing on 
these lines, every one of them will come forward, asking for the inclusion of his village too. 
They will acquire along with Vidhya (education), the virtue of Vinaya (humility). And, with 
humility, they can easily earn spiritual knowledge. This is very essential, and very urgent work. 
Due to the absence of these two, people are today, disgracing their humanness, though they are 


‘educated’, behaving like fools and blind men, giving up the power of discriminating between the 
temporary and the eternal. It is enough progress, if men live as men! Man must be vigilant that 
he does not descend to the level of demons, that he does not pollute society and inflict 
‘earthquakes’ on the country. If we do not take on hand these activities, we cannot remove the 
fear and anxiety that seem inevitable in the future for our students. 


9. You must all meet together and take necessary interest in this matter. You need not compel 
any one who is not interested. It is enough if we have some five or six who join with love and 
faith. If they have the desire, and if all share in this task, the greater the joy. There should be no 
trace of compulsion in organising this. I am placing a car at your disposal for carrying out this 
programme. On this holy Shankraanthi Day, I have given expression to the thoughts that I was 
having for a long time, taking into consideration your enthusiasm for work. I wish you will take 
the steps necessary for implementing this programme. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 14-1-1974 


What does surrender of the Self signify or imply? To experience 
God as Om nip resent, to be aware of nothing other than God--- 
this is true surrender. 


To see God in everything, everywhere, at all times, is true 
Sharanaagathi. He gives, He enjoys, He experiences. 


If you offer, and God accepts, you become superior; how can God 
be all-powerful? You should not reduce the glory of God through 
such high-sounding statements. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


26. You and I---together 


A COLLEGE which does not confer the knowledge of their Aathmic Reality to the students 
engaged in the pursuit of various objectives and material studies is as barren as a sky without the 
Moon, or a heart without peace, a nation without reverence for law. Colleges in India have a 
greater responsibility in this matter, for, here, more than the material, technological and scientific 
side of civilisation, emphasis was laid for centuries on the social, cultural and spiritual side. The 
goal of life and the ways of ensuring harmony were discovered here and propagated by saints 
and sages. The young men and women that emerge from the colleges of India have to cleanse 
this land of untruth, injustice, violence and fear. They must spread the message of peace, 
tolerance, righteousness and service, and be exemplars of these qualities for the people. 


You are not educated, if all that you have achieved is, the study of a ton of books. The body and 
the mind have to be illumined by the light of Love that emanates from the awareness of the Soul 
and its essential Divinity. Since education today deals only with the body and mind, and is 
unrelated to the Soul and Spirit, the youth of the land is wafted hither and thither by every gust of 
passing, like rootless vegetation. Awareness of the Aathman will grant unshakeable power and 
courage. The Vedhas teach the means of securing this awareness, and drawing on it to meet the 
challenges of life. That alone can crown education with success. That alone can strengthen youth 
to encounter the problems of unrest and anxiety. The colleges have to teach not only certain 
subjects, but, the subject-object relationship too. The process by which man can transcend this 
duality and cognise the Unity has also to be communicated, in order to render ‘education 
complete. 


Today deceit is the rule that guides man 


Institutions where education is imparted today have no atmosphere of moral or spiritual value. 
Discipline is missing; honesty is at a discount; politeness and good manners are estimated as 
outmoded forms of behaviour; grab and not give is the rule; intolerance is held in high esteem. 


If a man is not equipped with detachment, virtue, tolerance and truth, how can he raise his head 
and proclaim himself a human being? Man has so degraded himself that he revels in untruth in 
an unashamed manner---his intention is different from his words, but still his actions belie his 
profession. Thought, word and deed are not co-ordinated. Deceit is the rule that guides. Man 
should redeem himself from this downfall; he should not sacrifice his glory and his goal for the 
petty triumphs of the moment; if he does, he would only make himself cheaper than clay. 


Men should grow straight, without any crookedness 


At the present rate and under present conditions, the future of India, once the Preceptor of 
Humanity, is grievously poor. Students must awaken in time and decide to transform themselves 
into worthy instruments for the revival of the grandeur of Bhaarath. They must grow straight, 
without any crookedness. They must grow as Indians on Indian soil, in the Indian atmosphere; 
they should give up the itch for aping foreign fashions of thought, speech and dress. Instead of 
delving into their inner reality and living true to it, they are now exploring the outer delusions 
and imitating the outer trappings of equally deluded people. They silence the Voice of 
Conscience and behave in exotic styles. The heart warns, the brain protests, but, the mind prods 
on. He who smothers the voice of God is as good as a living corpse. 


Note the type of dress that is now considered fashionable---the weird uncouth bush-shirts and 
drain-pipe pants. Note the side-burns and the weird moustaches and beards that besmirch the 
face of youth. Note the value attached to slovenliness and primitivity, to foulness and frivolity. 
No one can appreciate this trend, except those who are victims to it; disgust is the only reaction 
one gets. When the exterior is reeking with untidiness, how can the interior be tidy? How can 
harmony and honesty be installed in such a cluttered heart and in such a lumbersome brain? 
Young people move about like clowns; they pay no attention to the seriousness of the task which 
lies ahead of them. When the parents, society and the nation yearn that they should become 
'biggers', they revel as 'beggars', before the fashion fabricators of other lands, the imitators of 
other countries and the hysterics of other cultures. 


Use the present moment best to face life's challenges 


And, every tick of the clock snips a length off the thread of life. Money when unspent remains in 
your account at the bank; but, spent is your life with every moment whether wisely or unwisely. 
It marches relentlessly on. Use the present moment best, to sharpen your skills, to broaden your 
intelligence, to expand your heart and to master the technique of facing the challenges of life 
with courage and equanimity. That will be the reward you offer your parents for the love and 
sacrifice they have poured on you; do not offer them in return, an ill reputation, a ruined career, a 
damaged character. Make them happy and proud; win a First Class in your studies and a First 
Class in your character. 


Do not despise the villages where you have grown, do not desert the parents, who have sacrificed 
so much for you. Live with them and make them happy. Also, love and serve every one in the 
village, as if it is an extension of your own family, as if all are your kith and kin. Do not be led 
away by the artificial brilliance and deceptive display of the towns; whatever salary you may get 
front jobs in those places will be frittered in trivial pursuits; you cannot be free, fresh and pure in 
that atmosphere nor can you serve your parents and people. You will be a burden on others and a 
problem to yourselves. 


I am depending upon you, students, for a great transformation in outlook, a great revolution. 
Students of the Sathya Sai College must lead this movement. The older generation can only talk; 
it is you who must act. You have to prove yourselves worthy of this College. Be disciplined; be 
sweet in manners, in speech, and in your relations with the less fortunate. Be grateful to your 
parents, your villagers and those who strive for your welfare. Try your best always to earn a fair 
name for yourselves, for your College and for your parents. 


Do not be under the impression that you and I have come together only now since you study in 
this College! You have come to Me for the sake of far higher triumphs, as a consequence of 
merit acquired in many previous lives. You and your teachers are destined to achieve tremendous 
tasks under My guidance, in the execution of the Mission on which I have come. 


Brindhaavan, 31-1-1974 


Days that are marked out as festivals in the calendars of all races 
and religions are significant because they have a deep spiritual 
meaning. 


They have to be used by man for examining habits and practices, 
prejudices and partialities, and for cleansing the mind of these. 


The attitudes and guidelines that are clogging progress have to be 
discarded and fresh fruitful ones welcomed. The days have to be 
dedicated for trimming the old and planting the new. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


27. The Shiva in all 


Shivoham, Shivoham---was the exclamation that rose from the souls that knew the Truth in a 
flash of illumination, after long years of cleansing the mind through the process of thapas 
(penance). I am Shiva; Shiva am I---Though denoted by many names and recognised in many 
forms, the Divine Principle is One, without a second. It is Shivam and it is latent in each being, 
including man. Holy days are to be spent in the contemplation of this Truth and in special 
exercises to make oneself fully conscious of one's Divinity. 


God is the seed, which has expressed itself as all this. But, this fact, so deeply implanted in the 
hearts of every Indian for centuries, has been overlaid by veils of doubt and man has lost the 
courage and the energy that the faith had given him so long. This was the very core of Indian 
culture, but, children of India have neglected and very nearly lost this precious heritage. The 
fascination for Western fashions of thought weakened the belief in one's religion; that led to the 
giving up of the disciplines which shaped one's daily life; this in turn led to deterioration in 
moral standards; this has bred misery, disunity, hatred and disgrace. It is time to open one's eyes 
to the tragedy and retrace the steps. 


Meaning of worship of the Snake 


The saints and seers of this land never spoke lightly or acted irrelevantly. They had the good of 
the generations always in view. When they invested some places as holy and named some days 
as sacred, they also prescribed the rules and ceremonials to be observed by pilgrims and 
Saadhakas (spiritual aspirants), so that time, expense and effort could be used for the expansion 
of Love and the education of the instincts and impulses. The object of every rule was to bring the 
realisation of the Aathma, as one's Reality, a few steps nearer. For, the Aathma in the individual 
is the Aathma in all; Shivoham is the Truth; and the Truth alone can make man free and full of 
Bliss. 


Take one prescription, the worship of the Snake. Those afflicted with barrenness or serious 
illness or skin diseases of virulent types vow to proceed on pilgrimage to shrines of 
Subrahmanya (conceived in the form of a Snake). People laugh at this practice. "Indians offer 
adoration to snakes, because, in their opinion, they have poison in their fangs!" The Truth is 
quite otherwise. The inner meaning of snake worship is quite different. The spinal column of 
man ending with the 'thousand-petallied lotus' in the brain is very much like a serpent poised on 
its tail with hood widely spread. 


In the science of Kundalini Yoga, the vital energy of man lying dormant like a coiled snake, at 
the bottom of this column in the lowest Muulaadhaara Chakra (the Basal Plexus) is awakened 
and aroused, so that it courses up through six more wheels (centres of superior consciousness) 
until it reaches the Sahasraara (thousand-petalled Lotus Energy Centre) at the very top of the 
skull. The passage for the Kundalini is through the Sushumna nerve in the centre of the spinal 
column. The worship of the Snake, ridiculed as superstition, is the symbolic counterpart of this 
great Yogic Saadhana which confers vigour and vitality. 


Every appellation of God has deep significance 


Take the demarcation of Thirupathi as a holy place of pilgrimage; Lord Venkateshwara, the deity 
worshipped there is called the Lord of the Seven Hills, for Seven Hills have to be climbed before 
the Temple is reached. Obviously the six Chakras (energy centres) and the Sahasraara are 


indicated here, for in Raajayoga, the supreme is revealed, only when the individual raises the 
Vital Energy---the Kundalini Shakthi---up to the seventh stage. One of the hills is named 
Seshagiri, meaning, Snake Hill. From the plains, the range gives the appearance of a snake with 
a raised hood. 


And, what exactly does Subrahmanya mean? Spend a little thought on that. It means, 'He who 
has attained the realisation of Brahman the Universal Absolute, the Primal Cause, the Cosmic 
Consciousness.’ Every appellation of God has deep significance. In the Vedhas, Vishnu, for 
example, is named Parama. It means Paramanu, the Atom: He is omnipresent, as omnipresent as 
the atom, found as the substance and substratum of the Universe. Vishnu is the cause as well as 
the effect, for, there was nothing else when Time began. The One became many; the many 
disappear, the One remains. 


Cattle are different from horses; true. But, when four-footed animals are considered, they are 
both the same. Under 'animals' a vast variety of beings are included. Thus it goes on, until only 
One is. 


Strengthen the belief that all objects belong to God 


To teach the Unity behind the appearance of multiplicity, that is to say, to help realise the 
Adhwaitha (Non-dual nature of Existence), Shankara, the greatest expounder of that school of 
thought, established four seats of practical philosophy called Mutts in the four regions of India. 
The very first step in the endeavour to realise this Unity was, according to him, Upaasana or 
Worship of the concrete symbol of God, which gives one the experience of the ecstasy of Union. 


One day, Shankara was seated in meditation on the bank of the Ganga River. Suddenly, he 
exclaimed, "Lord! I am yours; but, surely, you are not mine." His pupil, Thotakacharya was by 
his side then; he was astonished at this statement, which, according to him, went against the 
Adhwaithic stand. So, he asked him how he could ever declare any distinction between I and 
you. Shankara replied, "The waves belong to the Ocean; but, the Ocean does not belong to the 
wave. The wave is the ocean, but, the Ocean is not the wave." The main point to be attended to 
is, the elimination of the ego, the elimination of the identification with the body and its needs, 
satisfiable through the senses. For, you get joy when these needs are fulfilled; grief when they 
are not, anger when something comes in the way, pride when you win over that opposition. 


To eliminate the ego, strengthen the belief that all objects belong to God, and that you are 
holding them on trust. This would prevent pride; it is also the truth. Then, when you lose a thing, 
you would not grieve. God gave; God took away. Of course you hear almost all talking in this 
strain and advising this reaction. But very few follow that advice themselves. This is the sin of 
all sins; saying one thing and acting quite the opposite, denying in practise what you assert as 
precept. 


Shiva is eternally auspicious 


Shiva is known also as Eeshwara, the 'repository of all the resources essential for Prosperity. The 
most important resource is Jnaana (Spiritual Wisdom). Three kinds of Jnaana are demarcated: 
Jeevaprajna (concerning the individualised Divine), Eeshwaraprajna (concerning the Cosmic- 
Manifestation of the Divine) and the Aathmaprajna (Concerning the Universal Absolute of 
which the individual is the temporary-particular). This is also mentioned in some other texts as 
Delta-prajna, Jeeva-prajna and Aathma- prajna, but, the meaning of the words is the same as in 
the other list. Eeshwara confers the Aishwarya of Jnaana. He is also known as Shankara, and 


sages have experienced Shiva as conferring Sam or auspiciousness of all kinds, Happiness in all 
ways. Shiva is eternally auspicious; He does not come embodied in other forms, with other 
names, as often as Vishnu. So, He is not described as Shri Shiva or Shri Shankara or Shri 
Eeshwara. Shri is inherent in His very Person and so it is superfluous to add Shri to His Name. 


When you realise Shivoham (I am Shiva), then, you have all the happiness, all the auspiciousness 
that there is. Shiva is not to be sought on the peak of a distant range of mountains, or in some 
other special place. You must have heard that sin and merit are inherent in the acts that men do; 
so too, Shiva is inherent in every thought, word and deed, for He is the Energy, the Power, the 
Intelligence that is behind each of them. 


All energy, power and intelligence are in you; you need not search for them outside yourselves. 
God who is manifesting as time, space and causation is in you; why then do you feel weak and 
helpless? Man is tossed about by his ambitions and the craving to fulfil them. But, he must first 
know where he stands and where he should decide to reach. Now, his efforts are wanton and 
wasteful. He is an expert in mathematics, but, unable to do a small sum in arithmetic. He has 
mastered algebra, but unable to measure the area of his home. He knows botany, with all its 
Latin names; but, ask him about the uses to which the common thu/asi plant and its leaves can be 
put; he has no answer. He has mastered all the physical exercises taught to him; but, he is 
helpless when asked to sit in Padhmaasana. He can talk loud and long on Moksha and of its 
being the final goal; but, he does not know that he 'is already free; he imagines himself as bound 
and.behaves as such. 


Do not get too bound with, or give up, the world 


Attachments to illusory objects bind him. When the illusory nature of the objects is revealed, the 
attachment falls off and he is free. These attachments persuade him to tarnish the acts of worship 
also; for, he prays to God for granting him trivial boons. Pray to God for God; do not use Truth 
to achieve Untruth. Have the inner vision, not the outer. Do not be attracted by the objective 
world; concentrate on the subjective world. 


You do not scatter seeds on the surface; you plant them deep enough for the roots to get a foot- 
hold. Do not dig the seeds into the soil too deep. Follow the middle path. Do not tighten the 
strings of the violin or veena too much; nor leave them loose. Do not get too bound with the 
world; do not also give it up. 


The Shivaraathri Festival, as celebrated here, is an example for you. You might ask, "Swaami 
has often declared that all days are holy days, that there is no special rite or ritual that has to be 
observed on any single day; but, Swaami Himself is pouting vibhuuthi (holy ash) on the Idol and 
calling it abhisheka (anointing the idol); is this right?" Swaami is doing so, to teach you a lesson. 


When desire is destroyed, Love reigns supreme 


The Vibhuuthi Abhisheka has a potent inner meaning which Swaami wants you to grasp. The 
Vibhuuthi is the most precious object, in the truly spiritual sense. You know that Shiva burnt the 
God of Desire or Kaama, called Manmatha (for he agitates the mind and confounds the 
confusion already existing there) into a heap of ashes. Shiva adorned Himself with that ash, and 
thus He shone in His Glory, as the Conqueror of Desire. When Kaama was destroyed, Prema 
(Love) reigned supreme. When there is no desire to warp the mind, Love could be true and full. 


What greater offering can you give God to glorify Him than the ash signifying your triumph over 
tantalising Desire? Ash is the ultimate condition of things; it cannot undergo any further change. 
The Abhisheka with Vibhuuthi is done to inspire you to give up desire and offer Shiva the ashes 
of its destruction as the most valuable of all the articles you have earned. Ash cannot fade as 
flowers do in a day or two; it does not dry and disappear or get soiled and unpotable as water 
does; it will not lose colour as leaves do, in a few hours; it does not rot as fruits do in a few days. 
Ash is ash for ever and ever. So, burn your viles, your vices, your bad habits; worship Shiva, 
rendering yourselves pure in thought and word and deed. 


Shiva is the source of Bliss 


Shiva is worshipped with the three-leaved bilva, for, He is immanent in the three worlds, in the 
three phases of Time, in the three attributes of Nature. He removes the three types of grief; He 
has no basis outside Him; He is the source of Bliss; He is the embodiment of the sweetness and 
efficacy of Nectar. Since every being is Shiva- Swaruupa (of the nature of Shiva)---for without 
Shiva, it is mere ‘shava' (corpse)---man has to live up to that Divine status. Scholars and 
Pandiths who propagate Dharma (right action) in our country are doing great disservice, for, 
they cast doubts on the very majesty of Godhead. Swaami Karunyaanandha spoke now of the 
episode where Brahma became jealous of Krishna, and stole the cows and cowherds from Him in 
order to bring discomfiture on Him. He said, Krishna created the same number of cows and 
cowherds, every one exactly similiar, and thus, foiled Brahma's conspiracy. People who hear 
such tales will naturally wonder how Gods can be envious of each other just like human beings; 
their faith in the Divine will be undermined thereby. These scholars are more ‘intent on 
exhibiting their textual scholarship, than revealing the Glory of God. They do not mind the 
damage they cause to the very cause they are pleading for. 


There was an old woman in a village,-some years ago. She sold a patch of land that she owned, 
and with the money, she had four gold bangles made, two for each arm. She wore them with 
great joy and went along the streets very proud of her new acquisition. But, she was 
disappointed, because no one in the village turned aside and looked at her bangles; she could as 
well have not worn them, for the villagers did not notice any difference in her. She tried various 
means to attract their attention towards the bangles, but, without success. One night she could not 
sleep at all, for, this neglect pained her much. At last she got a brilliant idea which, she decided, 
must succeed; the villagers must be drawn to notice the bangles. 


All beings are actuated by the same Divine Power 


Next day, after sunrise, she set fire to her own dwelling house! When the flames rose, and 
commotion ensued, the villagers rushed towards her, sitting and wailing in front of the burning 
house. She shook her hands pathetically, at the faces of the frightened villagers, causing the 
bangles to jingle and shine in the red light of the high flames, crying out, "Alas! My house is on 
fire," "O, pity my fate," "God, don't you see my plight?" Everytime she shouted a sentence, she 
put out her arms vigorously at some one, so that she or he could not miss sighting the bangles. 
The pity of it! She was so anxious to exhibit her bangles that she did not care for her house itself; 
the house was on fire but she was happy her bangles were noticed. The scholars who are lost in 
admiration of their own cleverness are as foolish as this old woman. 


Do not say or do anything that will bring Indian culture into disrepute, or that will undermine the 
faith of people in Goodness and in God. Do not claim to be - orthodox and encourage heterodoxy 
or heresy. Cast aside the desire for happiness and prosperity, do not moan that you do not secure 


Heaven; it does not matter, if you are smothered by difficulties. Stand up boldly in defence of the 
honour of your country. That will bring you all happiness and prosperity, all the Grace you yearn 
for. 


Indian Culture teaches that all beings are actuated by the self-same Divine power, blessed by the 
self-same Divine grace. So, love all. Do not develop jealousy or hatred. There are many 
Saadhakas (spiritual aspirants) who enjoy perfect calmness and equanimity while sitting in 
Dhyaana (meditation) or while in the Puuja (worship) room before the shrine. But, once they 
rise and come out into the open, they behave like demons. 


The Geetha says, Sathatham yoginah---"Be in Yoga, always." Be immersed in love, with no trace 
of pride or envy. This is the highest saadhana (spiritual practice). At the present day, all grades 
and groups of people all over the world resort to violence and hatred in order to satisfy their 
desires and demands, bringing about fear, anxiety, panic and revolution. The gains through such 
tactics are not much; the gains will be greater and more lasting if the path of love, tolerance and 
peace is followed. 


Love brings people together; hatred drives them apart. You cannot be happy, when you cause 
misery to others. God showers Grace when the nine steps of bhakthi (devotion) are observed. 
Masters or rulers can be won over by the same means---sacrifice, love, devotion, dedication in 
the path of duty. When success is achieved by means of unrest and violence, it has to be 
preserved and prolonged only by further unrest and violence. 

Therefore, let this be the lesson of Shivaraathri for you: Shiva is in all beings and all things. He 
is the inner motivator. Be aware of this always; do not cause pain to any one, do not harm or 
injure, anyone, or hurt his self-respect. Love all alike, cultivate tolerance and spread 
brotherliness. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 20-2-1974 


28. "You are freed!" 


Do not be misled by what you see; what you 'do not see with your eyes is much more significant. 
Why waste your life without achieving its purpose---namely, knowing and experiencing the 
truth? Come, come with Me, you can make your life worthwhile; you can succeed. 


Man has in him all the Bliss, as well as all the equipment needed to unravel it; but, he is caught 
in dire ignorance of his own inner resources. He can have supreme peace but, he does not strive 
to earn it; his attempts are weakened by doubt and indecision, and so, they are doomed to failure. 
Of course, there is the flow of water underneath the ground. But, how can we benefit by it unless 
efforts are made to dig down into that. source? A good deal of 'desire-for-sense-satisfaction' has 
to be removed before that inner spring of peace and joy can be tapped. 


Your lives are essentially of the nature of Shaanthi (Peace); your Nature is essentially Love; your 
hearts are saturated with Truth. Rid yourselves of the impediments that prevent their 
manifestation; you do not make any attempt towards this, and so, there is no peace or love or 
truth in the home, the community, the nation and the world. The husband and the wife do not live 
in concord; the father and his sons are involved in factions; even friends do not see eye to eye! 
Twins take different paths. For, they live in a competitive waning world of passions and 
emotions. It is only when God is the Goal and Guide, that there can be real peace, love and truth. 
The Divine must be revered at all times; what pleases the Divine must be understood and 
followed 


Feel that all your skill and strength are God's gifts 


The Raamaayana gives two examples of such consecrated lives, those of Aanjaneya and 
Lakshmana. Aanjaneya (Hanumaan) dedicated every moment of his life, every wave of thought, 
every twitch of muscle, to his Master, Raama. When Raama sent him in the southerly direction 
on the mission to search for Seetha, he was neither elated on being thus recognised as an efficient 
instrument nor depressed at the dangerous nature of his task. He knew that Raama would confer 
on him the skill and strength needed to fulfil the errand; in fact all his skill and all his strength 
were 'His gifts’. To feel that he was too weak an instrument was, he concluded, an insult to 
Raama's Omniscience and Grace. 


Lakshmana too was a mighty hero, for, he drew strength front the Divine itself. And, he had no 
other strength. Once while moving about in the forest as exiles, Raama instructed him to choose 
a nice spot and erect a Parnashaala (green-bower) thereon, for Seetha and Himself. Lakshmana 
was so shocked with pain at this that he fell on the ground; he lamented that he had fallen from 
grace. Raama said that he had 'risen' instead, for, he was asking him to select the site himself. 


That was the very reason why Lakshmana felt he had fallen: "Have I a will apart from yours? 
How could you ever imagine that I could exercise my judgement independently and select a site 
myself? Tell me, where and how; it will be done. But, I have no judgement of my own; I have 
surrendered it long ago." That was the reply of Lakshmana. 


Bhajan must become an unbroken stream of Bliss 


You too declare that you have surrendered; but, that is just a verbal statement. If you sit in a car, 
you go along with it; on the cycle, you move with it; on a horse you go wherever the horse takes 
you. But, in this case, you say and perhaps you believe that you have placed yourselves in My 


hands and so, you are going along the path I have laid down. But, your mind and your heart are 
not fully in Me and so, the surrender is only in name. 


As a sign of this deed of surrender and in order to sustain it, nothing more is enjoined than 
constant remembrance of the Name. No regimen of exhausting Saadhana (spiritual discipline) is 
prescribed. Smarana (remembering) is enough. You have recited bhajans (group singing of 
devotional songs on Lord's Names) extolling the Names which summarise the Glory, all through 
the night, after the emergence of the Aathmalinga (symbol of the elemental form of Shiva). But, 
this is only an appetiser. Bhajan must become an unbroken stream of Bliss on your tongues and 
in your hearts; it must confer on you the uninterrupted awareness of Soham---of the Unity of I 
and He, of This with That. It is called Akhanda hamsa japa---unbroken japa of the Hamsa 
manthra, Soham (inner sacred sound formula). I will ensure freedom from anxiety, fear and 
grief. 


Mahaashivaraathri is dedicated to the disintegration of the aberrations of the mind, and so, of 
the mind itself, by dedicating oneself to Shiva, God. The Moon as well as the Mind whose Deity 
it is, have each 16 phases. On the Shivaraathri, fifteen of these have disappeared; and, there is 
just a streak of the Moon in the sky. The New Moon that follows will have not even that streak 
visible. 


Symbol of Time-Space manifestation of divinity 


The mind too must be mastered every day until, on the fifteenth day, fifteen phases have 
disintegrated and only a streak remains to be removed by a final flourish of effort. That is the 
saadhana that you did through the night, bhajan, vigil, fast. When the mind goes, there is more 
moha (deluding desire and attachment) and the Ashaya (decline) of moha is moksha (liberation). 


Smarana is the surest means of mastering the wiles of the mind. You are indeed blessed, since 
front among the billions of people on this earth, you alone were able to come into this 
congregation, this presence, on this occasion. People gather in many a sacred place for. 
Shivaraathri, but, you were able to be here on this thrice-holy day and witness the emergence of 
the Dhasa angula Swaruupa---the Upanishaths declare that God is athyaathisthath dhasha 
angulam, the ten-inch-symbol of the kaala (time), desha (space)---manifestation of divinity, as 
described by Sage Kapila, the incarnation of Naaraayana Himself. When Kapila who too was the 
personification of time and space was born, he called upon the Gods to gather in the Presence 
and take dharshan (audience); his mother who called upon the Gods is therefore named, 
Dhevaahuthi (She who called the Gods). And, when the Gods came, Kapila asked them, "Don't 
you know who I am?" Even now all human babies ask the same question as soon as they are 
born---Koham? (Who am I?). 


Having had the unique good fortune of witnessing the emergence of the time-space-embodiment 
in the Linga-Form, I assure you that you are released from the bondage of birth and death. 
Recollect (and live in the recollection of) that moment of emergence and meditate on the 
significance of the Linga Form. This is the chance that is seldom gained through the performance 
of yajnas or yaagas or other elaborate rituals; or as a result of years of arduous saadhana. When 
you are asked what happened at Prashaanthi Nilayam, tell them that your life's mission has been 
fulfilled, that you were able to witness the Lingodhbhava, see the Linga which emerged during 
the auspicious hour. 


Mystery revealed by Shiva's three-pronged spear 


The Linga, .as you can see, is dhasha angulam, ten inches in circumference. It has within it, 
shining with native light the Thrishuul (three-pronged spear) of Shiva, symbolising the three 
phases of Time---past, present and future---and the three dimensions of space---earth, sky and 
the nether regions, as mentioned by Me already. Time is measured in units of ten (60 vighatikas, 
60 ghatikas and 360 days for the year), and in this Linga too, as you can see even from where 
you are sitting, the colour of the Thrishuul inside the Linga changes into a new one, every ten 
minutes. The handle of the Thrishuul demonstrates the One, of which the three are 
manifestations. This is the grand Mystery that has been revealed to you. You have witnessed the 
Divine Creation; you have seen the Divine Symbol; you have shared the Bliss. Out of the world's 
population of many crores, you alone secured this fortune. The Shruthis declare the Purusha as 
splendour, as Jyothi. You have seen the splendour when the Linga emerged; you have seen the 
triple Jyothi in the Linga itself. No greater fortune can befall a man. 


Live hereafter as befits the recipient of this rare Grace. Thyaagaraaja the Saint-singer sang of the 
Raama Naama, as being composed of two vital sounds Raa and Ma, Raa being the life-sound of 
the manthra devoted to Vishnu (Om Namo Naaraayana) and Ma being the life-sound of the 
manthra devoted to Shiva (Om Namasshivaaya). The two sounds became Raama, the One which 
became Vishnu and Shiva, just as the Linga is the One from which all Forms manifest, the 
Elementary form which symbolises the First Emergence of the Will of the Divine. I repeat that 
you who have experienced the sublimity and splendour of this Divine Event have acquired 
thereby merit enormous enough to save you from the cycle of birth and death. 


Dwell on this mighty moment, this holy hour that you were privileged to spend here; 
contemplate the majesty of the event that you witnessed; sanctify your days by thoughts that are 
sacred, words that are suffused with love and deeds that are in accordance with the Grace you 
have won this day. Alert yourselves, whenever you are prone to deviate from this responsibility. 
Be ever vigilant that you do not stray or weaken or vacillate. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 21-2-1974 


Make the mind, the voice and the actions agree in harmony. That is 
the right way of life. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


29. Cells of the body of God 


WHAT has sociology or the social sciences to do with the sciences of the spirit or the inquiry 
into the human spirit? This is a question that is commonly raised. So too, many do ask: What has 
the spiritual student and saadhaka (spiritual aspirant) to do with society and its problems? It 
must be said, that both these attitudes are wrong. 


No society can find its fulfilment, no social ideal can fructify, without the blossoming of the 
spirit of man. Mankind cannot realise the Divinity whose expression it is, without careful and 
constant attention being paid to the cultivation of the spirit. How else can this Divinity express 
itself than in and through individuals? We can apprehend only the jagath (world of change), this 
moving, inconstant, fantasia; we cannot see or hear, smell or taste or touch the Director of the 
fantasia, God. In the same manner, we can apprehend the individual, but not he entity named 
Society. For, Society is no separate, distinct, complex formed out of elemental components. 
Society is the divine proliferation produced by the Will Supreme. 


Think, speak and act in the attitude of Love 


Man is mortal; dust he is and to dust returneth. But, in him, there shines Aathma, as a spark of 
the immortal flame. This is not a term of flattery invented by the vedhaanthins. The Aathma is 
the source, the sustenance of every being and every organistaion of beings. It is the one and only 
Source, Substance and Sustenance. The Aathma is God; the particular is the Universal, no less. 
Therefore, recognise in each being, in each man, a brother, the child of God, and ignore all 
limiting thoughts and prejudices based on status, colour, class, nativity and caste. Sai is ever 
engaged in warning you and guiding.you so that you may think, speak and act in this attitude of 
Love. 


Society cannot justify itself by planning to divide the spoils gained out of Nature either in equal 
shares or unequal shares. The consummation that must inspire Society has to be---the 
establishment and elaboration in every social act and resolution, of the knowledge of the One 
Universal Aathma and the bliss that knowledge confers. Sai does not direct, "the Aathma has no 
death, therefore, kill the physical sheaths, the bodies." No. Sai does not encourage wars. Sai 
directs you to recognise the Aathma as your closest kin, closer than the members of your family, 
your blood-relations and your dearest descendents. When this is done, you will never more stray 
from the path of right, which alone can maintain that kinship. 


Familial attachment operates even against the performance of one's legitimate duties. But, 
attachment to the Divine fills that Duty with a new dedication which ensures both joy and 
success. It activates man as nothing else can: it confers on him during the process of doing his 
duty the highest wisdom. Hence the advice, Do not enter the prakrithi (objective world) in the 
hope of realising the Aathma; enter the objective world, after becoming aware of the Aathma; 
for, then you see Nature in a new light and your very life becomes a long festival of love. 


There are many who use their scholarship and intelligence, even Vedhic scholarship, for dreary 
debate and competitive contests. They are enamoured of their petty triumphs. They declare that 
society is an arena for winning such triumphs. But, Sai calls on you to seek and strengthen 
another type of society, where there is no room for such trivial desires. 


Man is too weak to keep his nature under control 


Disputative Vedhic scholars crave for the fruits of their endeavour and efforts, through ritual. 
Nature does not crave so; the clouds bring rain, as a homage to God who is their Lord. But, they 
attribute it to the efficacy of their rites and use it to inflate their ego. They play about, among the 
far-spreading branches of the tree of desire. They are entangled in the coils of the three 'ropes'--- 
the thaamasik, the raajasik and the saathwik (the ignorant, the egoistical and the good). 


You have to go beyond the three ropes, the three bonds. You have to be, ever, in the unchanging 
eternal Truth. You must be established in the One, as the One, with no trace or taste of two. 
Earning and garnering should not interest you; you must not be caught in the pursuit of Yoga 
(Divine communion) and Kshema (well being); for, you are FULL already and have no wants. 


The ideal of a high standard of life, instead of a high level of living, has played havoc with 
human society. A high level of living insists on morality, humility, detachment, compassion; so 
the competitive greed for luxury and conspicuous consumption receives no encouragement and 
will be destroyed. Now, man is the slave of his desires; he finds himself helpless to conquer the 
thirst for pleasure and luxury; he is too weak to keep his nature under control; he does not know 
how to arouse the Divine Consciousness that is latent in him. 


Give up reliance on the vagaries of the mind 


Mere moral practices or instruction cannot help you to achieve this. It can be done, only, by 
spiritual saadhana. For, it is a basic transformation. It involves the elimination of the Mind, 
which is the arch-obstacle in the path. Grace of God, if invoked and won, can endow you with 
power. And, the Grace is available within you, awaiting the call. 


Man must give up reliance on the vagaries of the mind. He must act ever in the consciousness of 
his innate Divinity. When that is done, his three-fold nature (composed of the Gunas--- 
thaamasik, raajasik and saathwik) will automatically express itself through only holy channels. 
That is the genuine Manifestation. 


Another point. The argument may be raised: If one has to give up the desire for comfort, luxury 
and pleasure, why should one be embroiled in society? This presupposes the belief that Society is 
justified only by the provision of such worldly joys. But, what kind of society can one build on 
such slender foundation? If built, it can be a society only in name, it will not be bound by mutual 
love and cooperation The strong will suppress the weak. Social relations will be marred by 
discontent. Even when attempts are made to divide the resources of Nature equally among all, 
the cordiality will be only on the surface. It will not be spontaneous. We can limit the resources 
available, but, we cannot limit greed, desire and craving. Desire involves seeking beyond the 
limits of possibility. What has to be done is, to pluck out desire by the roots; man must give up 
the desire for objective pleasure, based on the illusion that the World is many, manifold, multi- 
coloured etc., and not on the Truth that the world, nature, all creation, is ONE. When one Is 
conscious only of the ONE, who desires which? What can be acquired and enjoyed by the 
second person? The Aathmic Vision destroys the desire for objective joys, for, there is no object 
distinct from the subject. 


Experience the unity: "the whole world is one family" 


This is the true function of Society---to enable every member to realise this Aathmic Vision. The 
men and women bound by mutual interests in a society are not merely families, castes, classes, 
groups, or kinsmen, kinswomen; they are ONE Aathma. They are knit by the closest of family 


ties; not only the one society to which they feel they are bound, but, all MANKIND is ONE. 
Vasudhaiva kutumbakam, as the Shaasthras (moral codes) declare, "the whole world is one 
family." This unity must be experienced by every one. 


Natural resources and wealth are now being misused for the boosting of one's ego. But, when the 
Aathmic Unity is realised, they will promote the new way of life through Love. What is now 
‘mercy’ or legally enforced mutual 'help' will then be transformed into 'Divine Love' that can 
effectively purify the recipient and the giver. This consummation is beyond the region of 
common politics, ethics or economics. They cannot transform the receiver and thrill the giver, 
however much they attempt to equalise. They do not have the appeal and they have no power to 
sustain. The equality they establish will be haunted by a shadow, the shadow of the ego. This 
shadow can disappear only when identity as ONE is known and felt. 


It may be said that not all desires are wrong; the raajasik ones which harm and exploit others can 
be condemned; but should one renounce the Saathwik desires? Desire is desire, though the object 
may be beneficial and pure. The fruit of effort, the mind that seeks it, the vitality that activates 
the mind, life itself---every one of these has to be turned towards the Lord, with devotion born 
out of the vision of the ONE. 


Devotion to God goes ill with hatred towards others 


Those who argue that the Spiritual Path is for the Individual only, and that the Society should not 
be involved in it are committing a great mistake. It is like insisting that there should be light 
inside the house, and saying that it does not matter, if there is darkness outside. Devotion 
towards God goes ill with hatred towards, fellow-men. Fellow-men and the world must be seen 
ever in the mirror of Sath-Chith-Aanandha (Being, Awareness, Bliss Absolute). Kinship based 
on this recognition will alone last. That is the Sai Kinship. When you deepen that kinship, the 
True Presence, the Constant Presence of Sathya Sai will be yours. Do not be led away by your 
fancies into the jungle of words and feelings. Be firm, true to your innermost nature. 


Good and evil are based on the reactions of individuals; they are not inherent in things or events. 
Vedhaantha (Vedhic philosophy) or Atheism is accepted or rejected, when one likes or dislikes 
it. They do not depend on logical acceptance or rejection. Only experience can establish their 
validity. Who can delineate Godhood as thus and thus. Those who do so are indulging in a futile 
exercise. They have no authority for declaring it. If they claim the right, they are but conceited 
people relying on their limited intellects. 


Divinity is fully immanent in every one, it is patent for the eyes that can see dearly and deeply. 
Whoever denies this is only cheating himself of his reality. He cannot dismiss it by denial, either 
from himself or others. 


The conclusion, therefore, is inevitable, that, it is the duty of man to see in Society the 
expression of Divinity, and to use all his skill and effort to promote the welfare and prosperity of 
Society. Men must cultivate: (1) this expansive feeling, (2) this inclusive thinking and (3) this 
intuitive vision. Without these three, man is but an inert being; if he derides these three, he loses 
his title-to be human. 


All men are of one Divine Lineage 


The spirit of renunciation, adherence to virtue, the eagerness to co-operate, the sense of kinship-- 
-these are the characteristic signs of man. Life which considers the as encumberances cannot be 
valued as 'life.' 


The brotherhood of man can be translated into life only on the basis of the Aathmic Vision. All 
men thirst for peace, happiness and bliss. They are the precious heritage which is their right, for, 
they are God's Treasure. They can be earned only by recognising the bond that knits man to man. 
All men are of one lineage; they are of Divine Lineage. 


All men are cells in the One Divine organism, in the Divine body. That should be your faith, 
your fortune, your forte, your fullness. Awareness of this alone gives you the right to call 
yourself a man. Learn to live as men. This is the saadhana, this is the message of Sai. 


Brindhaavan, 1-3-1974 


30. Full circle or half circle? 


You have joined the Study Class at Dharmakshethra, and are engaged in poring over all types of 
books and gathering information and instruction. But, what have you gained? Knowledge about 
what this author says or that sage teaches is not what your Study Circle must aim to acquire. Not 
information, but transformation; not instruction, but construction should be the aim. Theoretical 
knowledge is a burden, unless it is practised, when it can be lightened into Wisdom, and 
assimilated into daily, life. Knowledge that does not give harmony and wholeness to the process 
of living is not worth acquiring. Every activity must be rendered valid and worthwhile by its 
contribution to the discovery of Truth, both of the Self and of Nature. Of what use is it to know 
everything about nature, if you do not know anything of the Self? Nature is only a projection of 
the Self, and so, unless the Self is known, knowledge of Nature is either distorted or deceptive. 
The Self is Aathma, of which the entire Creation is composed and so, knowledge of the Self 
alone can quench the thirst of man. 


You are the Infinite Universal Absolute 


You tell Me that you have read the Bhaagavatha Vaahini and all other. Vaahinis that I have 
written for you. Good. But, let Me ask you, have you put at least a single direction given in them 
into daily practice? Question yourself calmly and decide, to benefit by practising the processes 
mentioned in them. This is the proper plan of study---reading, reflection and regular application 
in life. Study is WORK. Inquiry into the value and applicability of what is studied is WORSHIP; 
the experience of the validity and value of the practice is WISDOM. ' 


You must first learn about 'what others think you are.' They deal with you as a body, with a 
specific name and an identifiable form. Then, you must learn about ‘what you think you are.' You 
are aware of your mind and its monkey tricks, its prejudices and preferences, its passions and 
pursuits. You are aware of your individual consciousness, of your version of 'me' and 'mine.' 
Learn about the mind as an instrument, which can harm you if used unwisely or help you, if used 
wisely. You' have to learn about yet another 'you!' The YOU ‘you really are.' For, you are neither 
the body, nor the mind. You are the embodiment of Purity, Power, Love, Bliss. The miserable 
little prison named Individuality’ has to be denied. You are free, but, you fancy you are bound 
and mope in the cell you imagine is limiting you. See the Truth that will set you free. It is within 
you, feel it. Feel it. You are not the body, the mind, the intellect, the brain, the heart, the 
denotable diminutive ego. You are the Infinite Universal Absolute. You have to get yourselves 
established firmly, unshakeably in this awareness. Paramahamsas (ascetics of the highest order) 
have that awareness. Every one of you can attain that state; it is your destiny, your duty to 
yourself. Merely finishing the study of book after book selves no purpose. Practising one line 
from any one book is enough to save you from aeons of darkness, of ignorance, and of yearning 
for Light. 


External and internal saadhanas are both essential 


Mere gymnastics will not do; the Bhagavath Geetha (the Song of God) can be used as a 
Bhagavath Duutha (Messenger from God) if only you welcome It into your heart. Once a famous 
Pandith was expounding the Bhagavath Geetha before a massive gathering; he gave an elaborate 
explanation of the shloka (verse) recounting the Glory of the Lord, through the media of different 
epithets. The Lord, he said, is Kavi (He knows the past, the present and the future), Puraana (the 
Ageless One, the effulgent light and life-spirit in all beings), Anu-shaasitha (He who lays down 


the Law which regulate the Mind and lead it on to its source and sustenance, the Universal 
Spirit). The audience was amazed at his encyclopaedic scholarship; but, that was all. He had no 
experience of the God whom he was delineating in such attractive colours. He had only learnt it 
from books, parrot-like from teachers. 


You must be guarded against pride that infects the scholar who has mastered a certain number of 
ancient texts. Do not judge others as inferior, because they do not participate in bhajans (group 
devotional singing), nagarasankeerthans (public devotional singing by moving groups), or your 
type of Study Circles. You can be very wrong, if you estimate a person's spiritual development, 
by mere externals. Inner purity cannot express itself through pompous show. Only He who sees 
into every heart can know who resides therein: Raama or Kaama (God or selfish desire). 


Of course, disciplines like bhajan, Nagarasankeerthan and japa (silent repetition of God's name) 
are needed for cleansing the mind; to cure the terrible malady of birth and death, the external 
medication of these saadhanas (spiritual practices) and internal medication of dhyaana and 
sheela (meditation and virtuous conduct) are both essential. External discipline is dharma vidhya 
(the acquisition of righteousness as a way of living); internal discipline is Brahma Vidhya (the 
acquisition of spiritual experience as a perpetual treasure). That is why the Vedhas command 
"Sathyam Vadha, Dharmam Chara"---"Always speak Truth. Always do Right." This is. the way 
to God. 


Have the goal of putting into practice what you read 


Every one of you is a pilgrim on that road proceeding at your own pace, according to your 
qualification and the stage reached by its means. The advice that appeals to one of you or applies 
to one of you might not be appropriate to another, who has travelled less distance or reached a 
more advanced state. When I tell one person to follow one line of saadhana (spiritual discipline), 
it is specifically for his benefit; do not take it as prescription for your benefit also, saying, 
"Swaami told him thus; let me also adopt it." Each has a different make-up---mental, physical 
and spiritual. The doctor directs one patient to drink curds and prohibits another from drinking it. 
When a man is obese, he advises certain types of food;, when he is lean, he advises other types. 
When doctors who treat diseases of the body have to prescribe different remedies, how much 
more specific and personal must be the remedies for the complex and varied conditions of mental 
situations and spiritual yearnings and aspirations? 


Unless you make earnest inquiry, you cannot discover the remedy applicable to your 
temperament and its problems. Study with faith and devotion. Delve into the significance and the 
meaning of what you read; and, always have before you the goal of putting what you read into 
practice. Unless you do so, the Study Circle will remain a half-Circle for ever; it cannot be a full 
Circle. 


And, pay attention to one other point also. Do not confine your Studies to this Circle and these 
Books. The whole Universe is University for you. You can imbibe wisdom from the sky, the 
clouds, the mountains, the rivers, the daily phenomena of sunrise and sunset, the seasons, birds, 
trees, flowers, the insects---in fact, all beings and things in Nature. Approach these teachers, with 
awe, reverence and humility; they will respond with their lessons. Do not worry that you have no 
mastery of Samskrith; Samskaar (purificatory act) is enough equipment, for the University that 
lies around you. Samskrith is the language of the ancient Scriptures and of Classical Literature; 
Samskaar is the Language of the Heart, the refined medium of fruitful communion with Nature, 
in all the manifold outpourings of Divinity. 


Bombay, 3-3-1974 


Where Divinity is sought after, one ought always to behave in the 
spirit of Love, devoid of the slightest trace of hate, envy and 
anger... When one cultivates the inner look, one attains the 


conviction of the basic equality of all. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


31. To those who are Mine 


THE world is a furnace and factory; where man has to shape destiny by his honest untiring 
efforts. He who takes up this challenge and spends his allotted years and the skill and 
intelligence with which he is endowed, in purposeful activity, is really entitled to the status of 
Karma Yogi. You, who work in these Deogiri Mines are genuine Karma Yogis. For, from dawn 
to dusk, you utilise every ounce of your energy in work that is beneficial to yourself and the 
people of this country. You do not waste time in wasteful habits; you devote your strength and 
stamina for productive aims; you strive to feed and foster your wives and children and sit down 
for your meals with them in the happy family circle. Really God is delighted to reside in your 
hearts. Keep the heart pure, unsullied by evil or vice. Let the rays of Love' illumine it. Let the 
foul bats of hatred and greed fly away from the cavity of your hearts; let the clean air of mutual 
cooperation and help render the cavity safe and sweet. 


You see these trees; they are able to stand firm and grow, because of the roots that have spread 
out of your sight. You see this garland in my hand. The hundreds of flowers are held together by 
a thread, which you do not see. You see this building over there; the walls have risen so high, 
because the foundations inside the earth are also high, though you cannot see them. So also, this 
world is so plentiful, so charming, so rich, so comfortable, so regular in its movements and 
moods, because it has an unseen master and law-giver, God. The unseen is the sustainer of the 
Seen. 


The rich desire more and so are disappointed more 


Have faith in His Grace, and lead a virtuous life, a life devoted to service of the weak, a life 
spent in thoughts about the might and glory of God. The nation relies on you to-supply it with 
very essential commodities; you are in duty bound to answer that call. Pray that you may carry 
out that duty well. God will certainly answer your prayer, for, you are so simple and innocent. 
Let Me tell you that you are really more fortunate than most of the so-called rich, for, the rich do 
not sleep as soundly as you. Their burden of worry is much heavier; they desire more and so are 
disappointed more. They are tempted into worse and worse styles of living and so, they alienate 
themselves more and more from Grace. 


When you spend your hours in thoughts about God, you are also free from evil ways. You will 
not be tempted to abuse others or harm them in any way. You live in Love, accepting all the 
events of life as His Gifts. Homes such as yours are, really speaking, heavens on earth; the joy 
that bubbles in your hearts is the symbol of Vaikuntha; the earnestness and care that you evince 
in your work is the sign of Kailaash, the abode of Shiva. Hearts dedicated to these noble ideals 
are indeed 'golden.' They cannot be tarnished by the ups and downs of life; they can remain 
unaffected and pure. 


Approach your work in a reverential spirit 


You are drawing wealth out of Prakrithi (Nature). Prakrithi is the manifestation of Purusha 
(God). When you desire to master Prakrithi, and bend it for your needs, you have to earn the 
Grace of Purusha. So, approach your work in a reverential humble spirit. Raavana sought Seetha 
(who is Prakrithi, since she was the daughter of the Earth, discovered by Janaka in the furrow on 
the field he was ploughing). But, .he did not first win the Grace of Raama, the Purusha (God), 
who is the master of Nature. So he brought untold disaster on his head and on the heads of all his 
kinsmen, clan, and followers. Everyday before you begin work, pray to God a few minutes at 


least; and, at the end of the day, when the work is over, gather in some consecrated spot, a 
mandhir (hall of worship), and offer grateful thanks to the Lord, singing his name and meditating 
on his majesty. That will make you real Karmayogins, even heroes of the Karma path. 


This place is full of charm; it is quiet, with a forest all around. Such retreats are sought after by 
saadhaks (spiritual aspirants) and sages, but, you have the luck to be working in these 
surroundings. This is a thapovan (hermitage), I should say, a spot which aspirants would love to 
settle down in. I bless that you all have lives of joy and happiness, of love and service, of the 
ceaseless shower of Divine Grace. 


Deogiri Mines, 9-3-1974 


32. The second visit 


EMBODIMENTS of the Divine Aathma! I am addressing you thus, so that you may recall to 
your minds, at least occasionally; the noble truths that are treasured for your sake in the culture 
of Bhaarath; meditate on its width and depth and derive solace and strength therefrom. That is 
your privilege; the Avathaar (divine incarnation) has come to call your attention to the 
profundity and profitableness of the Dharma (righteousness) that Bhaarath has been upholding 
for centuries, but, which is undergoing neglect at the hands of the very children of this land. 
Bhaarath was the home of many centres from where the message of eternal peace and Universal 
Love spread all over the world; but, today; it is in the grip of fear and anxiety, hatred and greed. 
The ways in which man spends his days are really ludicrous in the extreme. He craves happiness 
and is ever on the go in all directions in its pursuit. And, when he finds that when secured, the 
happiness is but a flash in the pan of misery, he starts cursing himself and' others. Though all the 
sacred books, all the saints of all the lands and all the creeds, and all the teachers and preachers 
have been saying that God alone is the source and spring of lasting happiness, man turns a deaf 
ear to the counsel and goes his own blind way. 


The more you have, greater the bother and anxiety 


There is the story of a young man who was riding a cycle on a dark night along a crowded road; 
the policeman on duty asked him to stop and alight, for, he had no lamp on his cycle. The fellow, 
however, shouted, "Policeman! Keep away. Of course, I have no lamp; but, beware, I have no 
brake, either!" That is the pathetic' condition of every one now. No one has the lamp of wisdom, 
or the brake of sense-control. How then can they go along the road to Aanandha (divine bliss), 
without causing injury to themselves or others? The cyclist must have both; man too has need of 
wisdom and self-control. Or else, he is certain to ruin this chance he has got to save himself. 


Man has been sent into the world, in order that he may use the time and the opportunity to realise 
the truth that he is not man, but God. The wave dances with the wind, basks in the Sun, frisks in 
the rain, imagining it is playing on the breast of the Sea; it does not know that it is the Sea itself. 
Until it realises that truth, it will be tossed up and down; when it knows it, it can lie calm and 
collected at peace with itself. 


Food, clothing, shelter---these are incidental; the more you have, the greater the ill-health, the 
bother, the anxiety, the fear. And, nothing can save you from death, when you have to leave 
everything and disappear from the scene. If you are good, if you serve others to the best of your 
ability, and shower Love on all, then, though you may be away, your name will remain in the 
memory of man. That is the marble monument you can legitimately covet and work for. But, it is 
your duty to serve, and to be good, whether men honour you or throw scorn at you. What do you 
say, to your Master or Guru? "I Liberation want," or, "I Aanandha want," isn't it? Well. The 
means of getting it is in your own hands. Liberation and Aanandha (bliss) are in your hands 
already, packed between the upper cover (I) and the lower cover (want). 'l' means the 'ego;' 'want' 
means 'desire.' Remove the two covers, the ego and the desire. What remains is Liberation, 
Aanandha. In order to remove the upper and lower covers, intelligence is wanted. That is why 
Gandhiji went round the country with the prayer Sabko Sanmathi dhe Bhagavan: "0 Lord, Give 
every one good intelligence." 


Discover ways and means of expanding Love 


Intelligence has to be directed to good ends; to seek and discover ways and means of expanding 
one's Love and deepening one's compassion. It should not descend to cynicism, and the search 
for faults in others. When a rose is held in the hand, its fragrance can give the holder joy; the 
fragrance can be enjoyed by people standing near. So too, when your intelligence is saturated 
with the fragrance of virtue and charity you can derive contentment and joy, and those around 
you also can share in the peace and harmony. 


It was as early as 1949 that I first came to Saandur State. At that time, there was no chance like 
this for Me to meet so many of you and tell you about such valuable spiritual principles. 
Everything in its own good time, as the saying goes. A flower blooms; but, a long time elapses 
before it grows into a fruit and is filled ,with nectarine juice. A child is born; but, he takes a long 
time to grow into a strong intelligent member of society. I am glad I came now and was able to 
meet and bless so many thousands of the people of Saandur. 


Saandur, 10-3-1974 


When you are in bed, asleep, dreaming and wandering through 
varied escapades and experiences, what has happened to the body 
which you had fostered as you yourself?. 


And while in deep sleep, where have all the levels of consciousness 
taken refuge? Sleep is short death: death is a long sleep. 


You, the T in you, endow the inert material vehicle called body 
consciousness. You are the Cosmic Consciousness, God, 
temporarily in the role of 'I.' 


The body-mind-complex is the instrument to be utilised for that 
Will. This is the message of Rig Vedha. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


33. The poetry of Love 


ANTICIPATING the rains at the appropriate time of the year, as dictated by previous experience 
of himself and his forefathers, the ryot prepares the field with plough and harrow; then, when the 
rains come and soak the furrows, he sows the seeds, so that they may sprout and shoot through 
the soil. If he delays or desists, how can he reap the harvest? Or, if, when the crop is ready for 
the sickle, he does not reap the sheaves and bundles them home, how can his granary be filled 
with the food he needs must have? 


The rain is the gift of God; man can only pray for it, and propitiate God by righteousness. The 
ploughing, the sowing, the weeding and the reaping are the saadhanas man must undertake to 
deserve the Grace and to get the strength to thank God for His Gifts. 


Without God, life is like a school without a teacher; it is a wire with no current passing through 
it; it is a body with no soul. God is in us, around us and beyond us; as the air is imperceptible in 
the absence of breeze or of things that it moves; so God too can be known only by His 
manifestation in man and beast, plant and bird, in things and beings all around us. No one yet 
knows the mystery of the electric current, why it behaves so, what is the exact nature of its origin 
and flow; but, yet it is manipulated into a thousand uses and it is manifesting through a thousand 
appliances and instruments. 


God is a Reality ever present in every being 


So too, God is present everywhere; but we can understand only that part- of Him that manifests 
before our cognition. Ordinary people will swear that the earth does not move at all; it is held 
forth in poetry as a symbol of stability. But, it has two motions, both unbelievably fast! It rotates 
on its own axis at a speed which exceeds a thousand miles per hour; even while rotating so, the 
earth moves round the Sun at an astonishing rate of speed! But, do we notice it while it happens? 


God too is a reality, ever present in us and in every being; but, we miss Him, as we miss the 
movement of the earth. We have to infer God through proofs and evidences of His Providence, 
His Grace, His Majesty and His Glory, just as we infer the movements of the earth, the Moon 
and the Stars, by watching the sky, the seasons and the precise procession of day and night. 


We cannot describe God in the vocabulary learnt upon the earth. We have to experience the Bliss 
of realising Him as the core of our being. Man is endowed with a sense of wonder and awe, the 
sense which makes him either Karma Yogi (a participant), Jnaana Yogi (an inquirer into the 
mystery) or Bhakthi Yogi (a devout adorer). When he suppresses or ignores or bypasses this 
sense of wonder, he gets involved in the physical world, physical needs and physical pursuits. He 
starts worshipping Mammon and he strays away from the good, the just and the beautiful. He 
barters the Chalice of Bliss for a mouthful of dust. 


Poets have to discover God first 


Since we have today a few poets reading their poems before us, I am tempted to tell them 
something about their art. The poets of today are in the forefront of those who regard God as 
dead, a decorative piece, if not an encumbrance or a nuisance! They cater to their fans sweets 
coated with fashionable slogans and catchy phrases. They never care for the higher values of life, 
or the lasting ideals for living. Their poetry deals with external objects, sensuous emotions, and 
trivial tinsel. It is all extremely shallow and sapless. 


Real poetry emanates from the call of the Divine within, to express itself in sublime vocabulary. 
It grants lasting joy to the poet as well as the reader. It does not lower one's estimate of the world 
and its Creator. Readers must be drawn more often to read the poem, and each time they browse 
on it and ruminate over its lines, new vistas of meaning must open up before their minds. Then 
only can the poem be for all time and for all men. 


Poets have to discover God first and then, disseminate their ecstasy among those that are thirsty 
for that bliss. And, who has not got that thirst deep within himself? Every one is an exile, pining 
for his home in God. The pilgrimage towards God can be made smooth, quick and safe, by the 
fight type of poets. A blind person or a lame person cannot cross a river at the ford, all by 
himself. The lame man can ride on the shoulders of the blind man and lead him across, safe. For, 
he has the eye and the other has the purposefulness and the strength. The poet has the eye full of 
experience; he knows the path; he can avoid the pitfalls and help others to do likewise. He can 
encourage, enthuse. 


In the same manner, a person cannot, by himself, acquire the jnaana (spiritual wisdom) or 
discover the path to realise the soul within him; the poet is the Guru (Preceptor) for such earnest 
Saadhakas (spiritual aspirants). He must be aware of this high role, as the Rishis (sages) of old 
were aware; he must train himself for this high status. When I speak to you, I do not pause to 
examine whether I am following your rules of grammar; the words pour from the heart, full of 
Prema (divine love). The heart renders all words sweet and soft. Sweet words and sweet manners 
lead to sweet actions and sweet reactions. 


There is no power more effective than Love 


Fill the heart with love; then, the words coming out of the heart will be full of vitality and power. 
There is no Shakthi (Power) more effective than Prema (Love). The grammar of Love makes the 
words enter the hearts of the listeners and moves them into acceptance, appreciation and action. 


A child's prattle has no grammar, but, it wins the love of the mother. Raamakrishna 
Paramahamsa did not know the word ‘pension’; he said 'pence' once, instead of pension. Swaami 
Vivekaananda interposed with the correct word, but, the Paramahamsa said that the word did not 
matter, it was enough if what was meant to be communicated was understood. The bhaava (the 
idea intended to be communicated) is the real thing; the bhaasha (language in which it is 
clothed) is of superficial interest only. I want you to imbibe the bhaava; I want the poets to 
inculcate pure bhaava, not pretty bhaasha. 


If you understand the bhaava which I am transmitting, then you can become genuine devotees 
and Saadhakas, and progress on the path of self-realisation. Now, there are bhakthas (devotees) 
by the million! They are increasing daily in number. And you might have noticed, Sai Babas too 
have become very large in number! Also, people claiming association with Me, claiming that I 
have blessed them more plentifully than others, and authorised them to go about among the 
bhakthas and gain importance by collecting funds or donations! 


Real devotees will never announce such absurd claims or listen to such claims made by others. A 
true devotee will be steadfast in faith, whatever the ups and downs Of worldly fortune. He prays 
to the Lord not for padhaartham (material objects or the fulfilment of worldly desires), but, for 
Para-ar-tham (the happiness that is supra-worldly). The Paandavas were such devotees and so, 
Krishna declared that He dwells in the heart of every one of those five brothers, as well as of 
their queen, Dhroupadhi. They are five examples for mankind, in this Kali yuga (Iron Age). I 


exhort every one to cultivate Prema, for, I am Prema, and when you manifest Prema, you are 
only expressing Me, the Indweller of your heart. 


Hyderabad, 1-4-1974 


Individual spiritual practice is the negative pole and service is the 
positive pole. The conjunction of both poles can alone bring 
success. The mind carries the Divine Principle (the Light of Love) 
and conveys it to all who contact it. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


34. Limits that liberate 


THIS is a Yajna, a holy ritual. The participants in this 'sacrifice' can consider themselves 
rewarded if they acquire two benefits therefrom: Understanding the true state of Prakrithi 
(Nature) and Visualising the true path of spiritual effort. The students and teachers who have 
come from the far comers of this country and from beyond the seas are the officiating priests; 
they have to be vigilant and full of care, lest the Yajna be tarnished by sloth, waywardness. In the 
sacrificial fire it is customary to pour ghee and a variety of precious articles as oblation. But, 
here, in the fire of this Yajna, I call upon you to offer your selfishness and false pride. This Yajna 
needs two ceremonial rites: fix your mind on the higher truth; expand your sympathy and love so 
that they may encompass all living beings and activate you towards real service. 


For, Life is a journey from the position 'T' to the position 'WE,' from the singular to the plural, 
from the imprisoned One to the liberated One, who is seen in the Many. The vision of the One, 
immanent in the obvious Many is the fulfilment of all the years of one's life. This is the teaching 
contained in the ancient texts and scriptures. But, these have been forgotten, ever since the minds 
of the people of this land were won over by Western Civilisation. When this happened, the goal 
of life became the amassing of money and not the awareness of the Self. 


Man has in him a spark of the Divine 


What has to be gained is not money, but, virtue. The means of sustenance are sought after and 
collected by birds and beasts; there is nothing specially human in this pursuit. When intelligence 
is used for the acquisition of food and physical comforts, man is lost. in animal pursuits. Human 
life is much more meaningful than that of birds and beasts. Man has in him a spark of the Divine; 
his body is the temple of God. So he must live in such a manner that the innate Divinity 
expresses Itself through Love, through service of others, and through the recognition of the 
Constant Presence of God, in him and all around him. When man dedicates his skills to the 
search for food, he estranges himself from the light that shines within him, the Aathma. 


Man consumes as food many living beings, plants, eggs, fish, cattle, sheep, etc. These are born as 
human beings, on account of this act of consumption. But, since they have not had the education 
which can reveal the God within, they vegetate or stay brutish, without appropriate ticket or 
passport for rising higher than the human status in which they have been hurriedly placed. Like 
most men, they roll along from womb to tomb, bondslaves to the senses and the ills that the 
bondage brings inevitably in its train. Do not be content with slavery; yearn to reach the Sun of 
Splendour, the Source of Perfect Wisdom. 


Attempt to assimilate our ancient culture 


Man does not discriminate and discover the special excellence of his own faith, as compared 
with the faiths of others, or, the difference between his beliefs and religion and the beliefs and 
religion that others hold dear. He does not evaluate his viewpoint, in the light of the viewpoints 
and attitudes of others. He does not weigh his acts and judge them, as worthwhile or waste. The 
seers and sages of India have laid emphasis on this discipline and prescribed measures to achieve 
these ends. But, now Indians have no knowledge of this discipline or of its value. 


As a consequence, the sons and daughters of India are pitifully silent, when cynics and purblind 
critics discredit their ancient culture and point the finger of scorn at what they interpret, as 
absurdities and inconsistencies. Do not join such people in their campaign of vilification. On the 


other hand, attempt to assimilate the culture and yearn to experience the Bliss it promises. It is 
indeed a great shame that people calling themselves Indians are not informed enough or 
experienced enough to silence the opponents and traducers of Indian Culture. 


The fault lies in the system of education that does not give them even a glimpse into the glory. 
The country is now sunk in fear and the cure lies in your understanding the remedies prescribed 
in-the ancient texts, practising them and propagating them. You are now being led away by 
people who do not know the true characteristics of that Culture. And, the ideas you have about 
the epics and the Puraanas (mythological stories), the Shaasthras (spiritual sciences) and the 
Vedhas (sacred scriptures of the Hindhus) are warped by the prejudices that these people have 
implanted in you. For example, the story of Virgin Mary giving birth to Jesus Christ is acclaimed 
as an evidence of Divine Will, but, you who accept this interpretation, are not able to affirm that 
the birth of Karna to Virgin Kunthidhevi is equally an evidence of the same Divine Will. You are 
apologetic and ashamed when the fact of Karna's birth as a result of Divine Will is twisted and 
turned by the so-called scholars of today. 


Students are woefully deficient in general knowledge 


People who are completely ignorant have no doubts or misgivings; those who are fully wise, too, 
have no doubts or misgivings. It is the half-baked variety of scholars and students that fall into 
the traps laid by the prejudiced and perverted. We hope that your contact with the ripe mind, the 
intelligent learning and the experience-filled hearts of those who come to speak to you during the 
course of this Camp will strengthen your resolve and enthuse you to foster and support the 
principles underlying Indian Culture. 


Education should not aim at merely making students get acquainted with a pile of books. It 
should insist on their assimilating the essence of the teaching which they elaborate. Now, 
students direct all their efforts towards acquiring more and more knowledge of just one 
specialised branch of learning. So, they are woefully deficient in general knowledge, and are 
unable to adjust their behaviour or conduct, and survive the vagaries of fortune. 


Minister Ghorpade referred to the relationship between Science and Religion. Of course, science 
has to develop more and more, for, science makes life more comfortable. It has given man many 
items that make living faster, more entertaining, and more standardised. But the trouble is that 
while Science and Technology have advanced by leaps and bounds, man has not learnt the art of 
using them in the right manner. He has allowed Science and Technology full licence to cater to 
his sensual desires and thereby demeaned his stature and status. 


Humanness and Godness co-exist as inseparables 


You must avoid this mistake. At this age-period when your intelligence, your alertness, your 
awareness are all in good condition, you must learn how to keep your impulses under control, 
and to master the senses that tend to drag you into wrong and vicious paths. When the desire for 
pleasure overcomes your reason and your innate goodness, you are left only with the shape and 
form of a human being; you have no right to be called a human being. 


Humanness and Godness co-exist as inseparables; they are the negative and positive poles, that 
have to be together to produce-the warmth of love and the light of wisdom. Once you have 
established your Self in the Higher Self, you would not get lost; you can then wander freely in 
the realms of the Unreal. If you have not experienced the Self as a spark of the Supreme Self, 


your wanderings will be as fruitless as the trekkings that animals do, by instinct. So try to 
transform the humanness with which you are endowed, into the Divinity which is its real core. 


The Universe is the body of God; every particle in it is filled with God, His Glory, His Might, 
His Inscrutability. Believe that God is the inner Truth in every thing and being. He is Truth, He 
is Wisdom. He is Eternal. Be humble, before the evidences of His Power and Majesty. 


It is the God in you that guides and guards you 


We have the example of Hiranyakashipu, the father of Prahlaadha. He was the repository of 
enormous knowledge. He had won enormous skills through his asceticism and efforts. He was so 
proud of his achievements that he denied God, and declared that he had no need for him. But, a 
day came, when even he had to call out and clamour for God. So too, you may deny or dismiss 
God, out of ignorance or perversity; but, a day will come when you have to pray for his 
compassion. 


You are God in reality. It is the God in you that guides you and guards you. When you deny 
God, it is tantamount to your arguing, "I am bom of a barren woman," or asserting very 
vociferously, "Iam incurably dumb!" It is as absurd as denying yourself. This great Truth is well 
explained in the scriptures of this land, and every one of you has the right to know this heritage. 


The seers of this land have marked out the limits and lines, to be respected by aspiring men. The 
Vedhas give these injunctions: Maathru dhevo bhava; pithru dhevo bhava; aachaarya dhevo 
bhava; Sathyam Vadha; Dharmam Chara.---"Revere your mother as God; Revere your father as 
God; Revere your Teacher as God; Speak Truth; Act Righteously." These five are as the five 
vital airs that sustain the body of man. Believe them as such; have unshakeable faith, that they 
have been laid down for your material and spiritual progress. Practise these precepts sincerely 
and without slackening. That will ensure success in your pilgrimage from humanness to Divinity. 


If you revere your parents today, your children will revere you in the coming days; for, the 
present shapes the face of the future, as it was, in its turn, shaped by the past. That is why I 
always insist, 'Be Good, See Good, Do Good; this is the way to God". 


Pleasure is but the interval between two pains 


When you return to your places after the Summer Course, each one of you must be equipped 
with the knowledge of these five disciplines and the fervour to practice them in your daily lives. 
Concentrate your attention for the full period on this task; do not mind the inconveniences, the 
change in diet, or the regulation of play and entertainment. Bear with these handicaps and rules 
patiently and gladly. 


Life is all the sweeter for these restrictions and limits. You will encounter many obstacles in life, 
but do not be disheartened by them. Pleasure and pain alternate in life; in fact, pleasure is but the 
interval between two pains! And that makes it welcome and worthwhile. Have the future always 
in view, and put up with pain now, so that you can meet it boldly when it befalls you later in life. 
Thyaaga (selfless sacrifice)'is the real Yoga (divine communion); renounce and become a master 
of yourself. Bhoga (enjoyment) brings about roga (disease); indulgence is the cause of disease. 


Treat all who are sharing this Camp with you as brothers and sisters. Remember ever the 
brotherhood of man and the fatherhood of God. People talk glibly while on platforms facing vast 
gatherings "Brothers and Sisters!" But are they prepared to divide their property among the 
brothers and sisters? Of course, you need not go as far as that; but, you must recognise the one 


Divine Principle that animates all. When you are inspired by that belief, surely, your eyes and 
ears will refuse to note differences and distortions. Your hands will refuse to engage themselves 
in low activities; your tongue will not tarnish itself by low talk; your mind will not entertain low 
thoughts and ideas. Resolve that you will attain and maintain this purity in thought, word and 
deed. 


That is the central message of Indian Culture, which will be explained to you in all its interesting 
facets by the lecturers who have responded to the invitation of the Organisers. 


Brindhaavan, 20-5-1974 


The message of "Fatherhood of God and the Brotherhood of Man," 
which Jesus Christ proclaimed 2000 years ago, should become a 
living faith for the achievement of real peace and the unity of 
mankind. 


The oneness of all creation affirmed by the ancient seers and sages 
must be expressed in a transcendental love which embraces all 
people regardless of creed, community or language. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


35. Terrible and tender 


YAATHE Rudhra Shiva thanoo raghora paapa Kaasini---The Prajaapathi, who is the Divine 
Inspirer of the Vedhas has two natures and names, two forms and features---the terrible known as 
Rudhra, and the tender known as Shiva. When the Nara-simha Incarnation of God, human with 
the head of a lion, emerged from the pillar in the Audience Hall of Hiranyakashipu, Prahlaadha, 
his little son, saw Him as tender, charming and compassionate. For, he was saturated with 
devotion to God. But, the father who ignored God and dared to insult Him and injure His 
devotees, saw before him a terror-striking .form of total destruction. While 'Prahlaadha sang and 
danced in ecstasy, Hiranyakashipu shivered and shook in fear. It is therefore clear that man 
visualises in the One God the two opposites of terror and tenderness, reflections of his own 
mental make-up. 


The One God manifests Himself in these two aspects, so that the world may be sustained and 
fostered, improved and cleansed. These two---the terrible and the tender---are the characteristics 
found together in every single thing on earth, for, are not they all parts of the selfsame God? 


It is the mind that decides the desire 


Take the articles of food. it has the Shivam aspect, when taken in, intelligently and in moderate 
quantities. It can also be Rudhram, or devastating in its effects, if taken unintelligently and in 
excess. Every thing or thought that obstructs t-he surge of Aanandha (divine bliss)---every such 
situation, experience, idea---is Rudhra; every step towards limitation, regulation, control, 
progress, sublimation, is tender, Shivam, auspicious, fruitful, beneficial. 


It is the desire which haunts man that is responsible for making the one item, food, either a boon 
or a bane. It is the mind that decides the desire and directs it. A sharp knife can be used for 
slicing fruit or for stabbing: in the hands of a surgeon, it can save a life, rather than destroy one. 
The mind can liberate you from bondage or bind you more tightly with the objective world. 


God is Omnipresent, the inner motivator in every being. So, we have to' posit Him as resident in, 
and manipulating the mind too. When He manipulates it to our benefit we can call Him, Shivam; 
when He playfully or purposefully turns it against our best interests, we can call Him, Rudhra. 


One point has to be emphasised here. We should not identify God as Shivam when we get 
happiness and Rudhram when we fall into misery. For, happiness and misery are not two distinct 
experiences. The absence of one is the presence of the other. Each is inextricably intertwined 
with the other. Undiluted happiness is a chimera; pleasure is the interval between two moments 
of pain; pain is the gap between two moments of pleasure. 


God is eager to award victory to the aspirants 


Again, God assumes or appears to assume the terrible aspect only to ensure the welfare of 
mankind and the happiness of the worlds. It is mentioned in the Epics and Puraanas that God 
placed various temptations and tribulations in the path of ascetics and aspirants, thus 
demonstrating that He is either cruel or vindictive or positively mischievous! No! God has no 
desire to prevent or postpone their spiritual progress; nor has He any apprehension that they 
might trouble Him if they succeed! He is eager to award them the victory they seek; that is the 
reason why He puts them through the obstacles. 


Being students, you know very well, that the University has prescribed certain examinations, at 
the end of every academic year. Do you ascribe tiffs system to any desire for persecuting you? 


Do you think it is a sign of displeasure? You know that they are conducted so that you could be 
promoted, aren't they? The Yogins, saadhaks, and aspirants are being tested by God, only to 
promote them. Instead of accepting the tests as signs of His Care and Love, people grow 
desperate and defeatist; they cry out, "0 God! We cannot face these tests," just as students cry 
out, "We don't want examinations!" How then can progress be measured and achievement 
recognised? Those who pilot planes or drive cars or captain ships must possess certificates of 
having attained the required proficiency. They are tested before the certificates are awarded. 
Those saadhaks, who protest and clamour when tests confront them, are only proclaiming 
themselves as unworthy of higher positions, as content to remain where they are. 


God's test of Emperor Sibi's spirit of renunciation 


The story of Emperor Sibi is an illustration of this truth. Though endowed with power and 
authority, prosperity and wealth, Sibi was a genuine Saadhak, having attained a high stage in 
detachment and the spirit of renunciation. God decided to discover whether his achievements 
were deep-rooted and unshakeable. Agni (the God of Fire) and Indhra (God of the Heavenly 
Regions) took on the forms of a dove and a hawk. The hawk (Indhra) pursued the dove (Agm) 
across the sky, until the frightened bird fell into the lap of Sibi sitting on his throne, pleading for 
protection from the hawk. 


As befitted his Dharma, Sibi gave word that he would save the dove from its enemy and assured 
full protection for it. At that moment, the hawk presented itself before the Emperor and 
demanded its meal, its legitimate prey. "I am hungry, I had secured my food, you have deprived 
me of my meal," it complained. "Of what use is all your vaunted spirituality, if you rob me of my 
meal?" it lamented. At this, Sibi said, "Yes, I shall slice off flesh from my body weighing as 
much as this dove weighs; you can appease your hunger with that." 


The hawk agreed; a balance was brought; the dove was placed on one pan, pieces of flesh cut 
from the body of Sibi were placed in the other pan. But, lo and behold, however many pieces or 
flesh were laid thereon, the pan on which the dove sat did not rise at all! It was indeed a mystery 
how a bird could weigh so much. At last, Sibi said, "Well. You can take all of me. Eat me whole. 
Here am I at your disposal." No sooner did he utter these words than the hawk became Indhra 
and the dove was transformed into Agni---Gods effulgent in their Glory! They were supremely 
happy at the depth of Sibi's spirit of renunciation; they blessed him profusely and departed. 


Though Indhra and Agni might appear to be terribly cruel in their dealings with Sibi, it was 
indeed only a test to provide him a chance to express his sovereign qualities of self-control, 
compassion, and charity. 


Krishna's test for Emperor Mayuuradhwaja 


The Mahaabhaaratha has a fine story which proves the same point. The fact that God might 
assume terrible aspects in order to examine attainment and establish the truth of achievement is 
witnessed in the story of Mayuuradhwaja. The Paandavas celebrated the Aswamedha Yaaga 
(Horse Sacrifice), and as part of that ceremony released the chosen horse so that it may take its 
own course across the length and breadth of the land. Whoever stops and binds the horse is 
thereby challenging the sacrificant for a fight; he has to win back the horse, after defeating the 
audacious obstructionist! 


Mayuuradhwaaja, a great devotee of Krishna, a virtuous ruler, a wise man learned in the Vedhas, 
a man of deep compassion, held the horse, and Arjuna, the Paandava hero decided to meet him in 


battle. But, Krishna advised him to desist; for, he desired to demonstrate to Arjuna the devotion 
of Mayuuradhwaja which far surpassed his own; he also desired to proclaim to the whole world, 
the heights that Mayuuradhwaja could reach in the realm of self-sacrifice and truthfulness. 


So, He proposed that He and Arjuna proceed to Mayuuradhwaja's palace in the guise of a pair of 
Brahmins, seeking a meal. They were welcomed by the King, who offered them rich hospitality. 
But, before they could eat the very first mouthful, Krishna stopped very dramatically and recited 
a tale of woe. 


Emperor's humility rewarded, Arjuna's pride humbled 


"Listen! O Soft-hearted Emperor! As we were coming along through a forest on the border of 
your empire, a tiger snatched away the young son of my companion here. Before we could come 
up with the beast, it had swallowed half the body; but, it heard our piteous appeal, and promised 
to release the boy, and return him alive to us, provided it is given as substitute, one half of the 
sanctifying body of the pure and holy Emperor of the land, Mayuuradhwaja. How can we relish 
your hospitality with this agony in our hearts? Promise to give the tiger half your body in 
exchange for the full living body of this Brahmin boy, and then, we shall partake of your 
hospitality". Mayuuradhwaja agreed most gladly; when the lunch was over, he sat on the floor 
and instructed his queen and his son to saw his body into two halves. 


They placed the saw on the head and began the process of division, with the Brahmins 
witnessing the operation. They saw drops of tears in the left eye of the King. Krishna said, "O 
You are giving us the promised gift with tears, not with unalloyed willingness. I cannot accept 
anything given with tears." But Mayuuradhwaja replied, "Sir, If I am unwilling or hesitating, 
both eyes should shed tears, shouldn't they? Only the left eye is shedding them now; and the 
reason is this- the right half is being used for a highly sacred purpose, to save a person from cruel 
death. But, what will happen to the left half? Cast away, to be eaten by dogs and vultures? So, 
the left half-is weeping, but the right half is jubilant that it is being put to some meritorious 
purpose." At that moment, Krishna manifested Himself to the great Mayuuradhwaja in all His 
Glory and Majesty; He blessed him that he would have Krishna always installed in his heart and 
that he would be ever blissful and content. Arjuna too realised that there were devotees of 
Krishna far more advanced than he was His pride was humbled. Mayuuradhwaja's humility was 
rewarded. 


Tests such as these are evidences of Grace rather than of anger. The terrible aspect of God is not 
terrible in essence. God is described in the scriptural texts as, Raso vai sah---"He is sweetness 
Itself." How can sweetness ever become bitter? Godhead is a spotlessly clean mirror; you see in 
It your own reflection. When you have terror-striking propensities, the reflection you see will 
strike terror into you. When you have soft harmless propensities, the reflection will be tender and 
soft. Do not lay the blame on Godhead, as you are prone to do. When everything goes right, you 
say that God has come close to you; when something goes wrong, you say that God has deserted 
you and gone afar! He does not move far or near. The distance from Him to you is as much as 
the distance from you to Him. He is everywhere. He always is in your heart. Recognise Him 
there; realise Him as closest and nearest to you. He is your own Self, neither terrible nor tender, 
but, simply IS. 


Brindhaavan, 30-5-1974 


You are not doing service for others. You are doing it always for 
yourselves, to the God in you, the God who is equally present in 


others. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


36. He sings ever 


KRISHNA is the One Name signifying all Names, the One thought comprising all thoughts, the 
One deed encompassing all deeds. Utilise this festival which commemorates the advent of 
Krishna for developing bhakthi (devotion to God). Bhakthi is defined as the means of 
discovering the Divine Reality within each being. Four steps are laid down in the scriptures to 
help man succeed in this effort: discrimination between the permanent and the impermanent; 
withdrawal from the process of catering to the senses; positive control of the feelings, thoughts 
and pursuits; incessant yearning for liberation from all bonds. 


Bhakthi is the urge which manifests as all these four endeavours. But, that word is applied to all 
sorts of desires and disciplines, so widely and so indiscriminately that it is identified even with 
epicureanism! Bhakthi is derived from bha or Bhagavaan or God. It directs man to have God 
ever in mind and to cultivate love for God within him. It advises him to rid himself of egotism, to 
curb sensual desires. And to rise to the height of one's aspiration and achievement. 


Bhakthi leads man on to the Wisdom arising from the realisation of the unity called God. Just as 
childhood grows into old age and gets fruition thereby, devotion grows into wisdom, that is, 
bhakthi grows into jnaana (spiritual wisdom). There are some who deny the need for bhakthi and 
assert that jnaana can be won without the preliminary stage of bhakthi. But, bhakthi is as 
necessary and as inevitable a process as childhood. 


Devotion is the most precious treasure 


Devotion fosters the highest virtue; it is the most precious treasure; it is the truest path, the only 
way to God. Man must live in bhakthi, for bhakthi, through bhakthi. For, bhakthi is love of the 
purest and the noblest variety. Such love is the breath that sustains life, that supports the soul in 
the effort to merge in the Super-soul. The years of life spent without the light of love are years of 
ruin, of dust and disease. One could as well be dead, and decay for ever. 


Love can transform man into a Divine Being; it helps him manifest the Divine which is his core. 
Love can tame even the most ferocious of beasts. It prompts man to fill even the world with joy 
and to partake of that joy. It implants a deep distressing thirst for that exultation, that elevation of 
the spirit. The Avathaar (divine incarnation) of the Lord as Krishna and the career of Krishna on 
the earth were for the propagation and promotion of this Principle of Prema Divine Love), by 
precept and example. 


Prema (the highest. Love) transcends the ego; it is pure; it is sweet, it is sacred and sanctifying. 
Prahlaadha had that prema; so, whatever befell him---pain, grief, torture, disgrace---he bore them 
all, for he was unaware of anything except God whom he had enshrined in his heart. Meera too 
was so hungry for God and so agonised by separation from Him that she was always singing 
only of His charm, His might and His mystery. 


God is the nearest and dearest kinsman for man 


You must yearn to be blessed with that earnestness, that dedication and that devotion shown by 
Prahlaadha and Meera. That alone can give you the Supreme Bliss. But, now, though many 
declare their desire to earn that state of mind, their efforts are all towards exhibitionism and 
elaborate self-aggrandizement! Those days, the saadhana (spiritual discipline) was silent and 
subdued; now, it is all loud and lavish. Bhakthi reveals to you that God is in every one; so, the 


Love that surges in your heart towards God must flow towards all, for, all are embodiments of 
the self-same Divine. 


God is bound to you by the closest bonds of Love. Parents might fall out; brother might take up 
arms against brother; sister might slip away without recognising sister; children might not revere 
or even recognise their parents. Those are but 'social or economic ties,' they might declare. But, 
God will never desert you or deny you, or turn away from you. 


God is the nearest, the dearest, the most loving, the most eager companion, comrade and 
kinsman for man. This is’ demonstrated fully in the acts of Krishna, as related in the 
Mahaabhaaratha and the Bhaagavatha. 


Creation posits a Creator; nothing can happen without the Will to make it happen. Before the 
beginning -of things, there must be some Will that willed them to become. It can only be He that 
has become all this, whatever be the name or form that these have assumed. That Will is Love, it 
is Wisdom. It is Power, It is Bliss. Each one of you must 'insure your lives' with That. Like other 
Insurance institutions, this One cannot suffer loss or liquidation. It can never fail or falter. Pay 
the premium regularly as per the rules and you can claim the ‘amount,' and receive it. 


Peace will dread the company of the egotist 


The premium you have to pay is the 'Love' that springs from your heart towards all beings. 
Liberation from pain and grief, the Bliss everlasting, is the 'amount' you get. Or, we can picture 
the process as a Tree; which yields fruit at the end of a long process of cherishing care. Truth is 
the seed, faith in the Self, faith in the loving care of God---these are the roots that hold it firm 
and, feed it; the recitation of the Name, singing of hymns and psalms, meditation on the glory 
that encircles and elevates---these are the showers that feed the Tree. Bliss is the fragrant flower; 
Jnaana (the wisdom that liberates) is the fruit. 


When man neglects this duty to himself ‘he suffers grief. He is denied peace and security; he is 
restless and afraid, peace will dread the company of the self-centred egotist, the hard calculating 
miser, the sharp heartless demon. It keeps close to the stage, the generous giver, the virtuous 
eamer, the wise seer. You must long to be of such type that peace can approach you and award 
you its presence. 


If, on the other hand, you stray away from the path of love, not only men but even nature will 
throw obstacles which hinder your progress. For, the evil in you will manifest as obstacle in your 
path. They are not laid there by your enemies, but, are set there by your own feelings and 
impulses. Think good, feel good, act good, speak good---the path will be free and fair, easy and 
effortless. Think evil, plan evil, do evil---the path will be strewn with fear and failure. 


Krishna taught his message by precept and example 


The mind has to be cleansed for the path to be rendered smooth. Devotees do not deserve that 
status, merely by doling out charity or visiting holy places, or attending religious discourses; fill 
the mind with Love, remove hatred and envy; adopt straight thinking and planning, that alone 
can justify the status of devotee. Walk steadily and silently towards the goal, merging with God. 


This day, being the day reminding you of Krishna and His birth in human form, it is best to 
remember that, He taught this Message of Love by precept and example, throughout his earthly 
career. The Bhaagavatha and Mahaabhaaratha are full of lessons for you in the cultivation of 
bhakthi---one-pointed Love for God and all God's creatures. The Paandava Brothers and their 


consort were devotees of this high status. When Dhroupadhi their Queen, was humiliated and 
publicly dishonoured by their cousins in the Royal Assembly Hall, she did not call upon her 
spouses, the redoubtable heroes of many a battle, armed with heavenly bows and maces; she 
called upon Krishna, for she knew that He was her closest kinsman, shield and sword. 


Many years later, she quipped Krishna for responding rather late on that occasion, with His 
succour, but, Krishna asked her to repeat the words with which she called Him then; she said that 
she had called out, "Oh Dweller in the hearts of the gopees (cowherd girls)! Oh Wanderer in the 
floral bushes of Brindhaavan! Oh Resident of Dhwaaraka!" Then, Krishna explained that the 
delay was caused by the wrong address to which the prayer was directed. He said, "Your words 
forced Me to move on to Brindhaavan and Dhwaaraka, before I could come to where you were! 
If only you had cried, Oh Dweller in my Heart, I could have appeared before you at that very 
moment." 


Develop the inward vision, taste the bliss it gives 


So, you should endeavour to install Him in your heart and be ever aware that He is there. Raadha 
alone had that consciousness and the uninterrupted Bliss derivable from that knowledge. 
Cultivate that knowledge, that closeness. When you are aware all the time, only of the body and 
its clamour for attention, how can you ever concentrate on the Dweller within? Develop the in- 
look, the inward vision, and taste the Bliss it gives, 'at least for half'a minute every day; that will 
surely confer on you great strength and security. Raadha prayed that Krishna must keep her in 
.the cool shade of His Presence so that she might be saved from being scorched in the arid desert 
of earthly life. 


Embodiments of the Universal Aathma! Scriptures are endless; saadhanas (spiritual disciplines) 
are countless; opportunities are few; time is already overstocked. But, you can easily win the 
baffle of life, in spite of these handicaps, provided you arm yourself with Love, which is the 
essential teaching of all scriptures, the goal of all varieties of saadhana, the best use to which all 
opportunities can be put and the most profitable way of utilising the precious capital, time. The 
simple men and women who tended cattle in Gokul where Krishna spent His boyhood years 
knew no saadhana, learnt no Shaasthras (spiritual sciences), observed no vow, visiting no 
temple; they just kept the Name and Form of the God they moved with, ever in the shrine of their 
hearts. And they were saved. 


Embodiments of Love! You are agitated, I know, since the world today is tossed on waves of 
unrest and insecurity. But, do not blame the world for it. The unrest is but the image of your own 
unrest, which you have projected on the world. The insecurity is fuming in your minds; the fear 
is raising its hood in your heart. The forces of the world, the beings in Nature are all unaffected, 
unchanged! You have changed; you are nervous; you are afraid, you have no peace! 


Try to subsume the many in the One 


You wear coloured glasses and see everything through those glasses. Correct your vision; the 
world will get corrected. Reform yourselves; the world will get reformed. You create the world 
of your choice. You see many, because you seek the many, not the One. Try to subsume the 
many in the One; the physical bodies of yourself and others, the family, the village, the 
community, the state, the nation, the world, thus progressively march on towards more and more 
inclusive loyalties and reach the stage of Unity, in thought, word and deed. This is the saadhana 


of love, for, love is expansion, inclusion, mutualisation. The individual has to be Universalised, 
expanded into Vishwaswaruupa (Cosmic Form). 


When you enter upon this saadhana, you have to suppress all tendencies of hatred, greed, envy 
and malice, and concentrate on expanding love towards all, at all times. You might have to 
encounter opposition from all sides; but, consider these as tests of endurance, of sincerity and 
steadfastness. Your own parents, brothers and sisters, wife and children, kith and kin, friends and 
favourites, countrymen and others might try to turn you aside by ridicule and threats. You might 
even develop dislike for God for putting obstacles in the way; atheistic ideas might sprout in you 
trying to scotch the faith; but, you must overcome these with courage and confidence. 


The good are always the target of malice and envy, slander and abuse from the wicked. Be 
assured that your goodness can be made tough enough to stand these ordeals. Avathaars (divine 
incarnations) too are not exempt from the attentions of these wicked forces. 


Forces of evil dig for their own downfall 


Krishna had to encounter these obstacles from the very cradle, right up to the finish of His life on 
earth. Personal spite, false slander, unfounded abuse and defamation followed Him at every step. 
Demons who could not tolerate the Light and the Love that He cast around Him conspired to 
tarnish His Name and obstruct His Mission.' They tried to bind Him, to fail His plans and pervert 
His instruments. But, Truth triumphed and falsehood stood exposed and disgraced. 


Truth may be clouded for some little time by the fog of slander but, victory is certain. The forces 
of hate will be defeated by their own wiles; they dig for their own downfall; their action results 
in reactions, ruinous for themselves. In the Court of Dhritharaashtra, the Kauravas planned to 
bind Krishna and put Him out of action, when He went to His Court on the mission of peace; but, 
what happened? The stratagem recoiled on themselves and they were destroyed. Krishna was 
unscathed by their wiles and their campaign of defamation. When the Kauravas were indulging 
in their campaign of slander, many devotees were greatly distressed. For example, Sahadheva, 
the youngest of the Paandava Brothers, welcomed Lord Krishna back to their camp, with the 
words, "I am not concerned at failure of your mission; I know that it is all part of your plan. But, 
I am overjoyed that you have returned unharmed, from that nest of demons." 


Krishna is undefeatable, ever pure, ever bright and ever effulgent in renown. Those who try to 
fail Him are for ever tarred by their own blackness. The malignancy of those who cannot bear 
His Glory will cause their eternal disgrace; it cannot affect Him in the least. His Glory will 
increase a hundredfold with every challenge from these pedlars of slander. Wicked men tried to 
bring the Lord into disrepute by persecuting and torturing devotees like Prahlaadha; but, when 
they stood up to every challenge with joyful fortitude, they failed ignominiously. Prahalaadha 
gained vaster glory and the Lord's Truth was magnificently vindicated. 


Even Avathaars have faced campaigns of slander 


Persons who cannot tolerate the Glory of the Avathaar have indulged in such campaigns, in 
every Age! They have contributed to the heightening of the splendour and the spread of the 
message, in every age. Their activities are all instruments to the propagation of the glory 
throughout the world. 


Even today, such things happen; but, all of you must recognise their inevitability and their 
fundamental falsehood, and carry on your saadhana in full faith and assurance, with 


undiminished enthusiasm and joy. The Sai Principle, the Sai Divinity can never be affected by 
any slander; it can never be shaken by any tactics; its progress can never be halted. Do not pay 
heed to the barkings you hear. 


A stray dog stops and looks at its own shadow in the stream; it mistakes the shadow for another 
dog and starts barking aloud. This sets all the dogs in the neighbour-hood, and later in the region, 
bark in unison. The reason why first dog barked is its own ignorance of fact. The reason why the 
other dogs followed suit is that the first dog called the tune. A huge scare is built on a patent 
falsehood. Thus the story goes on, adding one thing to another. 


Just as devotees remained unruffled in the Age of Krishna, you too must stand firm and be 
unaffected. Faith must endow you with courage and calmness. The life of Krishna teaches you 
this lesson more than others' do not lend your ears or mortgage your minds to purveyors of 
scandal or lies. 


Devotion to the Divine will give you prosperity 


Krishna had to meet these traducers and destroy them one by one, through His life. His parents, 
His companions, His devotees, no one had peace from this tribe. The message of this Festival is 
that you must see the Truth that is covered by all the tales and legends that tarnish the Name. 


Devotion to the Divine will give you bliss, and prosperity and peace. It cannot inflict pain, 
perturbation or personal anxiety. It fosters love and brings all together as one band of brothers. 
The Avathaar will not be affected in the least by these trivial tactics. It is love itself; so, it is 
always bliss, always happy in song and dance. 


Krishna lived all His years singing and dancing in the ecstasy which was His very nature. He was 
humming a tune within Himself all the while, whether He was on flower bed or a battle field. 


I too am unaffected by praise or blame. My Aanandha (bliss) never suffers diminution. Where 
there is love, there is aanandha; where there is aanandha, there is music. That is the reason why 
Krishna sang the Bhagavath Geetha (the Celestial song) while the clarion calls to start the 
holocaust were rising from the serried ranks, eager for the fray. 


Love knows no fear, no untruth, no anxiety, no grief. I am love; I shower love; I share love; I am 
pleased with love; I bless that you have more and more of love to more and more Beings. Love is 
God, Love is Love---that is the message of Sri Krishna janmaashtami. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 10-6-1974 


Just as there are three basic energies that govern man---the 
Physical, the metaphysical and the psychical, the Aadhi-bhowthik, 
the Aadhi-dhaivik and the Aadhi-aathmic---Gaayathri has three 
facets: Gaayathri, Saavithri and Saraswathi. 


Gaayathri fosters the metaphysical, Saavithri, the physical, and 
Saraswathi, the psychical. These three karanas or instruments 
have to be cleansed and sublimated so that man can realise the 


goal of life. 


Through the recital of Gaayathri manthra and meditation thereon, 
this great task can be achieved. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


37. Kindle the lamp 


DURING the last thirty days, you have been listening to expositions of the meaning and 
significance of Vedhic words, like Brahman, Prajaapathi, Vaachaspathi, Saraswathi, and 
Brihaspathi; you have also been told the real significance of the name Bhaarath that this country 
bears. It is necessary that you should recognise, even when you are students, that the Vedhas are 
the basis of the culture of this country; the guides for material as well as spiritual progress. When 
you understand the hymns, the dedicatory verses, the ritual directives, and the invocatory 
formulae contained in the Vedhas, life would be rendered peace-filled and secure, against the 
winds of fortune, both fair and foul. It is natural for every being to seek happiness. Yet, each 
being must know that happiness does not emanate from the material things of the objective 
world. 


You are students and so, I must tell you that the type of education that does not confer on you 
abiding happiness, the unshakeable sense of equanimity, the awareness of the Divinity behind 
every particle in the Universe, is not entitled to that name. Education must implant elevating 
ideals, and kindle the lamp of wisdom. Nowadays, education is aimed at providing a living; it is 
a bread-and-butter trade. But, do we not have millions who have not gone through this mill, 
wasting money and precious time in the process like you, but yet earning a decent living and 
enjoying peace and joy therein? 


AS science advances, man becomes a menace to man 


Though they have not gone through school and college, they have had the more valuable 
schooling in the University of Life. Any system of education that does not help you to 
discriminate between fight and wrong, that does not instil the fear of sin and the love of God, 
train you in the codes of humility and reverence, widen the horizon of your wonder, encourage 
you to worshipfully serve your parents, and inspire you to dedicate your skill and attainments to 
the progress of your family, village, community, country, language and nation stands 
condemned! The corruption and cruelty that are rampant in the country can be traced to this 
grave defect. Selfish greed, pomp and injustice are prevalent in every field. The nation has no 
peace and the sense of security is feeble. As science develops and technology advances, humility 
and mutual love should also develop to the same extent. Or else, man becomes a menace to man. 
Human sensitivity must be so high that no one can tolerate the misery of others. But, when one is 
not moved by the misery of even one's own-parents how can this trait be cultivated? 


Students! You are pure in heart. Do not slide down into such depths. Bring to mind the Glory of 
Indian Culture. Do not crave for the trivial pleasures of the senses; do not condemn yourselves to 
be lazy lubbers; be active, earnest; bear with all troubles and disappointments; strive on and 
march towards success, or else, the nation will weaken and decline. 


Serve your family and be examples to others 


You are a pin or bolt or nut or wheel in the huge machine called the Cosmos. If the pin is not in 
perfect shape, the entire machine will be hampered. Do not get disheartened and disabled; if you 
do, you are injuring the welfare of the whole world. Remember that Indian Culture is built on the 
faith Soham, 'I am that,' the undefeatable, majestic, mighty That. It is not built on the somari 
principle (the principle of laziness). True rest is ensured only by hard work. Sleep is the reward 
for hard physical labour. And, if sleep does not switch off the mind of man for some hours 
everyday, he would have spun out all sorts of wild fancies. Young people, that you are, work 


hard; serve the interests of your family and country, and be examples to others. Imagine how 
your forefathers during the Vedhic Age engaged themselves with no respite, in good deeds and 
beneficial acts, so that they could be happy and make others happy. But, alas, the descendants of 
those men have devised a system of education which does not ensure even a decent daily life. 


Education was then called, Swaadhyaaya: (Swa---one's own; adhyaaya---study). Study for one's 
own best progress, (that is, spiritual progress) which gives peace and joy immeasurable. Today 
this type of progress has become a matter of ridicule; the run is all behind fame, sudden fortune 
and power over fellow-beings, and their fates. The Vedhavidhs (men learned in the Vedhas), had 
but one ideal---the discovery of the I which they felt they were. 


The Vedhavidhs marked three stages in the life of man and assigned one aspect of God to preside 
over each stage. The first---where man is deep in activity of some sort or other in Karma---is 
presided over by Vaasu. The second, under the protection of Rudhra, 1s filled with reverential 
worship of the God in all, discovered through the impact of Love. The third is the stage of 
jnaana, the Supreme Wisdom, presided over by the source of Illumination, Aadhithya or the Sun. 


Fancy and fantasy rule the mind of man 


This is the genuine Bhaaratheeya Vision, to transform life into a pilgrimage towards the God 
resident in oneself, a steady march, along the straight path to Bliss. There is no such steadiness 
now. Fancy and fantasy rule the mind of man. You desire one thing in the morning; at noon, you 
change over to something else. That desire will not persist until evening. If your desire is 
fulfilled, you praise God and parade your devotion. But, if it does not prevail, you throw God 
overboard, and parade your unbelief! 


I am reminded of a story in this connection. A clever villager used to enter the village temple in 
the early hours of the day, and sit on, with eye closed, in the hope that people will honour him as 
a great devotee. Since he did not get up and go about his business until about midnoon, the 
temple priest was hard put to close the doors and go home for his daily tasks there. So he struck 
upon a plan to stop the nuisance. He knew that the closed-eye session of dhyaanaa (meditation) 
was all a pretence. He hid himself behind the Idol of the Deity, and when the villager was well 
set in his pretence of deep meditation, he said, in an imposing sonorous voice, "Listen! Excellent 
Devotee! I am mightily pleased by your asceticism and your steadfastness. Come. I shall merge 
you into Myself." At this, the fellow ran fast out from the temple, leaving no trace where he had 
gone to! 


Parents should practise the values of Indian Culture 


The devotion and sense of surrender of men are similiar to those of this impostor. Faith is weak, 
discipline is absent; earnestness is lacking. But, do not forget or ignore God; do not be misled 
into attachment for the world; do not dread death; be happy with whatever you have and hold. 
Live ever in the remembrance of the Name of God. 


I wonder how you would follow this advice! For, I know you are reluctant even to repeat the 
Name a hundred times a day or twenty five or at least ten times. You wag and waste your breath 
for hours together, but, when it comes to the pronunciation of the Name of the God, you have 
neither the time nor the inclination. 


There was a son who was instructed by his aged father to repeat the sacred Gaayathri exactly 
108 times a day. The fellow promised to do so but, he-simplified the task by reciting it only 
once, and then, saying ditto, ditto, 107 times! The same boy secured a scholarship to study in 


America. The father took him to a temple near the airport from where he was to board the plane, 
and made him swear before the idol of Dhevi that he would adhere to Indian culture and tradition 
while abroad. But, he returned quite lost to all the values cherished in that culture and tradition. 
The astounded father took him to the same temple, and when the son stood before the Goddess, 
he accosted Her, "How do you do, mummy?" and moved forward to shake hands with Her. The 
father was so shocked at this impunity that he dealt him two severe blows on the spot. 


Fathers today do not treat their sons so; they appreciate outlandishness, brazenry, vices and 
foppery. In fact, they .are themselves even worse examples. The parents and the teachers have to 
learn and practise the values of Indian Culture. When the tank is full, the taps will yield water. 
But, when the tank is dry, how shall the thirsty quench their pang? Parents and teachers can earn 
My Grace only by becoming good and worthy examples to their sons and daughters, or their 
wards and students. You claim to have devotion to Me; but, you must examine and discover 
whether I am pleased with you. You must examine yourselves every moment whether you are 
observing the disciplines I have laid down, the programmes of service I have marked out. That is 
the way to earn My Love, Love others and serve them; then, you can win My Love. 


Brindhaavan, Summer Course, 17-6-1974 


The seers of God proclaim what they have visualised, and when 
people put their faith in it, it is condemned as blind faith as if belief 
of people in the number of star clusters in the Milky Way as 
proclaimed by those who have seen them is not blind! Have faith in 
the Divine and one can experience the Divine. Have faith in 
oneself and one can have faith in the Divine. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


38. Who is Sai? 


GOD is inscrutable. He cannot be realised in the outer objective world; He is in the very heart of 
every being. Gemstones have to be sought deep underground; they do not float in mid-air. Seek 
God in the depths of yourself, not in tantalising, kaleidoscopic Nature. The body is granted to 
you for this high purpose; but, you are now misusing it, like the person who cooked his daily 
food in the gemstudded gold vase that came into his hands as an heirloom. 


Man extols God as omnipresent, omniscient and omnipotent, but, he ignores His Presence in 
himself! Of course, many venture to describe the attributes of God and proclaim Him to be such 
and such; but, these are but their own guesses and the reflections of their own predilections and 
preferences. 


Who can affirm that God is this or that? Who can affirm that God is not of this form or with this 
attribute? Each one can acquire from the vast expanse of the ocean only as much as can be 
contained in the vessel he carries to its shore. From that quantity, they can grasp but little of that 
immensity. 


Each religion defines God within the limits it demarcates and then claims to have grasped Him. 
Like the seven blind men who spoke of the elephant as a pillar, a fan, a rope or a wall, because 
they contacted but a part and could not comprehend the entire animal, so too, religions speak of a 
part and assert that its vision is full and total. 


There is only one religion, the Religion of Love 


Each religion forgets that God is all Forms and all Names, all attributes and all assertions. The 
religion of Humanity is the sum and substance of all these partial faiths; for, there is only one 
Religion and that is the Religion of Love. The various limbs of the elephant that seemed' separate 
and distinct to the eye-less seekers of its truth were all fostered and activated by one single 
stream of blood; the various religions and faiths that feel separate and distinct are all fostered by 
one single stream of love. 


The optical sense cannot visualise the Truth. It gives only false and fogged information. For 
example, there are many who observe My actions and start declaring that My nature is such and 
such. They are unable to gauge the sanctity, the majesty and the eternal reality that is Me. The 
power of Sai is limitless; It manifests for ever. All forms of 'power' are resident in this Sai palm. 


But, those who profess to have understood Me, the scholars, the Yogis (spiritually advanced 
persons), the Pandiths (scholars), the Jnaanis (liberated persons), all of them are aware only of 
the least important, the casusal, external manifestation of an infinitesimal part of that power, 
namely, the "miracles"! They have not desired to contact the Source of all Power and all 
Wisdom, that is available here at Brindhaavan. They are satisfied when they secure a chance to 
exhibit their book-learning and parade their scholarship in Vedhic Lore, not realising that the 
Person from whom the Vedhas (sacred scriptures of the Hindhus) emanated is in the midst, for 
their-sake. They even ask, in their pride, for a few more chances! 


'Defeats' experienced by Avathaars are part of Leela 


This has been the case, in all ages. People may be very near (physically) to the Avathaar (divine 
incarnation), but, they live out their lives unaware of their fortune; they exaggerate the role of 
miracles, which are as trivial, when compared to My glory and majesty, as a mosquito is in size 


and strength to the elephant upon which it squats. Therefore, when you speak about these 
'miracles,' I laugh within myself out of pity, that you allow yourself so easily to lose the precious 
awareness of My Reality. 


My power is immeasurable; My truth is inexplicable, unfathomable. I am announcing this about 
Me, for, the need has arisen. But, what I am doing now is only the gift of a 'Visiting Card!' Let 
Me tell you that emphatic declarations of the Truth by Avathaars were made so clearly and so 
unmistakably only by Krishna. In spite of the declaration, you will notice in the career of the 
same Krishna that He underwent defeat in His efforts and endeavours, on a few occasions; you 
must also note that those defeats too were part of the drama which He had planned and which He 
Himself directed. For example, when many Kings pleaded with Him to avert the War with the 
Kauravas, He confessed that His Mission to the Kaurava Court for ensuring peace had 'failed!' 
But, He had not willed that it should succeed! He had decided that war would be waged! His 
Mission was intended to punish the greed and iniquity of the Kauravas and to condemn them 
before the whole world. 


"Do not crave from Me trivial material objects" 


Now, I must tell you, that during this Sai Avathaar, there is no place for even such 'drama' with 
scenes of failures and defeats! What J will, must take place; what I plan must succeed. I am 
Truth; and Truth has no need to hesitate, or fear, or bend. 


Willing’ is superfluous for Me. For, My Grace is ever available to devotees who have steady 
Love and Faith. Since I move freely among them, talking and singing, even intellectuals are 
unable to grasp My Truth, My Power, My Glory, or My real Task as Avathaar. I can solve any 
problem however knotty. I am beyond the reach of the most intensive inquiry and the most 
meticulous measurement. Only those who have recognised My Love and experienced that Love 
can assert that they have glimpsed My Reality. For, the Path of Love is the Royal road that leads 
mankind to Me. 


Do not attempt to know Me through the external eyes. When you go to a temple and stand before 
the Image of God, you pray with closed eyes, don't you? Why? Because you feel that the inner 
eye of Wisdom alone can reveal Him to you. Therefore, do not crave from Me trivial material 
objects; but, crave for Me, and you would be rewarded. Not that you should not receive whatever 
objects I give as sign of Grace out of the fullness of Love. 


I shall tell you why I give these rings, talismans, rosaries etc. It is to signalise the bond between 
Me and those to whom they are given. When calamity befalls them, the article comes to Me in a 
flash and returns in a flash taking from Me the remedial Grace of protection. That Grace is 
available to all who call on Me in any Name or Form, not merely to those who wear these gifts. 
Love is the bond that wins Grace. 


There is no creature without Love 


Consider the meaning of the name, Sai Baba. Sa means 'Divine;' ai or ayi means 'mother' and 
Baba means father. The Name indicates the Divine Mother and Father, just as Saamba-shiva, 
which also means the Divine Mother and Father. Your physical parents exhibit Love with a dose 
of selfishness; but, this Sai "Mother and Father" showers affection or reprimands, only for 
leading you towards victory in the struggle for self-realisation. 


For, this Sai has come in order to achieve the supreme task of uniting the entire mankind, as one 
family through the bond of brotherhood, of affirming and illumining the Aathmic Reality of each 
being in order to reveal the Divine which is the basis on which the entire Cosmos rests, and of 
instructing all to recognise the common Divine Heritage that binds man to man, so that man can 
rid himself of the animal, and rise into the Divine which is his goal. 


I am the embodiment of Love; Love is My instrument. There is no creature without Love; the 
lowest loves itself, at least. And its self is God. So, there are no atheists, though some might 
dislike Him or refuse Him, as malarial patients dislike sweets or diabetic patients refuse to have 
anything to do with sweets! Those who preen themselves as atheists will one day, when their 
illness is gone, relish God and revere Him. 


I had to tell you so much about My Truth, for, I desire that you should contemplate on this and 
derive joy therefrom, so that you may be inspired to observe the disciplines laid down by Me and 
progress towards the Goal of Self-realisation, the Realisation of the Sai that shines in your hearts. 


Brindhaavan, 19-6-1974 


If you yield to alpabuddhi (inferior thoughts), you will be losing 
the akhanda-thathwa (principle of the Universal). Never give ear 
to slander, ridicule or praise. 


They are all bubbles on the surface. They are mere manipulations 
of words, the magic of vocabulary, the tamasha of style, the dance 
of phrases. Learn the means of winning Grace and earning purity 
from those who know: the elders, the scholars who have put their 
learning into practise. 


Attachment causes pain and detachment results in joy. But, you 
cannot easily detach yourself from activity; the mind clings to 
something or other. Make it cling to God, let it do all things for 
God and leave the success or failure of the thing done to God, the 
loss and the profit, the elation or the dejection. Then, you have the 
secret of Shaanthi (peace) and contentment. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


39. An epic moment 


THE agonising years of torment, hope, and disillusion were over; the moment of decision had 
come, though it was sought now, by the sharp edge of the sword and not the soft words of Lord 
Krishna. The armies gathered by the Kauravas from their kingdom and from their allies were 
standing face to face with the forces of their Paandava cousins. Cavalry, chariotry, elephantry 
and infantry, eager to start the destruction of the enemy, the chief actors all dressed and equipped 
for the fray! Conches were blown; trumpets rent the sky with their blare. The air was tense with 
hope, fear, anxiety and anger. Blood in million bodies became redder and warmer; hearts 
pounded quicker; arms grasped weapons in deadly grip. 


Dharmaraaja, the 'eldest of the Paandava brothers, suddenly, removed his footwear; he laid aside 
his armour; he slid from his chariot; he walked towards the opposing cohorts, towards 
Bheeshma, the Generalissimo of the enemy forces. Dhuryodhana, the eldest of the 


Kaurava brothers, the cousin most responsible for the war, the unyielding opponent of the 
Paandavas, saw Dharmaraaja cross over to the aged Bheeshma. He was overjoyed; he guessed 
that Dharmaraaja had decided surrender, for, he was by nature against bloodshed and battles. 


Dharma will guard those who follow Dharma 


The four brothers of Dharmaraaja were astounded. Bheema, the redoubtable hero of a hundred 
contests with the Kauravas, the person most .eager for the battle to begin, felt foiled of victory. 
He recalled the many occasions when Dharmaraaja had stood in the way of revengeful action 
against the Kauravas. He feared that he would apologise and withdraw like a craven from the 
bloody gamble of war. Arjuna, the formidable bowman, witnessed his brother's defection with 
horror and anger. Nakula and Sahadheva, the twins, were struck dumb at their own helplessness. 


Lord Krishna studied the situation from the seat of the charioteer on the chariot of Arjuna, which 
was in the front line of the Paandava army. He signed to the four of them to follow their eldest 
brother and do likewise. He said, "All these years you have revered’ him, and trod on his 
footsteps. Do so now. Do not hesitate; do not doubt." Dharmaraaja was the very embodiment of 
Dharma (right action); he knew the right and he practised it whatever the consequences. He 
knew that Dharma will guard those who follow Dharma. He never did a hypocritical or a non- 
Vedhic act; he never took a wrong step. He went straight to Bheeshma and fell at his feet. 
Standing before him with folded hands and bowed head, he prayed. "Grandfather! We had no 
chance to experience the love of the father; he passed away too soon. You brought us up from 
infancy with love and care, and made us what we are today. We have no fight to "fight against 
you; but, fate has conspired to bring us now into battle with you. Please have mercy on us; 
permit us to raise our arms against you." 


Adherence to Dharma ensured Paandavas victory 


Bheeshma was naturally charmed and overjoyed at the humility and righteousness of 
Dharmaraaja; his eyes were filled with tears at the strange turn that destiny had taken; he blessed 
him and said, "Dharmaraaja! You have stuck to Dharma, in spite of the temptations this situation 
has placed before you. What a noble example you have set before the world! This Dharma that 
you follow will itself give you victory." 


Next, Dharmaraaja and the brothers moved towards General Dhrona, the Brahmin Preceptor, 
who had taught archery to both the Kauravas and their cousins, the Paandavas. Dharmaraaja fell 
at his feet too and prayed, "Highly revered Preceptor! We five are your pupils; how can we 
rightfully take up arms against our Preceptor? The times have indeed gone awry. Pardon us, for 
this wrong. Permit us to engage with you in battle." Dhrona, the Aacharya, was visibly moved by 
this appeal. "Ah! How great and good, this Dharmaraaja is ! Even at this moment when the 
hounds of war are to be let loose to spread death and fury, he is sticking to the dictates of 
Dharma!" Dhrona was thrilled at the thought. He clasped Dharmaraaja in his arms and said, 
"Son! You are dearer to me than Aswathaama, for, I am drawn to him only by duty, whereas I 
am drawn to you by love. You are all my sons, for, I love you as such. Your right will certainly 
earn victory over our might." 


It is this adherence to Dharma that ensured their victory. Or else, was there any one on earth at 
that time who could force the redoubtable Bheeshma to lay down his arms? Could any one excel 
Dhrona in archery? The Kauravas, whom Bheeshma and Dhrona sought to support were defeated 
because they trod the path of adharma (vice), while the Paandavas never deviated from the path 
of Dharma. Dharma gave them the skill, strength, courage and tenacity to defeat these great 
masters of military strategy. 


The Kauravas went counter to their parents and their God. Their mother, Gaandhaari, counselled 
her children in a thousand ways not to continue their vendetta, against their cousins, the 
Paandavas. But, they did not heed her. Their father Dhritharaashtra pleaded with them to desist 
from the path of hate; but, to no avail. They turned a deaf ear to the advice offered by their 
Preceptor, Dhrona, to make' peace with the Paandava cousins and give them their legitimate 
share of the realm. When the Lord, Sri Krishna Himself, went to them as a messenger of peace, 
as an Ambassador with the Mission of Peace, they refused to listen to His Divine words; they 
attempted even to overpower Him and put Him into bonds! 


If you follow the same line of wilful blindness, you will have to meet the same fate---total 
destruction. The five Paandava brothers are, you should believe, worthy of your reverence and 
have to be regarded as your ‘five vital airs,’ 'five sheaths,'. 'five sense-organs.' Have them as 
ideals to be followed; you can then win the Grace of God. The memory of their travail and 
triumph will act as a manthra to purify and strengthen you, and elevate you to the Divine status 
which is your heritage. 


Brindhaavan, June 1974 


40. Vaster than the vastest ! 


BRAHMAVIDTH Brahmaiva bhavathi (He who knows the vastest becomes the vastest), say the 
rishis (sages). Brahman is the word used for what they indicate as the vastest, which words 
cannot reach nor the imagination conceive. There is a Brahma, the First of the Trinity, with four 
heads, the Creator, from whom we have to distinguish this vast immanent Principle. This 
Brahman is described, not as one of three, but as the One without a second. The Vedhic 
statement Sarvam Brahma mayam ("All is Brahman") is the key to the understanding to the 
Universal Eternal Principle. The Brahman need not be sought, at some far distant spot, on the 
Himaalayas or in the depths of space. Some cosmonauts when they landed on Moon reported that 
God does not exist, because they did not spot Him anywhere in their spatial journey, as if He 
lives and moves in space and accosts all who dare flit through His corridors! Brahman is the 
Reality of the seeker, the Cosmonaut, the person who asserts its existence as well as of the 
person who doubts or denies. To say that the Divine is a fiction of some one's fancy is to be false 
to one's own genuine truth. The Divine is what integrates and unites all this diversity into one 
single essence. 


Brahman is the activity in every atom and cell 


We can easily become aware of it, if we observe the prescribed course of saadhana (spiritual 
discipline) and have the elementary faith to impart sincerity for that saadhana. One must sharpen 
the intellect and widen the imagination to be able to conceive of Brahman, which is subtler than 
the subtlest, vaster than the vastest. Brahman is the very urge behind all aspiration and all 
achievement, even the aspiration to know Brahman. It is the activity in every atom and cell, as 
well as in every star and galaxy, 


Brahman also means sound, voice, word, manthra (sacred formulae), and, through the sound 
OM, as well as through various other manthras, it is possible for man to develop the superfine 
intellect necessary to grasp the immanent and transcendent principle called Brahmam. Brahman 
means Brh or big, the biggest, the vastest. It is described as bigger than the biggest, vaster than 
the vastest. The Universe is the body of Brahmam that emerged from it when the desire to 
become many arose in it. The Universe rose when Brahman uttered the first word, and so, the 
vaak (word) is also called Brahman. The word is also called padha and all created things are 
referred to in Samskrith as padha-artha (the meaning of the spoken word). For, when the word 
was uttered, the thing was created or became manifest. The word produced its meaning, namely, 
the thing! 


The Infinite Eternal Brahman can be cognised as having three attributes, for the convenience of 
awareness: Sath, Chith and Aanandha. The minutest particle in the Universe has these three 
characteristics, and the vastest too. Man too is the embodiment of Sath-Chith-Aanandha (Being, 
Awareness, Bliss absolute); but, since he is too attached to the body and its impulses, he is 
unable to dive deep into his reality and benefit from the springs of Chith and Aanandha that are 
there. 


See all as parts of the same whole 


The attraction that the vast Brahman has for the anu (the small) is the attraction of the whole for 
the part. It is the basis of all love---the love of the mother, of the father and son, of the friend, the 
spouse and even of the devotee towards God. The jeeva (the individualised being) loves the 


Brahman or the totality of which it is part. See all as parts of the same whole to which you 
belong; then there can be no hatred or envy or greed or pride. 


Saraswathi, the Consort (the potent power) of Brahma is celebrated as the Goddess of vaak 
(word) or the urge to express, to manifest. Her vehicle is, according to the Vedhas, the Hamsa 
(Celestial Swan), the pure bird that is endowed with the rare power of discriminating between 
water and milk, even when they are mixed and receiving only the milk (that is to say, separating 
the valid from the invalid, the lasting from the fragile, the true from the untrue). Moreover, 
Hamsa is a symbol of Soham, the seed-manthra that is uttered by human breathing (Soham- 
Soham; Soh means He and ham means I; He is I). I and He are the same from birth to death, 
meaning that the Jeeva is Brahman, no more and no less. There is certainly difference in quantity 
but there is no difference in quality, between the two. A drop of sea water is as brackish as any 
other; you need not taste the entire sea to know that. The jeeva is Sath-Chith-Aanandha; the 
Brahman is also Sath-Chith-Aanandha. That is the reason the jeeva is asked to announce itself as 
"Aham Brahmaasmi"---"I am Brahman." It is .as true as the drop of sea water saying, "I am the 
sea." 


Yogis (spiritually advanced persons) can cognise this easily. That is why one yogi sang, "'Go, 
mind! Rush to where the Ganga and Jamuna are." This does not mean that the saadhaka 
(spiritual aspirant) should go on pilgrimage to Prayaag, Allahaabad where the two rivers meet. 
Ganga and Jamuna are the Ida and Pingala, the two nerve-channels through which the Kundalini 
(soul power) is uplifted and Prayaag is the Bhru-madhyasthaan (the spot on the brow where they 
meet between the eyes). When the Yogi is able to concentrate on that spot, his 'serpent power,' he 
can become aware of the sea and transcend the name-form of the drop. That is the meaning of 
the Call. 


Brindhaavan, Summer Camp, 1974 


Man has to recognise the preciousness of time. Not even a fraction 
of a second should be wasted. He must be engaged always in the 
investigation of his own Truth and his own Duty to himself Life is 
dripping away, drop by drop, from the leaking pot! Time hangs 
over every head like a sharp sword, ready to inflict the mortal 
slash. But, man pays no attention to this ever-present calamity. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


41. Instruments of the Divine Will 


I AM happy to meet you and talk to you on this occasion---the very first gathering of the 
members of the Council of Management of all the State Trusts and of the Education and 
Publication Foundation. The aims and objectives of the Trusts are themselves your guides; they 
can certainly inspire you in your dedicated task. They can help canalise your skills and devotion 
into activities that can help your spiritual realisation, as well as the welfare and prosperity of 
your countrymen of all creeds and conditions. I am aware of this. But, yet, since we are working 
within the framework of the legal and administrative system, we have to pay attention' also to 
strict accounting and sincere adherence to the requirements of law. 


There are many Trusts operating in this country and in others beyond the seas. I wish to 
emphasise that the Sathya Sai Trusts have to shine forth among them all by their special 
characteristics. They must be based on mutual trust and cooperation, built on the actual 
experience of the One-ness of all. There is no room here for egoistic poses, compulsory tactics, 
greed for power, recrimination, and jealousy. 


Trust depends on faith in God 


Of course, wherever money is dealt with, these evils are common; there are Trusts that are 
compelled to enter into the process of litigation even as far as the Supreme Court, against their 
own members for breach of trust. Remember that Trusts are built firmly on the foundation of 
trust; if you do not trust yourselves and your own reality, you can never trust another. Ultimately, 
trust depends on faith in God, as expressed in your own actions and in the actions of others. 
Virtue can grow only in an atmosphere of theism; you must have faith in the omnipresence of 
God, that God is the witness, the guide, and the guardian. Self-confidence, confidence that you 
are the pure unlimited self, is the great reinforcement that religion can endow you with. When 
you establish this in your hearts, you can be entrusted with any type of responsibility, and any 
type of work. 


The Vedhas lay down four goals before men: Dharma, Artha, Kaama and Moksha. But they 
have. to be pursued in pairs. Dharma and Artha (virtue and wealth) together and Kaama and 
Moksha (desire and liberation) together. That is to say, wealth has to be earned through 
righteousness, and desire has to be for liberation. But, man takes these four separately, and loses 
all. 


He puts them into separate compartments and adopts distinct plans to achieve them. So, his 
personality is not integrated; he leads a broken life. He gives up dharma and moksha as beyond 
him and wastes his life pursuing sheer artha and kaama. They lead him into ruin. 


You have to practise righteousness in the management of wealth, especially when the wealth is 
to be used for human uplift and human betterment as here. Udhyogam purusha lakshanam, it is 
said. Udh-yoga means, as is commonly understood, employment in some job, something that is 
worth doing. No, it means udh (higher) yoga (spiritual discipline), a saadhana which has 
assumed the status of a job. All. jobs which you take up are udh-yogas (higher disciplines), 
which "mark out the man" (Purusha lakshanam). When artha is sought through dharma, the 
purushaartha deserves the name ‘parama-purushaartha' for it is parama or oriented towards the 
para (the higher eternal values). 


You have to struggle to ensure spiritual progress 


Tiffs is a chance for service for which you must feel extremely delighted, for, here you can. 
transmute your devotion and faith into positive acts of service for the benefit of your brothels and 
sisters. And, since I am with you in all that you do, you have no worry about the success of the 
undertakings. You have only to be '‘instruments;' you need not devise devious ways or 
roundabout tactics. Doing your duties as members, you have the need to preserve and develop 
trust in Sai, too. 


This is Sai work, which you are invited to enjoy. This is elevating work that brings you nearer to 
the heart of the Divine. When Naaraayana hastened to save the elephant front the jaws of the 
crocodile, the Bhaagavatha says, He did not take with Him the weapons---wheel or even the 
Lotus or the Conch. He went empty handed, as far as eye could discern. The conscious hand 
must have the inert pickaxe in order to break the hard sod; so too, the Divine Consciousness 
must have the Prakrithi (objective world or objective instrument) to carry out His plan. 


You have the chance to contribute to the happiness and beatitude of thousands. In order to carry 
out this duty, you have yourselves to lead exemplary lives. Your nithya jeevitha (daily living) 
must be transformed into live prayers and live saadhana. How much struggle are you now going 
through for ensuring physical comfort! You have to struggle much more for ensuring mental 
peace and spiritual progress, for sathya jeevitha (life in truth). 


Calculate within yourselves the benefit that would accrue to you from this saadhana into which 
you are initiated now, and prepare for shouldering the task assigned to you---to be instruments 
dedicated for advancing the mission on which the Divine has come. 


Brindhaavan, 20-6-1974 


Control gives power; regulation gives greater strength; discipline 
reveals divinity. People pine for happiness. But, can one gain it by 
allowing a free rein to the senses? Can one be happy eating four 
meals a day, or riding prestigious cars or living in many-roomed 
bungalows? No. Happiness consists in helping others. It is brought 
about by giving up, not by hoarding. Catering to the senses makes 
man bestial. They will drag. him into dirt and disgrace. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


42. Many voices and the Voice 


OF the many billions of living beings, man alone has the privilege of being entitled to investigate 
the Truth of the Universe and to merge in the Bliss of its Realisation. But, man is lost in the 
pursuit of wrong goals; he is struggling in the fog of doubt and divisive loyalties. He is frittering 
away energies and time in activities that bind him still further in the tangles of material wants. 
This type of activity called Moha karma, flows from delusion and leads to further delusion. Man 
must outgrow this tendency, and turn towards Dharma karma---moral activity; idealistic activity; 
activity that sublimates lower instincts and impulses and transforms every deed into an act of 
dedication. When this attitude is confirmed and consolidated, all. karma (action) becomes 
Brahma karma (dedicated activity). Man merges in the Universal and loses the inhibiting 
individuality. That is the karma which the Aathma craves for and delights in. 


Even in the first stage of Moha Karma (attachment/desire oriented activity), man should 
endeavour to charge it with Prema (divine love). For, Prema will correct the karma 
imperceptibly into the path of Dharma (virtue) and lead systematically, into the further stages of 
human progress towards Divinity. What then is Prema? It cannot be earned or acquired; it is the 
natural endowment of man. It cannot be refused or thrown off the mind. It cannot be taught or 
learnt. If directed towards sensual objects, it may well spell ruin-if directed away from them, it 
can well ensure salvation. 


Yearning to reach for the sublimity is alone Prema 


Prema or Love is a much-misused word. Any positive response to the attraction is called Love; 
any feeling of attachment, however trivial or transitory, is characterised as Prema. We must 
certainly coin new words or set aside specific words to indicate the forms of love. The. 
attachment of parents to their children or of children to the parents must be called affection. The 
response to the attraction of sex can be best described as fancy, fascination or Moha (delusion). 
The feeling of kinship or comradeship evokes dearness. The pleasure one gets through a sense of 
possession, especially of material objects, can be known as satisfaction. The yearning to reach 
for the sublimity that lies inherent in Truth---this alone is entitled to be called by that holy word, 
Prema. For, that is the sweetest, the most charming, the most satisfying possession of Man. 


Prema is strong and steady enough to leap over all obstacles, confront with equanimity all 
changes of fortune and defeat, all attempts to delay or deviate. It does not judge one incident as 
good and another as bad; it does not ascribe them to different agencies. Just as the same Sun 
causes both day and night, the same Divine Will causes joy and grief; so the devotee does not 
wince or exult, when ill or well. 


The fault lies in man's fascination for the 'many,' instead of the 'one;' he pursues the diverse, and 
forgets the unity 'in the universe. Really speaking, the 'many' are but different vehicles for the 
expression of the 'one. Take the example' of the electric current. When the fan whirls, we say that 
there is the current flowing; when it stops whirling, we note the absence of the current. When the 
bulb is on, we notice its presence; when the bulb is off, we note its absence. The current, by 
itself, is 'invisible;' it is niraakaara (formless). It activates various things and so we recognise it. 
So too, Divinity is in all things and behind all activity. To understand it and to recognise it, we 
need instruments, vehicles, upaadhis (limiting adjuncts). 


Clean the eyes of the cataract of ignorance 


The eyes see; but, can the organ 'eye' see of itself?. It cannot function without prompting-of the 
Divine Aathma (spirit) within. The brain thinks; but, can the cells perform the process all by 
themselves? No. They must be activated by the Divine within. The 'one' is the basis, the cause, of 
the manifestation in the many. Through Prema alone can the inherent, the immanent One be 
recognised. For, the Divine is Prema, more than anything else. shaa vaasyamidham sarvam'', 
"All is enveloped by Me, activated by Me", says the Lord. All is one. The One appears as many, 
to the prejudiced eye. Clear the eye of the cataract of ignorance, and it cognises all as One. In 
fact, you see with your eyes, only yourself, everywhere. You talk only to yourself, to 
whomsoever your speech is addressed. You are pleased with yourself; you hate yourself; you 
harm yourself. There is no other! 


Even when Divinity comes down as Avathaar (divine incarnation), man is unable to pierce the 
veil and revere the Divine. Lord Krishna says that people are unable to recognise the Divinity 
that is He, because they deem Him merely human. Only those who are aware of the current 
within, the Aathma, can identify the Source of Power before them. 


Always, listen to the voice of God within 


Three disciplines are essential, to become aware of Divinity in all and in the Avathaar: No 
activity should be taken up with individual aggrandizement in view; intellect and emotion must 
be directed to the revelation of the Resident in the Heart, Aathma; every act should be done 
sincerely, with love, with no yearning for acquiring personal profit, fame or benefit. Above all, 
listen to the Voice of God within. As soon as one contemplates a wrong act, that Voice warns, 
protests, and advises giving up. It pictures the shame that has to be suffered, the punishment that 
has to be faced, the disgrace that it entails. It would appear as if there are two personalities inside 
you, the one that prompts and the one that prevents. The warning signal, the timely advice, is 
given by the Jangam (the spirit of right) in the Angam (the physical body). It reminds you of the 
absurdity and the danger inherent in the identification of the Self with the body, it encourages 
you to discriminate between right and wrong; it is God, enthroned in every heart as the Highest 
Wisdom, the Prajnaana (consciousness), the Eternal Witness, whom you can contact easily in 
the depths of Dhyaana (meditation). 


In fact, when you examine your mind, you will find there, holding sway not one but many 
‘counsellors' with their contrariness, causing confusion. For example, no sooner have you 
planned to Come to Puttaparthi to take the Dharshan (vision) of Swaami, these counsellors start 
playing their game. One voice advises you to start only after ascertaining whether Swaami is 
actually present there. Another voice suggests that you can put through a call to 'so-and-so' and 
discover whether Swaami is at Bangalore or at Puttaparthi. A fourth lays before you alternative 
routes and means of transport, and causes a good deal of headache. This is the Sangam, around 
the Jangam, the Sangam (group) of voices that play around the spirit of fight, trying to distract it. 


Cultivate the vision directed inward 


Another voice might say, when the others have finished, "Well, my dear man! Consider from all 
points of view, this desire of yours. You may go there, putting yourself to a lot of expense and 
bother; think of this possibility also---you may or may not get an interview with Swaami." 
Another voice might-intervene and say, "O! Considering all the wrongs done and all the faults 
committed, it is very doubtful, if Swaami will grant you the interview." In the wake of this Voice 


another will begin its argument of assurance. It will comfort saying, "No! Swaami is the very 
embodiment of compassion. He will certainly pardon all errors." This principle that guides and 
guards you along the spiritual path is the Lingam (symbol of the formless), that is in the centre of 
the Sangam, clustering round the Jangam. 


The Lingam is in the very core of the heart of man, as the sole purveyor of bliss, power and 
illumination. Cultivate the vision directed inward, so that the Lingam might grant you these 
three. The mind will then be illumined with the cool comforting Light of Love, Wisdom. That is 
why the mind has as its presiding deity the Moon---Chandrama manaso jaathah. Hence, the 
celebration of the Day of Thankfulness for all Gurus (spiritual preceptors) and the Prime Guru, 
Vedha-vyaasa, is done on the Full Moon Day. 


Unless you cleanse the mind with Love, the Full Moon of spiritual wisdom cannot shine therein. 
The recital of the Name, the observance of vows and vigils, of fasts and festivals, may scintillate 
on the inner sky of the mind, as stars stud the sky; but, until the Lamp of Love is lit, the darkness 
will not vanish. 


Guru means remover of ignorance 


This day is a Day set apart for the worship of the Guru. Who is the Guru? How can a person who 
has not reached the goal guide you towards it? When he is himself groping in the dark, how can 
he illumine your path? Most Gurus who profess to lead are themselves not quite sure of the road 
or quite convinced of the rightness of their path. 'Gu’ means darkness, or ignorance; "ru" its 
removal. So the Guru must know the process by which ignorance can be removed in another. 
How can he do it when he has not done it for himself? The blind cannot lead the blind. 


Guru has a further meaning too. 'Gu' means gunaatheetha (beyond the three strands of energy of 
which the Cosmos is composed) and ‘ru’ means ruupa-rahitha (devoid of any particular form). 
Now, no mortal has transcended the guna (quality) and ruupa (form). God alone can be 
described as unaffected by these. And, God is the Guru, fight in your heart, ready to lead and en- 
lighten. He is all-knowing, all-powerful, all-pervading. 


Scatter the dark clouds of ignorance and egoism that cover the face of the Sun shining in the sky 
of your heart. Your parents might disown you, your kinsmen might desert you. Your friends 
might give you up; your treasure possessions might be lost. But, God will be ever near, ever 
dear, ever ready with counsel and courage. People will gather around you so long as you have 
pelf and power; you will be left severely alone, when you lose these. They are like swarms of 
frogs that infects a full lake, croaking flattery, but, disappearing, when the lake is dry. 


Guru worship can be done all days of the year 


You rush here, for the Guru Poornima Festival; but, there is no need to await this annual event 
for revering the Guru. People spend this day in worshiping the Guru and seeking his directives. 
This can be done all days of the year! Selecting a special day smacks of superficiality and 
exhibitionism. I desire to discourage this attitude of yours; I want you to cultivate not these 
external ceremonies and festivals, but, the internal Saadhana, the inner vision, the spiritual 
longing. 


I do not claim that I am a Guru; or, consider you as disciples or pupils. When I am All that is, 
who can be separately specified as Guru and who as disciple or pupil? Ignorance of the One 


leads one to this dichotomy. Realisation of the Truth will end this distinction. None need teach, 
none need learn. All are fundamentally Chith (Awareness). This is the Reality. 


The teacher---that is the more correct appellation---should not feel superior; the pupil should not 
feel inferior. Both are Aathma in reality. There is no high and no low. All are waves in the ocean 
of Bliss. When your body is healthy, charming, fully content, consider how happy you are! Now, 
know that the bodies of all beings are you--really speaking. And, when all those other bodies are 
happy, healthy, strong, and full, calculate how much Bliss you can cherish in your heart! The 
vision of the Viraat (the Cosmic Form), is given for those who 


surrender their ego and take refuge in the Lord (as Arjuna did) and who imbibe with care the 
Geetha sung by the Lord in the silence. God is Omnipresent; He is the Inner Motivator of every 
particle in the Universe. To declare that He is amenable only to your style of worship, that He 
will answer only to the Name that you have learnt to use, is to insult His Omniscience and His 
Glory. See Him in all, serve Him in all. Revere Him in all. Pray, "-Let the whole-world prosper; 
let all mankind be happy." This is the Special Message I give you on this Day. 


Guru Poornima Day, July 1974 


When you are driving a car, the car is your God. When you are 
doing business in a market, the market is your God. 


According to the culture of Bhaarath, we first make obeisance to 
the work which we have to do. Before we undertake to do any 
work, we should regard that work as God. 


Thasmai Namaha Karmane---"The work I have to do, I regard as 
God and make obeisance to God in that form"---that is what the 
Upanishaths are teaching us. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


43. To the mothers 


MANY of you sit in Dhyaana (meditation) and after some time start complaining, "O Why is it I 
am not able to concentrate? Bhagavaan! Help me to fix my mind on you!" Do not get impatient 
and bewail. Feel rather that you must make the mind pure and clean, so that God Himself will be 
tempted to possess it. He is the chora (thief) of the heart. When thieves enter the house, they 
select things of value; they will not bother about firewood or charcoal bags! God too when He 
comes in the role of a thief, looks for the most precious thing, the thing He values most, the thing 
you have taken most pains to foster. He carries away the pure thoughts, the deeds soaked in the 
sweetness of sympathy and compassion, the feelings of Love that do not crave requite. God is no 
ordinary thief! 


This Thief makes people richer by His theft! Richer in happiness, serenity and self-esteem. This 
thief is loved the more, the more He steals! He wakes up the sleeping and then steals what the 
household has kept for Him. Many times, the people pretend sleep so that He may come and 
steal the things they have kept for that very purpose. He calls out: Thasmaath Jaagratha, 
Jaagratha! "Therefore, wake up, wake up;" and then, He carries away the treasure He seeks and 
finds. 


What is taught must be imprinted on the heart 


You have that treasure in you; but, you do not know it; hence, you do not keep it ready for Him. 
You feel you have nothing to give Him, and that you are poor and downtrodden. Once you offer 
the heart to God, there is no more wail or want. 


Those of you who are not affluent, have to borrow some vessels for cooking the marriage feast 
from some rich neighbour or acquaintance. Or, you may hire them from some institutions which 
keep such big vessels for helping others. The code of conduct, whether you borrow or hire, is: 
clean the vessels before returning them; they have to be given back just as they were brought- 
from the owner. Cook in them; then, cleanse them before you restore them intact to the person 
who lent them. 


The Immortal Beings, who have assigned for themselves, this role, this venture of celebrating a 
‘life-time on earth,’ have as it were, borrowed a HEART front God!---the Supreme Giver, in a 
clean condition. When finally you give it back, see that they are as clean and pure as when He 
gave them. That is the code of conduct; or else, He will not accept them! 


Even experienced teachers' nowadays delight in the mere injection into the brains of the children 
under their care the components of the text books! For, they endeavour only to push them 
through the 'examinations;' so, it is just a question of guessing correctly the questions that might 
appear in the paper and mugging up the answers for just those! Once the boys and girls have 
written the things which their heads have been stuffed, they return home, with-heads emptied and 
hollow. What you teach must, however, be imprinted on the heart, not stacked in the brain. That 
will mould their character and make them useful for themselves and society. 


Take the example of Dhruva,. His stepmother told him that he can win the favour of the King, 
his father, only through God's Grace, which he has to win through penance! So, the five-year-old 
boy went into the forest and practised austerities that were unparalleled in history) As a result of 
the penance, his desire was so sublimated that, in the end, he declared, "I do not care for royal 
favour, or even the worldly throne! I shall attain the Kingdom of God; I shall sit in the lap of 


God." Thus, he rejected the lordship over humans and preferred the joy of being a child of God, 
with God. 


Recognise the great potentials of the child 


In the tender hearts of the children, there is much potentiality of devotion and attachment to 
higher ideals and objectives; this can be developed and cultivated by you. Do not think that they 
do not know anything; that you can divert them any way you wish; this is a mistake. Recognise 
the great potentials of the child; adopt such methods as the child himself might suggest or 
indicate, Help the child to reach Godliness and become aware of its high destiny. Do not 
presume that the child is some inferior personality or that is incapable of attaining the heights. 


The parents themselves are not competent to guide the children; they dote on them and do not 
know how to correct them, they have reprehensible habits and ways of life. They smoke, play 
cards, gamble, drink, and fight in the home; they utter falsehoods, talk scandal, boast and 
slander, in the presence of the children. How then can they lead their children on right lines? You 
will have to persuade such parents to mend their ways and be inspiring examples, rather than 
enemies and obstacles. 


But, before you advise the parents see that you have no defect to which they can point their 
fingers! Learn the right to advise, before you venture on the mission. First, set right your own 
homes; see that atmosphere of the home is free from hatred, pride, slander and greed; see that 
Love is the fly-wheel of the home, that faith in God is the bedrock on which the relations 
between the members are built. 


India stands forth as the teacher to humanity 


Indian traditions and Indian modes of living are now being fast cast away; crude manners of 
dress and speech and personal appearance are replacing them; children should be taught to look 
upon these with disgust, they should know them for what they are---aberrations and vulgarities! 
Now, obscene posters are pasted along the roads by cinema theatres in order to attract fans; they 
contaminate character very subtly and silently; children must make the elders ashamed when 
they permit such demeaning and deleterious posters to appear in public view.! They have to 
waken the elders into a sense of shame, at the lowering of human values. Unless we plant these 
ideals in the children, India will go down to the depths of degradation. 


How can you tolerate these obscene pictures, these posters publicising pornographic films, this 
most objectionable type of dress, this brazen behaviour and appearance? Do everything possible 
to root out this evil. Train the children and the young, to remove this blot, from the face of 
Bhaaratha Maatha (Mother India). 


India stands forth as the teacher to humanity, thanks to the virtue, the fortitude, the moral 
strength of the women of the past and the present. You have to maintain these qualities and foster 
them so that she might hold her head high among the nations of the world. 


Children are the roots of the National Tree 


Establish the status of the mother in the home, as the upholder of spiritual ideals and therefore, 
the Guru of the children. Every mother must share in this effort---the expansion and steady 
manifestation of the God-consciousness latent in every child. 


Children are the crops growing in the fields, to yield the harvest on which the nation has to 
sustain itself. They are the pillars on which the foundation of the nation's future is built. They are 


the roots of the national tree, which has to give the fruits of work, worship and wisdom to the 
next generation. 


The Sathya Sai Baala Vikaas has been evolved in order to feed these roots, strengthen these 
foundation pillars and fertilise the growing crops. Children are now growing up in an atmosphere 
polluted by corruption, anxiety and hollow pomp, because people are enamoured of the shallow 
material culture, mainly imported from the West. Parents and teachers and even the leaders of 
the nation are devoid of admiration and adoration, understanding and practice of the basic 
principles of Bhaaratheeya. Culture; children are denied the precious heritage which is their due; 
they are inducted into alien ideals, thoughts and habits. They are praised for reciting foreign 
Nursery Songs, to the neglect of native rhymes! The educated child cuts himself away from the 
village child or the children of the unschooled. 


The older persons have but a little distance to travel, before they disembark. But the children, 
remember, have many miles to go and they take the nation along with them, to perdition or 
progress) The rishis (sages) of old knew the value of our culture and the deep peace and security 
that the heritage of that culture can give in times of turmoil and strife. They prescribed three 
disciplines for every one, young or old. They declared, Maathru dhevo bhava, Pithru dhevo 
bhava, Aachaarya dhevo bhava. So long as a nation grows up with these three noble ideals, it 
can never be pulled up by its roots and get dried up. For, adoration of the mother as Divine, of 
the father as God and of the Preceptor as God will make the growing generation cherish the 
heritage, which is handed down by them and through them. The generation gap will not be an 
unbridgeable chasm. 


Bangalore, 10-7-1974 


One of you may be working in an office, another in a shop, a third 
in the press but every one must engage in saadhana with devotion, 
discipline and a sense of duty. Do not feel that your role is low and 
the other persons high. Do not be depressed when you find your 
role is minor; do not be proud when you discover that your role is 
a major one. 


Give your best to whatever role is allotted to you. That is the way 
to earn Grace. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


44. The higher role 


Eakam sath; vipraah bahudhaa vadhanthi---"The One alone exists; wise men call it by many 
names." This is the harmonising unifying Truth that India teaches through the ages. Another 
lesson that Indian culture embodies and Indian thought emphasises is: When the process of living 
revolves around the body, it is steeped in misery; when it revolves around the Aathma, the 
Divine spark within, it is resplendent with joy. 


When the years of life are spent and man has not discovered at least who he is, surely, such a life 
is a stupid, waste. Search for the Reality, for the Witness within, the Divine that animates; this is 
the first duty of man to-himself. Indian .Culture calls on all to discover for themselves the special 
nature of his 'isness' and its sacred consequences and to shape his activities and attitudes 
accordingly. 


Ayam Aathma Brahma---This Aathma is Brahma. The Individual is the Universal, ‘pretending to 
be separate!' The individual exists, cognises and is cognised, delights and confers delight, 
because it is the Universal. The tiny flame of a candle can light a thousand other candles and yet 
burn with undiminished strength. The other flames have to acknowledge that they have with 
them only the flame of the first one. The One has lit the many; the One is shining in and through 
the many; the One is the many. Ekoham bahusyaam---"the One decided to be many," to enjoy its 
own manifoldness. The One appears as all this diversity. That is the Truth. 


Seek the Knower behind the knowing process 


Air which is but One, appears as storm, whirlwind, breeze, simoom, assuming various forms by 
change of speed in movement. The names too differ from form to form. The insistence on the 
fundamental unity of all creation is the special feature of Indian thought. It is faulty vision, to see 
variety as variety, the world as composed of disparate elements and forces. In spite of this great 
heritage which Indians have come by, they are today disparaging it and devaluing it by their 
behaviour and beliefs. 


The beliefs of man must be free front aswuya (jealousy), as the Geetha declares. Asuuya is the 
evil nature that cannot tolerate the happiness and prosperity of another, that prevents man from 
loving his neighbour, from serving the distressed, and seeing, in all, the same Divine Motivator 
that he himself has, as his inner charioteer. It makes man eager to pick holes in the activities of 
others and renders them blind to their virtues and excellences. 


This is a College, an institution that imparts education and prepares the rising generation to be 
better women and better citizens. Education must open the eyes and enable them to recognise the 
One behind the many. When that One is known, the many can be known easily and clearly. 
Pursue the vast, the cosmic, the all-inclusive Truth; do not be satisfied with paltry partial scraps 
of information; seek the Knower behind the knowing process. That is the Real victory. 


Education must promote peace and happiness 


Educationists must concentrate on methods by which unity will be imparted and distinctions 
relegated to a subordinate role. But, unfortunately at the present time, in the name of 
individuality and the sheer fancy for distinctness, every encouragement is given to idiosyncracy 
and adventurism, foppishness and flippancy. Parents and elders have to hang down their heads in 
shame at the vagaries of their children. 


Education must promote, peace, security and happiness. But, as a result of the educational 
process through which they have passed, youth is :causing anxiety, fear and unrest in the society 
of which they are a part. Neither have they any peace or. joy or security. The Kaurava brothers 
sought for power, fame, selfish gain and competitive victory. They loved separatist divisive 
policies. Their thirst for power could be quenched, as Krishna said, only by a rain of arrows 
which wiped them off the face of the earth. In order to remove the terror that stalks the land from 
end to end, an immediate reform of the educational system is called for. 


Roots hold the tree firm; the foundation keeps the building from collapsing. Awareness of one's 
responsibilities, detachment from entangling bonds, confidence in one's own sense of 
righteousness---these have to be fostered in colleges. Integrity, sincerity, and the desire to use 
one's skills and intelligence, for the service of one's fellowmen are essential in youth. 


At present, educated people are wanting in the grit necessary to act according to their 
convictions; they know a thing is right but lack the will to carry it through. Teach the students to 
discriminate in a detached manner and arrive at right conclusions, and encourage them to put 
their faith into practice fearlessly. Now that the cultivation of the spirit is in the name of 
secularism, beyond the ken of the system, teachers who are themselves unaware of higher values 
are leading youth into less and less firm grounds, into fear and fickleness. How can such people, 
who have no inner strength, no vital faith in themselves, lead others? What can the country 
expect from this method of bringing up the young, this foolish and futile round, where the blind 
lead those unwilling to open their eyes in series of fallow circles? 


The God within does not fail to warn, to counsel 


Naayam aathma balaheenena labhyah---"The soul cannot be won by the weak." That is the 
pronouncement of the Vedhas (sacred scriptures). Without the awareness of the source of all 
strength, the Aathma, man is basically weak and he can only lead men into further weaknesses. 


There are many who swear that they have infinite confidence and faith in themselves, but, they 
assert they have no faith in God. How then could they have faith in themselves? For, who exactly 
is I? Is 1a bundle of bones and muscle? Is I the name? 


No. The reality of I is God; the I is a wave of the Ocean of Divinity, endowed with the same 
sublimity, the same taste, the same depth. How then can defeat descend on I? 


Man has to be continually examining every desire that emerges in his mind, so that he may 
suppress or destroy or by-pass or obey. He must learn, from parents, elders, teachers, friends and 
the leaders of the land besides the books written by wise men of his own as well as of other 
countries, the standards by which he can test his desires. He has to accept them or reject them. 
There are some who are wilfully wicked, who attempt to justify by specious arguments the 
inequities they perform. But, even then, they know that they are on the wrong path. The God 
within does not fail to warn, and to counsel. 


Become instruments to reestablish righteousness 


Students! If you are drawn into evil in pursuit of momentary pleasure, you will have to suffer 
misery a thousand-fold as a consequence of the impulse. Wicked thoughts, wild schemes and 
frolicsome escapades might give pleasure for the moment but in the long run they are sure to 
land you in irretrievable ruin. 


Your role is something far higher. You have to correct and transform those who behave like 
blind men though they have eyes; those who move about as lame men though their legs are 
strong and straight, those who behave like insane men though they are equipped with bright 
minds; such men are in all fields now. There are hypocrites who talk ‘peace’ and practise 'war.' 
Your task is to expose them and educate them back into normalcy and virtue. Become 
instruments in the great effort to reestablish Righteousness throughout the world. 


This College has not been established just to prepare you for earning degrees. The main purpose 
is to help you to cultivate self-knowledge and self-confidence, so that each one of you can learn 
self-sacrifice and earn self-realisation. The teaching of the university curricula and the 
preparation for presenting you for the university examinations and the award of university 
degrees---these are only the means employed for the end, namely, spiritual uplift, self-discovery 
and social service through love and detachment. Our hope is that by your lives you will be 
shining examples of spiritual awareness and its beneficial, consequences of the individual and 
society. 


Ananthapur, August 1974 


From the tree of your life, to pick out such fruits which you have 
protected and which you have grown in the form of good qualities 
and offering them to God, there is some distinctiveness in that. 


In order to promote good qualities, you have to undergo several 
troubles. So, it is through these good qualities that your mind can 
also acquire a divine concentration. 


Without good qualities and without good thoughts, how can you fix 
your mind in meditation? 


Sri Sathya Sai 


45. The banana and the peel 


THULSI DHAAS has said in his Raamacharithaamaanas that he composed the great epic on the 
story of Raghunaath for ‘swaanthasukhaaya,' that is to say, for his own sukha or happiness and 
joy. He engaged himself in that self-imposed task, not to any patron or even Raama, but to 
please, himself. He derived great Aanandha (divine bliss) while writing it and when it was 
finished. That was the urge which moved him. 


In fact, all that a man does, is, ultimately, traceable to this urge---the urge to earn self- 
satisfaction. A man builds a house, writes a book, enters a job, executes a plan---all because he 
gets joy therefrom. The cuckoo coos sweetly, and derives joy therefrom, far more than those who 
happen to listen. The rose blooms on the plant, because of an inner urge, not an outer prompting. 
The father fondles his baby and receives thereby more joy than he ever gives. The various 
disciplines undergone by saadhakas (spiritual aspirants), monks, ascetics, and those on the 
march along the path of self knowledge are all adopted and adhered to, because they give joy to 
oneself, and fulfil an inner need. 


Sacrifice, is at the very basis of Bliss 


This day is celebrated by you as the day when Emperor Bali was both humiliated and blessed by 
God, in the form of Vaamana. Emperor of the three worlds, Bali called himself, so, for, he had 
bala (power), more than any one else. He was saturated with egotism. God came to him, while 
he was busy with a Yaaga (an offering), in the form and guise of a Brahmin boy, and asked for a 
gift of just three foot-measures of land. Bali told him that he could ask for infinitely more riches 
and lands; but, the Boy insisted on that tiny gift only. The preceptor of Bali warned him about 
the identity and bonafides of the strange mendicant; he mentioned that he may be God Himself. 
Tiffs made Bali happier, for, if it was true, he was so mighty that even God came to his door as a 
mendicant. Such was the measure of his conceit. 


But, when Vaamana drew Himself up to cosmic proportions and measured the entire earth with 
one foot and the vast expanse of space with another foot, Bali was humbled; he offered his own 
head as the third foot-measure, and let himself be trod-down into the nether-world. This day 
marks the day when the Incarnation of Vaamana happened, in order to teach this lesson that 
pride meets with doom. Once the ego was thus suppressed, Bali became cleansed and God 
blessed him, with various boons. He assured him that He would ever be his guardian. He 
permitted him every year, on Onam Day, to come up into the world and see for himself his 
empire and receive therefrom the homage of his people. So, this is the Festival of Vaamana's 
Advent as well as Bali's Transformation. 


This day also extols the merit of gifts, renunciation, charity, however little, to any one, for, all 
are images of God. Thyaaga (Renunciation or Sacrifice), is at the very basis of Bliss, of Grace, 
of Immortality. Na medhayaa na prajayaa dhanena, thyaagenaike amrithathwam aanasuh---say 
the Vedhas. ("Not by intellect, not by progeny, not by riches, but, by renunciation alone can the 
Bliss of Immortality be attained"). Onam is the Festival which instils this message into those 
who observe it with an eye on its inner significance. 


Every obstacle is a step that leads to Aanandha 


Kerala has contributed a great deal to the preservation of Vedhic culture, and Sanskrit learning, 
Keralites have a name for faith and dedication. Witness the age-old privilege the Nambuudhiris 


of Kerala enjoy, priest-hood of the great Vaishnavite shrine thousands of miles away from their 
land, namely Badhrihath among the Himaalayas. 


Of course, wherever faith and dedication to God are evident, forces that tend to ridicule it, 
diminish its strength also are found. Where Aasthika (believer in God) is, there Naasthika 
(athiest) too will raise its head. But, disbelief in God or in some Supreme Will can be only a 
pose, assumed for the sake of personal aggrandizement or advertisement. It cannot stand the light 
of reason or of experience; even so-called atheists have Love in their hearts, honour Truth while 
dealing with Society and live on the basis of some eternal basic principles of justice. So, they are 
believers in Sath-Chith-Aanandha (Being, Awareness, Bliss Supreme). 


You have the duty to stand witness in your lives to the courage, the joy, the strength, the 
generosity, the humility that true spirituality and faith can impart to man, while faced with 
disappointment, distress, defeat, defamation and other calamities against which the atheist has no 
such shield. Gold gains in value when it is melted in the crucible. A piece of diamond when it is 
cut into a many-faceted gem is thereby rendered more brilliant and more costly. The dull stone is 
not sought after by all. Prahlaadha, the grandfather of emperor Bali was subjected to torture by 
his irate father; but, that only added to his lustre. Bali himself shone all the brighter for the 
punishment he received from the compassionate Lord. This is the lesson you have to gamer 
today. Every obstacle is a step that leads you to the Aanandha that can never be destroyed or 
taken away. 


It is natural of man to raise himself up 


There is another duty that you owe to yourselves, which you have to recognise today. The world 
is the playground of Nara (human) and Naaraayana (God). Nara transforming himself into 
Naaraayana and Naaraayana transforming Himself into Nara, and playing their roles in unison. 
You know full well that Naaraayana has come in human form for reestablishing Dharma 
(morality) in the world, for feeding the roots of faith, in God and for interpreting God to man; 
you have to be assured that it is natural of man too to raise himself up, through spiritual 
discipline, moral elevation, expansion of love and other means to become Naaraayana. But, man 
is unaware of this high destiny. He misinterprets his skills and strength and is so absent-minded 
that he slides down the scale into a monster or a monkey. Of course there are many who struggle 
with these downward dragging tendencies and endeavour to elevate themselves; these most often 
grope in the dark and are badly led. 


Devotion ‘must flourish, unaffected by time 


There are two truths that must be accepted by every pilgrim or devotee: (1) Devotion has to be 
full, free and comprehensive. (2) Divinity must be conceived as full, free and comprehensive. On 
the other hand, devotion today is almost always only 'part-time.' That is to say, whenever disease, 
defeat, or disappointment happen to assail you, you turn to God and pray for His Grace; but 
when you are happy, prosperous, healthy and in good shape, you ignore God and claim that they 
are all due to your own abilities and achievements. God is ignored in sunshine, He is wanted 
only when there is night. Devotion must persist and flourish, unaffected by time, place or 
circumstance. 


God too has to be experienced in His fullness, and the Aanandha of that experience made one's 
permanent possession. Kasturi recited that poem, which,, was sweet to the ear and full of 
Sanskrit words. But, words seldom come out of actual experience. It is impossible to experience 


God and also talk about him. Words like Sarvajnaana, Sarvavyaapi, meaning that "He knows 
all," "He is everywhere" are used by people, since elders and saints have used them from ancient 
times; it is impossible for any one to have the fullest and the most comprehensive experience of 
these qualities of the Divine, and also speak about that experience. 


The Geetha speaks of God as achalam chalam evacha, "immoveable as well as moveable," 
which strikes one as impossible. God appears to move, to act, to bless, to save, to test; but, He is 
unconcerned basically with these. Look at a tree. The branches, leaves, etc. might be moving 
with the wind; but the trunk is steady and unmoved. God is but appears as not is. The body 
moves, the intellect moves, the mind moves, but the Aathma is unaffected; it is steady, firm, 
unchangeable. The lake is unmoved; the surface is tickled into wavelets by every passing breeze. 
The colourless unmoved curtain or screen is unaffected by the pictures of fire, faction, floods, 
and glaciers that appear upon it in a realistic manner. When the pictures are seen, the screen is 
unseen; when the screen is seen, the pictures are unseen. But, without the screen (Brahman), the 
pictures have no meaning, carry no message, tell no story. They impart no Aanandha. 


God is the stealer of hearts 


You may carry a match-box in your pocket, with no danger of fire emanating, though the 
components are there in that box. So too, there are the components of Divinity in you; only, it is 
not patent, it is not expressed. Take a stick and strike its head against the chemical coating given 
on one side of the box, and suddenly, in a flash, you get the flame of fire. So too, take the Jeeva 
(the individual) and strike it on the Brahman-principle that is immanent in the Universe, make it 
aware of it, so to say, and the Individual too manifests the Divinity latent in it. The tree is the 
Individual; the Forest is the Brahman. The one, apart from the Many is the individual. The Many. 
and the Manifold is the Brahmana; Kasturi standing alone, apart, is Vyashti; when he goes and 
sits among you, the thousands who have come here for Onam, he merges in the Samashti. 
Samashti is Brahman; Vyashti is the Jeevaathman. 


Prahlaadha's grandson, Bali whom you honour today, extolled the Lord standing before Him, as 
Master of the entire Cosmos, as "Arch-thief among thieves," (Dongalalo gajadonga!). For, God 
steals the most precious possession of man, even when its owner is awake. He steals the 
chiththa; He is the chiththa apahaari, the Stealer of Hearts. I disappointed you; I even requested 
you not to come so far, away from your homes for this festival; but, yet, your hearts have been 
stolen by Me and so, you could not stay away. Onam is the day when you Keralites feast on the 
banana; when you eat a banana, you have first to remove the skin. So, too, when we desire to eat 
a mango or a lime fruit. The sweet substance has to be reached after removal of the bitter skin. 
For Bali to be received and accepted by God, the bitter cover of egoism and power-mania had to 
be removed. Ignorance, maaya (delusion), illusion, pride, all are the components of the skin. 
Onams come and Onams go; but, people are no nearer the Goal. This is because though Onam is 
given a hearty send-off, generosity, renunciation, love and the spirit of service are not given an 
equally hearty welcome. You have to take this as the Onam Message---strive to manifest, 
cultivate and express Love, and suppress pride and egoism, so that you can win the Grace of 
God. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 30-8-1974 


I ask only that you turn to Me when your mind drags you into grief 
or pride or envy. Bring Me the depths of your mind,, no matter how 
grotesque, how cruelly ravaged doubts or disappointments. I know 
how to treat them. I will not reject you, I am your mother. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


46. The Vedhic rite 


EVERY one of you ought of feel proud that you took birth in this holy land, long famous as the 
land of Yoga (divine communion), of Thyaaga (selfless sacrifice) and of God-oriented Karma 
(dedicated action). You are the children of Mother Vedha, whom she loves so affectionately that 
she has called you here to witness this great Vedhic Yajna. Bhaarath is the land that God loves, 
for, He has taken Avathaar (divine incarnation) here often, and is even now moving on this land, 
carrying out His Mission of restoring Dharma (righteousness) to people who are ignoring it. This 
Yajna (Vedhic ritual of sacrifice) is an item in that great Task. 


It is a great pity that Bhaarath which earned such eminent renown in the spiritual field is today in 
the throes of a devil dance of vice and wickedness, in the background of falsehood, injustice, 
hatred and faction. 


The land is sunk in anxiety and fear. Therefore, at this juncture, it is necessary to light the lamp 
of love and hope and impart courage and confidence, by both precept and example. 


Vedha means "that which makes you know" 


The Vedhas (sacred ancient scriptures) are the very roots of Bhaaratheeya Culture. So, it is the. 
bounden duty of every son of India to observe the rites and rituals, the injunctions and 
instructions, laid down in the Vedhas. Many have fallen into the habit of asking, what is the 
object of these directions, what can we gain from them? Well, let Me tell them that the one single 
object that the Vedhas have in view is to make man Divine, through a series of spiritual 
exercises. They lead man from the animal stage, when he believes he is just this body suffering 
hunger, thirst and desires of various kinds, into the state of human-ness, when he recognises that 
he is far higher than an animal and later, the Vedhas persuade him to use his intelligence and 
discrimination to sublimate his passions and emotions to the Divine level where he is in eternal 
bliss. 


The Vedhas elaborate the Sanaathana Shaasthra (the primal science of the spirit). Understanding 
this science well and practising it form the duties every man owes to himself. That science 
results in the removal of ignorance, the gaining of knowledge; not the knowledge of material, 
worldly things, which changes and gets superseded every few years! It endows the seeker with 
the knowledge that is the key to the entire gamut of knowledge, that which if known, everything 
else is known. 


That is why the Vedhas are called so. The word means, Vedhayathi ithi Vedhah, that is to say, 
"Vedha means that which makes you know." The cosmic principle is amenable to the mystic 
formulae and sound patterns that the manthras (sacred formulae) of the Vedhas represent; the 
four fundamental urges of man (Dharma, to be righteous; Artha, to earn and accumulate; Kaama, 
to desire and get the desires fulfilled and Moksha, to expand and get liberated from the ‘here and 
now’ into the ever and everywhere’) get sanctified and sustained by the Vedhic path. The material 
physique of God can be adored by the yanthra (machine); his spiritual physique has to be 
propitiated by means of manthras. 


There is nothing in creation that is not Divine 


Coming to this ritual of Yajna which we are inaugurating, you will notice that when the 
sanctified offerings are laid in the holy fire, the Pandiths (scholars) utter the word, Svaahaa, as 
often as they offer. The reason why that word has to be uttered is, according to them, to enable 


the offering to be totally’ reduced and consumed by the fire. Now, it is the very nature of fire to 
consume and so, there is no need to call upon fire in this manner; it does not stand to reason to 
declare that fire has to be prayed to for being and behaving so. 


It is uttered to acclaim the energy and splendour that are latent in fire and to invoke the Divine 
Thejas (lustre) that enables fire to shine and purify. The presiding diety is called upon to-carry 
the offering to the particular God to whom it is dedicated, saying, Indhraaya svaahaa,. 
Kesavaaya svaahaa, Rudraaya svaaha, Varunaaya svaahaa etc. Indhra, Kesava, Rudhra and 
Varuna will receive the oblation through Agni the presiding deity of Fire, only when He is 
invoked and aroused by the syllable Svaahaa. 


Not only is Fire Divine; all the elements are Divine. In fact, there is nothing in creation that is 
not Divine. Kaalidhaasa in the Kumaara Sambhavam Poem has addressed the Himaalayas and 
the streams, glaciers, peaks and trees thereon as Divine, as symbols and signals of the immanent 
Divine. For every element and being, fire which gives heat and light is considered to be the very 
life-principle, the vital breath. 


Activity declares whether the society is good or bad 


There is another clarification which I feel I should make just now. The Vedhas are countless--- 
‘Anantho vai Vedhaah,' it is said. Now, the doubt may arise why countless Vedhas are necessary 
to lay down the path of spiritual progress. Let us take an example. To make a child understand 
the meaning of one word, the parent or teacher uses very often a whole barrage of words. 
Explanation means elaboration, repetition, re-emphasising. So, to make clear to men of average 
intelligence or no intelligence, it became necessary to have a number of supplementary or 
complementary texts and scriptures, and since their number is immense, they came to be known 
as Aanantha (countless). The aim of every Vedha, however large the number, however varied the 
approach, is the same: to lead man from the animal stage through the human into the height of 
Divine self-realisation. 


From the Universal Absolute manifested the Brahman, the Cosmic Principle. From the Brahman, 
Karma (Regulated Activity)based on Vedhic prescriptions originated; from this kind of Karma, 
the Gods are delighted and they shower rain, directing the rain God Parjanya to bless the world 
and its people; since rain falls, crops grow and food is available for consumption; through food, 
man gets health and strength and vitality; as a result of this vitality, man multiplies and 
reproduces himself. This is the cycle, according to the Vedhas--Karma, Rain, Crops, Food, 
Fecundity. Krathus (elaborate rituals) of this type, are undertaken for invoking timely rains, 
congenial seasons and peace and prosperity for the whole world. 


It is the activity which declares whether the individual or society is good or bad. The 
thermometer measures the temperature of the body and announces whether the body is well or 
ill. The Karma or activity is the indicator of inner character. Observing one's actions, their 
motives, their consequences and the extent of one's involvement, it is possible to declare one as a 
pashu (beast) or Pashupathi (the Lord of Individual Souls), that is to say as Divine as God 
Himself. 


Vedhic yajna is for the prosperity of all mankind 


The Krathu is also a Karma, albeit a Vedhic Karma, dedicated to the acquisition of the welfare of 
the world. All Karma done to ensure the welfare of others, without, any aspiration for personal 
benefit, is good Karma which the Gods would appreciate as a Krathu. The evil consequences 


that are sure to affect you when you have committed wrong karmas can be counteracted by 
engaging yourself in beneficial Karmas, thereby earning merit. 


There is no attempt now to counteract evil by good and so, the country is fast sliding into ruin. 
How can the country uplift itself? The country is not just a piece of the map, or a slice of earth. It 
is a collection of men, women and children, bound together by tradition and certain common 
ways of life and thought handed-down as valid and valuable by generations of patriots and 
leaders of spiritual life. 


Once upon a time, since the vices of greed and vanity developed uncontrolled among men, the 
Vedha was so incensed and insulted that it took the form of a black deer and fled into the forests. 
At this, it is said, the Vedhic Pandiths, sages and scholars followed it with prayerful 
importunities; but, it would not return. They had to come back, with just the skin of the deer and 
be content with that remnant. These rithwiks who officiate in this and other Vedhic rituals wear, 
as you can see, pieces of the skin of the black deer, to warn themselves against the recurrence of 
that catastrophe. They also take their seats on deer-skins. Every act and gesture, every accent and 
tone of the manthras has a meaning traceable to the deep past and the experiences of the makers 
of our culture. The skin is called ‘charma' in Sanskrit. But, worn during the ritual it gives 
‘sarma,’ which means joy and enthusiasm, aanandha and sukha. 


Yajna means, as you know, sacrifice, thyaaga (renunciation). The Yajna celebrated here. has no 
particular individual desire to satisfy. The aim is to ensure the prosperity and peace, not of any 
one individual, nor of any region or community or country,' but, all ‘mankind. 


Gandhi used to go round the country praying Sabko sanmathi dhe Bhagavaan: "0 Lord, give 
every one, give all, goodness of mind." You who are attending this Yajna dedicated for the 
welfare of the world should pray likewise and, yourself entertain only sanmathi, so that the 
world will profit by the example. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 10-10-1974 


True human greatness consists of a continuous series of tiny acts 
executed with absolute sincerity and largeness of heart. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


47. The flag of victory 


THE hoisting of Prashaanthi Flag on the Prashaanthi Mandhir (Hall of Worship) is the Inaugural 
Function of all festivals celebrated at the Prashaanthi Nilayam. This has become an event, looked 
forward to with eager expectation and enthusiasm by the thousands of devotees who gather here. 
But, most people do not know that the hoisting of the Flag is a meaningful signal of victory, and, 
even, those who know, do not often recall to their minds what the victory is, that is indicated by 
the hoisting of this particular flag. 


Of course, as all of you have realised, the Dhashara Festival marks the triumph of the forces of 
good over the forces of evil, of Paraashakthi (Supreme Divine Energy) in Her three Forms of 
Mahaadurga, Mahaalakshmi and Mahaasaraswathi, subduing and destroying the asuric - 
(demonic) embodiments of lust, greed, hate and other Raajasik (quality of pride and passion) and 
Thaamasik (quality of inaction and ignorance) vices. 


But, what is your share in this struggle and this victory? What is the impact this ceremony should 
have on you? This Prashaanthi Flag symbolises the victory that each of you has to achieve over 
the demonic urges that infect and torment you. The triumph that deserves to be celebrated here 
by you is the one accomplished over the forces of ignorance and delusion, that, by their subtle 
and sinister influence veil your true nature and reality and lead you into the desert wastes of the 
sensory world. 


All that are created undergo a process of change 


Of what benefit is it, to know everything about the 'object,' while knowing nothing about the 
'subject'"? Such incomplete knowledge is of no avail at all; to boast of it is tantamount to making 
oneself the target of ridicule! 


Examine any object of Nature; examine anything, alive or inert, in Creation. You will observe 
that they all undergo a process of disintegration, of transformation, of transmutation; they are 
never one moment what they were the previous moment! It is a flowing river, you cannot dip in 
the same water more than once! A seed fallen on the ground soon becomes different: a sprout! It 
fast becomes a sapling, a tree, with a variegated equipment of trunk, branch, twig, leaf, bud, 
bloom and fruit! Each of these manifestations has a distinct colour, got evidently from nowhere; 
it has a distinct feel, form, taste, and name, and so, it has a unique purpose and use. The seed 
itself disappears from the ground, but, is found, multiplied a thousand-fold in identical forms, 
encased in each of the thousand fruits! What a grand mystery is this! 


The same heap of day is transformed by the deft hands of the potter into a vast variety of plates 
and pans. The one nugget of gold is transformed by the artistry of the smith into a fascinating 
array of beautiful jewels. These facts are within the experience of every one. The fruit, the pot 
and the jewel are 'effects'; there can be no effect without a 'cause.' The seed, the heap of clay and 
the nugget are the material causes, the gardener, the potter and the goldsmith are the instrumental 
causes; the manipulative causes. So far as the creation of the manifoldness of the Universe is 
concerned we call Him, God. 


When the Cosmos manifested through the Will of God, who is the Universal Absolute, It arose 
from the Absolute only, since there was then, only ONE, just as even now there is only One, 
inspite of all this seeming variety. That Will which' emanated from the Absolute persuaded us to 


see and experience Many; that is all that has happened. The One Reality is still the One, it has 
not undergone any change. We have super-imposed on the One, the illusion of the Many! 


Nature is God's Body, Cosmos is His Will 


God, therefore, is the material cause as well as the instrumental cause, the gold and the 
goldsmith, the potter and the clay, the seed as well as the tree.. "“Beejam maam sarva 
bhoothaanaam," Krishna says in the Geetha: "I am the seed of all the elements and all beings." 
Nature is His Body; the Cosmos is His Will; the Vedhas are His Breath. 


The Saankhya School of thinkers declare that the objective world arose out of the 
conglomeration and conjunction of disparate atoms; but, they do not pursue the matter and 
explain what induced the atoms to join with their kind in particular designs and groups. How 
does this urge arise? How does this awaken, within the minute atom? Who has planted this desire 
in the tiny heart of the atom? These questions are by-passed. 


Most philosophers especially in the West, ignore the problem of identifying the cause of all the 
effects we find every moment all around us. The Upanishaths (integral wisdom of Vedhas) 
declare, Ekoham bahusyam---"I am one, let me become many," willed God; and God became all 
this, in response to that divine desire, the primal urge. 


He became all this. He is therefore the Anthar-aathma (the Inner Reality); and the Anthar-vaami 
(the Inner Motivator). The Vedhas declare Vaasudhevah sarvamidham--"All this is Vaasudheva, 
God." They all say, Neha naanaasthi, kinchana---"There is not the. slightest trace of many-ness 
here." Ekam eva---There is only ONE; adhwithiyam,--Without a Second. 


Realising and experiencing this basic Truth, becoming blissful and aware of one's native Divinity 
is the victory that this Prashaanthi Flag denotes. 


Have you won that victory? No. Why then. am I hoisting it for your exhilaration, on this Festival 
Day? I am only hoisting it to instruct you, to inspire you, and to remind you of the precious 
heritage of Upanishathic wisdom, that your forefathers have earned and left for you. You are 
basking today in the sunshine of their glory; you have the chance to live on the fortune they have 
left behind for their children and children's children. This Flag invites you all to share in that 
immeasurable treasure. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 16-10-1974 


Every being in the Universe has the potentiality of transcending 
the senses. Even the little worm will one day transcend the senses 
and reach God. No life will be a failure. There is no such thing as 
failure in the universe. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


48. Vehicle care 


DOCTORS agree that illness is caused through faulty food habits and foolish ways of spending 
leisure. But, they do not seem to know that food is a Word that connotes a wider variety of 
‘intakes.' Every experience that is drawn through any of the senses in 'food' has an effect on one's 
health We say “food for thought’; whatever we see or hear or smell or touch has an effect on the 
body; good or bad. The sight of blood makes some people faint; or, it may be some bad news, 
that administers a shock. Allergy is produced by unpleasant smells, or when something 
intrinsically unwelcome is contacted or tasted. A sound mind ensures a sound body; a sound 
body ensures a sound mind. The two are interdependent. Health is essential for happiness; 
happiness or a capacity to be happy, whatever may happen is essential for physical health, too. 


The food we consume should be tasty, sustaining and pleasant. It should not be too ‘hot' or too 
saltish; there must be a balance and equilibrium maintained. It should not arouse or deaden. 
Raajasik food enrages the emotions; thaamasik food induces sloth and sleep. Saathwik food 
satisfies but does not inflame the passions or sharpen the emotions. 


Five types of bath prescribed in the scriptures 


Nature has many mysteries in its make-up. Man is able to unravel only those that are cognisable 
through his five senses; he does not realise that there is a vast unknown beyond the purview of 
the five faulty instruments of perception that he has. For example, from every being and thing, 
constantly, without intermission, millions of minute particles and millions of vibrations are 
issuing forth. Certain substances like camphor emanate so much of these that a lump disappears 
in a few days. The bodies of others affect us by these emanations and we too affect them in the 
same way. For good or bad, we are interacting in this manner, inescapably. Naturally, the growth 
of the body is affected, as well as its health and strength, by the contact or company we develop. 
These emanations are intensified when dirt accumulates, or sewage collects, or drains are 
choked. Sanitation rules are framed to reduce the possibility of disease spreading from such 
areas. 


Five types of bath are prescribed in the Hindhu scriptures, in order to maintain physical 
immunity from the emanations of others. First, we have the 'mud bath,' wherein fine mud is 
applied over the body and kept on for some time before being washed away. Second, the 'Sun 
bath' is recommended, because the rays of the Sun are powerful disinfectants; they feed as well 
as freshen. 


Third: bath in water. If the water is a flowing river, considered holy, and if the bath is taken after 
propitiatory hymns etc., the bath will cleanse the body and, at the same time, elevate the spirit. 
The fourth type is the 'air-bath,' when the body is, exposed to the cool breeze, and its salutary 
effect. The fifth and last type is the 'ash bath,’ where the body is given a coating of fine ash or 
Vibhuuthi (sacred ash), revered as the mark of Shiva. The ash guards the body from evil contacts 
and the deleterious effects of the vibrations proceeding from others; it also sanctifies and purifies 
the vibrations of the individual wearing the ash, for, it reminds him always of the inevitable end 
of all that one feels as one's own, except the Lord who is the very person himself. 


Uncleanliness has become a popular cult 


Untouchability as a social practice must have had its origin in the realisation of this truth. But, 
practices like avoiding contact with demeaning or defiling men or things later became a ritual, a 


hollow round of negations. Those who are ridiculed for observing such restrictions and taboos 
are finding it difficult to explain the inner significance of their behaviour. These observances 
originated from the anxiety to earn length of life and strength of body, so that the seeker might 
gain the goal. The Geetha speaks of yukthaahaara vihaarasya---"habits of feeding and recreation 
which are controlled and regulated." The gross part of food is discarded as faeces, the subtle part 
is transformed into muscle, blood, etc. and the more subtle of the subtle aspects are transmuted 
into the mind and its activities. That is why the sages have prescribed certain limits and levels of 
food, in order to promote the spiritual urges and prevent contrary tendencies. 


But, nowadays, as a result of the downgraded time-spirit, food that damages the spiritual urge is 
being increasingly favoured! The elementary rules of personal cleanliness are neglected in the 
name of ‘novelty and neospiritualism.' Bath is given the go-by. Oral hygiene is not cared for. 
Damaging habits are cultivated and tolerated. The mouth is the gateway of the physical mansion; 
if the gateway is foul, what can we say of the residence and the inmates! Uncleanliness has 
become a popular cult; it is necessary to keep away from its votaries, for, cleanliness is next to 
Godliness. Unkempt, dishevelled, dirty heads and bodies denote unkempt, dishevelled intellects 
and minds. 


The body will shine if the character is fine 


Of course, it is true that many sages and saints paid little attention to personal cleanliness, since 
they were always on the higher plane of nearness to Reality. Imitating them without the inner 
conviction that one is not the body but that one is the Universal Indweller .can only be hypocrisy 
and exhibitionism. Eeshwara swallowed the poison that emerged from the Ocean; but, mortals 
cannot do the same, even to remove the minor poisons of the world. Develop equanimity, install 
in the mind the faith in the Divine and then you get the authority to neglect the claims of the 
body, with impunity. You cannot challenge the wisdom of the sages and ask, what harm is there 
if I too behave likewise! Great harm will certainly ensue, when you venture into these realms of 
the spirit with the ego bloated big. 


The body has to be carefully and tenderly fostered; it is a precious gift, a very complicated but 
well co-ordinated machine, given for achieving a laudable task. Its exterior too must be clean and 
full of the charm of goodness. The skin of the fruit of Aanandha (divine bliss) is the physical 
body; the succulent flesh is the muscle, bone and nerve; the hard uneatable seed is the evil that 
gets mixed up in life; the juice which the fruit offers, for which the tree was planted and 
nourished is the Bliss it shares with all. The body will shine if the character is fine; service of 
man and worship of God will preserve its charm. The Lord will be watching with a thousand 
eyes the least activity of man to discover any slight trace of selfless Love sweetening it. 


In the past, illnesses were cured by the simple remedies that nature herself provided,--roots, 
tubers, fruits, leaves etc., rest, change of residence, regulation of diet, saadhana (spiritual 
discipline) etc. But, now man lives in an age of tablets and injections. Do not believe that health 
is retained or maintained through doctors; nor can drugs alone guarantee it. Were that So, the 
dead should all be alive now. Well, examine whether the doctors themselves follow the advice 
they offer to others. They are victims of the very habits which they advise against! They 
condemn smoking and drinking intoxicants as dangerous to health, but, they indulge in both, and 
thereby, encourage the very evils they condemn! 


This is the type of health-advisers that we have! In every field---spiritual, moral, .economic, 
political, and literary---absence of proper leaders is the root cause of all the distress, anxiety and 
fear that torment the world. 


You are embodiments of the Divine Aathma. Do not crave for recognition and respect from 
others; crave rather for winning Grace from the Lord. In the pursuit of that aim, do not be misled 
by the emergence of obstacles and obstructions. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 16-10-1974 


49. Honour your kith and kin 


VOLUNTEERS! Embodiments of the Divine Aathma! Service without idea of self is the very 
first step in the spiritual progress of man. For, it trains you to transcend all the distinctions 
artificially imposed by history and geography and realise that the human community is ONE, and 
indivisible. Learn this truth; experience it in action. That is the duty of the Seva Dhal 
Organisation. How can a person be held ‘divine’ (as every man truly is), unless he has established 
himself in the sense of this Unity and shaped all his actions thereby? Man has been brought forth 
so that he may enjoy his heritage, namely; the Bliss that comes of the realisation of the One. Any 
activity solely intended for the individual is, on that very account, barren. 


For, the community is essential for the individual, for his very survival. Your service will confer 
on you and on the community wherein you live untold benefits; it will also bring an invisible but 
potent benefit, namely, Divine Grace, Seva (selfless service) is an important ingredient in the 
nine-fold discipline of Bhakthi (devotion). You can see, sense, understand and sympathise with 
others who are akin to you, and so, you have greater reason to render them help and service. 


God will not accept hypocrisy 


If you do not feel the call at the sight of human distress, disease or deviation from the right, how 
can you muster the determination and dedication necessary to serve the unseen, inscrutable, 
mysterious God. When you do not love man, your heart will not love God. Despising" brother 
man, you cannot at the same time, worship God; if you do, God will not accept that hypocrisy. 
God is the resident in every heart; so, serve any one, that service reaches the God within him; it 
brings on you the Grace of God. The heart that does not melt at the sight of persons caught in the 
coils of ignorance, disease or deprivation has to be labelled demonic; to call it bestial is an insult 
to the beasts. Give up egoism, sensualism and greed; fill your hearts with renunciation, belief in 
the glory of the Aathma (Self) and Love. That is the means by which you can make yourselves 
efficient Seva Dhal workers. 


Thousands arrive at the Prashaanthi Nilayam during the festivals; among them we have a large 
number of sick people, the aged and children. You have to serve these visitors with special care 
and love. Do not go about strutting with pride that you have a badge and a scarf; go humbly 
among the people with love in your hearts and softness in your speech and sweetness in your 
acts. It is a badge which a "servant" alone is entitled to wear, not a master lording over others. 
The badges rest on your hearts, don't they? If your hearts are filled with pride, and a sense of 
superiority over others who have no badge on their chests, then, the hearts themselves will be 
affected by the evil aroused by this decoration. When you disregard or disrespect the badge, you 
are disregarding and disrespecting your own inner reality. The badge and scarf do not entitle you 
to roam about in the bazaar, or lounge in the hotel outside the Nilayam, indulging in low talk and 
vulgar habits. It does not allow you to exercise authority over any one or appropriate anything 
from any one. 


It is a call and a challenge for you, to provide comfort and consolation to those in need, to seek 
out means and methods to increase the ways in which you can help others and contribute to their 


JOY. 


Serve the community, the Community will serve you 


Be worthy of this gift of Grace; maintain' the high ideals of the Seva Dhal organisation. This 
opportunity has been given to you out of sheer Grace; it is not given as a consequence of some 
rule or claim. It does not bind you; it gives you distinction and duty, both. If you have it with 
you, and yet, -withdraw from service or hesitate to render it, you are 'on the wrong, track. People 
come to this Presence to get rid of sin and accumulate spiritual merit; if you dishonour the badge, 
you are retaining the sins and accumulating a lot more. Remember, with each act of Love and 
Service, you are nearing the Divine Presence; with each act of hate and grab, you are moving 
farther and farther away. The ideal of service must inspire those in authority, those who possess 
riches, those who-are endowed with skills and intelligence, leisure and health. Serve the 
community and the community will serve you. Exploit it and it will exterminate you. Put an end 
to. laziness; bury your clamorous ego; bury the greed for power and pelf; then, you get the 
qualifications needed for a member of the Seva Dhal. 


I know that some people allow others to use the scarf and badge given to them; they do so to 
escape work or to please their friends. This is very wrong; these symbols of Seva are as vital to 
reach one of you as your own breath. When you give them over, you do great injury to your own 
breath. Or, there are some, I know, who keep them hidden, out of sight of others, when they 
drink, gamble, or smoke and indulge in such harmful and shameful acts. This too is despicable. 


Soft speech reaches the heart quicker 


Now, about some things you have to bear in mind, when you serve the people who come here 
and stay for the festival. Distribute water to the thirsty; help the aged to find places away from 
the scorching sun or pouring rain. At the gatherings, arrange to seat the persons who have come 
from long distances for the first time, eager to take Dharshan (audience), in places and rows 
wherefrom they can see and enjoy the festival in all its aspects. When you meet with cases of 
illness, report immediately to some doctor and help them to get relief. Do not delay. When your 
services are called for, do not rush thither in huge numbers; go in as small a number as is 
required. Too many enthusiastic persons can only hinder the work; and, work in other fields will 
suffer. 


I am Prema (divine love), and you should hold on to Prema as your method of Seva (selfless 
service). Soft speech reaches the heart quicker and deeper. Reveal in gentle words the reason 
why you do not allow certain things to be done or you require certain other things to be done. 
Win the willing co-operation of people, not their resentful acquiescence. Do not rely on harsh 
behaviour, or violent means. That is a path into which many slide easily; but, they do not realise 
that they are ridiculed as alsatians or bull-dogs by those who suffer their attentions. Do not also 
use your status to show favour to your kinsmen, or friends in any manner. All are your kith and 
kin, in the Sai Family. 


This is your home, and the thousands who come to this home are your kith and kin. Welcome 
them, as you will welcome your nearest and dearest relations; as far as in you lies, make their 
stay comfortable. This scarf and this badge confer on you the right to declare that Prashaanthi 
Nilayam is your home. Keep that in mind and do not behave in any manner that will tarnish the 
brightness of that declaration. That status is a precious gift. Do not overstep the limits imposed 
by the Organisation; do not disobey the rules laid down; do not deviate from the ideals laid 
down. March straight on, and reach the goal. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 16-10-1974 


Peace is inherent in man. When ego becomes egoism, the Aham 
becomes Ahamkaar by enfolding itself in a from. 'T'--pure and 
simple, maintained pure and simple---is still 'being'; it 'becomes' 
when the I identifies itself with something other: Iam a man, Iam 
a monk. Iam a student. The 'T' has become an ‘ism;' has put on a 
form, a vesture, which it is loath to give up, the aakaar which has 
rendered it Aham-kaar, egoist! 


Sri Sathya Sai 


50. The Labyrinth 


THE real and the unreal (that appears to the ignorant as 'real') are not two distinct things; one is 
the absence of the other, that is all. The 'absence' of reality cannot be an ‘unreal thing.' The 
absence of light cannot be raised to the level of a distinct thing called ‘darkness.’ There is only 
One; it appears as two. In order to explain this, Brahmasri Mudigonda Pichayya Shaasthry gave a 
good example. He spoke of a red-hot cinder, which burns the hand, since fire has entered into the 
piece of coal. So too, when the ego enters the jeeva (individual being), the ego develops 
attributes and appears many-faced. 


But, just inquire, how the coal itself came into being. That too was a result of fire! The jeeva 
itself was manifested since the feeling of aham (ego) arose in the nirguna Brahman (the 
attributeless, desireless Universal). 


The Shaasthry also spoke of the difficulties involved in releasing the jeeva from the clutches of 
the ego. He said it is like separating the heat from the red-hot cinder, it has become part and 
parcel of the coal. But, by the process of cooling, the coal can again rid itself of the heat that 
informed every particle of its substance. 


He called 'life,' a labyrinth, from which few can escape, though all have entered it easily! He 
quoted the Mahaabhaaratha episode where Dhrona, the teacher of the clans in the art of warfare 
(also called Kumbhaja, born in pot) had arrayed the Kaurava troops as a labyrinth on the battle- 
field of Kurukshethra; Dhrona challenged the teenage son of Arjuna, Abhimanyu by name, to 
come into the padhmavyuha (labyrinth of the lotus shape) and fight his way out, if he dared. His 
father Arjuna was not present in camp; his wife was pregnant at the time and, so, as the 
Shaasthras (spiritual sciences) declare, the prospective father had no right to gamble with his 
life. When the young warrior mentioned the challenge, his mother expostulated with him, and 
told him that he could well excuse himself from the ordeal. 


The pure mind reflects the Reality of God 


The reasons she gave him for this withdrawal have a deeper meaning. The labyrinth was 
constructed by Kumbhaja, which means, one born in intelligence, Brahman Itself, for, Brahman 
is Prajnaanam (the Supermost Wisdom). How can a person break through the labyrinth devised 
by Brahman, when he is overwhelmed by the egoistic pulls, consideration for his-wife and his 
child-in-the-womb and the absence of his father? These two excuses are the symbols of I and 
Mine. 


The Mahaabhaaratha declares that Arjuna alone had capacity and skill to break the 
Padhmavyuha (that is to say, the labyrinth of birth and death, the tangle of desires and 
fulfilments). Why? Because, Arjuna, (the word means, pure, unblemished, immaculate) was free 
from the ego and so could foil its stratagems. Through the pure mind alone can the chain be 
broken, the tangle cleared. The pure mind reflects the Reality clearly, the Reality of God that is 
the basis of One---Self as well as the objective world. Chiththa-shuddhi brings Jnaana-siddhi--- 
"the pure mind confers the boon of wisdom." God is immanent in every particle in the Universe; 
the clear vision can experience Him everywhere at all times. 


"Soham" is the refrain of every breath 


That vision gives immeasurable, inexpressible bliss. Of what avail is all the loud chanting, 
praying, singing and wailing, when the heart is soiled by egoism and selfish desire? A person 


behaving so might be taken by ordinary mortals as highly devoted to the spiritual path; but, deep 
in his disturbed consciousness,' he will be tormented by anxiety and fear. On the other hand, a 
person might appear poor, distressed, and depressed, to ordinary mortals; he might not have the 
exterior demonstration of devotion. But, God would be ever installed in his heart, guiding and 
guarding him. He might be doing all acts as acts of worship to the God residing in his heart. 


The bird in this physical cage wherein man is imprisoned is always, from the moment of birth to 
the moment of death, chirping ‘Soham,’ declaring that 'in reality the jeeva (embodied soul) and 
dheha (body) are ONE. It is this affirmation that is the justification for the gift of life. When that 
chirp does not emanate from the breath, the body is a shavam (corpse)! When it manifests, 
illumines and fills the cage ‘with the Divine fragrance, it is a tabernacle, Shivam! Identify 
yourselves with the manthra (sacred formulae) the bird chirps, the breath repeats. You might 
forget any other saadhana (spiritual discipline) or any other duty to yourself---but, the breath 
never, even for a moment forgets this Saadhana--reminding you of your innate Reality, namely, 
Sah (He). "I am He. He is |"---that is the refrain of every breath. What deeper instruction, what 
greater inspiration do you require, to keep you on an even keel of equanimity? 


Faith in God must be constant and firm 


A devotee once lamented, saying, "0 God! You have forgotten me!" This is never possible; it is 
the devotee who forgets that he is the child of God, that God is his never-failing friend and guide. 
God is all-knowledge, all-power, all mercy. Faith in God has to be constant, firm in the face of 
every challenge by fate or fortune. 


On one occasion, the deers of the forest held a huge conference to consider their plight. The 
leader of the vast multitude that had assembled counselled courage and unity; he said that it was 
areal shame that mean creatures like dogs, who were not as fleet as they and had no horns, could 
put terror in their hearts. At this, the vast congregation unanimously resolved with loud 
acclamation that no deer shall henceforth turn its back when dogs pursue them, should stand their 
ground and give a fight to the finish. While the echoes of the acclamation were still booming 
through the forest, but with the distant barking in an instant, not a single deer could be spotted 
where thousands had assembled to pass that resolution. They dissolved into thin air, and denied 
their own resolution. This is verbal hypocrisy, which is fatal to spiritual progress, and ruinous in 
any field. 


The fault lies in the belief that things happen as a result of human effort and planning, human 
intelligence and care. No one can succeed in any venture without Divine Grace. It is a God's plan 
that is being worked out through man but, man prides himself that he has worked for it. 


This reminds me of a story. A poor simple villager made his first rail journey. He purchased a 
ticket and entered a compartment; he found it occupied already by a few passengers who had 
kept their boxes, bundles and odd items of luggage on the racks or under the benches on which 
they sat. They were unconcerned with the extra effort that the engine would have to make to drag 
along those boxes and bundles. How cruel of them, the villager thought. The engine has to pull 
along their weights, and now they are imposing on the train, this additional burden too. He for 
one was not going to inflict this extra trouble on the poor thing; so he kept his box on his 
shoulder and his bundle on his head. He believed that he was carrying his box and bundle along, 
and not the engine. Most people behave in the same silly fashion, ignoring the fact that God is 
All; man is but an instrument in His hands, for the execution of His Plan. Faith in this fact is the 
key to peace and joy. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 23-10-1974 


Desire destroys devotion, anger destroys wisdom, greed destroys 
work. Hence these bad qualities must be sacrificed. With good and 
sweet words, keeping desires under check and control (for ultimate 
removal), one should start on the path of sacrifice. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


51. Diamonds in the dust 


COMPASSION towards all creatures is the greatest virtue, wilful injury to any creature is the 
worst vice. Have full faith in this; spread love and joy, through compassion, and be full of joy 
and peace, yourself. You do not have joy and peace now, mainly because, your. vision is warped 
and wobbling. The vision is now directed towards the faults, and failings of others, never 
towards one's own faults and failings. The ears too delight when stories of failures and foibles of 
others are related. No attempt is made to examine the failures and foibles of oneself. Really 
speaking, inquiry and the investigation have to begin with oneself. For, what we see in others is 
the reflection of our own selves, our own prejudices and preferences. 


Besides, when your attention is focussed on faults and failures, vices and wrongs, the mind too 
becomes infected with the pollution and it starts relishing only experiences of such tastes. 
Hence, the lives of such people lose the peace and joy that are the heritage of the wise and the 
wary. 


Let us take the example of the snake. It has two characteristics: (1) It never moves straight. Its 
path is always crooked. (2) It strikes at all that comes in its way. Man too is snaky, for, he 
exhibits these two characteristics in a marked manner. So, he shares another characteristic too of 
the snake, namely, poison. 


Slavery to sensory objects is like snake’s poison 


Poison is called in Samskrith, visha. A kindred word is vishaya, which means, the sensory 
objects, which poison the mind of man with lust, anger, greed, craving, pride and hate. The 
snake’s poison is the cause why it is destroyed wherever seen. Man’s slavery to vishaya is the 
cause of his downfall. But, the situation is not without some hope. The serpent can be tamed 
and its poison-fangs removed, when music from the naagaswaram pipe is played and when it is 
fascinated by that sweet melody. The poison that vishaya exerts on the human mind can also be 
eliminated and countermanded, when man is fascinated by the sweet melodies of 
Naamasmarana and sankeerthan --- that is to say, by the repetitive chanting and congregational 
singing of the meaningful Names of the Lord. The poison in both can thus be transmuted into 
pure nectar. 


What happens to man when Naamasmarana withdraws his mind from the sensory tangles is --- 
the acquisition of Samachiththa --- a new balance of mind, of blissful equanimity. Nature is in 
constant flux; nothing remains the same even for a few seconds. The sweet dish that is cooked 
now becomes stale and stinking a few hours hence and is ruined so much that it acts as a danger 
to health, when consumed. Other types of changes happen in other fields, other things and 
beings. 


And, man not only expects these changes, he prepares himself to face them; in fact, in many 
cases, he is unhappy if the change does not happen! If things remain the same, it is certain to 
cause deep disappointment. A new-born babe must grow in weight, in movement of limbs, in the 
intake of food, and the output of energy through activity. Or else, parents become anxious and 
run from doctor to doctor. The same thing happens when the child does not walk or talk, weep or 
laugh. 


Aim at constant consciousness of the Reality 


In a normal babe, there exists real Samachiththa, for, there is no desire (except the instinctive 
desire for food, drink and maternal protection), to agitate it. The babe is the inheritor of 
Immortality; so it is unaffected by anxiety, that haunts the adult. The word Samachiththa is, in 
common parlance, taken to mean, sheer equanimity---an unshaken balance, when confronted by 
success or failure, loss or gain, pleasure or pain. But, ‘Sama’ has another and more significant 
meaning, namely Brahman, the Universal Eternal Absolute principle. Samachiththa, therefore, in 
its philosophical sense, means, a consciousness established in the Absolute Brahman, and as a 
consequence, above and beyond the storms and stillness of the world of duality. This constant 
consciousness of the Reality is the fruit of yajna (selfless sacrifice), the Vedhic symbol of 
thyaaga (renunciation), as mentioned in the statement na medhayaa, na prajayaa, dhanena, 
thyaagenaike amruthathwam aanasuh---"not by the intellect, nor by progeny, nor by wealth, but, 
only by renunciation can immortality be attained." Yajna (sacrifice) means thyaaga 
(renunciation). 


It is to emphasise this great axiom that during Dhashara every year, the Vedhic Yajna is 
performed; the thousands who attend the Festival can share the knowledge and the inspiration 
that the Yajna provides. 


Master the assertive ego by the Real Self 


This day is the Samaapthi of the Yajna. Sama means, as I just now said, Brahman. So, 
Samaapthi means, the attainment of Sama or Brahman, which is the summum bonum of the 
ritual. The realisation of this Braahmic Reality is the birthright of all men. But, though born with 
the fight and the responsibility, as the Amritha-puthra (Child of the nectar of immortality), man 
denies himself the victory, courts defeat and prides himself as an Anirtha-puthra (child of the 
Illusory, the delusion). The realisation which is his due is not an attainable achievement; it is a 
simple conquest, so simple that people never attempt it! 


The assertive ego that urges him to identify himself with the body and the instrument with which 
it is equipped, the motives with which those "instruments work and the reactions which those 
motives breed, has to be mastered by the Real Self, a wave of the great Ocean of Cosmic 
Consciousness, that is all. Now, man declares himself as aham and takes pride in his ahamkaara 
(egoistic-consciousness). But, he is not aware of the inner meaning of the word aham! Aham is 
just a verbal symbol for what he really is. A is the sound that represents the Omnipresent 
Godhead, named also as Vishnu. In the Geetha it is asserted, aksharaanaam a-kaarosmi--"Among 
the letters Iam A," (pronounced as in anatomy, etc). Ham means Shakthi (energy, power, force). 
So, when one points to himself as aham, he is unconsciously announcing that he is the hardened 
energy of the Omnipresent Universal Absolute Brahman called also Vishnu. 


Besides, the Lord says in the Geetha, mayaa kritham idham sarvam---"I have made all this out of 
Myself!" When all is He, you and all jeevas (individualised beings) are He. How then can we 
demarcate some as bad, and relish the stories concerning them and list their faults and failings? 


Make the mind concentrate on the Brahman 


The question may be raised, "The good and the bad are so obvious, how can we deny them or 
ignore them?" They are obvious only so long as the individual is not fully established in the truth 
that Vaasudhevah sarvamidham (God is all). Until that moment, the body dominates thought, 
desires haunt the mind, ego rules the intellect; so dualities lord over man. When like the boy 


Prahlaadha, one is sunk and saturated in God-consciousness, there can be no feeling of gain or 
loss, pleasure or pain. He is immersed in the word, and is unconcerned about its meaning which 
is manifested in all its variety in the objective world. The one Word seems to have many 
meanings, as a result of ignorance. It is the word, the Paraa-shakthi (the Supreme Power) that 
gives value and validity to every one of the meanings. 


Another idea called ekaagratha (one-pointedness) too can now be elucidated. Saadhakas 
(spiritual aspirants) often bewail that they do not earn one-pointedness. They mean, by that term, 
that they are not able to concentrate their attention long on a flame, light, picture, or idol. The 
eye concentrates on something seen; the nose, on some fragrance; the ear on some melody. But, 
the mind concentrates on the One, (the Ekam), the Brahman---which is described as ekam 
nithvam vimalam achalam sarvadhee saakshibhootham (the One, the eternal, the pure, the 
unmoving, the all knowing witness of all). Ekaagratha, therefore, denotes the concentration of 
the inner vision on Brahman (Omni-self). The intellect, the ego, the senses--these should 
subserve this great purpose and help in attaining the ideal. They should be vigilant that they do 
not divert the vision or deviate it from the Brahman. 


Nature is beauty, truth but man sees it ugly, false 


However, it has to be admitted that such saadhana is now very rare; very few fix their inner 
vision on the universal and the eternal; nor do they listen to its majesty and mystery. The tragedy 
which has fallen upon mankind is just this: the mind of man has strayed away from its moorings, 
and is being tossed about on the waves of doubt and diversity. Brahman is One, unchanging, 
everlasting. A mind filled with the yearning for Brahman will see the One in all, it will remain 
unaffected by the smiles and sneers of fortune. But, man's mind has been tempted into strange 
paths that can lead him only to fear and frustration. Man condemns the world and calls it a seat 
of wickedness and war. 


The fault lies not in the world, but, in himself. He has war in him and so, he sees war; he is 
inherently wicked and so, he observes wickedness all around hint. A brilliant lamp cannot 
remove the darkness which a blind man has always around him. For those who have eyes to see, 
it is brilliant, the light around them. The darkness the blind man swears by is in him, not outside 
him. So too, the man who is at peace with himself, will discern peace all around him. Nature is 
beauty, truth, peace. Man sees it ugly, false and violent---that is all. 


It is strange, but true Immortality lies enshrined in the mortal; there are diamonds in dirt and 
dust; wisdom dwells in this mansion of muscles; the aathma illumines this tabernacle of the 
jeeva (individual being). Man does not look into himself; he is poor, though under his feet there 
lies buried treasures. Heir to inexhaustible bliss, he runs after momentary pseudo-pleasures! He 
gets as reward only distress, disappointment and defeat. He spends all his allotted years in this 
wasteful adventure, and even at the last moment of life he is beset with sorrow and fear. He has 
no peace when he leaves his body, for, he has lost the chance of winning peace through its 
instrumentality. 


The Will to live in man is very strong 


There was a woodcutter once, going daily into the forest and collecting a bundle of fuel which he 
sold in the village nearby for pittance; which just sufficed to keep his wife and children alive. 
One morning, while he was stepping out of his hut, the wife reminded him that it was Yugaadhi 
(the Thelugu New Year festival), the next day; she pleaded with him to collect a heavier bundle 


of fuel that day, so that they could get a few more paise to give the children a morsel of sweet 
rice each. The man nodded assent and walked on. He succeeded in gathering an extra huge 
bundle, but, with that heavy load on his head, he was soon exhausted; he had to deposit it on the 
ground, before he could approach the village. This set him thinking of his plight. 


He had lost all his old zest for living. He called upon the Angel of Death, the Mruthya dhevatha, 
to relieve him. He cried, "O Death! Have you no mercy towards me? Why have you forgotten 
me, so long? How I wish I could die and escape from this daily grind?" The Angel of Death took 
pity on him, and appeared before him, to fulfill his wish. But, the woodcutter suddenly receded, 
he cleverly changed the purpose of his appeal to the Angel. He had no wish to die, though in his 
despair, he had called for her help. He said, "No. No. I had no one here to lift this bundle on to 
my head, so I called on you to come to my aid. That was the only reason behind my prayer. 
Please help me to lift this burden and place it on my head; I have to reach the village soon!" 
Since man is innately immortal, he recedes from the grasp of death, the Will to live is very 
strong, much more persistent than the Will to die. 


The shadow of man is neither true nor false 


It is like the story of the Sun and darkness, this question of meeting death or vanquishing death. 
The Sun-God was, one day, very much impressed by the 1008 Names with which a devotee 
offered Him worship. He listened to the Names, as he uttered them in steadfast faith. He was 
particularly alerted when he called-upon Him as Andhakaara dhweshi--"He who is looked upon 
as the enemy of darkness." He could not tolerate the existence of an enemy alive; so, He called 
for a war unto death for this demon called Darkness. He went into all the places where Darkness 
hid himself; but no sooner did He spot him, the demon disappeared so that He could never come 
into grips with him. Finally, He concluded that darkness was nonexistent and was only a creation 
of the imagination of His adorers! Before the splendour of Immortality, the darkness of mortality 
too would flee in haste. 


The resident in the body has no birth and therefore, no death. But, man is hugging the falsehood 
that he is the body and so is subject to death and birth. A silver cup can be reshaped by the smith 
into a plate, or later, into a paan-box; but though the name, the form and the function might 
change, the silver is there, in all three, unchanged in substance, in spite of the births into plate 
and box and the deaths as cup and plate. When a man stands on the bank of a sheet of water, his 
shadow appears in the water. People say it is he, but Vedhaantha (Vedhic philosophy) says, he is 
not it. When the shadow is beaten with a stick, he is not hurt; so, it is not he; but, when some one 
says it is misshapen, ugly, etc., he gets angry! So, he is it. The shadow is both he and not-he. It is 
neither true nor false, it is real-unreal, it is mithya (only mythical). 


The eye is distinct from the objects it sees; the eye is an instrument used by the I, which is a ray 
of the Splendour of the Aathma (soul). The senses are mirrors and when the light of that ray falls 
on them, things and objects are reflected therein. The Aathma shines and all the inner organs of 
perception awaken to their duty of gathering knowledge and revealing Bliss. It is their duty to 
function according to their nature; the result is not to be aimed at. It follows when the duty is 
done efficiently to the best of one's ability and Will. A knife cuts vegetables; but, does not eat 
them. It cuts a fruit; but, is not tempted to taste their sweetness. 


Let us imagine a cup, full of fruit-juice. The cup is not aware of the sweetness of the juice. A 
straw is used to sip the juice, the juice fills the entire length of the straw-, but yet, the straw is a 
stranger to the taste; the tongue has the juice on it; but it has no knowledge of its calorific value 


or its components; it can only pronounce judgement on its taste; for other purposes, it sends the 
juice into the stomach. The stomach discriminates and distributes the essentials of the juice to 
every part of the body, every nerve and cell, and contributes to their efficiency and strength. The 
cup is the body of man; it has in it the Divinely sweet Aathma principle. The sense organs are the 


straws; intellect is the tongue; the ego principle is the stomach; it converts the sweetness into 
spirit and confers bliss, peace and light. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 25-10-1974 


52. Four steps to freedom 


THE culture of this ancient land is as deep as it is vast, it is built on strong and sustaining 
principles of human development. But, Indians at the present time are neglecting its lessons and 
entangling themselves in the search for material joys and pleasures. They ignore the true and 
eternal values. They turn a deaf ear to the call of the Divine; they respond to the siren voice of 
the worldly. This is the twentieth century, the Age of Science and Technology. There is plenty of 
material comforts and sensual pleasure easily available. So driven by an insane urge for the 
temporal and the trivial, man rushes into rain, and loses the precious heritage of Aathmic (pure 
spiritual) treasure which the culture promises him. In fact, if only man knew the purpose and 
plan of Life, he would not waste his years and his skills in the pursuit of mere time-bound Joys. 
That he is everywhere engrossed in these endeavours is a pitiable fact, which can be attributed to 
his misfortune or his ignorance. Of course, man has lost faith in himself; so, there is no wonder 
that he has lost faith in God also. Only those who know themselves and have confidence in 
themselves can acquire knowledge of God and confidence in God. Know thyself, first; then, your 
attempt to know the world will be rendered simple. 


Wisdom can come only through work as worship 


Indian Culture has laid emphasis on four aashramas (stages of life) for individual development 
in order to assure everyone with the education needed to know himself. For Aathma vichaarana 
(enquiry into the Self), Aashrama dhanam (code of duty) is very essential. Through adherence to 
the regulations and prescriptions of conduct and study-assigned to each stage or Aashram, the 
earning of knowledge and wisdom is made easy and automatic. Wisdom can come only through 
work as worship; the Aashrams guide man to sublimate all activity into worship. 


Just as we have four stages: childhood, youth, middle age and old age, we have four 
corresponding Aashramas: Brahmacharya, Grahasthya, Vaanaprastha and Sanyaas-- 
studentship, householdership, recluseship and monk-ship. During the years of childhood and 
teenage, man has to equip himself with the information necessary to share in the work of society 
and to derive health and happiness thereby, and acquaint himself with the tools of knowledge and 
the paths along which wisdom can be garnered. As a-householder, raising a family and sustai- 
ning a society, he has also to uphold the ideals of justice and truth, and promote them by his 
actions. He must feel the innate majesty of mankind and live in accordance with that high status. 
As a recluse and monk, in old age, he has to be the guide and teacher of the people around him, 
imparting to them the fund of wisdom he has won through his experience. 


The Shaasthras (spiritual sciences) lay down the lines along which man has to direct his thoughts 
and activities. Sincere adherence to these laws and limitations alone can guarantee jnaana 
(spiritual wisdom). Otherwise, man drifts aimlessly along the crosscurrents and whirlpools of life 
and ends up ignorant, both of the nature of /oka (world) and the glory of Lokeshwara (God). 


Forces of atheism have gained strength now 


The higher paths must be trodden from childhood; it cannot be adopted at an advanced age. The 
child must learn to be truthful in word and deed, and avoid the cowardly habit of falsehood. 
Later, boys and girls have to become conscious directors of their senses, instead of being 
automatic slaves. Heads of families have to adhere to the schedules of rites and worship 
prescribed for them; they have to supervise the behaviour and conduct of the members of the 
household; they have to render hospitality to guests and deal charity to the poor; they have also 


to equip their sons and daughters with processes by which they can have mental peace and 
equanimity, under all conditions. Because these obligations have been neglected for some 
generations, the forces of atheism have earned strength now. 


When the seeds are ridden with defects, how can the tree yield richly? When parents and elders 
do not provide good examples to the children growing under their shade, how can the country 
prosper and be free from anxiety and fear? You cannot separate the rind, the pulp and the seed 
that a tamarind fruit has, when it is still green. But, once it has ripened, the separation is quite 
easy. So too, until a person becomes ripe in experience and can be pronounced wise, he cannot 
discard his identification with the body, the senses and the mind. He will not be able to 
differentiate between Aathma (spiritual Self) and non-aathma, kshethra (the body) and 
Kshethrajna (the controller of the body). Prakrithi (Nature) and Paramaathma (Supreme Self), 
Guna (impelling characteristic quality) and Trans-guna, and such other entities. 


Man's restlessness affects society too 


Let me tell you a small example: Krishna killed the Kaaliya serpent that was poisoning the 
Kalinidi river and destroying all trace of life for miles around, by means of deadly fumes. No 
sooner was Kaaliya killed than the 'wives' (serpents) of his harem, prayed to Krishna for succour 
and surrendered to Him. This story is according to the Bhaagavatha. Now, what does this 
signify? In the Mind-lake (the Maanasa-sarovar) of man, there lurks a poisonous serpent, desire. 
When that is destroyed, the various frailities and frivolities, triumphs, trials and failures, pains 
and pleasures, that desire brings in its train, surrender to God. 


Desire can be killed, only when faith in the Aathma as the very core of being is firmly 
established. Since all efforts are now directed to the accumulation of material goods and the 
satisfaction of sensual desires, man is tossed about on the waves of fight and faction, falsehood 
and greed. The individual is intimately related to society and so, his restlessness affects society 
too. 


The individual Will is ultimately responsible for the welfare and well-being of the world. The 
world is but a mental image of the individual. How this happens is a mystery. One can only say, 
that just as sleep is the cause of dreams, maaya (Worldly illusion due to basic ignorance) is the 
cause of Creation. Doctors ascribe dreams to various reasons: indigestion, the compulsions of 
thought, the confusions of mental pictures, etc. But, we can be certain only of one reason, 
namely sleep! Dreams are nullified when the person becomes a jnaani (one aware of the Truth). 
At that stage, one gets rid of the night-dream as well as the day-dream. 


The four Aashramas have been devised in order to awaken man into the jnaani stage. Education 
today, in all grades, is a process of packing information in the brain and skills in the hands. It is 
useful only for parading scholarship, dialectical controversies and mutual recrimination. It does 
not instil humility, a sense of balance and equanimity. Of course, spiritual training is totally 
absent. Perhaps, the feeling is that spirituality is a solitary pursuit, which can be undertaken only 
in the silence of the forest. No! True spirituality is the awareness of the fundamental unity of 
man in God. 


The main mission of man is the march towards Unity 


People celebrate the birth of a child; they are happy when the child grows tall and strong. But, 
the fittest event for such celebration is when the child justifies its birth, by achieving good fame 
as a benefactor of man or a servant of manking. Emperor Dhritharaashtra had hundred sons! He 


must have celebrated their birthdays, too. But, no one of them did any one good; they were all 
arrogant, greedy and full of spite. Therefore, they accomplished only the extinction of the entire 
dynasty and all who were attached to it! 


Sons and daughters are now keen to share the properties of their parents and spend their portion 
as quickly as possible. They do not care for the much more precious wealth of experience that 
their forefathers have earned for their sake. They waste their years in fallow efforts so much that 
even their health is destroyed; children wear glasses when barely ten; they dye their hair when 
barely fourteen; they age fast and show signs of senility when barely sixteen! To praise the habits 
that people adopt today as 'modern,' or 'conducive to progress' is ridiculous to say the least. 


As the ancients emphasised, food habits and recreation habits have to become Saathwik 
(conducive to health of body and mind), that is to say, such as cannot arouse and feed the 
passions of man, or make him dull and stupid, idle and listless. 


Above all, everyone must realise, (and guide himself accordingly), that the main mission of man 
here below is the march towards the ideal of Unity and Peace. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 23-11-1974 


If you can fill your heart with love, then peace will come into you 
from outside. Through bad qualities, to some extent, we lose peace. 
With truthful thoughts, a man will have peace. 


If you can get rid of all thoughts, you will become a saint. It is only 
when you can be free from all thoughts that you can have peace. 


Your own bad thoughts are responsible for all your pain and 
sorrow. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


53. Never a party 


EMBODIMENTS of Divine Aathma! You are celebrating this day as the Birthday of Swaami, and 
deriving Aanandha (divine bliss) through various programmes here, carried on with enthusiasm 
by you; but, in fact, I have no wish to consider this as a special day because it is the birthday and 
celebrate it as such. I have come on purpose to reveal to man the mystery of his Reality and the 
goal of his life; I have not come to set them the task of celebrating the birthday or to get arranged 
any pompous and personal festivals. I have no such desire, at any time, in this or any other 
sojourn. 


On what day do I celebrate my birthday? On that day when all of you experience genuine 
Aanandha, in your hearts! Now, when your hearts are surging with manifold fears and anxieties, 
and torn by miseries and losses, and riven as under of grief, declaring this day as-My birthday 
seems to be barren of meaning! 


While on this subject, it is essential that I warn you of another subject also. Do not spend your 
time trying to understand Me; do not waste your time in the attempt. The reason why I am saying 
this is: It is beyond any one's capacity to understand Me. So, trying to do the impossible, you are 
only wasting your time and your effort. It is only when you succeed in knowing yourselves that 
you can know Me. 


Need for establishing colleges by Sathya Sai Trust 


I need nothing, however great or small, in this Universe. At no moment has desire affected me 
for any thing or activity. I am the person come to give, not to receive. And, what you can offer 
Me is just this: pure, unadulterated love. When you offer Me that, I derive Aanandha. 


During the recent Dhashara Festival, some announcements were made; if you ask Me what 
connection I have with those announcements, I reply, the connection is that of the name only. 
Otherwise, I have no connection with these. 


Considering the wrong and undesirable paths that youth is courting and preferring all over the 
world at the present time, the Members of the Sathya Sai Central Trust have decided to establish 
Colleges in many States and through these institutions, to provide youth opportunities to 
transform itself in various ways, to maintain unimpaired the ideals of Indian Culture, and to 
equip youth with the strength and sweetness that are the common virtues of all faiths and their 
basic truth. For the realisation of this plan, they resolved to utilise the fiftieth birthday of Swaami 
and celebrate it with its unfoldment, on a grand scale. They decided thus, as a result of 
earnestness and depth of devotion. In order to establish colleges, funds are needed; no task can 
be fulfilled without money, even the smallest and least important. So, they agreed on a method 
by which each devotee gives as a life-time contribution, the sum of fifty rupees; thus, a corpus 
can be built up, out of which they could start and develop educational and health services. They 
were moved by high ideals and pure intentions to resolve thus. 


Spending huge sums on any festival is heinous crime 


This resolution they placed before Me. I responded to their proposal in this manner: Well. Do not 
carry out this task in a hush-hush way, swayed by the one purpose of 


collecting money. Be frank about it; adopt such means as will remove all doubts from the minds 
of individuals, of the Government and of the world outside. 


Finally, they made the announcement that day. But, many have imposed on that announcement 
their own interpretations and absurdities, and they have started propagating that it is proposed to 
spend fifty lakhs of rupees, for the celebration of Swaami's 50th Birthday! 


Really, to spend 50 lakhs of rupees for wastefully celebrating either a birthday or any other such 
festival is a sin which cannot be compared with any other in the degree of iniquity. When people 
all over the world are affected by manifold miseries consequent on the absence of food and 
shelter, if someone spends 50 lakhs of rupees on his birthday, it has to be proclaimed a vast 
misuse, a heinous sin. I can never be a party to such activities. 


Not only this. In Prashaanthi Nilayam, no misuse or extravagance can ever happen, for any 
festival, either Shivaraathri, Navaraathri or the birthday. Many. people imagine that lakhs are 
spent here for the dhashara celebrations; but, all who come, serve their best in the fullness of 
devotion that dwells in their hearts and so, not a naya paisa is spent for any purpose. The rithwiks 
(Vedhic Priests) who officiate at the yajna, the lecturers who deliver discourses---all come and 
share in the joy, out of love and faith; their comforts are looked after by the members of Seva 
Dhal and the Seva Samithis and by the volunteers, who dedicate their strength and skills to make 
the Festival a success. No paisa is spent on any item. 


Today, you find the Prashaanthi Nilayam area clean and pleasing. What is the reason? How 
many sweepers have we employed, how many coolies are engaged?. You may wonder. No, not 
one. Everyone cleans the place where he is staying, and the area adjacent. Thus, cleanliness is 
ensured, without any cost. It can be asserted that at no place in the world are resources put to 
such good use, with the least expense, as at Prashaanthi Nilayam. 


Always be ready to help the sick and the poor 


Prashaanthi Nilayam is holding forth and exemplifying the highest ideals, in the material, ethical, 
economic, moral, spiritual, worldly, and even political fields. There is no place here for anything 
contrary. This can be asserted without any possibility of contradiction. In spite of this, some 
ignorant individuals rely more on their guesses than on facts, and indulge in spreading wrong 
conclusions. Let Me tell you that if a single person in the whole world points out a wrong step in 
Prashaanthi Nilayam, he shall be met and convinced. For, the Prashaanthi Nilayam is eagerly 
bent upon the task of upholding and demonstrating high and holy ideals achieving spiritual 
realisation. It does not seek these worldly riches; nor does it yearn for earning favours and fame. 


Embodiments of the Divine Aathma! When you feel the desire to give away in charity, direct 
your minds towards the development of good educational institutions, the provisions of healing 
facilities for the sick, and the amelioration of distress among the poor. Not in this place, but, 
anywhere, the members of our Organisation must be ready and eager to help students, the sick, 
and the poor. Feel that this work, wherever carried out, is work that pleases Me. 


You need not offer Me anything; I only want that you should realise the goal of life by playing 
your role in the activities that help and cure, carried on by such institutions. 


You are all aware of this: I do not allow anyone to bring here even a flower, a fruit or a coconut. 
However, some persons, carded away by their devotion and dedication, or moved by sudden 
enthusiasm or exultation, send by post or bring when they come here clothes for Me and place 
them before Me. From this day, I am directing that this should not be done; observe this as My 


command. If anyone brings clothes despite this he shall not be admitted to Prashaanthi Nilayam. 
Such persons will be treated as acting against Swaami's wishes and orders. What you should 
place before Me as offering is Pure Love; only that. 


Therefore, from this day, spend your days and years in activities that help those who are in dire 
need, and thus make this human existence of yours worthwhile and fruitful. I wish you will 
conduct yourselves accordingly and I bless you. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 23-11-1974 


54. The mind stuff 


IT is a vain task to divide the things of the world into good and bad and it is also sacrilegious! 
For, when all are the products of His Will, how can anything be extolled or condemned? Besides, 
what is good for one may be bad for another; what is good at sometime may .be bad at another 
time; what is good in small quantities may be bad in large quantities. The crow relishes the bitter 
neem fruit; the cuckoo eats the tender leaves of the mango tree. People find joy and satisfaction 
in a variety of things and experiences, of the most contradictory character. Therefore, one can 
only infer that it is the mind of each that directs one to seek this thing as good, and avoid that 
other thing as bad. 


Philosophy tells us that the mind decides, not merely the goodness or badness of a thing or 
experience, it creates all things and all experiences. Without the mind, there can be no object or 
feeling or emotion. No mind, no matter! The mind revels in name and form; it imposes name and 
form and thus, helps in creating things and experiences. It cannot contact or operate upon 
anything without name and form. That is why the mind is helpless when meditation has to be 
done on the nameless and the formless. It clings ever to name-form. Mental pictures have 
concretised themselves as objects and as ideas; so, the Shruthis declare: "Yath bhaavam, thath 
bhavathi" ("As the thought, so the consequence.") 


Realisation of God instils Divine Bliss 


But, God is beyond Name and Form; He is all names and all forms and yet, incomprehensible 
and mysterious. How then can God be apprehended by means of dhyaana (meditation) on name- 
form? This is a legitimate question. It can be answered by means of a simile. Water drowns man; 
water also helps him to swim. It draws in and it buoys up both. Only, man has to learn the 
process by which he can keep afloat. In the same way, name and form which appear to be 
limitations and handicaps can serve as instruments and helps to transcend Name-Form and 
realise God. 


The realisation of God instils Aanandha (divine bliss), which has no form, but only a man-made 
name. It springs and wells up in the heart, and pervades the entire body and expresses itself in the 
face. The face is the index of inner bliss. Sadness, anxiety, fear, hope, determination, doubt all 
are reflected on the face, and can be easily spotted. 


The mind can remain unaffected by the storms of emotion only by bending to the yoke of buddhi 
(intellect). It should escape from the grips of the senses and yield to the reins of the reasoning 
faculty, and obey unquestioningly its dictates. The senses are inert, so long as the Self keeps 
away from inducing the mind to accept the information submitted by them. This mike before me 
helps those who are sitting all over this vast Auditorium to listen clearly to My words. But, the 
mike and the loudspeakers are inert metallic things. A few minutes ago, the College student 
made a speech which was interrupted for a few minutes, since the electric current failed. Without 
that current activating them, they cannot work at all. 


The eye that sees is inert; all objects 'seen' are inert; only the seer is 'intelligent.' And, the current 
of intelligence is supplied by the aathma, which is your Reality. When the current does not 
activate, the eye might look on but it does not see; the ear might be hearing, but, the hearer does 
not react or recognise. For, the mind is elsewhere. It has to function with the help of the Divine 
Consciousness within. 


The mind has to be watched vigilantly 


The mind is like a fragrant flower; it emits fragrance whether it is held in the fight hand or in the 
left, whether the person who holds it is good or bad. It walks blindly along, irrespective of the lie 
of the land. It is blind; and so, someone has to take it on tow. When you invite ten blind people 
for dinner, you have to lay twenty plates. For, each blind person brings with him, and has to so 
bring with him, a guide who can lead him to your home. So, the mind too must have a guide who 
knows the way, the obstacles, the shoals and ferries. 


The mind has to be watched vigilantly, and warned against its own tricks. It is a clever actor, 
embroiling you in many a close adventure. The mind is like the revered old gentleman who 
appeared alternately in the houses of the bridegroom's party and the bride's party during a 
marriage festival and issued orders to all and sundry, which were honoured by both, since each 
party thought he was a person with authority coming from the other party! His very pomposity 
aroused the suspicious of both, before long, and when they jointly sought him and asked him 
who he was, he took to his heels and made himself scarce. The mind too is just like the 
gentleman. Catch it and inquire wherefrom it secured credentials to order you about; it will 
disappear in no time! 


Let your mind repeat ‘Soham’ all the time 


The only method which you can adopt to escape from the coils of the mind is the cultivation of 
pure intelligence. This is the sum and substance of all spiritual discipline. And, the intelligence 
gets cleansed of all partiality and prejudice, hatred and greed, only by the adoration of God 
through love poured out to all the beings created by God and standing witness to His Glory and 
Beauty. Share love with all; earn the treasure of love, store it in your heart and invite all to share 
in it. When you try to distribute the property earned by your grandfather or father, legal, moral, 
economic and practical obstacles will stand up before you. But, when you are distributing your 
'self earned’ property, nothing legal or otherwise can stand in the way. 


Remember the mind is a very talkative imp, it can never keep quiet even for a second. You have 
been listening to Me since more than an hour and perhaps you are under the impression that your 
mind has been quiet all that time. No. The mind has been holding conversation with itself, when 
it is supposed to be silent! Give it perpetual tasks. Ask it, (as some rishi did to a demon who 
acted as his servant but threatened to devour him the moment he did not have any task allotted to 
him); ask it to climb a pillar and slide down it, whenever it has no other work. The pillar is 
Soham, (1 am Thath), a manthra (sacred formulae) that the breath is repeating from birth to 
death, ‘So’ when you inhale and 'ham' when you exhale. Let it repeat Soham all the time. 


Bhajans (congregational devotional singing) have to be sung and offered to God in an attitude of 
utter humility; they are not to be taken as exercises in an exhibition of talents and as 
competitions for mastery of musical skill. 


They have to please the Lord, not your fans. With each bhajan song, the mind must be rendered 
purer, freer from passion, and stronger in faith. But, you find that you do not succeed in this task. 
The adoration does not arise from the heart; nor is it addressed to the .Supreme by the sincere 
Self. It is tainted by the admixture of envy, pride and hate. How can prayers so fouled reach 
God? 


Devotees should not develop attitudes of difference 


For example, I find that when any new-devotee sings, others leave him alone and do not sing 
lines after him! They ignore him and insult him in this manner. But, when one of themselves, one 
of the usual group leads with a song, they join enthusiastically. This kind of group politics has no 
place among Sai devotees and cannot be tolerated in Sai Bhajan groups. I find this evil trait 
spreading in most Bhajan Mandalis--members divided into rival groups competing for chances 
to sing, trying to attract the attention and appreciation of the people. Urged by this selfish 
motive, they discourage the sincere bhajan singers; they keep mum when they offer their songs; 
this means either that they have lost their voice or that their hearts have been so deadened by 
selfishness. 


Attitudes of difference and distinction should not enter the hearts of devotees so far as this sacred 
saadhana (spiritual discipline) is concerned, nor can the song of such people be pleasant to the 
ear; for, it is only when the feeling arises in the heart that the song will appeal to the hearts of 
others. It would be far better for all parties if such self-important and conceited folk stay away 
from bhajan, rather than pollute the sacred atmosphere by the spirit of rivalry and factionalism. 


All are sons and daughters of Sai Maatha 


When devotees taking the name of Sathya Sai behave in such a manner, that is to say, people to 
whom the world is looking for guidance and inspiration, when they descend to such levels, what 
is to happen to the uplift of the world and the restoration of dharma? 


Bhajans, where you quarrel and compete, and revel in putting down others and raising 
yourselves, might give you satisfaction; but, let Me announce here: they do not please Me at all. I 
am pleased only when love is the keynote, when the feeling of Unity prevails, when the melody 
comes from a cleansed Godloving heart. 


The office-bearers in the Units of our Organisation should be ever vigilant, that this poison does 
not creep into the working of the Units, either in bhajans, or in the activities of the Mahila 
Vibhag or Seva dhal. 


Remember all are the sons and daughters of Sai Maatha (Mother SAI). How can I tolerate when 
the sons and daughters quarrel among themselves and divide themselves into rival groups? 
Unless you sing bhajans for your own joy, you cannot bring joy to others. 


The Sathya Sai Organisation has been established to provide sacred tasks for every moment of 
wakeful life, to make people conscious of the vagaries and vanities of the mind and teach them 
the processes of disintegrating the mind and establishing the reign of the pure intellect, by which 
alone the One behind all this multiplicity can be realised as the only Reality. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 24-11-1974 


Certainly, every human being must be educated, irrespective of 
race, religion, caste, colour or creed. But, like the foolish mother 
who is happy when her child's limb swells with disease, believing 
that it is getting stronger, we too mistake this increase in size and 
number as a healthy development! In reality, we are only 


witnessing a disease, which results in debility, greed, hatred and 
envy. 


The flowers in nature fade always, drop down, lose fragrance and 
also develop an odour which is not pleasant. Instead of worshiping 
with such worldly flowers, which are impermanent, and receiving 
impermanent rewards from God, we should worship Him with 
what is truthful and thereby attain a stage which-is higher. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


