Sathya Sai speaks 


He does not hesitate, hum and haw, 

He does not calculate, pause and ponder, 

He does not wait, waver, wander. 

Collecting, selecting thoughts and words, 

He seeks no notes or quotes. 

He does not tarry, decorating speech 

With flowery frills, dressing borrowed phrase 

In shimmering gloss. He is no orator 

Cultivating cults, clamouring for claps, Publicity-prone. 
He does not declaim, circumlocute, Or even, speak. 
He talks to you and you and you 

And every single you, sitting there, 

The Arjuns, willing to reach but afraid to march. 


He talks on the task ahead and the Truth within. 


1. Vedhic Declarations 


ONE should yearn not for the prolongation of life but for the purification of life. A few moments 
as Hamsa, the Celestial Swan, are far more precious than many years as the crow. In order to 
sublimate the low yearnings of man, to lead him along the path of holiness and to hold before 
him the glorious destiny of his oneness with the Cosmic Consciousness, the identity of the Jeeva 
(individual) and the Dheva (Universal), the Vedhas (ancient revealed scriptures) have laid down 
many lessons, in profound axioms summarising realisable Truths. Each Vedha has one central 
declaration or Mahaavaakya or Mahaamanthra around which it revolves. 


PRAJNAANAM BRAHMA is the Holy Declaration of the Rig Vedha. Prajnaanam means constant 
integrated awareness. This is present and active, in all things, at all places, all the time. It 
energises the physical, mental and spiritual realms, the lower, middle and higher regions and the 
sub-human, human, and super-human beings. The three periods of Time--the nether, spatial and 
heavenly worlds, and the three modes of being--goodness, passion and inertia (Sathwa, Rajas 
and Thamas)--are all pervaded and permeated by Prajnaanam (total awareness) or Chaithanya 
(pure consciousness). 


Aham implies a total composite Personality 


AHAM BRAHMAASMI is the Holy Declaration of the Yajur Vedha. It is a component of three 
words Aham, Brahma and Asmi. Aham implies a total, a composite: Personality. Man is 
subjected to countless thoughts, desires 


and resolutions, called "Sankalpa". The very first Sankalpa that nestles in the mind of man is 
Aham or I-ness. Other ideas or thoughts leading to action can enter the mind only after Aham has 
struck root. Earlier than that event, no acceptance or rejection, no Sankalpa can find a place. 


The I-ness persists in the gross body of the waking stage, the subtle body of the dream stage and 
the causal body of the deep sleep stage. It persists through all three states. The One that 
permeates in all three is the I, the ham. I is the universal response, whether I ask who is Gokak or 
who is Sudharshan or who is Chakravarthi. From every, one, the answer arises, I, I, I. I is in 
every one, the core of all. 


Next, we have the expression Brahma-Asmi, (1 am Brahman). This truth can be made clear by an 
example. To curdle milk and get curds for use, we add a small. quantity of curd itself to the milk. 
Then all the milk turns into curds. Wherefrom did we get the curd, initially? From milk which 
was similarly treated. The years of life are the milk: the Divine Principle. Brahman is the curd, 
which, when it is welcome to pervade life, converts them into a Divine Saga. This is what the 
Upanishaths mean when they declare that he who knows Brahman becomes Brahman 
(Brahmavith Brahmaiva Bhavathi). Asmi is the process of mixing, the consummation of adding, 
the merging, the union. When it happens, Aham becomes Brahman. When human-ness is 
permeated by God-ness, man becomes God. 


For, what is it that takes place subsequently? The milk that has been curdled is churned by 
inquiry and inner probe and the soft sweet fragrant butter, Aanandha (divine bliss), emanates. 
This Aanandha can be gained only through and from the Divine. Hence it is proclaimed that 
Aanandha is the core of all the Vedhas, the fruit of all the Shaasthras (the goal of all the 
scriptures) in all the tongues. One must have faith in this truth, or else, he will miss the fruit. I am 
also stressing the need for faith, very often. For, where there is faith, there is love. Where there is 


love, there is peace. Where there is peace, there is truth. Where there is truth, there is bliss. And, 
where there is bliss, there is God. 


Faith arises in the heart through conviction 


People, nowadays, have weakened their faith and even lost it; yet they clamour for Aanandha. 
Aanandha cannot be procured from any shop or ordered from any Company. Many enquire, 
"How do you develop faith? What are the reasons for faith?" One cannot define or demarcate the 
reasons; faith arises in the heart, through imperceptible conviction. One has faith in son and 
father, husband and wife, but one cannot explain why? It does not grow in the mind or as a result 
of external causes. 


The I or Ego should not be moulded or enclosed in an "ism"; then, it becomes harmful as 
egoism. If the I is limited to the body and labelled on the form, it is harmful, it brings about pride 
and selfishness. If it is identified with the Aathman (true self), it is sanctified and it leads to the 
mergence with the Brahman (Divine Self). Do not take the temporary, trivial body which is like 
a bubble as the Aham. For, what exactly is such an I? You use the words "I" and "mine" from 
morning till night and repeat My home, My body, My life, My senses, My, My, My, without 
delving into the I that owns these. When you are in deep sleep, you don't feel I, or think of the I, 
or worry about any My. Where does it go to, then? When the "I" leaves you even during the few 
hours of sleep, how can it be with you during the permanent sleep from which you do not wake? 
Sleep is a short death; death is a lasting sleep. Consider the attachments that develop between the 
one and the other. Then, you can arrive at the truth, Aham Brahmaasmi. 


There is nothing in the Universe higher than God 


THATH THWAM AST is the holy declaration of the Saama Vedha--That thou art. Thath (That) 
was in existence before creation and is in existence subsequently too. It is the Principle of Total 
Consciousness, the totality of Being and Becoming, encompassing and transcending the physical, 
mental and spiritual reaches, "beyond the horizon of expression and imagination" (Yatho Vaacho 
Nivarthanthe, apraapya manasaa sah). The Cosmos did not originate from God; It is God. There 
is nothing "Other"; "there is no Second." Some people ask, "Have you seen God?" Reply, "I 
have." Then they ask, "Where is He? Show Him to us." If He is in one specific place, you can 
point your finger in that direction and say "He is there." But, this microphone before Me is God; 
this garland on this table is God; this handkerchief is God. There is nothing in the Universe 
higher than God, different from God, distinct from God. He is the "Thath" (That). It is the 
Omnipresent (Eternal Awareness Chaithanya. It is referred to as Thath (That), since we now 
imagine It to be distant, far from us. Far from where? Yes. Far from your body, your senses, your 
mind, your reasoning faculty which are all equipped only with limited capabilities. But, once 
your intuitive consciousness is aroused, the "far" is "close." 


The Aathma shines within the cave of the heart 


The Vedhas announce It to be “duuraath duure, anthike cha" (farther than the farthest, also 
closer than the closest). “"Thwam" ("Thou") is the body-sense-mind-reason complex. This too is 
That, as confirmed by the verb, asi (art). When you are engaged in reading the prayers of a book, 
what exactly is happening? The hand is holding, the eyes are seeing, reason is judging, and the 
mind is reacting to the flood of feeling. "Thou" is the composite of hand and eye, reason and 
mind. "Thou" is the mould, the Aakaara (the form). "That" is the core, the genuineness, the sva- 
bhaava. To realise the identity of the two, one has to resort to the saadhana (spiritual discipline) 


of meditation. Meditation is the process of sublimating concentration (which concerns itself with 
the realm of the senses), leading into contemplation (which concerns itself with the realm of 
mind and reason), resulting in real meditation (which concerns itself with the realm unreachable 
by logic or .thought or even imagination). 


This declaration is enshrined in the Saama Vedha, whose hymns are musical and have to be sung 
as part of holy rites. Music is an excellent medium for harmonising Thou and That, the Human 
with the Divine. Of course, the song/ms to emerge from prema (selfless love), not from greed for 
fame or profit. When rain pours, the sheet of water brings together earth and sky. So too, the 
shower of Love-lit song can bring Thou and That together. Asi (art) can be consummated. 


AYAM AATHMA BRAHMA is the Holy Declaration of the Atharva Vedha, the Fourth among the 
Vedhas. It means, "This Aathma is Brahman." It implies' 'that the Individual Self is the 
untarnished, unaffected Witness of the activities of the Body-Mind Complex. The lamp illumines 
the area around it. One person falsities accounts so that he can escape paying tax; another writes 
the Name of Raama as a saadhana; another person takes advantage of the light to lay his hands 
on articles to steal. The lamp is the witness. The Aathma too shines within the cave of the heart. 


One should engage oneself in sacred activity, with the inspiration of that illumination. Many 
people who come to Me ask, "Swaami! We are striving to control the mind but it runs about like 
a maddened dog. How am I to succeed?" Therein lies a wrong step. The mind is beyond contact, 
for it is attached to the senses. Control the senses; let them not draw you into the objective world. 
By this means, the mind can be made an instrument of illumination and not of delusion. The 
truth will then dawn, this Aathma is Brahman. The splendour of this awareness will drive away 
the darkness of ignorance. There can be no thamas (ignorance) where there is jyothi (light). The 
Aathma (Self) is jyothi (self-luminous). 


The Gaayathri Manthra helps to uproot nescience by invoking the splendour of the Sun to 
illumine the buddhi (intellect), the faculty of thought. That splendour will reveal the identity of 
Ayam Aathma, of this self (individualised) with Brahmam (the Cosmic Overself). 


Discourse on New Year Day 


Sri Sathya Sai Institute of Higher Learning, Prashaanthi Nilayam, 1-1-1983 


Truth will always triumph; do not doubt that in the least. There are 
two eight-lettered axioms in the Geetha, which support the Vedhic 
dictum: Sathyam eva jayathe na anritham (Truth only wins, not 
falsehood): They are, Samshayaathma vinashyathi (He who doubts 
is destroyed), and Shraddaavaan labhate jnaanam (Steady faith 
wins true wisdom). If people are slaves of doubt, how can they save 
themselves? 


Sri Sathya Sai 


2. The daily prayer 


Without giving up sloth, how can Truth be known? Without giving up passion, can devotion take 
root? Be serene and calm, in stress and storm, That is the Saathwik Road to win the Lord, the 
Truth. 


THE mind is a wonder, its antics are even more surprising. It has no distinct form or shape. It 
assumes the shape or form of the thing it is involved in. Wandering from wish to wish, flitting 
from one desire to another, is its nature. So, it is the cause of loss and grief, of elation and 
depression. Its effects are both positive and negative. 


It is worth while for man to know the characteristics of the mind and the ways to master it for 
one's ultimate benefit. The mind is prone to gather experiences and store them in the memory. It 
does not know the art of giving up. Nothing is cast away by the mind. As a consequence, grief, 
anxiety and misery continue simmering in it. If only the mind can be taught thyaaga (sacrifice), 
one can become a yogi (spiritually serene person). 


Dhyaana provides rest for the wayward mind 


The clock, to all appearances, keeps on ticking away continuously. But this is really not the case. 
It is not continuous, for there is, one can notice, a short pause between one tick and the next. 
That is the interval of rest. But, the mind does not have even this short interval between one 
thought and the next. And in the continuous succession of thoughts, there is no order or 
relationship. This adds to the confusion and concern. This is the main source of ill-health in man. 
We are at present planning and preparing for physical rest and recreation and we know that even 
machines need hours of rest! But, we have neglected the duty of ensuring rest for the mind. 
Dhyaana (meditation) is the name for the period of rest we provide for the busy and wayward 
mind. 


The heart is engaged, like the ticking of the clock, in beats but, a new pulse of energy is 
generated between one beat and another. It makes for the flow, regardless of the past or the 
future moments. It is a constant flux towards a goal. 


The swimmer in the river has to push aside the waters in front to the sides and to kick the waters 
to the back so that he can move forward straight and fast. Forcing the water back is the act that 
takes him forward. That is to say, do not attach importance to it, throw it back, give it up, 
renounce; that alone can help you to progress, even an inch. Instead, man collects and stores, 
accumulates and takes pride in what he holds firm, regardless of the preciousness of the human 
trait of renunciation. So, we sink in material possessions, victories and vagaries. We do not float 
or swim across the temptations. 


We must try to discover and learn the means of progress. A poet sang, "Can canines conceive of 
colourful poetry? Or, donkeys know of the taste of the parched grains that we load on them? Or, 
a blind man admire the charm of the full moon?" We may well ask, how can a man sunk in 
relative knowledge become aware of Aathma (the Absolute)? But there is no reason for despair, 
or for condemning ourselves as mean and low. For, when small men take big decisions, they earn 
encouragement from the great. When the tiny squirrel decided to share in building the passage 
across the sea, did it not receive the blessings of Lord Raama? The squirrel knew that its help 
could only be infinitesimal, but the feeling of dedication which prompted it won the grace of 
God. 


Devotion has to fill and overflow the heart 


Men, however, generally do not sublimate small saadhana (spiritual effort) through high 
purpose. They engage in Bhajan (congregational chant), Puuja and Dhyaana (ritualistic worship 
and meditation) but these are but physical exercises! The mind does not elevate them into 
sincerity. The heart does not pour forth or vibrate in them. So, they remain at the human level. 
They do not rise to the Divine. "Can the lake be filled when there is only a sprinkle of rain? Can 
thirst be relieved, when saliva gets in? Can the belly be full, if breathing is held tight? Can live 
cinders be secured by the burning of blades of grass?" asks the poet. Logs have to be burned if 
charcoal is needed: only sheets of rain can fill a lake to the brim; a glass of cold water alone can 
cure a person of thirst, nothing less. The heart has to be offered in full. 


Devotion has to fill and overflow the heart. Look at the lotus; its roots are in under-water slush. It 
grows through water and floats on it. But, it does not get tarnished by slush or wetted by water! 
The wonder is, it cannot survive without slush and water, but it rises up to the air and the sun, 
nevertheless! Our life has its roots in the Aathma and it grows through the agitated waves of 
living. It can never uproot itself from its Aathmic source. 


Grief has three sources and three characteristics 


Man has, through the ages, sought liberation, struggled for freedom from bondage. But, he has 
no correct appreciation of what he has to liberate himself from, what the bondage is from which 
he has to be freed. Many are not even aware that they are imprisoned and are bound. So, they do 
not even try to free themselves. Is the family, the wife and children, the prison? Are riches, 
properties and possessions the bonds? Are attractions and aversions the bonds that curb him? No. 
No one of these binds him. The tightest bond that limits his feelings and deeds is his ignorance of 
who he really is. 


Until one is aware of the Aathma (divine soul), one is certain to be tossed from grief to grief, 
with intervals of joy. The grief has three sources and so, it has three characteristics: (1) grief 
caused by the unreality of the apparent, (2) grief caused by want of knowledge or wrong 
apprehension on account of the limitations of our instruments of perception and inference or on 
account of the mystery of the Divine phenomenon that subsists in everything, and (3) the grief 
caused by the death, disintegration or dissolution of things which we held to be real! When one is 
established in the awareness of the truth of the Jeevi (the individual being), the jagath (Cosmos) 
and God, the Creator, he need have no grief or fear any more. 


Let us consider Jagath---The visible cosmos around us, which we can cognise. The filings we 
experience in dreams disappear when we wake. The things we see when awake are also short- 
lived. During sleep, we are not aware of the world at all. Though the body is in the bedroom, we 
dream, and the dream is direct and dramatic, that we are busy shopping in Mount Road, Madras! 
So, the waking, dreaming and sleeping stages are all only relatively real, deludingly real. When 
you come towards the hostel at dusk singing Bhajans, the boy in the front row shouts in fear, 
"Snake! Snake!" fear overtakes all. Fear made them step back. But, was it a snake? A boy looked 
at it with a lit torch, and found that it is only a rope! Ignorance caused it, knowledge removed it. 
When the torch lights up the world, it is seen to be really God, Vishnu, the Divine Body, sacred 
substance, Sath-Chit-Aanandha (Existence, Awareness, Bliss Absolute). The Asath (unreal) is 
realised as Sath (Real). 


Faith is life, absence of faith is death 


The process of living is the swinging of a pendulum from smile to tear. Childhood is too tender 
and innocent; youth is too full of folly and faults, middle age is muddled with problems and 
possible remedies; old age is spent in regret over past failings and falterings. When can man taste 
some little sincere joy? Nature is the vesture of God. It images the Supreme. It shines through the 
machinations of the mind. The inner core of each living thing is God. Joys and sorrows are the 
results of the mind's involvement in the transient and the trivial. Like the Sun, divine grace falls. 
The Sun is not tarnished by anything harmful which it falls upon. The Self too is unaffected by 
the effects of the mind pursuing the senses wherever they lead it. When one becomes aware that 
the Self is God, there can be no fear of death haunting him. The building may collapse, but the 
basis is safe. When does man die? Every moment he dies; every moment, he is born. When the 
next tick does not happen, it is death. When it beats again, one is born anew. Faith is life; 
absence of faith is death. Only the body dies; the Aathma (Divine Self) is beyond birth and death. 
Aware of this, one is soaked in Aanandha (Divine Bliss). 


Death affects only the body-mind complex 


Give up what has to be cast away, know what has to be attained, then, Aanandha becomes your 
unruffled nature. So give up the idea of the world being valid; know the reality of the Self and 
attain the Source, the Brahman. This is the significance of the Upanishathic Prayer, which you 
use every day before the lessons start at the Institute: 


Asatho maa sath gamaya (Lead me from the Unreal to the Real) 
Thamaso maa Jyothir gamaya (Lead me from darkness to light) 
Mruthyor maa amrutham gamaya (Lead me from death to immortality) 


This is a prayer asking to be led from the Jagath (mundane world), which is constantly being 
built and rebuilt, resolved and dissolved, into the Divine whose Being undergoes no change. The 
darkness symbolises the ignorance which induces identification with the body-senses-mind- 
reason complex. The light reveals the Divine core, over which all the rest is superimposed by the 
fog of faulty vision. Death affects only the body-mind complex. When we are led into the light, 
we become aware that we are the undying Aathma, and so we become immortal. 


The human heart is an ocean, whose depth none can gauge nor can anyone limit its horizon. The 
ocean has countless pearls and precious corals but it has also sharks and crocodiles. One has to 
explore continuously and boldly for the gems and pearls of good thoughts and feelings, and 
cultivate them more and more. 


Source and the goal are God and God only 


There are two obstacles which prevent man in this valuable effort. The first is the tendency to 
compare yourselves with others. This is very wrong. No two things or no two men are identical. 
Even identical twins grow in distinct ways of life. No one of the millions of leaves on a tree is 
exactly the same as another. Botanists are aware of this feature. Billions of human beings are on 
the earth, but which is the press which has given each of them a novel imprint? This is the glory 
of God. Millions of boxes are manufactured by a company; all are identical; all can be locked 
and opened by the same set of keys. Man is created by God, each with his distinct nature, quality, 
potentiality and destiny. How, then, can any one compare himself with another and either exult 


or despair? We say he is tall and feel dejected because we are short. We are proud that we are 
better than others. All this is very silly when we come to think of it. 


Secondly, we are in the habit of justifying our faults, rationalising our errors and avoiding the 
responsibility of facing them squarely and correcting them. These two attitudes thicken man:s 
ignorance and breed further failings. Every one has God as the source. No one is higher or lower. 
We are all kin, through God from Whom we have come. Parents and other physical kith and kin 
are those whose impact we feel on the way. But, the Source and the Goal are God and God only. 


"Keeping the child on her hip, the mother roamed in search of the child, which she thought had 
wandered far. She was peering into the face of every child to discover whether it was hers. Poor 
unripe fruit! Incompletely wise" laments the poet. One can ripen only when the Divine in us is 
developed, after its discovery. Live in God, with God, live on God and for God. Drink God, eat 
God, see God, reach God. God is the Truth, the substance, the Heart of Man. "I am the occupant 
of your heart", says Krishna. Every cell in the human body is God, though under a microscope 
you cannot find Him. You are now recording my speech in the cassette. But can you see my 
voice or words now on the cassette? No. When you play it back, you can hear the words. So too, 
the body is the tape, the voice of God is immanent. Equip it with faith and tune it with Love. 
Then, you can imbibe My voice and words. A pure heart, a cleansed mind, a God-filled 
consciousness will help you to listen to the voice of the God within you.' 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 8-1-1983 


3. Ceiling on desires---I 


MEMBERS appear to be confused about the true meaning of this programme of "Ceiling on 
Desires" decided on at the Tenth All India Conference of Sathya Sai Organisations. There are 
four components in the term "Ceiling on Desires." They are, respectively; curb on excessive talk, 
curb on excessive desires and expenditure, control of consumption of food, check on waste of 
energy. Man needs some essential commodities for his sustenance and he should not aspire for 
more. We can learn a lesson in this respect from Nature. Only if air is available in sufficient 
quantity will it be comfortable and good. If it is excessive and there is a gale you will feel 
uncomfortable. When you are thirsty; you can consume only a limited quantity of water. You 
can't consume the entire water of the Ganga! We take only as much as is needed for the 
sustenance of the body. 


Doctors know that the body temperature is normally 98.4. If this goes up to 99 they say fever has 
set in due to some disorder in the body. We inhale and exhale at a normal rate. If there is a slight 
increase or decrease in the rate it indicates disorder in the body. Changes in the pulse rate or 
blood pressure also indicate disorder. So you find that if you cross the limits even to a little 
extent it is dangerous or harmful to the body. There is a limit for everything to function in a 
normal way. When your eyes happen to see a flash of lightning or a flash light while taking 
photographs, they automatically close because they can't withstand such high illumination. Ear 
drums also cannot tolerate hearing beyond a certain volume and we close our ears or keep cotton 
inside the ears. From these we see that our life is a limited company! 


Misuse of money is a great evil 


Similarly our desires also should be limited. Women are usually desirous of adding to their 
wardrobe any number of sarees when they go to a shop or an exhibition. You should have a 
reasonable number of sarees, but not a huge collection for pomp or show. Misuse of money is a 
great evil. Even men will have to do their own bit in controlling the expenditure on unwanted 
and unnecessary things. Money is Dhaivaswaroopam (embodiment of Divinity). When you talk 
of wealth you should be careful to avoid avaricious accumulation and extravagant expenditure. 
Even in the preparation of food, you should be careful in avoiding wastage. We are only doing a 
disservice by consuming more food than what is necessary for the body. 


Thirdly, you should be careful about 'time’, which is the yardstick of life. Seconds become hours, 
hours become years, years make yugas (ages) and so on. You should not waste this most 
valuable 'time’. Time lost in wasteful pursuits can't be got back by any means. All our activities 
should be planned for utilising the available time to maximum advantage. So, we should not 
waste food, money, time and energy. Even in purchase of garlands, you need not waste money. 
What God wants is the flower of your heart that is filled with humility and devotion. Eight types 
of flowers can be offered to God, viz, (1) Ahimsa (Non-violence), (2) Indhriya Nigraha (Control 
of senses), (3) Sarvabhootha Dhaya (Compassion towards all beings), (4) Sathyam (Truth), (5) 
Dhyaanam (Meditation), (6) Shaanthi (Peace), (7) Vinaya (Humility), (8) Bhakthi (Devotion). 


God appreciates only your motive 


I feel very much concerned about the excessive money that is spent by the Trust and Samithi on 
the expensive huge garlands offered to Me on every occasion and also the use of flowers for 
decorating the path. No doubt you are doing this as an expression of your Aanandha (Divine 
bliss). But I won't call this Bhakthi (devotion), though you may not own this. We should realise 


our defects and rectify them. You may show your affection by just handing over one flower and 
spend the money wasted on garlands for helping the poor people in distress. 


People may think that Baba will not like it if flower paths are not provided and huge garlands are 
not offered. You must understand that God appreciates only your motive and not the external 
things. By indulging in such exhibitionism, you will only spoil the name of the organisation. As 
a member of Sathya Sai Organisation you should have no sense of ego or pride. As I have often 
said you should have your "Hands in society and heads in the forest". This should be your 
guiding principle. What little you do you must do with a good and pure heart. 


In the Bhagavathgeetha, Krishna has referred to "Pathram, Phalam, Pushpam, Thoyam" (that is, 
leaf, fruit, flower or water) that can be offered to God. I am pleased with any of these provided it 
is offered with sincere devotion. What is ‘pathram'? It is not the 'leaf' that you see around you. 
The inner meaning is that your body itself is the leaf. Flower is not the one in the plants but it is 
the flower of your heart, "Hridhaya Pushpam". 'Phalam' is not the ordinary fruit but 
'Manophalam' (the fruit of your mind). 'Thoyam' means water but what is referred to here is not 
the water from the river or tap. It refers to the tears of joy welling up within you from a sincere 
and prayerful heart. 


Transform yourselves into better individuals 


Moreover you should not only practise yourself but teach others also about this ceiling on 
desires. Though Naaraayana is in everyone, the one in the poor people is referred to as 
"Dharidhra Naaraayana". When this Naaraayana begs for food, you refuse to give him food 
while you offer food to another person who is already well-fed. You place before God's pictures 
a lot of food of rich variety as 'Naivedhyam' (offering). You do this because you know very well 
that this is coming back to you. So, here too it is ‘Swaartham' (self-interest) and not 'Thyaagam' 
(sacrifice) The amrithathwa (immortality) or Moksha (Liberation) will come out of thyaagam. 


We have Seva Dhal, Bhajan Mandalis, and other Wings. It is a good sign that more and more 
youngsters are coming forward to join the Seva Dhal and take part in service activities. The 
participation of youth is necessary for the welfare of the world. We should rejoice when they 
turn over a new leaf in their life. There is a common saying that you should not rejoice and 
distribute sweets etc. when a child is born, but you should do so only when the son grows up and 
earns a good name as a ‘Sathputhra' (good son). You can't please Me just by joining as a member 
of the organisation. I shall wait for the day when you turn over a new leaf and transform 
yourselves into better individuals. You should become 'Guna-sheelas' (persons of sterling 
character and good qualities). 


It is the code of conduct which is responsible for the organisation moving forward growing from 
strength to strength. The office-bearers should exercise maximum care to see that the code of 
conduct is adhered to and guide others also in the fight path. When a cook in a house works with 
integrity the master on his own will entrust him with the keys of the house. Similarly, God also 
will appreciate only men with integrity. The desire to please God should be the fundamental 
motive. 


Discourse to active workers of the 


Sri Sathya Sai Organisations, Tamil Nadu at Abbotsbury, Madras, 19 January 1983 


Be always saturated with prema: do not use poisonous words 
against any one, for, words wound more fatally than even arrows. 
Speak soft and sweet; sympathise with suffering and loss and 


ignorance; try your best to apply the salve of soothing word and 
timely succour. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


4. Service and Saadhana 


LIVING in this land of Bhaarath with its rich rewarding culture but yet not absorbing its broad 
all-inclusive insight, not delving into the secrets of its survival and freshness, how can any one 
achieve progress and ensure the peace and prosperity of the world? Uttering the voice of peace 
while shattering by deeds all hopes of establishing it can only be termed as deceiving oneself. 
World progress is not an abstract ideal; it means series of concrete achievements in the 
community of nations, the diversity of societies and the entities of individuals. Each of these has 
to march forward to the same goal, in concord and with cooperative effort. 


In spite of the amazing victories that man has won over the forces of nature, man has yet to win 
peace and joy, for himself and his fellowmen. For, these can be gained only by the mastery of the 
inner impulses and the sublimation of the inner emotions. 


Lions have as their motto, "Together, we serve better." This togetherness inspires mutual help 
and service. It must inspire those who serve and those who are served and bring both into the 
bond of Love. 


Man is no more the master, but the slave of habits 


The path of Love and Service is not smooth: it abounds in struggle and disappointments. Life 
itself is a pendulum between sighs and smiles. But, every obstacle is an invitation to your 
intelligence. "Life is a challenge; meet it ! Life is a dream; realise it." 


Mankind is terrified by a crowd of problems at the present time-- scientific, technological, 
economic and moral. These cannot be solved by material means alone. Mental transformation 
too must happen. The ideals laid down by the seers who moulded our cultural tradition have to 
be honoured and practised. They hold before the eyes the means to fulfil the years of life, not 
through the multiplication of material comforts, but through serenity and simplicity. Bigger 
mansions, swell cars, rare luxuries are eagerly sought after Man is no more the master; he is the 
slave of the habits, the pleasures and the riches he runs after He counts the number of years he 
has grown; he forgets that each year, his life-period is being shortened. Erudition sans humility, 
expertise sans discrimination, work sans wisdom, life sans love, music sans melody can never 
receive honour in the community. 


When virtues are few and studies are huge 
What is the gain, what is their worth? 
When desert land one has acres ten, 

What is the gain? What their worth? 

A patch is a treasure if fertile it be. 


Character is the measure of man. Character insists on keeping vice and wickedness at a distance. 
It reminds man of obligations and responsibilities, of the high ideals and goal of human life. Life 
not sanctified by character is a home without lamps, a coin that is counterfeit. 


Money makes many things and wrongs too 


Many a time, the game ends even before one recognises the Master. So, while life is on, one 
should devote it for some sacred activity--the most sacred being Seva (Service). It ensures 
fellowship and kinship among all men. It discloses the unity inherent in all the divinity. In India, 


people have clubbed together in the name of seva or service as Lions Club, Rotary Club, 
Cosmopolitan Club etc. Their ideals are really sacred and the projects too are commendable. 
They revere all men as a single family. Many worthy persons perform devoted service as 
members of these Clubs. It is indeed a fortunate chance for them, for there can be no good work, 
higher than this. 


They say, "Money makes many things" but it is more correct to say "Money makes many 
wrongs." Not all, of course, are ruined by affluence. They can help such organisations to do more 
and better service. They can supply medicines to those who render health service to the poor. 
They can visit slums and offer help in various ways to the dwellers. These are all laudable. But, 
collecting money and paying others to do the service is not enough; we must assess what services 
we ourselves are offering directly. And, we must not be content--the doctors, lawyers, the rich, 
the educated---with spurts of service, off and on. It must be a continuous process, according to a 
settled time table undertaken every week Doctors must proceed to slums and villages and help 
the dwellers. There is urgent need for this type of seva. Lawyers must take up the cases in which 
wrongs are committed on the poor through their ignorance and plead on their behalf for justice. 
They could devote time for at least two or three such cases per week. Their pleadings on behalf 
of the poor should not be cursory and casual. They must be as earnest and as effective as the rest. 


Love is selflessness, while Self is Lovelessness 


Embodiments of Love! Members of the Lions Club have high ideals and are urged by sacred 
feelings. They have frequent meetings in order that they can come close, to each other. Some 
Clubs meet in five star hotels and spend huge sums. At home, we can feel happy with a full meal 
on five rupees but in hotels, even fifty rupees won't suffice. We lose forty five rupees each, 
whenever we have a meeting. The amount gained by discontinuing this practice can be spent on 
helping the poor. Our aim should be the work, the practical solution and not publicity only. Even 
from our personal point of view, we should so manage our affairs that money is not wasted. 
What is most important at this juncture is the consideration of the problems facing Bhaarath. 
These problems require the promotion of Prema and Seva (Love and Service). Love is 
selflessness, while Self is Lovelessness! 


I wish the citizens of Bombay to stand shoulder to shoulder with you and ensure the success of 
all your efforts on their behalf. They must co-operate with all their hearts all their resources and 
with all their skills. We waste heaps of money but we do not feel they are best utilised in service 
projects such as you have planned. 


This day is really a day of joy. I am happy I am amidst persons dedicated to service. It is 
essential that members of such Clubs pay attention to our spiritual advancement also, for that 
ensures our attainment of the goal of Life. The worldly and the spiritual are like the two wings of 
a bird, the two wheels of the vehicle, equally essential and equally important. By means of 
spiritual saadhana, earn spiritual wealth and share it with those whom you serve. 


Regional Conference of Lions International, Bombay, 
23 January 1983 


In the Sathya, there is no mithya; but, in the Mithya Jagath 
(illusive world)you have to search for sathya (truth) and 


experience it. You can do it if you rid your mind of all 
modifications and modulations. 


Let it be transformed from its present complex confusion into 
something like the sky, which does not bear any mark though 
millions of birds fly through it and thousands of planes move 
across it. 


Be unaffected, untouched, unattached. That is the spiritual 
discipline which will reveal the Reality, and which will ensure both 
Physical and mental equanimity. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


5. The Ever Auspicious Lord 


The ever auspicious Lord 

The manifest form of Om, the one who has come to teach, 

The One who churns for butter, the hearts and minds of men, 

The Friend, the charmer, the liberator from blinding bondage, 

The Comforter of those who clamour and pray, the Destroyer 
of currents that drag, 

The Consoler of torn hearts, like the moon so cool, 

The Derider of Pride, the Healer, curing birth and death, 

The Lotus-eyed, the Negator of Time, Himself the process and 
the play of Time, 

The Thief who steals for Himself the pure minds of the good, 

Beauty embodied, the child of Dhevaki, Vaasudheva, Son of 
Vaasudhev, 

The glory of the Yadhu race, is here, with you, beside you. 


THE man who is unable to imbibe true wisdom which broadens the mind, and to explore the 
inner truth about life, cannot promote the welfare of the world. The well-being of the world 
depends on the well-being of society and the latter depends on the welfare of individuals. All 
these are mutually interdependent. 


They are integrally related to one another. Hence the need for individuals in society to be truthful 
in thought, word and deed. The spiritual principle dearly warns those who mouth slogans of 
peace but indulge in acts inimical to peace. Human life can be truly understood only in the 
context of harmony and co-operation. For this to be realised, one must engage oneself in service 
to society. Such service is rooted in spiritual faith. 


Man must turn away from the material to the Divine 


Man today is exploring outer space, but does not know the truth about himself. Those who 
cannot know their own true nature cannot accomplish much. They cannot perceive the Real. And 
without perceiving the Real, they cannot realise Aanandha (Divine Bliss). 


There is nothing that man cannot achieve, but before attempting anything he must recognise his 
powers, role and purpose in life. As long as he is bound by ignorance of his true nature, he 
cannot escape from sorrow. 


The Cosmos, as has been said before, is a manifestation of the Will of the Divine. To realise the 
Divine, however, it is not necessary to explore Prakrithi (creation). Everything in the universe is 
subject to change, impermanence and disappearance. How, then, does it acquire such importance 
of value? This is because of the Jeevis (the human beings) without whom the universe will be 
valueless. Here is a small example. In cities like Madras, Delhi, Bombay and Calcutta there are 
millions of people. In these cities land costs hundreds of rupees per square metre. But, for the 


same price one can buy many acres of land in a jungle. Why is land so costly in cities? It is 
because of the density of population in them. In a forest, remote from human aggregations, land 
has little value. 


Man is the most valuable being in the Universe. He is also the creator of all values. The gold- 
bearing ore that is mined from the earth acquires value after it has been extracted and refined by 
human effort. Likewise the rough diamond that is got from a mine becomes extremely valuable 
after it is cut and shaped by man. 


Immersed in worldly concerns and looking upon material things as the source of happiness, men 
become victims of unhappiness. The material world can only produce sorrow. Man must turn 
away from the material to the Divine. Involvement with the mundane should yield place to the 
quest for Self- realisation. 


Man is the creature of evil planets, Raaga & Dhwesha 


Life is like a tangled skein of yarn. The more you try to unravel it, the more tangled it becomes. 
Life is like a tank infested with crocodiles. It is difficult to cross it avoiding the crocodiles. But it 
has to be done. Life is like a block of ice that is continually melting away. Before it melts 
completely, the truth has to be realised. People believe that man is controlled by navagrahas (the 
nine planets). But he is in fact the creature of two evil planets, Raaga (Attachment) and Dhwesha 
(Hatred). 


Life is a short play on the stage. This body is like a bubble. The mind is always fickle. In the 
Geetha, Arjuna confesses to 'Krishna that the mind, which is constantly vascillating, is difficult 
to control. Nevertheless, man has to concentrate on his true destination. What is this destination, 
the goal and the aim of life? The Bhaagavatha and the Bhagavath-geetha have made this clear. 
Our destination is the source from which we came. As long as the individual is caught up in the 
Prakrithi (phenomenal world), his mind will be unsteady and vacillating. As long as there is life 
in the body it is Shivam (sacred). Once life goes out, it is nothing. The Vedhic declaration, "So- 
ham" ("He is I") is demonstrated by the inhaling done during breathing. When you exhale and 
utter "“Aham," you are giving up the "I". "So-ham" proclaims the identity of the individual and 
the Divine (‘I am He'). This identity will not be understood as long as one is caught up in the 
tentacles of the material world. 


Service to the public is true worship of God 


This is the truth about God. If one asks, "Where is that God?" the answer is given in the 18th 
canto of the Bhagavath-geetha in Stanza 61. Krishna has declared there: “Eeshwarah- 
sarvabhuuthaanaam hriddheshe" (The Lord resides in the heart region of all beings). We study 
the Geetha. We adore it. There is daily recitation, but no practical application in daily life. The 
one who realises his identity with the Divine will not cause hurt to any one. Service to the public 
is true worship of God. The power of the divine permeates everything. Our journey is from the 
individual to the Universal from ‘Swam' (mine) to ‘'So-ham' (oneness with God), from 'T' to 'we'. 


The effulgent Sun can be seen only with his own light. Similarly, only by the grace of the Divine 
can one obtain a vision of the Divine. No skill, intellectual effort or scholarship is required to 
experience the Divine. Just as clouds may obscure the Sun, the clouds of egoism, attachment and 
hatred prevent one from seeing the Divine. Prayer and saadhana are the means by which these 
clouds are dispersed. Saadhana (spiritual discipline) is the royal road to reach the Divine. The 
human make-up is a mixture of good and bad traits. One in whom the good traits predominate, 


tends to see only the good in others. Those who have equal-mindedness see the good and bad 
qualities impartially. It is necessary therefore to cultivate good qualities. 


Shiva or Shankara is always auspicious 


Whether one does good or bad acts, there is no escape from their consequences. Knowing this, 
our ancients always sought what was good and auspicious. This is the meaning of the worship of 
Shiva. When we speak of Shiva Raathri, we refer to the night that is associated with Shiva, that 
is, an auspicious night. 


Shivam means that which is auspicious. The Shiva principle is totally free from anything that is 
inauspicious or unholy in any circumstance. When incarnations like Raama and Krishna appear 
in human bodies, they have some inauspicious associations related to their bodies. Although they 
incarnate for the purpose of saving the world, protecting the devotees and uplifting humanity, 
they have to shed their bodies sometime or other. Hence in the name of such avathaars, the 
honorific 'Sri' is prefixed to indicate the sacredness of their advent. But for Shiva no such 
appellation is needed because Shiva transcends corporeal limitations. Unlike Sri Raama or Sri 
Krishna there is no "Sri Shiva" or "Sri Shankara". Shiva or Shankara is always auspicious. The 
realisation of oneness with Shiva means the attainment of immortality. 


"Chandhrama manaso Jaathah," says the Purusha Shuktha (The mind arose from the moon). 
The Moon has sixteen digits. Likewise the mind has sixteen digits. On Shivaraathri night, fifteen 
of the Moon's sixteen digits are invisible, and only one digit can be seen. The mind also is in the 
same state. If during Shivaraathri one meditates on God, one can achieve nearness to the Divine. 
Supreme sacredness of Shivaraathri consists in realising oneness with the Divine through 
meditation on God. 


What you deny is the Reality; only the Divine exists. The world is the unreal. Forgetting the 
Real, men are lost in the pursuit of the transient. The world must be viewed as the reflected 
image of the Divine. All acts must be done as an offering to the Divine. 


True devotees of God should not attach any importance to differences of religion, caste or sect. 
These are merely differences in name and form. Realising that the sacred Shiva principle is 
present in everyone, the devotee should not look down upon anyone or cause harm to others. Dr 
Chenna Reddy spoke about greatness of the name "Saamba Sadhaashiva." Saa + Amba + 
Sadhaashiva represent the union of the Universal Divine Mother and the Universal Divine 
Father, who are eternally auspicious. Saambashiva is the embodiment of the Shiva-Shakthi 
union. The world may change, but the Shiva principle is unchanging. The same union of the 
Universal Divine Mother and Father is represented by the name and form of "Sai Baba." 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 11 February 1983 


6. The Gaayathree Path to God 


Out of action arises the bondage of Delusion; 
From Delusion grows a perverted mind; 
Mental perversion leads to perverse deeds; 
Such deeds again result in rebirth. 


YOUNG embodiments of the Divine! The grand mansion of Hindhu thought has been raised on 
the four walls of karma, janma, dharma and Brahman (action, birth, righteous action, and 
Supreme Self or God). These four are interdependent. No one can escape the consequences of 
one's action, whether good or bad. No action goes in vain. Karma (action) is the primary cause of 
one's birth. 


The jeevi is born in karma, 
He grows through karma, 
He ceases in karma. 
Karma is the cause 

Of happiness and misery. 


It has been well said that "The body indeed, is the basis for the pursuit of dharma" 
(Shareeramaadhyam khalu dharma saadhanam). It is by the pursuit of dharma that Brahman is 
realised. The Geetha has declared that whenever dharma declines the advent of the Avathaar 
(Divine incarnation) occurs. This implies that the object of human existence is to uphold dharma. 
As creation is a projection of the Divine Will, the aim of every human being should be to live in 
harmony with that Will. One's life should be dedicated not for promoting one's selfish interests 
or to serve the interests of other fellow-beings but in the service of the Divine. Whatever is done 
to anyone, if it is done as an offering to the Divine, it will reach the Divine. Man should 
consecrate every action by regarding it as an offering to the Divine. 


Gaayathree initiation gives one the Second Birth 


From the moment of issuing from the mother's womb, one is involved in action. This natural 
state is common to all and may be described as Shuudhrathwam (the state of the Shuudhra, that 
is, one who is not subject to any regimen). After one receives the Gaayathree initiation, he is 
born again and becomes a Dwija (the twice-born). The Gaayathree is described as 
"Chhandhasaam maathah"---the mother of all the Vedhas (ancient sacred scriptures). One 
meaning of Gaayathree is that it is a manthra (sacred formula) which protects or fosters the 
"Gayaas" or jeevis (individual beings). 


You must note that today you have all got a second birth by receiving the Gaayathree manthra 
(Vedhic prayer to illuminate the intelligence). By observing the disciplines of the Brahmachaari 
(celibate) stage, you will qualify yourselves for the study of the Vedhas. When one begins to 
study the Vedhas he is known as "Vipra" (Braahmana). This is a third birth, as it were. At this 
stage, by the study and understanding of the Vedhas and living up to their precepts, one gets the 
opportunity to understand Brahman (Supreme Being). Once the Brahman principle is 
understood, one merges in Brahman. It is only when there is awareness of Brahman can one 
claim to be a real Brahman. It is not birth alone, but the realisation of Brahman which confers 


real Braahmanathwa (Braahmana-hood) on a person. 
Gaayathree manthra is the embodiment of all deities 


The Gaayathree manthra has to be recited three times a day---in the morning at sunrise, at noon, 
and at sunset. These are called "Sandhyaa Kaalam"---the time of coming together of night and 
day, of morning and evening, and of day and night. Time, like man, has three qualities: Sathwa, 
Rajas and Thamas (poised, passion and inertia). The day is divided into three parts. The four 
hours between 4 and 8 a.m. in the morning and between 4 p.m. and 8 p.m. in the evening have 
the Sathwa (equanimous) quality. The eight hours between 8 a.m. and 4 p.m. are Raajasik 
(Passionate). The eight hours between 8 p.m. and 4 a.m. which are mainly used for sleep, are 
Thaamasik (inaction). The eight hours of the day (from 8 a.m. to 4 p.m.) are employed by all 
beings, including animals and birds, in the discharge of their day to day duties and are regarded 
as Raajasik (active pursuit). 


When the four Saathwik hours of the morning (4 a.m. to 8 a.m.) are used for engaging oneself in 
good actions like worship, virtuous deeds, keeping good company, one is sure to raise, himself 
from the human to the Divine level. It is during the Saathwik period (from 4 a.m. to 8 a.m. and 4 
p.m to 8 p.m.) the Gaayathree manthra should be recited. This manthra is the embodiment of all 
deities. It is not related to any particular sect, caste or idol or institution. It is said to embody nine 
"colours": (1) Om (2) Bhuh (3) Bhuvah (4) Suvah (5) Thath (6) Savithur or powers (7) Varenyam 
(8) Bhargah (9) Dhevasya. "Dheemahi" is related to the meditative aspect. "Dhiyo-yo-nah 
prachodayaath" relates to the aspect of prayer. The manthra as a whole thus contains three 
aspects descriptive, meditational and prayer. 


Discover the Unity that underlies the Diversity 


On the basis of differences in behaviour, the antahkarana (inner-psyche) has been accorded four 
names. When it is concerned with thoughts, it is called manas (mind). When it is restless and 
wavering it is called chiththa (consciousness). When it is concerned with enquiry and 
understanding, it is called buddhi (intellect). When it is associated with the sense of "mine" 
(possessiveness), it is called ahamkaara (egoism). Why are four different names and attributes 
given to one and the same entity (the Antahkarana)? The mind is pre-occupied with distinctions 
and differences. The buddhi is concerned with oneness and reveals the Unity that underlies the 
diversity. All our efforts must be directed towards discovering the Unity that underlies the 
diversity rather than seeking to divide the One into the many. 


The Gaayathree manthra (Vedhic prayer to illuminate the intelligence) is a sacred manthra 
which demonstrates the unity that underlies manifoldness in creation. It is through the 
recognition of this unity that we can understand the multiplicity. Clay is one and the same thing, 
though pots of different shapes and sizes can be made from it. Gold is one, though gold 
ornaments can be multifarious. The Aathma (Divine Self) is one, though the embodied forms in 
which it resides may be many. Whatever the colour of the cow, the milk is white always. 


There is no object in the world which does not have a form and a name. The Cosmos is made up 
of things with forms and names. While the forms are subject to constant change, the names 
remain unchanged. The form may change and even completely disappear but the name remains. 
Once we know the name, we can recognise what or whom it represents. In a large gathering, it 
will not be easy to trace a person merely from the description of his features. But when his name 
is called, he immediately responds and can be identified. Likewise, through the name of the 


Lord; the form of the Lord can be visualised. 
Five faces---Three deities 


Gaayathree is described as having five faces. The first is "Om" The second is 
"Bhurbhuvassuvah" The third is. "Thathsavithur Varenyam". The fourth is "Bhargo Dhevasya 
Dheemahi". The fifth is: "Dhiyo-yo nah Prachodhayaath", Gaayathree represents in these five 
faces the five Praanas (life forces). Gaayathree is the protector of the five Praanas in man. 
Gaayantham thraayathe ithi Gaayathree -- "Because it protects the one who recites it, it is called 
Gaayathree." When Gaayathree acts as protector of the life-forces, she is known as Saavithree. 
Saavithree is known in the puraanic story as the devoted wife who brought back to life her 
husband, Sathyavaan. Saavithree is the presiding deity of the five praanas. She protects those 
who lead a life of Truth. This is the inner meaning. 


When one's intelligence and intuition are developed by the recitation of the manthra, the 
activating deity is Gaayathree. When the life-forces are protected, the guardian deity is called 
Saavithree. When one's speech is protected, the deity is called Saraswathee. Because of the 
protective roles of Saavithree, Saraswathee and Gaayathree, in relation to life, speech and the 
intellect, Gaayathree is described as "Sarvadhevathaa-swaruupini"---he embodiment of all 
goddesses. 


It is essential to recite the Gaayathree manthra at least three times during morning, noon and 
evening. This will serve to reduce the effects of the wrong acts one does every day. It is like 
buying goods for cash, instead of getting them on credit. There is no accumulation of karmic 
(result of action) debt, as each day's karma (action) is atoned for that day itself by reciting the 
Gaayathree Manthra. 


Redemptive Power of the Gaayathree manthra 


The plea that one cannot find time for reciting the Gaayathree thrice a day is specious and 
untenable. People waste so much of their time in worthless activities that they can easily find a 
few moments for reciting the Gaayathree when they wake up from bed and before they go to 
sleep, if only they have the will. The Gaayathree can be recited even when one is talcing his 
bath. It will mean also offering ablutions to the goddess. At noon, if the Gaayathree is recited 
before taking one's meal, the food will get sanctified and become an offering to the deity. 


The Brahmachaaris (celebates/religious students) should realise the redemptive power of the 
Gaayathree manthra. Through the Brahmopadhesam (initiation into sacred knowledge), the 
young boys have had a second birth. It is only when they have achieved the purposes of this 
second birth will they be qualified to enter on the sacred third stage of "viprathvam" 
(Braahmana-hood), which leads to the realisation of Brahman. 


"One who is aware of Brahman, becomes one with Brahman" is the Vedhic saying. To recognise 
the Brahman principle, one has to understand one's own true nature. There is a story to illustrate 
how one can see whether he is qualified to realise Brahman. An unmarried girl acquires the fight 
to a haft-share in a man's property after she is married to him and he ties the mangalasuuthra 
(the auspicious marriage thread) round her neck. It is this sacred thread that confers the right on 
her. Likewise, one remains remote from God as long as one has not acquired the thread of 
"surrender to the Divine" (Sharanaagathi- thathwa). The moment one wears the swuthra (thread) 
of Sharanaagathi (total surrender), one acquires the right to a half share in the energy and 
authority of the Divine. We must strive earnestly to pursue the path of submission to the Divine 


Will and offering everything to the Divine. 


The attitude of surrender will grow in us as we recite regularly the Gaayathree manthra. This is 
the reason why boys are initiated into the manthra at an early age. There is also another reason 
for this early initiation. Boys, who have been indolent or dull before getting the 
Brahmopadhesam have been able to develop their intelligence and be more diligent in their 
studies after they have received the Gaayathree manthra. This is a matter of proven experience. 
Like sunrise after the night, the Gaayathree manthra dispels the darkness of ignorance: "Dhiyo- 
yo-nah prachodayaath." The rays of the Gaayathree manthra illumine the mind and intelligence 
and promote knowledge, wisdom and discrimination. 


I bless the young vatus (boys who have been initiated) so that from today they recite the 
Gaayathree regularly, lead exemplary lives and grow into good, god-fearing, educated and 
enlightened citizens of Bhaarath. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, Puurnachandhra Auditorium, 17-3-1983 


The pain that another suffers from, which you seek to assuage, is 
really your own pain; when you stop his pain, it is your pain that 
stops. Service can be effective only when the feelings of 'I' and 
'Mine' give p lace to 'God' and 'God's'. It is only when your 
attention is monopolised by the body and its needs, that egoism 
will grow in strength. 


When you direct your attention to the Anthar-aathma (Inner-self) 
which is God, then, you find the same of God in all and a flood of 
reverence fills you and fertilises every act of yours. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


7. Karma, Dharmaja and Brahma 


Without Charity and Righteousness, 
Devoid of Truth and Compassion, 
With a mind bereft of scruples 
And filled with bad impulses, 

The evil minded man fares ill 
Here and Hereafter. 

Oh foolish mind! 

Seeking the Vision of the Divine 
Where do you wander in vain? 
What you seek is within you 
Know that truth. 


THERE are in the world various kinds of subjects for which knowledge is available--knowledge 
of music, literature, art, sculpture, economics, politics, and the like. All these are only 
components of worldly knowledge knowledge relating to the phenomenal world. 


All worldly knowledge can help to increase one's comforts, but will not contribute to his Mukthi 
(liberation). However much we may acquire control over material conditions, this will not serve 
to produce peace of mind or the bliss of the soul. In a sense, the more the worldly knowledge the 
less is one likely to have mental peace. 


Whatever is perceptible, is perishable 


Worldly knowledge is no doubt necessary. But it is not the be-all and end-all. Many great kings 
in the past, who had ruled over vast empires and enjoyed every kind of pleasure, chose at the 
close of their lives to renounce everything for the sake of realising spiritual peace. 
"Yaddhrushyam than-nashyathi" - "Whatever is perceptible, is perishable." In the pursuit of 
fleeting and impermanent pleasures, we are throwing away the permanent, the unchanging and 
the real elements in human life. You imagine you are the architect of your fate. But the Author, 
the Master and the Enjoyer of everything is the Lord. By failing to grasp the nature of karma 
(action) and not seeking the path of dharma (virtue), man is making himself remote from 
Brahman (Supreme Being). 


For the performance of karma, the body is the primary instrument. It is through fight karma that 
one understands dharma (righteousness). The Karma Kaanda (branch dealing with action and its 
reaction) of the Vedhas (ancient revelations of spiritual knowledge) indicates how the primary 
goals of life are to be realised by the performance of sacramental duties--Sandhyaa Vandanam 
(daily worship of Sun God), yagna (sacrificial rite) and yaaga (ceremonial sacrifice). Even as 
birth is related to karma, karma to dharma, and dharma to Brahman, the mother, the father, Guru 
and God are related to the individual. The mother indicates the father. The father leads one to the 
Guru (preceptor). The Guru shows the way to realise God. All the four are fundamental to one's 
life. The mother comes first because she bears the travail of carrying and giving birth to the 
child. Hence, the Upanishaths urged: "Maathru Devo Bhava" (Regard the mother as God). Then 


comes the father, who takes the child to a proper Guru for the acquisition of jnaana (spiritual 
wisdom). 


The primary duty of the Guru is to show the path to God-realisation. Prahlaadha declared: "Only 
the Guru who teaches about God is worth the name". True Gurus are those who show what are 
the true purposes of life and how they should be realised. The Guru is one who dispels the 
darkness of ignorance by leading one to the light of knowledge of the Good, the True and the 
Eternal. The Guru should demonstrate to the student that beyond the changing forms and names 
of the phenomenal world there is a Divinity that is permanent and unchanging. 


Fruits of one's actions bound to appear sooner or later 


The materialistic philosophers today speak about oneness of mankind. But how do they explain 
the vast and immeasurable differences among men--- differences in abilities, conditions, attitudes 
and impulses? One is continually sick. Another is hale and hearty. One is always cheerful. 
Another is continuously miserable. People do not realise that these differences are the results of 
past karma (action). Karma is the cause of everything that happens. The fruits of one's actions 
may not be evident immediately, but sooner or later, they are bound to appear. 


"T shall do this, I shall do that," 
Vain is this boast, Oh man, 

As you sow, so shall you reap, 
As the seed, so will the fruit be. 


Hence, it is only by doing good deeds can one achieve desirable results. It is for this purpose that 
the Vedhas (sacred scriptures and eternal values) have laid down in the Karma Kaanda (action- 
oriented part of Vedhas) the good deeds by which beneficial results can be got. 


Even the Trinity cannot avoid of karma 


The Karma Kaanda reveals that the Law of Karma affects everything that has a body and not 
merely human beings alone. For instance, even the Trinity---Brahma, Vishnu and Rudhra--- 
cannot avoid the consequences of karma. By their actions they are demonstrating this truth to the 
world. For instance, like a potter, Brahma is continuously creating things in this Cosmos. This is 
the unceasing work. Why is he involved in this? Because he has a distinct body. Assuming the 
body for performing karma and discharging his dharma (righteousness) through his karma, he is 
setting an example to the world. 


Vishnu comes down in human form whenever dharma declines on the earth and is in danger of 
extinction. Facing the censure of the wicked, punishing evil-doers and protecting the good and 
the innocent, and receiving the praise of the devotees, Vishnu is carrying out His duty of 
protecting dharma and reforming mankind. It may be asked, "Why should Vishnu go through 
this ordeal as the protector of dharma?" It is no ordeal. It is only a demonstration of the duties 
that are related to the assuming of a certain form. Eeshwara (Shiva) covers Himself with 
vibhuuthi (sacred ash), dwells in the burial ground and subjects Himself to various rigorous 
disciplines. Thus even Brahma, Vishnu and Maheshwara, by their actions, have been setting an 
example to mankind as to how to make human life purposeful. 


There are in human beings three aspects: mala, vikshepa and aavarana. "Mala" is the cause of 
ashaanthi (mental disquiet). "Mala" represents the fruit of actions done in previous births. As 


long as this is not eliminated, like the faeces resulting from the digesting of food, it will give rise 
to all kinds of trouble and sorrow. How can there be peace or joy when the fruit of past karma 
remains in us? Only when we are rid of the burden of karma can we attain peace. The results of 
past sins continue as "mala". To get rid of "mala", we have to engage ourselves in sacred tasks. 


The Lord looks at your heart, not your wealth 


The Lord judges you by the sincerity of your thoughts, not by the forms of your worship. The 
Lord sees your bhakthi (devotion) and not shakthi (power). He cares for your gunas (qualities) 
and not your kula (caste or lineage). He looks at your chiththam (heart) and not at your viththam 
(wealth). You must strive to purify your heart and engage yourself in righteous action, with 
devotion and integrity. No saadhana (spiritual discipline) is of any use if you are involved in 
sinful deeds. 


"Vikshepa" consists of worldly distractions to overcome which various saadhanas are 
undertaken for realising the Divine. The saadhanas include meditation, concentration and 
performance of good deeds for achieving purity of mind. When one succeeds in overcoming 
Vikshepa, one is confronted with "aavarana" (the thick covering in which one is enveloped). 
This covering is known as maaya (delusion). It envelops everything in the universe. The eyes 
with which one can see everything that is outside cannot see themselves. Likewise, Maaya, 
which reveals the entire universe, cannot reveal the Divine. Because we are enveloped in Maaya, 
we seek worldly pleasures and do not seek our own Divine essence. 


Gaayathri Manthra is the royal road to Divinity 


Young people should realise the connection between food and the state of one's mind. For much 
of the demonic qualities prevalent among men today, the primary cause is the food they 
consume. One will develop good qualities if one takes Saathwik food, which is wholesome and 
moderate in quantity. It should not involve causing pain to others. And all that is eaten should be 
regarded as an offering to God. This is the inner significance of the Sandhayaa Vandhana 
manthras. When uttering the different names of Vishnu--Keshava, Naaraayana, etc.---one should 
bear in mind the meaning of each name. Naaraayana, for instance, means that He is the Lord of 
the Five Elements. If the name is recited, bearing in mind what it signifies, the full benefit of 
reciting the manthra will be got. 


The Gaayathree manthra is the royal road to Divinity. There is no fixed time or regulation for 
reciting it. Nevertheless, the young Brahmachaaris (celibates) would do well to recite it during 
the morning Sandhyaa and evening Sandhyaa (worship during dawn and twilight hours) to 
derive the greatest benefit. However because the Divine is beyond time and space, any time, any 
place is appropriate for repeating God's name. The Bhaagavatha declares: "Sarvadhaa, 
sarvathra, sarvakaaleshu Harichintanam" -- "Contemplate on God always, at all places and at 
all times." You must learn to think of God in whatever you see, whatever you do and whatever 
you touch. You must realise that you are playing temporary roles on the cosmic stage. You must 
get back to your true Divine Selves when the play is over. By regularly reciting the Gaayathree, 
you must purify your lives and be an example to the world in righteous living. This is my 
benediction for you. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, Bhagavaan's Discourse on 17-3-1983 


When someone suffers from acute stomach pain, his eyes exude 
tears! For, there is one consciousness pervading and activating all 
parts of the body, and _ producing appropriate reactions 
everywhere. Similarly, the world too is just one body and pain 
anywhere naturally affects other parts. No single part can rejoice 
when another part, however distant, however insignificant, is in 
pain. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


8. "Build temple in your hearts" 


YOU have built this mandhir (temple). This does not satisfy Me. Only the temples erected in 
your hearts are permanent. The sums spent on the construction of temples could be spent more 
usefully on service to the poor and the needy. 


Almost every activity of man is motivated by swaartham (self-interest). This concern for self- 
interest is opposed to the divinity that is immanent in man. Without realising this Divinity, how 
can man achieve peace internally or in the world outside? The individual, society and the world-- 
-all the three are inextricably inter-connected. The individual's welfare is dependent on the state 
of the nation. Everyone should strive to develop his spiritual qualities and utilise them for 
promoting the interests of the community and the country. Service to society should become the 
constant concern of the individual. 


There is no greater quality in man than selfless love, which expresses itself in service to others. 
Such love can be the source of real bliss. The relationship between karma and karmayoga should 
be properly understood. Ordinary karma (action) done with attachment or desires causes 
bondage. But desireless, selfless action becomes karmayoga. Our life should become a yoga 
(Divine Communion) rather than a 'roga' (disease). 


Today most of our actions result in 'roga’ because they are related to sensuous pleasures. 
Freedom from this disease can be obtained by pursuing the spiritual path. The spiritual path does 
not consist merely in singing bhajans (devotional songs) or reciting hymns. These are good 
deeds. Only actions performed as a complete offering to the Divine can be regarded as spiritual. 
The man who is in a state of ignorance about the Self is like the bud of a flower that has not yet 
blossomed. When the flower blossoms, it sheds its fragrance all round. Likewise, the man who 
has realised the Divinity within him becomes a source of light and strength. 


Temples are useful only as reminders 


Why should you build temples? The ideal is to make your hearts the temples for the Divine to 
dwell. But this is not possible for everybody. Temples in stone are reminders of the existence of 
God. When you see a lawyer you are reminded of your legal troubles. When you see a doctor 
you think of your illness. Likewise, when you see a temple, you are reminded of God. 


Temples are useful only as reminders. But true worship consists in heartfelt devotion to the God 
within each one. Purifying this temple of your heart, you must dedicate your life to service. It is 
such dedicated service, done in the spirit of saadhana, which distinguishes the Sathya Sai 
Organisations from other spiritual organisations. Innumerable Sai devotees--men and women, 
young and old---are rendering service in various forms out of their love of Sai. People talk about 
Swaami's vibhuuthi (sacred ash) and Swaami's miracles. But the real miracle is Swaami's 
boundless love. It is this love which is inspiring countless devotees to engage themselves in 
selfless service. 


Ups and downs of life have lessons to teach us 


There is nothing greater than this love. You have all been drawn to Me by this love. To give love 
and to receive love. This is My business. No income-tax officer can know the extent of the 
"income" derived from this "business". There is no limit to My Aanandha (Divine Bliss). I am 
always immersed in bliss. This is because My bliss is associated with love and not with any 
material objects. If you follow this path, you will also derive this ineffable aanandha. You will 


realise peace of every kind. 


Look with an equal mind on good fortune and misfortune, on happiness and sorrow, loss and 
gain. These are products of nature like heat and cold, summer and winter. They have their 
purposes to serve. Similarly the ups and downs of life have lessons to teach us. In fact, without 
reverses in life, we shall not be able to experience Divinity. Without darkness, we cannot value 
light. Without experiencing difficulties, we will not enjoy benefits. It is the lack of peace of mind 
which compels us to seek the means to realise enduring peace. The Upanishadhs have declared 
that through renunciation alone is immortality to be attained. Men should learn to practise 
renunciation so that they may discover the secret of enduring peace and bliss. 


Inauguration of new mandhir "Sathya Sai Shaanthi Sudha," Guntur, 6-4-1983 


The significance of yajna, dhama and thapas (sacrifice, self-control and penance), of sahana, 
saadhana, samyama (forbearance, spiritual discipline and restraint), of the great Mahaavaakyas 
(Vedhic dicta) enshrined in the Vedhas, of the three Yogas--bhakthi, karma and jnaana--as 
elaborated in the Geetha, of the Dhaivi and Aasuri (godly and demonic) natures---all these and 
many more of the fundamentals of Indian culture have to be taught to the children in schools and 
colleges. 


They must be encouraged to practise them, for their own as well as 
for the country’s good. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


9. Bhagavan's advice to villagers 


MORE than economic development or provision of amenities, what is important in the 
reconstruction of our villages is the raising of the quality of life of the villagers and developing 
their moral and spiritual values. 


Jnaana (spiritual knowledge) is regarded as the primary requisite for man. But what is really 
primary is his conduct--righteous conduct. One's conduct determines one's qualities and the 
qualifies, in their turn, determine one's behaviour. All are God's children and are equally entitled 
to the love of the Lord. 


Why, then, are there differences among men? Why is there no equality or sameness? This is 
because of differences in the mental make-up of people. If the mind is impure, one's actions are 
bound to be impure. When the mind and the consciousness are warped by egoism, the human 
behaviour is also distorted. When these are turned towards the Divine, good actions follow 
naturally. The mind is the cause of good and bad deeds. 


Hence, whatever we wish to achieve, we should try to accomplish without excitement or 
agitation. For a human being, the important qualities are sathya, dharma, shaanthi and prema 
(truth, righteousness, peace and love). The villages are very backward today. To remove this 
backwardness, the first requisite is unity in the village. Villagers must be helpful to each other. If 
any one is afflicted with pain, all others should feel that they are equally affected. If the village is 
considered as a body, all the households in it are different limbs of the body. Harm to any part is 
to be treated as harm to the whole. Villagers should learn to speak sweetly and pleasantly. A 
harsh word can cause lasting damage. "If the foot slips, only the leg is injured; but if the tongue 
lips, one may go to hell," says the proverb. 


Unity should be the watchword of villagers 


The villagers must eschew hatred and discord. The village can prosper only when the villagers 
develop mutual love and cooperation. There may be differences between individuals. But these 
should not affect common action in the interests of the village as a whole. Unity should be their 
watchword. Through unity anything can be accomplished. 


It is unfortunate that politics has invaded rural life and promoted conflicts and divisions among 
the rural population. This is not good for you. You must all make .your village an ideal village 
by banishing factions and other differences. You must suppress your ego and pride. There is no 
basis for this pride when you realise that life is impermanent and all one's possessions may be 
taken away in one moment. Raavana made Lanka greater than Swarga (heaven) itself. But his 
egoistic arrogance brought about his fall. Similar has been the fate of arrogant men like Kamsa 
and Sisupaala. All of them courted destruction. The Kauravas met with disaster because of their 
arrogance. People should cultivate humility. 


The villagers should avoid idle gossip and wasting their time in useless pursuits. I desire that you 
should build up your village as an example to the country by your unity, mutual cooperation and 
integrity. 


Singanamuppavaram, 8-4-1983 


The Lord has declared in the Geetha that He is Sarvabhuutha- 
antharaathma---"the Inner Reality of all beings." Try to be ever in 
the awareness of this Unity in God; this is the one truth that has to 
be seen, experienced and announced; this is the soundest basis for 
individual and social life. This will serve as an unshakable 
foundation for your international outlook. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


10. "Your Divine destiny" 


The Universe is illumined through and through by, the 
splendour of the Lord. 

The Universe shines forever in the glory of the Lord. 

When the Light of the Lord is withdrawn from it, the 

Universe cannot shine. 

The Univese and its Lord are eternally bound by 

all-prevading light and love. 

Embodiments of Love! Good thoughts in mind good words 
in speech, 

Good steps in every deed - When these are not found, 

How can Sai pat and praise and give you joy ? 

Decide and declare the answer to yourself. 


WHAT pleases man most is sweetness--in thought, word and deed. This mysterious component 
that evokes joy in the human heart is the genuine Raama principle. Raama means that which 
causes delight. A stomachful of food, an eyeful of sleep, a home full of children's laughter-- 
these, according to most people, are the highest levels of happiness. But this refers only to the 
interval between birth and death. What of the before and after? The body is something separate 
from you. You own it for some years and you feed it and foster it and struggle with it, to tame it 
to do your will. "'You' or the 'T' in the body, the ‘4athma’, is the One, without a second. When 
identification with the body weakens, the effulgence of the Aathma (divine Self) will be patent. 


Accumulation of things cannot win Grace 


Attachment to the body complex implies accumulation and acquisition of things that cater to its 
needs and greeds. Accumulation promotes exploitation;-it cannot win Grace. It has no limit; the 
thirst increases with each gulp. It always asks for more. Can a lake be filled with a drizzle? Can 
saliva slake the thirst? Can blades of grass bum as coal? Accumulation of things, of scholarship 
or fame can yield no good, unless what is acquired is put to practical use for oneself and others. 


The wisdom to recognize that the body he believes is himself is only an instrument wielded by 
him, has to dawn in man. That is the first step to the higher spiritual consciousness. There is in 
every person the ever-free, ever-unattached, ever-pure Aathma. That is the Brahman (Absolute 
Reality), the Cosmic Awareness latent and patent in every one. Yoga (Divine Communion) 
awakens when the world is viewed with glorious unconcern. This is the source of supreme 
Aanandha (Divine Bliss). 


How can renunciation, non-attachment, result in joy, it may be asked. Discard the sense of 
egotism while engaged in activity; discard, while experiencing any emotion or reaction, the 
feeling of being a partaker--then, one can be ever in joy. Then the Bhogi (enjoyer) is really a 
Yogi (spiritually advanced person). 


The Divine is the basis for everything 


Consider the reality of the things from which one derives joy! Each one of them is saturated with 
the Divine Principle. The rain that falls, the Sun that shines, the Moon that cools, the rivers that 
flow are all for all. Therefore no one has the right to claim them exclusively or to prevent others 
from sharing these gifts. The Divine is the basis for everything, objective as well as subjective. 
The eye cannot see nor the ears hear unless the life-principle is active through the grace of the 
Divine Aathma or Brahman. Man can become aware of the Aathmic truth when he casts off the 
trammels of egotism and possessiveness. 


The tender child is not burdened with these two. Fed at the mother's breast, inhaling fresh pure 
invigorating air, it is thrilled by the sweet lullabies the mother sings. But, as it grows in age, it 
assumes the dual emotions of mine and thine and gets entangled in greed and hate, in pomp and 
possessiveness. So, the basic Divinity gets ignored. The Aathma is unaffected by what we call 
ups and downs. When the waters of the lake are agitated, the moon reflected in its depths appears 
agitated and wavy but the planet up in the sky is unaffected by what happens to its image. So, 
too, the mind wavers and wobbles but the Aathma is calm and unconcerned. 


Another facet of the Aathma or the Divine in us has also to be kept in view. It is not only in us 
but outside us also. In fact, the Vedhas say, "Anthar-bahischa thath sarvam vyaapya Naaraayana 
sthithaha" (Inside, outside That Divine pervades everything). No one can see his own face 
except in a mirror or some medium that can reflect it. When he discovers that he has some dirt on 
his face he can clean it and become free. Retiring into a lonely silent place is like facing a fine 
mirror. Being in the midst of turmoil and travail is like peering into a hazy dusty mirror. Hence 
such retreats are desirable. 


Man is directly derived from the Omniwill 


The Aathma in us is identical with the Cosmic Divine Consciousness, the Param-Aathma 
(Supreme Self). It is Sath-Chith-Aanandha; its nature can only be described as Being- 
Awareness-Bliss. The Vedhas (ancient revealed sacred scriptures) also refer to it as Truth- 
Wisdom-lnfinity--Sathyam, Jnaanam, Anantham Brahma. The individual is derived from 
Brahman and so is entitled to the awareness of Brahman. The Vedhas declare that the sky is the 
manifestation of Brahman; from the sky comes air; fire is a projection of air and water, the earth 
arose from air, water and fire, plants grow on the earth and form the food (anna) which, in turn, 
moulds man. So, man is directly derived from the Omniwill of the Omni-Self. 


Man is enclosed in five sheaths the physical, vital, mental, intellectual and Blissful. This Blissful 
is the core. So, man need only explore within himself for infinite Bliss. Bliss has to be sought not 
through accumulation but through sacrifice and promotion of the welfare of others. Thyaaga 
(sacrifice) is recommended by the Vedhas as the only path to immortality. Give in plenty, give 
gladly, give for the glow of God, in gratitude to God. 


Selfishness is the canker that destroys charity. Though one is aware that a step is wrong, 
selfishness does not allow him to desist. But, it can be overcome by steady determination. Share 
with others the knowledge and skills you have earned, the ideas and ideals you have benefited 
and the joy you have won by discipline and dedication. Sharing will not diminish them or 
devalue them. On the other hand, they will shine better and put on added splendour. 


Raama is the Voice of God within 
Of these ideals, Truth is the one that Raama upheld. Take it that it is Raama that speaks through 


you and honour every word as Raama would have done. Consider how much Lakshmana had to 
repent for not acting, on one fateful occasion, according to the word he had given to Raama 
himself. Raama had asked him never to leave Seetha alone in the hermitage and he had agreed. 
But, he left the place and Raavana could kidnap Seetha and carry her to his island city! Raama is 
Aathma-Raama, the Voice of God within. Do not disobey it or circumvent its directives. Pray 
that the Voice alerts you ever, pray with humility and surrender to the advice. Then Raama will 
guide you right with compassion. 


Raamadhas of Bhadhraachalam was thrown into prison; he was whipped without mercy. But, he 
never lost faith in Raama. He pleaded plaintively for grace, and he was able to earn Divine 
intervention to save himself from torture. Unwavering faith is the sign of spiritual success. That 
is the result of the awareness of one's inner Reality, the stablising core, the Divine in man. 


Practise this ideal of inner peace and universal love. .Shower selfless love on,.. ten others and 
bring about once again the Raama Raajya (righteous rulership of Raama) of the Raamaayana. 
'Raama' means ‘he who pleases'. Be pleasant to every one; let every one be pleased with you Do 
not hurt or harm, by thought, word and deed. Purify your heart; cleanse it of narrow selfishness. 


Bring million flowers and do puuja with them. 
All will be rejected, none accepted. 

Bring a single lotus, your heart, so fresh; 
Sathya Sai accepts, grants both love and peace. 


Offer your virtues as flowers. Virtues that spread beauty and fragrance. Offer your heart-lotus 
freed from insect pests like lust, anger and hate. 


The seed of Divinity has to be fostered by human effort and steady care, in order that it may 
blossom and fructify. Remove from your mind all traces of desire to harm others, by thought, 
word and deed. The reaction you will encounter by indulging in such temporarily satisfying 
behaviour, will be disastrous. Each such act is a seed planted in your own mind, a weed that will 
grow wild and destroy your peace and joy. So, be vigilant against such tendencies. Cleanse your 
thoughts, words and deeds and acts as men on the march towards their Divine Destiny. I bless 
that you may succeed and reach the goal. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 21-4-1983 


11. Revere the mother 


THE mother is man's first Guru (preceptor). She gives the physical body to him. Besides, she 
gives man, the father. She alone can point the father to the child and draw his love and care 
towards it. The mother bears, fosters and moulds the child into human-ness and, therefore, 
gratitude is due to her first and foremost. Next, the father. He clothes and feeds, helps you to 
grow and then, points out the Guru, the Preceptor, for you. So be grateful to the father. 


The Teacher sharpens your intellect, broadens your vision, endows you with discrimination, and 
helps you to attain higher levels of consciousness and wider horizons of love. Therefore, one has 
to offer gratitude to the Guru also. The mother leads you to the father, the father leads you to the 
Guru and the Guru leads you to God. Today, we have mothers who place the children under the 
care of the father and many fathers who place children under the care of Gurus, but few Gurus 
lead the pupils to God. The parents promote the health and strength of the body; the Guru reveals 
the Resident, the Inner Reality in the body. 


My life is my Message. So, I am setting an example of reverence to the Mother. Nature is the 
mother in whose lap mankind grows. And Nature fondles the child and says, "Baabu, That is 
your Father, See." Though Mother Nature draws attention to God, the children seldom pay heed. 
How can they, who do not love the mother that fosters them with affection and zeal, adore the 
Master of Nature? 


The proof of the good is the way they die 


"Children! You have come here and gone through the course of studies successfully. Besides 
developing scholarship, you must live according to the wishes of your parents. You must earn 
great fame for them. You must maintain the honour they receive from people. By your actions 
you must please them and increase their happiness." 


This day is Eashwaraamba Day. The significance of the Day is that it is celebrated as Children's 
Day, a day when little children are to be reminded of the ideal, a day when she presented an 
ideal. No one can escape death, but the aim of everyone should be to remind oneself at the time 
of death of the Divine or have some holy or sacred thoughts. The importance of this Day is 
known to many. Kasthuuri also spoke about it now. There is a saying in Thelugu: "The proof of 
the Good is the way they die." Genuine devotion is evidenced during the last moments. I shall 
point out a small incident concerning the goodness of Eashwaraamba. 


The Summer Classes were on at Bangalore. In the morning at 7, breakfast had to be served to the 
students. They went round with Nagara Sankeerthan (street singing of spirituals) and returned at 
6. I gave them Dharshan (audience) at its dose. Then, I went for my bath. Meanwhile, 
Eashwaramba had finished her bath; she drank her coffee as usual quite happily, and took her 
seat on the inner verandah. All of a sudden proceeding to the bathroom, she cried out. "Swaami 
Swaami, Swaami," thrice. At this, I responded: "Coming, Coming." Within that period she 
breathed her last. 


What greater sign of goodness is needed? She had no need to be served and nursed. Swaami will 
come to the memory at that time only for a very few. The mind will' usually seek and stay on 
some object or the other, some jewellery or valuables. 


From the ground floor, she called: "Swaami! Swaami!" I replied, "Coming, Coming," and she 
was gone. It was like the elephant's calling and the Lord proceeding to bless it---the two wires 


achieving connection, the release happening instantaneously. 
The sign of an ideal adorable life 


This is the authentic consummation that life must strive for. Beside her at the time she had her 
daughter moment is the fruit of holy purity. It is the sign of an ideal adorable life. Such attitude 
must emerge of its own accord and not by means of some external force. Here is an example to 
learn from. Once, there was a .man whose devotion was great. He had four sons. In order that 
their names may help him to remember the Lord, he had named them Govindha, Naaraayana, 
Krishna and Raama. He thought that he could, on some pretext or other, have the Lord's name on 
his tongue. To facilitate his plan, he started a factory and kept all of them busily employed there, 
so that they could respond to his calling them by name. 


Yearn for the Lord at the time of death 


The day when he had to yield to death arrived, he called Govindha; the son came near saying, 
"Father! Iam here." He called Naaraayana; "I am here father;" he too stood by his bed. He called 
Raama; Raama came to him and asked him what he desired to confide in him. Finally he called 
Krishna. He too bent low and wished to know what message the father had for him. He said, 
"Don't hesitate, tell me what you want to say." Seeing around him all the four sons, the dying 
man's mind was seized with anxiety. He blurted out "All of you are here! Who is in the factory?" 
Those were his last words. That was his last thought. 


When one is involved in the world only worldly thoughts will emerge at the end. To those who 
yearn with full heart for the Lord at that time, the Lord will present Himself. So, one has to 
attach oneself to kith and kin and respect them so long as one is concerned with the world. One 
must needs humour them. But, one must offer unstinted love and loyalty all through life to the 
Lord alone. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 
6 May, 1983 


12. Problems of the saadhak 


AN able monarch will have his ministers under control; he will direct them along proper lines 
and maintain the peace and security of the kingdom. On the other hand, a monarch who allows 
himself to be controlled by the ministers does not deserve the throne; he is spurned and 
disgraced. His kingdom has no peace and security. 


The mind is the monarch in man; the senses are the ministers. It is the slave of its servants and 
so, the realm has no peace. Every Saadhak (spiritual aspirant) who aspires to achieve the 
expression and expansion of the Divine in him has therefore to earn mastery over the senses. 
That is the first step. The next one is the conquest of the mind, its elimination. The third is 
uprooting the Vaasanas (innate tendencies), and the fourth, attainment of Jnaana (spiritual 
wisdom). The branches are the senses; the trunk is the mind; the roots are the innate tendencies. 
All three have to be overcome and destroyed, so that the awareness of the Aathmic (Divine) 
Reality can be gained. 


Man fails to benefit by the daily experience 


In the waking state, the senses have free play. The gross body is most active then. In the dream 
stage, the senses subsist in their subtle form. The mind revels in its fancies then. In the dream, 
the subtle body is active. It creates many attractive and astounding scenes and incidents for its 
own edification. In the deep sleep state, the mind along with the subtle aspects of the senses are 
submerged in the ego or the causal body. This is .the shuunya (vacant) stage, according to 
Vedhaanthic terminology. It is vacant because there is no positive gain associated with it. It does 
not confer awareness of' the Aathma (Divine Self) and the Bliss of that Awareness. That can 
happen only in the fourth state after the sthuula (gross), suhkshma (subtle), kaarana (causal). 
That state is named the Mahaa Kaarana (supercausal). The waking state is the gross region of 
Brahma, the Creator, when activity abounds. It merges in the dream, the Vishnu region, when 
mere sthithi (existence) abounds. That too merges in deep sleep, when both dissolve and lose 
their identity in Laya (Rudhra). 


The fact to remember is that every individual, every day, experiences Shrishti (Brahma, Creator), 
Sthithi (Vishnu, Maintenance) and Laya (Rudhra, Dissolution). But, he fails to recognise it and 
benefit by the experience. He mistakes birth as creation and death as dissolution. 


This is sheer ignorance. One has to transcend these three changes and establish himself in the 
stable unchanging Mahaa Kaarana, the Aathma. 


One has to be cautioned against believing that the victories over senses, mind, innate tendencies 
and the attainment of the Awareness can be won one at a time. Parallel efforts must be made in 
all four from the very beginning. You cannot place oil in one place, the lamp in another and the 
match in a third and hope for light. One has to succeed in mastering the senses, conquering the 
mind and eliminating the Vaasanas all at the same time. 


Mind can be subdued through concentration only 


The mind hops from object to object with incredible speed. It rises to the heights and drops to the 
depths with every wink of the eye. It hides, deludes and distorts. One can subdue it through 
concentration only. The process can be practised in either of two directions--the A-ruupa or the 
Sa-ruupa. A-ruupa means ‘unbound' by form.” One feels that he is not the doer or enjoyer; he is 


only an agent of God, a tool, an instrument. One is not affected, well or ill, when the act results 
in good or bad. One has no identity with the ruupa (form or body). Sa-ruupa meditation gets lost 
in dualities of pleasure and pain, profit and loss, for it considers the name and form, the body and 
its activities as valid. 


Similarly, Man has the choice of two paths---the Pravritthi Maarga (the path of involvement) or 
the Nivritthi maarga (the path of non-involvement). When involved, man is confronted with the 
six internal foes---lust, anger, greed, attachment, pride and hatred. When non- involved, man is 
helped by six internal friends---sense control, mind control, fortitude, contentment, faith and 
equanimity. The human body is deified as a temple, yes, but the foes have to be evacuated and 
the friends admitted before the Divine can establish itself there. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 6 May 1983 


The rich, the healthy, the strong, the powerful, the influential--all 
are afflicted with discontent, worry, fear and anxiety. They have no 
peace of mind. 


Shaanthi comes from within; contentment is a mental condition. 
Do not feed the roots of attachment to worldly comforts more than 
is absolutely necessary. They lead only to anxiety and fear; they 
can never satisfy the innermost craving of man. 


Lead them into the path of devotion and dedication; for them that 
will be the path of contentment and joy. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


13. Develop devotion to Dharma 


HUMANITY has achieved today tremendous progress through science. Astonishing advances 
have been made in areas like plastics, computers, electronics and exploration of space. On the 
other hand, in the sphere of ethics, the picture is depressing. The world is confronted with grave 
economic and political problems. International, racial, religious, caste and communal 
differences, inter-state conflicts, violent agitations by students are rampant, all over the world. 
What is the reason for these contradictory developments scientific progress on the one side and 
moral deterioration on the other. How has mankind fallen to this egregious depth of ethical and 
spiritual degradation? 


Wickedness and cruelty are spreading among men today. Lacking in devotion and righteousness, 
men are developing only their bad habits and tendencies. Mankind does not lack scriptures like 
the Vedhas (sacred ancient scriptures), the Upanishadhs (Vedhic metaphysical treaties), the 
Bible, the Quran, the Zend Avesta and other great works to show how peace and the higher 
wisdom are to be got. Spiritual books are published in countless numbers. Nor is there any dearth 
of religious preachers. heads of mutts, religious scholars, saadhus and sanyaasis are proclaiming 
spiritual and ethical truths to warn mankind. In spite of all these well-meaning efforts, why is it 
that men's minds are turned towards narrow, unrighteous pursuits? 


Social transformation is related to spiritual change 


There has been any amount of transformation in the political, social and scientific fields. But all 
this development is of no avail if there is no commensurate transformation in the mental outlook 
of the people. Ethical transformation depends on social transformation. Social transformation is 
related to spiritual change. Without tends to Spiritual transformation, social progress tends to 
become inimical to human advancement. Spiritual transformation is the basis for ethical 
transformation. 


There is a belief that science is opposed to spirituality. Science by itself tends to make man's life 
artificial. Demonic qualities like envy, greed, selfishness and ostentation are today dominating 
men's minds. Selfishness has grown beyond limits in men. Behind every action there is the desire 
for personal gain. Man is attached to worldly things out of selfishness. The world will make 
genuine progress only when men give up self-interest and self-centredness. 


Dear students! Time is infinitely precious. You should not waste even one moment of it. In a 
man's life, the period as a student is most valuable and sacred. You should make the best use of 
it. Milk mixed with water cannot get back its original purity, however much you may try to 
separate it. But once you have converted the milk into butter, it will not be affected by 
association with water. It will float above the water and maintain its distinctive quality. 
Likewise, Samsaara (worldly attachment) is like water. The mind of man is like milk. When the 
pure, sacred, uncontaminated mind is mixed with the water of worldly desires, it is difficult to 
recover the original purity. However, if in this sacred period of study you derive from your 
unspoilt mind the butter of knowledge, wisdom and right conduct, you will be able to remain 
unpolluted by the attractions of the world even when you are in it. 


Teachers who can inspire are becoming rare 


Students should realise the importance of ethical, dharmic (virtuous) and spiritual development. 
These three should be present in teachers to a greater degree. 


The reputation of teachers and their success depend primarily on their conduct. The future of 
numerous innocent children is in their hands. The good conduct of the students depends on the 
example set by teachers. The teaching profession is a highly responsible one. Today there are 
three kinds of teachers. The first type consists of teachers who revel in "complaints." They are 
the teachers with grouses of one kind or another. The second type consists of teachers who 
"explain". They "explain" what the students have to learn. To the third type belong teachers who 
"inspire." This category of teachers arouses the enthusiasm of students and inspires them to take 
deep interest in their studies. Such teachers are becoming rare these days. 


Once the enthusiasm of the student is aroused, learning becomes a creative process. The teacher 
should patiently understand the problems of students and help to solve them. Teaching today has 
become more and more mechanical, with each teacher content to "teach" the prescribed portions 
of the syllabus. Teachers should see whether the students have properly comprehended the 
subjects taught to them. Any deficiency on the student's part should be ascribed to the teacher's 
failure to do his job well. 


Pursuit of the science of the spirit is essential today 


In the field of science today, there is great emphasis on research and discovery. But unless the 
results of research are applied in practice, it will be an expensive futility. If all the time is spent 
on research when is it to find useful application in practice? Nor is there any sense of 
discrimination in the promotion of research. 


To give an example: When I attended recently a symposium in Bombay on "Science and 
Spirituality," a prominent scientist said that the nuclear arsenals of the Big Powers contained 
enough atom bombs to destroy the world ten times over. What is the sense in building up such 
arsenals? If you have destroyed the world once, what is there left for the other bombs to destroy? 
In the process, you would have destroyed yourself. 


Those engaged in research seem to be more concerned about boosting their name and fame by 
their research than about promoting public well-being through the results of their research. Nor 
do they seem to be bothered about the harmful consequences of their discoveries. There is 
nothing great about causing harm to others. To destroy a million persons by a single bomb is no 
great thing. To do good to a single individual in the world is more praise-worthy. The scientific 
knowledge we acquire must be used for the benefit of our fellow-men. Only that is proper 
education which prepares the student for disinterested action. The pursuit of the Science of the 
Supreme Spirit (Paraartha Vijnaana Shaasthra) is more essential than involvement with the 
Physical Sciences (Padhaartha Vijnanamu). 


The Supreme is in the subtlest and the vastest 


In every padaartham (object) in the Universe there is a Paraartham (Supreme Principle). The 
physical object is Matter. The Supreme Principle within it is Energy. There is no matter without 
energy or energy without matter. The Vedhas proclaimed this by saying that the Supreme is in 
the Anoraniyaan (subtlest of the subtle) and the Mahathomahiyaan (vastest of the vast). 


Students! By deriving pleasure from a small fraction of the Pancha Bhuuthas (Five Elements-- 
Space, Air, Fire, Water and Earth) we are forgetting the truth of the Cosmos. What is it that 
sustains these Five Elements? The five elements have their respective qualities: sound, touch, 
form, fluidity and smell. The corresponding sense organs in man are important for experiencing 
these qualities. But the power behind these sense organs should be noted. For instance, the eyes 


are able to see things. But the retina on which the images are reflected is more potent than the 
eye itself. The power of sight is more important than the eye. There are many who possess eyes 
but who cannot see. There are persons with ears but who cannot hear because they lack the 
power of hearing. We are trying to control the sense organs without trying to regulate the power 
that is responsible for their functioning. 


For example, there is in the body a digestive organ. When one takes a balanced diet, the food is 
properly digested and the body is kept healthy. Similarly the body's temperature has to be kept at 
a certain norm. If the temperature goes above or below that norm it is a sign of illness. Similarly 
if the Five Elements that constitute the natural environment are kept in balance, the world is in a 
healthy state. If this balance is upset or if the elements are polluted, then the country suffers in 
various ways. If the products of science and technology result in upsetting the balance of Nature 
and pollute the atmosphere or the rivers and the seas, many harmful consequences follow. 


Pollution gives rise to many new diseases. Today even pure air has become a rare commodity. 
Three-fourths of the earth is covered by water. There are many minerals in the ocean bed. But in 
extracting them, some limits should be observed. Otherwise, even the ocean, which has been 
adhering to its bounds, will exceed its limits. Even earthquakes and volcanic eruptions are caused 
by the unsettling of the ecological balance in nature. 


The five types of life-breaths or vital airs 


Take the body, for example. The body derives its vital force from the Sun. There are five types 
of Praanas (life-breaths). These are known as Praana, Apaana, Vyaana, Udhaana and Samaana 
Vaayus. (Praana Vaayu is the life-wind or vital air which has its seat in the lungs; Apaana Vaayu 
is the life-wind that goes downwards and out at the anus; Samaana Vaayu is the vital air which 
has its seat in the cavity of the navel; Vyaana Vaagu is the life-wind which is diffused through 
the whole body; Udhaana Vaayu 1s the life-wind which rises up the throat and enters the head). 
The Praana Ofie-breath) comes from the Sun. The Vyaana comes from Vaagu (air). The Apaana 
comes from the each. Udhaana comes from Agni (fire). The Samaana comes from Aakaasha 
(space). Because of these five breaths functioning in us, we are able to live healthily. There are 
72,000 blood-vessels in a human being. The Vyaana Vaagu blows through the entire circulatory 
system. The Vyaana Vaagu is derived from Vaagu (air). When the air is polluted, the 72,000 
blood-vessels get polluted and the effect of this on the Apaana Vaagu leads to cancer and heart 
attacks. 


Difference between worldly and spiritually minded 


Man needs pure Vyaana Vaayu for good health. Students should realise the importance of 
maintaining the putty of the environment and developing a pure heart in the interests of their 
body and mind. Some kind of cleaning powder is used for cleaning vessels. Similarly prayer is 
the means of cleansing the heart. Through a pure heart one achieves spiritual insight. Impure 
minds are the cause of many heart troubles. When the heart is filled with all kinds of worldly 
desires, there is no room in it for spiritual effort. 


There is a vast difference between one who is attached to worldly things and one who is devoted 
to Dharma. This may be illustrated from the actions of Dhrona and Bheeshma, the two principal 
Gurus of the Kauravas. Both Bheeshma and Dhrona were supreme masters in the arts of using 
Asthras (weapons directed by manthras) and Shaasthras (lethal weapons). But what a difference 
between the two! Bheeshma was highly spiritually minded. After he was wounded all over the 


body in the. Kurukshethra battle, when blood was flowing from the wounds, lying on a bed of 
arrows he taught Dharma (righteousness) to the Paandavas. His teachings are contained in the 
Shaanthi Parva (part dealing with peace-keeping) of the Mahaabhaaratha. 


On the other hand, when Dhronaachaarya heard Yudhishthira say "Aswathaama hatah" 
(Aswathaama is killed), he did not even wait to hear that it was the elephant named Aswathaama 
that had died, he concluded that his son Aswathaama had died, and he collapsed on the 
battlefield. Dhronaachaarya was filled with worldly attachments. Bheeshmaachaarya was filled 
with love of Dharma (virtuous action). 


Use scriptures as guides for right action 


There is another example in the Mahaabhaaratha of the differences in response of those attached 
to Dharma and those filled with worldly attachments. When the news of the death of her son, 
Abhimanyu, was conveyed to Subhadhra (Arjuna's wife), she saw in her son's death the signs of 
the impending Kali age in which mothers would lose their young children and unrighteousness 
would prevail on earth. She recalled that during Raama's reign' no woman wept over the loss of 
her child. 


When Arjuna received the news he bitterly lamented the fact that there would be no one to 
inherit the kingdom after his victory over the Kauravas. What use was there in winning a 
kingdom after he lost his son Abhimanyu, he wailed. While Subhadra was grieved about the 
impending plight of all mothers in the Kali age, Arjuna was only worried about his personal loss. 


Men today are either indifferent to Dharma or seek to use even the scriptures for their selfish 
purposes. The scriptures are to be used as guides for right action. They are signposts showing the 
way to the realisation of the Divine. We must be ever conscious of what we owe to God. The air 
we breathe, the food we eat, the light that enables us to see the world, all these are the gifts of 
Providence. What gratitude are we showing to the Great Giver of all these benefits? We are 
thankful to many for small favours. But to the Lord who is the source of all the innumerable 
things we enjoy, we show no regard at all. The man without gratitude is worse than a cruel 
animal. 


Six virtues to be cultivated in life 


Students! Realise that without the Grace of the Divine we cannot exist for a moment. Cultivate 
good qualities and strive for the promotion of Dharma in the world. This will give you more 
enduring happiness than the acquisition of perishable worldly things. Once the sage 
Maarkandeya asked the Goddess of Dharma why she was leaving the earth. She smiled and 
replied: "I have no place in a land where wickedness prevails and there is no truth or 
Righteousness." 


Education consists in cultivating the following six qualities: "Good thoughts, good actions, 
adherence to truth, devotion, discipline and discharge of one's duties." When you have acquired 
the friendship of these six virtues, your life will become purposeful and satisfying. 


Students! Concentrate on your studies from the beginning of the academic year itself and 
develop discipline and right habits so that you may make the best use of your opportunities in the 
Institute. Teachers should not consider that they are teaching for the sake of emoluments and 
students should not consider their studies as primarily for the purpose of getting a job. Education 
must develop in you self-reliance and prepare you for all the challenges of life. With faith in God 
and leading a righteous life, you must become true citizens of Bhaarath. The discipline and 


regulations you observe now will stand you in good stead all your life. Prepare yourselves to 
serve society and thereby propitiate God, whose Grace is a greater benediction than all the gains 
from the world. 


Discourse on the occasion of commencement of new academic year of the Sri Sathya Sai Institute 
of the Higher Learning, Institute Auditorium, Prashaanthi Nilayam, 16th June, 1983 


The best saadhana (spiritual practice) is to discover your Aathmic 
reality and to recognise your kinship in the Aathmic fold with all 
others. The body has to be kept trim until this is achieved; its 
purpose too is just this. Keep it light and bright. It is a boat which 
can take you across the sea of illusion, of false multiplicity. Don't 
add to its weight by attachment to things and others; then, it is in 
danger of sinking during the voyage. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


14. Unity and purity: message of Ramzan 


WHOEVER speaks, the expression begins with 'I' and revolves around 'T'. 'I am walking’, 'I am 
sitting’, 'I am eating’, 'I am going’, 'I am listening, 'I am seeing’ .... 'I' is ever forward. 'It is then 
that man manages to live. 'l' am the doer, whatever the deed, whichever and whenever. 


Who exactly is this 'l', the agent, the doer? There are three aspects connoted by the 'T'. 'I am this 
body' is the first; 'I am the life-force in it' is the second; 'I am the Aathma (Divine Self)! is the 
third. 


‘Tam dark’, 'I am fair’, 'I am short’, 'I am tall' these are statements generally made. 'I am young,’ 'I 
am old’, 'I am a Braahmana', 'I am a Non-Braahmana"---these statements too are indulged in. 
'These qualities concern the body only. When a person is unconscious or in deep sleep, or dead, 
he is not aware of any of these characterisations regarding his body. They are extraneous to the 
real 'l', for the attributes adhere or fall off when time elapses or when circumstances change. 


Next, the Jeeva (individual being) principle or Life Force: The incessantly active consciousness 
is ever wayward and restless. We say, "My intelligence is not clear," "My mind is perplexed." 
These apply to the second facet of the 'I' only. This facet too is linked with the body through the 
objects-senses-mind-reason complex. 


The Aathma is immanent all over the world 


Now, the third, the Aathma (Divine Soul): "Iam Sadhaanandh, Nithyaanandh, Sathchithaanandh! 
I am Nirmal, I am Nischal. I am all. Iam Brahman. Aham Brahmaasmi." The body is mortal; the 
Jeeva-principle undergoes transformation; but the Aathma is Immortal. The Aathma persists in 
unaffected glory in the waking, dreaming, sleeping and the fourth level beyond. The gross body 
is active in the waking stage; the subtle 1-consciousness is alert in dreams, the Causal Aathma is 
dormant as ‘J’ in sleep. The real I or Aathma has no exclusive affiliation to one body, one 
country, one nation or one sex. It is in every being everywhere, in bird and beast, plant and tree. 
Each of these reveals its existence. The Aathma is all pervading and immanent in Bhaarath 
(India), Russia, America, England, all over the world. 


All founders of religions have heard this impersonal Voice of God revealing the Aathma that 
activates the entire Creation. Just as the Vedhas (revealed sacred scriptures) were 'heard' and 
propagated as 'heard' (Shruthi), the Quran too was 'heard' by Hazrath Muhammad. The Quran has 
Salat and Zakat as the two eyes. Salat means prayer; Zakat means charity. Those who consider 
charity as a high duty and elevate their consciousness through prayers and continuous meditation 
on God are Muslims. Islam is a word which denotes not a particular religion but a state of mind, 
the state of total surrender to the Will of God. Islam means dedication, surrender, peace, 
tranquillity. 


Islam denotes the social community whose members have achieved supreme peace through 
surrender to the All-Merciful, All-Powerful God and who have vowed to live in peace with their 
fellowmen. Later, it came to be applied to communities that considered themselves separate and 
different and so hostile to the rest. Islam taught something higher. It directed attention to the One 
in the Many, the Unity in Diversity and led people to the Reality named God. 


The Aathma can never be hurt by insult 


Every human being has three needs: food, clothing and shelter. Seeking to fulfil them, man has 
developed a variety of foods to fill his little stomach ignoring the purpose of eating them. 


Clothing has to be worn to protect the body from cold. But we are attaching enormously 
exaggerated value to clothing. Of course, one must have a house to live in and lay the body down 
for rest. The Muslim, Gibran, asks why build these gigantic dwellings then? They are erected not 
for oneself but to hoard one's treasure and riches. Gibran says these mansions are tombs erected 
by the dead for the living. 


Hazrath Muhammad announced the message of God that he had heard to the townsmen of 
Mecca. At that time, people did not give heed to the Divine Declarations. They forced him to 
leave the place. But, Hazrath Muhammad. knew that truth will win and God will prevail. He 
knew that the insult and injury were only for the body; the Aathma can never be hurt. 


The Ramzan month is set apart for the holy task of bringing into memory and practice the 
teachings that Hazrath Muhammad conveyed and attaining that stage of unity and purity which is 
truly Divine. Islam gives importance to the Moon which regulates the months. Hindhus consider 
the Moon as the deity presiding over the mind. With the dharshan of the New Moon, the 
Ramzan fast begins and when the New Moon is seen again, the fast ends. 'Fast' does not consist 
in merely desisting from food and drink. The fast starts at sunrise and is broken’ only after sunset 
and is observed most rigourously. 


During Ramzan month rivalry is avoided 


Waking as early as three or four, in the Brahma Muhuurtha, prayer is started, and throughout the 
day, the constant presence of God is sought to be experienced. This is the meaning of Upavaasa 
(fast). Also, during the Ramzan month, rivalry is avoided, hatred is suspended. husband and wife 
live apart though in the same home, mother and children both follow the same spiritual regimen 
and an atmosphere of brotherhood is maintained. The body, the senses and the mind are subject 
to rigourous discipline. 


Periods of fast ‘comprising a month are prescribed in all religions. The Hindhus observe it in 
Maagha and Shraavana months. Zoroastrians and Christians have allotted for themselves months 
for the same purpose. 


The Quran lays down that all men should cultivate the sense of unity, of interdependence, of 
selfless love and of the immanence of Divinity. Generally, all men take food of some kind or 
other for the body five times a day: an .early cup of coffee in bed, breakfast two hours later, a 
heavy lunch at noon, tea at four and a fat dinner at nine. Islam prescribes food for the spiritual 
nature of man and directs that it be taken five times a day, as prayer. For the arousal of the 
Aathmic consciousness, for earning spiritual joy and for promoting the manifestation of Aathmic 
illumination, prayer is prescribed as many as five times a day, from the dawn of discretion up to 
the moment of death. 


Unity is the basic teaching of every religion 


Prayer, in Islam, is also a congregational activity. Prayer in a group produces beneficial 
vibrations. Islam promises a greater flow of ecstasy when God is adored by a huge concourse of 
yearning: hearts. All of them bow low at the sight of the Masjid. They sit in rows on their bended 
knees and lean forward until their palms and foreheads touch the ground in humble submission 
to God’s Will. Misunderstanding, conflict and enmity should not disturb the serenity of the 
occasion. 


Thus Islam emphasises the One in the Many, the urge for God which manifests in various 
degrees in various minds. Unity is the basic teaching of every religion. Faith in Unity is cardinal. 


Without it, no system of belief and conduct can be a religion. God is One and the teachings in all 
faiths that exalt Him are all on Love, Compassion, Tolerance and Sympathy. The tragedy is 
neither the Muhammadans, nor the Hindhus, nor the followers of other religions are practising 
these qualities in daily life. 


Islam teaches that God's Grace can be won through justice and righteous living; wealth, 
scholarship and power cannot earn It. Holy Love alone can please the Lord. This is the message 
of every religion. But mankind has ignored this crucial point. Ramzan brings together in bonds 
of love kith and kin, near and far, friend and foe. This type of negligence is happening in every 
religion. The followers adopt the rules they like and break those which they find exacting. So, 
they become narrow-minded and crooked. And, they rationalise their defects and justify their 
failings. They have become habituated to this practice of self-deceit. 


Demonstrate love and tolerance in daily activity 


Since Islam means surrender to God, all who in a spirit of surrender and dedication, live in peace 
and harmony in society, do really speaking, belong to Islam. Islam insists on full co-ordination 
between thought, word and deed. Muslim holy men and sages have been emphasising that we 
must inquire into the validity of the 'I' which feels it is the body and the 'T' which feels it is the 
mind and reach the conclusion that the real 'I' is the Self yearning for the Omniself, God. The 
Ramzan month, the fast and the prayers are designed to awaken and manifest this realisation. 
Whichever may be the religion, its emphasis is on unity, harmony, equal-mindedness. Therefore, 
cultivate love, tolerance and compassion, and demonstrate the Truth in every daily activity. This 
is the Message I give you with My Blessings. 


Discourse on Ramzan, Prashaanthi Nilayam, 12-7-1983 


15. The uniqueness of man 


RARELY does man realise that he is the crown of creation. Rarely is he aware of his innate 
glory. If he dwells in the constant consciousness of his uniqueness, his life would be lighter, 
more beneficial and fully saturated with ecstatic delight. Man, then, will strive unceasingly to 
reach higher and higher levels of consciousness enveloping both the objective and subjective 
worlds. He will not allow himself to slide into lower levels of animality, which he is now able to 
subdue and rule over through the use of his intelligence. 


Of the traditional 84 lakhs of living species, man is the last and the most significant. He is the 
only animal that is capable of knowing not only itself but also its Creator and Master, not only its 
own potentialities but the potence of God. Other living beings strive to preserve and prolong life. 
Man is prepared in pursuit of an ideal or in answer to a call to sacrifice and surrender life. 


Man alone can posit for his consolation a series of past lives and for his guidance a series of 
future lives. He can peep into the past as well as into the future and profit thereby. He has the 
power of choice to rise or fall, to become a God or a beast or a demon. He can use his unique 
intelligence and memory enshrined in language to widen his vision, to adjust his reactions to 
nature and society and to benefit by the knowledge and experience of others. He can influence 
society as much as society influences him. 


Man is the representative of the Divine 


Man is the only animal that can transform his own nature, along lines consciously laid down. A 
beast continues to be stupid or cruel until death but man can by spiritual effort or godly company 
deal with himself as a problem and modify his feelings and actions. The dacoit who became 
Vaalmeeki and the highway robber Angulimaala who became a staunch Buddhist are 
illustrations of this characteristic of man. By association, through-teaching and faith, sinners 
become saints. 


Again, man alone is capable of awakening the serpent-power of the life-energy that lies dormant 
in him as the Kundalini Shakthi and elevate it through chakras (higher fields of awareness), up to 
the thousand-spoked wheel on the very crest of the head. This is the uwrdhwa Gathi (the Upward 
Path). This yoga saadhana is possible for man, since he has a straight body and can sit with his 
trunk and head held in a straight vertical line. Quadrupeds and bipeds other than man are 
severely handicapped. They cannot tap the vital Kundalini Shakthi. 


The Samskrith word Maanava for Man means Maa (not), nava (new). That word intimates that 
man has had a series of births and deaths and is heavily laden with burdensome heritages of good 
and bad. He doesn't land on earth for the first time. His task is to discard this burden and become 
free. For that he must concentrate on another meaning of the word Maanava, where Maa stands 
for nescience, delusion and mistaken identity, na stands for 'without' and va stands for 'Varthana' 
(Action). Man must act, speak and think without being deluded by the apparent, in preference to 
the real. Man ignores the Aathma (Divine Soul), which is the only Reality, and allows himself to 
be fascinated by Maaya (illusory energy), which scintillates and deceives. 


Since he has in him the Divine enshrined as the Aathma, man has the high status of an 
embodiment of the Divine, a Prathinidhi (representative) of the Divine. The senses activised by 
the mind bring in experiences which are collected and coordinated by the mind. Buddhi 
(intellect) illumined by the Aathma examines these and directs action along beneficial lines. 


Acting under the dictates of the mind brings disaster; acting under the instructions of the 
illumined Buddhi is desirable. This is the great boon that man has won from God. 


Divine Discourse, Inaugurating Security Training Course, 22 July 1983 


To find out what is dharma (righteous) and what is adharma 
(unrighteous), apply this one test: If it goes counter to Truth and 
Love, it is unrighteous. If it promote, Truth and Love or is full of 
both, it is righteous. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


16. In Human Form 


A GREAT yogi (liberated person), resolved to delve into the glory of the Divine Principle, 
retreated to the depth of a silent forest. He started ascetic practices; he sat in the lotus posture; he 
kept his eyes closed. He held his fingers in correct chin-mudhra (hand posture with thumb and 
index fingers joined and other three fingers stretched out). His thapas (penance) continued for 
five long years. God willed to test his sincerity and his earnestness. So, He came before him as a 
young boy. At that time, his eyes were a little open. The boy asked him "Grandpa! Why have 
you shut your eyes thus? Whom are you praying to? Have you found out how God appears?" The 
yogi replied, "Boy! I have seen him only as much as my eye is open." Thereafter the yogi's eyes 
were half open. The boy returned again and asked him, "Grandpa! How much of God have you 
seen now?" He replied, "Boy! I have known half of Him." 


A year later the Boy came again. By that time, the yogi had his eyes fully open. "Grandpa! Have 
you seen and known God?" was the question and the answer was, "Yes! I have known." So the 
Boy demanded, "Tell me what you have understood." And the yogi said, "I have understood that 
He is beyond understanding." Now, God was before this yogi in human form but he could not 
identify Him and recognise Him. 


Sai gives the prema of a thousand mothers 


When God assumes the human form and is behind, before and beside you, speaking to you and 
moving with you, and allows you to cultivate attachment of various kinds with Him, you do not 
recognise Him. The Divine cannot be easily recognised, when It is embodied. The Divine 
proclaims, "I am not a mass of flesh and blood; I am not a bundle of desires, which the mind is, I 
am not the heap of delusion which the imagination is; I am the Paramaathma (Supreme Soul), 
the Origin and the End." 


I am the urge within you, the knowledge which you seek as a result of the urge, of your own self. 
"One word of Swaami grants the treasure of all the riches. A single glance of Swaami bestows all 
boons; it is the Paarijaatha (wish-fulfilling flower-tree) Glance. The arms of Sai confer the Hai 
(soft comfort) the mother gives, not one mother, no, the prema (divine love) of a thousand 
mothers!" This Sathya Sai is such Prema Dhaayi (Bestower of Love)." 


When the Divine plays and sings with us, meets us and eats with us, we should not be misled 
into the belief that It is just human and nothing more. We generally forget the Truth. 


Embodiments of Divine Love! You must be clear about the distinction between birth in general 
and the Advent of the Avathaar (Divine Incarnation). Karma (the cumulative consequence of 
deeds and thoughts) is the cause of ordinary birth. Birth in the human body is the reward for the 
merit acquired by worthy Karma (past deeds). What is the Karma that has caused the Advent? 
That too must have some Karma as the antecedent, it may be said. Well! In your case you earn 
the type of life which the good and bad karmas you have done entitle you to have. Unless you go 
through the mass of consequence, you cannot change the vehicle or instrument. For, it is a role 
you have been assigned in the Cosmic Drama on the world stage. The role is part of a play for 
which it is allotted. You may appear in the first scene but you cannot change your make-up. 


But, God is not bound or affected by Karma. He takes on a role, as a consequence not of any 
Karma, but to reward good karma and impose retribution for bad karma. God incarnated as 
Narasimha as a consequence of the bad deeds of Hiranyakashipu, and the good deeds of 


Prahlaadha. The truth is, the body that the Avathaar wears is not a karma deha, designed 
according to the nature of the individual's deeds in past lives. God, as Avathaar, can mould or 
change the body in any way He wills. He can develop it or discard it, as and when He wills. No 
other power or person can affect it. Everything happens as He desires, as He decides. To look 
upon the Avathaar as the body it has assumed is not correct. The Guru has, as his duty, to teach 
mankind this great Truth of the Paramaathma and the Aathma and of the Glory and Compassion 
of God. 


Guru Puurnima discourse, Puurnachandra Auditorium, 
Prashaanthi Nilayam, 24 July 1983 


17. “Let God Be Your Guru” 


THE supreme meaning of human birth is the realisation of one's true nature. Self-realisation is 
the path to immortality. Man's life is a bridge between this world and the Divine. The language 
of Pranava (Om) is the only medium for.conversing with the Aathma (Divine Self). By wearing 
the garb of this body, made up of bone and flesh, encasing the Aathma that is pure and eternal, 
man imagines that his happiness lies in the physical environment. This is a delusion. There are 
two kinds of knowledge which man can seek in his quest for happiness. One is Loka jnaana 
(worldly knowledge). This relates to knowledge of music and the fine arts, of the physical 
Universe, botany, chemistry, mathematics, and the like. All this knowledge is of use only for 
earning a living. All of it relates to matters which are ever changing and perishable. 


The other kind of knowledge is Brahma jnaana (knowledge of the Supreme). This knowledge 
reveals that the origin, growth and dissolution of the Cosmos are due to Brahman (Supreme 
Reality). The Upanishaths (Vedhic metaphysical treatises) have described it as Akshayya 
(imperishable) Brahman. Man today needs this supreme knowledge. There are three steps 
leading to this knowledge. One is “Bhaavam" (heart felt feeling). The second is "Saadhana" 
(spiritual effort). The third is "Upaasana" (contemplation). 


Consider the entire Universe as temple of God 


In the first stage, the thought of Brahman should be firmly established in the heart. When this is 
done, one has to look upon the whole universe as a manifestation of the Divine. One must realise 
that the Five Elements (space, air, fire, water and earth), the five Praanas (vital breaths)--Praana, 
Vyaana, Apaana, Samaana, Udhaana), the five sense organs, the mind and speech, all these have 
emanated from the Brahman. All that is beautiful and great in Nature--the lofty mountains, the 
vast oceans, the stars in the sky must be regarded as proclaiming the glory and power of the 
Divine. The sweet fragrance of flowers, the delectable juice of fruits should be regarded as 
tokens of God's love and compassion. The entire universe must be considered as the temple of 
God. 


The external world will reflect your thoughts. If you view the world with love, it will appear as 
filled with love. If you view it with hatred, everything will appear antagonistic to you. Eyes filled 
with love shine with brightness and cheerfulness. Eyes filled with hatred appear bloodshot and 
fearful. Our thoughts determine our good and bad actions. 


The Kauravas and Paandavas were cousins. But because of the inimical attitude of the Kauravas 
towards the Paandavas, they looked upon the Paandavas as their enemies. Because they looked 
upon Kama with a friendly eye, they made him ruler of Angadesha. The attitude of man to God 
is dependent on similar likes and dislikes. There are some devotees who worship God with 
devotion for a time. 


Then they turn against God. The reasons for these changes in attitude are traceable to their ideas 
about God. When they feel that their prayers are being answered and their desires are being 
fulfilled, they adore God. But when their wishes are not fulfilled, they revile God in all sorts of 
words. This kind of devotion is based on self-interest and has nothing divine about it. Pure 
devotion will not be affected by changes in circumstances or fortunes. True love is not based on 
any conditions. It is equal in weal or woe and is not affected by the vicissitudes of fortune. 


One should not blame God for his difficulties 


The Upanishaths regarded Prema (love) as a quality of the eternal and hatred as Asurathvam (a 
demonic quality). Looking upon love of God as a sacred quality, one should cultivate it and 
strengthen it. One should realise that he alone is responsible for his happiness or misery. He 
should not blame God for his difficulties. God has no likes or dislikes. As thoughts are the most 
important factor in determining one's attitude and behaviour, one should entertain only good and 
sacred thoughts. 


The second step is Saadhana. Saadhana does not consist merely in Bhajans (group singing of 
devotional songs), Keerthans (Spiritual Composition), Japa (recitation of holy names) and 
Dhyaana (meditation). All these are auxiliaries. The primary requisite is concentration on the 
Pranava (Om). All Saadhana should be based on Pranava. There are seven crores of names for 
God all of which have to be uttered with Pranava at the beginning. "Om! Naarayanaaya Namah; 
Om! Maadhavaaya Namah, Om! Keshavaaya Namah!" This is how the names of the Lord 
should be recited. To utter the name without the Pranava is like using a revolver without 
cartridges. By meditating on the Pranava, one can glimpse the nature of the Supreme Reality, 
according to the Upanishaths. 


Only when heart is purified Divinity can be realised 


The third step is Upaasana (divine adoration). Upaasana means approaching near the Divine. 
Upaasana is often equated with fasting. This is not correct. There is a bliss that is greater than 
food. When one is immersed in that bliss the bliss of Brahma-aanandha (divine bliss of rapture), 
one gives up food of one's own accord. It is such giving up of food that constitutes true 
Upaasana. To subject oneself to fasting as a compulsory regimen is not Upaasana, but mere 
starvation. For instance, to keep awake on Shivaraathri night by watching films or playing cards 
is a caricature of the. sacred vigil that one is expected to observe on that day. 


The Upanishaths speak of seven degrees of Aanandha (Divine Bliss). The first is the happiness 
derived from enjoyment of worldly goods, from good health and bodily comforts. This is called 
Manushya aanandha (human bliss). The Pithrudheva aanandha (the bliss enjoyed by the Manes) 
is hundred times Manushya aanandha. Dheva aanandha (the bliss enjoyed by the Dhevas) is 
hundred times that of the Manes. Hundred times this Aanandha is the Prajaapathi Aanandha. 
Hundred times this bliss is Viraat-Purusha Aanandha. Hundred times the previous one is 
Hiranyagarbha-Aanandha. Hundred times this is Brahma aanandha. You can reckon how much 
greater is Brahma aanandha than Manushya aanandha. 


The word Brahma aanandha is nowadays bandied about to describe any and every kind of 
pleasure. "I am filled with Brahma aanandha because a son was born today." "I got first marks 
in my class. I feel supremely happy." Such expressions of happiness are far remote from Brahma 
aanandha. This experience is tantamount to Moksha (Liberation). The Brahman experience is 
not to be got by the mastery of various saadhanas. It is only when the heart is purified that 
divinity can be realised. There is no room for divinity in a heart filled with egoism, pride and 
hatred. 


Cultivate love to achieve fullness 


Even when the Divine appears in human form, moves freely amongst men, and is near in various 
ways to people, few are able to recognise Divinity in the physical form. It is not easy to 
recognise the nature of the Divine through the corporeal form alone. A true Guru (spiritual 


preceptor) is required to reveal the real nature of Divinity. Such a Guru has been equated with 
the Trinity Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva. The devotee who regards God Himself as his Guru will 
not have any difficulties. Today many who are looked upon as Gurus utter the manthras (sacred 
formula) in the ear and stretch their palms for money. For everything they do, they expect 
money. Such Gurus are "baadha" (harmful) Gurus and not "bodha" (enlightening) Gurus. 


The true guru is like an ophthalmic surgeon. The latter removes the film in the patient's eye and 
restores his natural vision. The Guru also should remove the veil of ignorance and attachment 
that blurs the vision of the disciple and restore his natural spiritual vision. 


What is the recompense one should make to such a guru? On Guru Puurnima day, it is the 
practice for disciples to offer Paadha Puuja (offering worship to Guru's holy feet) to the Guru 
and give Dakshina (thankgiving offering). The significance of the Full Moon should be 
understood. It is a day on which the Moon shines in all his fullness, without any blemish. It is a 
day of purity. The Moon sheds his cool rays on the earth. The Moon is the deity controlling the 
mind. Only the day when the mind is rid of the darkness of ignorance and achieves fullness of 
illumination, is the real Guru Puurnima day for man. Looking merely at the full moon in the sky 
and calling it Guru Puurnima is only worshiping the external, while internally there is a sunna 
(void). It is only when you have cleansed your heart by getting rid of ignorance, sorrow, worry, 
greed, and envy, that you can celebrate your Guru Puurnima and realise the Fullness of your 
Reality. 


Carry with you the Divine experience and enlarge it 


To achieve this puurnathvam (fullness) you have to cultivate Prema (love). You have to go 
through all the three stages of shravana, manana and nidhidhyaasana (hearing, meditating and 
practising) to achieve the goal of human existence. 


You must all realise that relationship between you and Me is not related only to the physical 
body. Thinking only of the physical relationship, you should not waste your life. The body is a 
passing thing. You should concentrate on the attainment of that which is permanent and beyond 
the limitations of time and space. You have seen for yourself and experienced the Divine here. 
You must carry with you this experience and enlarge it by contemplating on it internally. 


Here is an example. Thousands have assembled in this Puurnachandra Hall. I have been 
conversing with you. How long can this last? Perhaps for two or three hours. Tomorrow you will 
all be returning to your respective places. After you go back, the memory of what you have 
experienced here, Swaami's discourse to you, the presence of thousands of devotees in the 
Puurnachandra Hall will be etched in your mind whenever you try to recall this day. It will be a 
life-long possession for you. This is because you are carrying Me in your mind. 


Tests are intended to strengthen your faith 


Looking at things externally, the Puurnachandra hall will be before you only for a short time. But 
you must retain permanently what you have seen with the outward looking eyes. What you see 
externally is a burden. When you have made it a part of yourself it ceases to be a burden. It is 
like the food which a traveller carries on his head for consumption on the way. As long as the 
food remains outside it is a burden. But when he has eaten it, he gets stronger and there is no 
burden on his head. 


As long as we are involved with external appearances, we have to carry the burden’ of doubts and 
weakness of faith. We will not be able to get rid of involvement in unnecessary things. Faith is 


like a live volcano. No seed will sprout on such a volcano. Doubts are like seeds. If the doubts 
multiply, it means that your faith is weak and unstable. It is like an extinct volcano. If your faith 
is strong, no doubts will crop up. Where there are doubts, there can be no faith. 


We alone are responsible for our doubts. The Divine acts as only a Witness. The Divine shows 
you the path to self-realisation. Your doubts arise or disappear because of your past karma 
(action). To realise Divinity you must first get rid of all your doubts. From time to time, God 
subjects you to various tests. These are not intended to be punishments as you may imagine. 
These are intended to strengthen your faith. 


Look upon God alone as your true Guru 


Arjuna himself was subjected to such a test by Krishna on the eve of the Kurukshethra battle. 
Arjuna was wotried about how to wage the war against his kinsmen and what strategy he should 
adopt. Krishna took him to a forest in the evening. It was twilight. The light of knowledge was 
setting and the darkness of ignorance was emerging. Krishna wanted to find out whether Arjuna 
was fit for receiving the Geethopadhesa (spiritual initiation 


to Geetha) the next day. He pointed out to Arjuna a bird on a tree and asked him whether it was a 
peacock. Arjuna said: "Yes, my Lord". "No, no. It is a dove," observed Krishna. Arjuna 
immediately said: "Yes, it is a dove." Krishna then said: "You senseless fellow. It is not a dove 
but a crow!" "Yes, Swaami! It is a crow," said Arjuna. Krishna then told Arjuna: "You have no 
power of discrimination at all. You cannot decide whether it is a peacock, dove or crow and only 
say 'yes' to whatever I say. Should you not have this much of understanding." 


Arjuna replied: "Krishna, if one does not know your real nature, one may attempt to agree or 
disagree with you. But I have understood the truth about you. If I declare that it is not a peacock, 
a dove or a crow, you have the power to turn it into a peacock, a dove or a crow. I have therefore 
no need to enquire into what it is. Your word alone matters for me. That is sufficient authority 
for me." When Arjuna displayed such implicit faith in Krishna, he felt that Arjuna was fit to 
receive the message of the Geetha. Hence He told him "Nimittha maathram Bhava!" ("Be thou 
my instrument"). 


Look upon God alone as your true Guru 


Therefore, the first requisite is deepening of one's faith in the words of the Lord. It is not possible 
to know the Lord by book knowledge or by human intelligence. When the Lord comes in human 
form, His measureless powers are not to be judged by looking at his age, size or innocent 
behaviour. Such judgement will only lead to greater misunderstanding of the Divine. 


When the child Krishna was brought before his mother Yashodha and accused of eating mud, 
Krishna protested to his mother that he was not an infant, or a naughty boy or a madcap to eat 
mud. Krishna then revealed to His mother His divinity. The Avathaar is not to be judged by 
reference to age or actions. 


Premaswaruupas (embodiments of divine Love)! On this holy day of Guru Puurnima, take a 
resolve to purify your minds and to install in your hearts the Supreme Lord. Look upon God 
alone as your true Guru. - 


Guru Puurnima Discourse at Puurnachandhra Auditorium, Prashaanthi Nilayam, 24 July 1983 


18. To Divinity through service 


THIS Cosmos is sustained by one fragment of the Divine (Ekaamshena sthitham Jagath), 
proclaim the scriptures. The universe is permeated by the Divine. The Sun's rays cannot emanate, 
if there is no Sun; the Universe cannot, exist without God. We say there is a 'pot,' there is a 
‘picture’, there is a 'tank' and so on. The basic word in these statements, "IS," proclaims the 
existence of God. 


The five basic elements which constitute the primary factors in Creation are present throughout 
the Universe. If the five elements, which are products of creation, have this limitless power of 
presence throughout the Universe, how can we doubt that the Creator permeates everything in 
the Universe ? 


The first of the five basic elements is Prithvi (the earth substance). It is the base on which 
everything--mountains, forests, dyers, oceans, cities and villages rest. Though the earth is 
rotating fast, it holds in position all that rests on it. But, what is the base on which the earth so 
revolves? It. is the Divine Principle, the immanent Divine Will which regulates its function. The 
second element is Aap (water), which too is present everywhere in space, whether patent or 
latent. 


All religions accept the Omnipresence of God 


The third, Agni (fire) is also omnipresent. Indeed, all living beings do function because of the 
existence of this latent Jathharaagni (‘digestive' fire). Fire is present even in inanimate objects 
like rocks. How else could fire be produced by striking stone against stone? 


The fourth element is air. Although air is not patent to the eye, its presence can be noticed in 
breeze or storm. In living beings, it exists as the inner vital force. The fifth element is Aakaasha 
(space). This ether is present everywhere. The Upanishaths (highest experiential philosophy of 
the Vedhas) have therefore declared it as the most pervasive element. 


When we understand the nature of these five basic elements that constitute the created universe, 
it needs no argument to realise the truth asserted by Prahlaadha, quoted in the Bhaagavatha: "Do 
not doubt whether God is here and not there. You will find Him wherever you seek Him." 


Persons, unaware of the Omnipresence of God, develop antagonisms among themselves based 
upon religion, caste and race. All religions have accepted the timelessness and the Omnipresence 
of God. So, it is strange that even those who accept this truth display such narrowness of mind. 
For, hatred between people professing different religions leads ultimately to the destruction of 
faith in religion itself. Those who are bent upon destroying religion must be utterly thoughtless. 
What has to be destroyed is religious bigotry, not religion itself. 


Respect the beliefs and practices of all others 


To despise other people's religion out of love for one's own religion, is like demonstrating one's 
love for one's mother by denigrating the mothers of others. One should realise that other people 
have the same regard and devotion for their faiths, as one has for one's own religion. Young men 
of today should, while cultivating attachment to their own religion, respect the beliefs and 
practices of all others. 


To give one example of-intolerance: The Vedhas declare that the Divine permeates everything in 
the Universe: "Eesha-aavaasyam Idham Sarvam." ("God resides in all this.") With faith in this 


declaration, the people of Bhaarath revere trees, ant-hills, mountains, rivers and even serpents. 
This holy attitude towards all things in creation is interpreted by some people professing other 
faiths, which teach the Omnipresence of God, as blind superstition! The obvious absurdity of this 
dual attitude has not struck them. 


The urge in the mind that animates the senses is stronger than the sense organs themselves. The 
eyes , for instance, are merely instruments for seeing, but seeing itself is a power that is superior 
to them. Similarly, hearing power is higher than the mere ear. The mind is superior to the sense 
organs and superior to the mind is "Buddhi" (intellect), the power of discrimination. Above the 
Buddhi is the animating Life Principle the Jeers. Above the Jeevaathma (the individual soul) is 
the Paramaathma (Supreme Soul). Between the individual and the Divine, there is an attractive 
deluding veil, Maaya (illusory power). When this veil falls, the individualised Self and the 
Universal Omni-self become one. 


When the mind turns away from the senses to the Buddhi for enlightenment, Aanandha (Divine 
Bliss) starts to flow and the glory of “Aathma" (Divine Soul) is revealed. Buddhi promotes the 
search inward. While the sense organs---the eye, the ear, the nose, the tongue and the tensile 
skin-- all open out towards external objects, true saadhana (spiritual discipline) consists in 
turning the vision inwards, in fact, to swim against the on rushing current. It is seldom realised 
how near is the goal of self- realisation when once the sense organs are turned inwards. 


Every act of service is service to the Divine 


Students should realise the importance of service, to realise the Divine. It makes one's life 
significant and purposeful. The first requisite for service is the elimination of the ego. Divine 
grace and the power it. can confer can be acquired by rendering social service in a selfless spirit. 
Students! Except the Grace of God, nothing else will stand by you, for long. Develop faith in this 
never-failing source of strength and support. The famous wrestler King Kong, who could stop a 
fast moving car,. died in a car accident! That reveals the limitations of muscle power. How many 
kings have left the earth, leaving no trace of their wealth or power. Do not postpone the 
cultivation of devotion to God. Start serving God through service to fellow-beings. Every act of 
service, however small, is service to the Divine. Demonstrate by reverential behaviour, selfless 
service, truthfulness and integrity that you are pursuing the ideals for which the Sathya Sai 
Educational institutions stand. 


Discourse while inaugurating the social service programme 
of students of the Sathya Sai Institute of Higher Learning 
at Puurnachandra Auditorium, Prashaanthi Nilayam, 


24- 7-83 


The most precious possession is mental equanimity; and it is the 
one thing you cannot give, even if you have it. Each has to acquire 
it the hard way. 


But you can enlighten people on the disciplines through which 
mental equanimity can be gained, and Shaanthi can be won. 


It cannot be earned through a higher standard of life, bush shirts, 
transistors, sofas, air-conditioners, etc. 


It cannot be got through riches, through the acquisition of power 
and authority, through developing physical strength and 
endurance. 


When you plan of service, remember this estimate of comparative 
values. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


19. Food and character 


ALL men everywhere are of one species. Yet, man hates man; one religion is opposed to 
another; one race feels superior to another; one country avoids contact with another. How does 
this conflict arise? When one delves deep into this question, the answer becomes clear. 


Everything in creation has five properties. The first three are Sath-Chith-Aanandha (Being, 
Awareness, Bliss) and the last two are Ruupa and Naama (Form and Name), which are lent to 
the thing only temporarily. They are subject to modification but the first three Being, Awareness, 
Bliss are inherent, unchanging characteristics. In the language of Vedhaantha, the three are 
named Asthi, Bhaathi, and Priya (existence, shining or expressing and loving). They are the 
innate qualities of every manifestation of the Divine. The last of the three is Aanandha (Divine 
Bliss). Every human being is an embodiment, repository and vehicle of Aanandha. 


The awareness of this Aanandha (Bliss) is the goal of man, the consummation of human life. 
But, man seeks pleasure and happiness from objects through the senses and attains the low 
material Aanandha, not the supreme Aanandha he ought to win. It must be said that the 
Aanandha attained through the objective world or through subjective means is only a fractional 
expression of the Aanandha which mergence in Brahman (Supreme Reality) grants. We speak of 
hot water, though heat is not a quality of water, fire has given it the heat. So, too, objective 
Aanandha or subjective Aanandha are rendered so, through the grace of Brahma-aanandha 
(Supreme Divine Bliss). 


Food prevents or promotes emotions and passions 


Man prides himself that he has earned Aanandha himself by his effort. It is sugar that makes the 
bland globules of flour into sweet Laddu. The grace of the Ground of all Being can alone confer 
sweetness or Aanandha. The stars are proud that they shed light on a darkened world but the 
bright moonlight renders starlight too faint to be noticed. The moon's pride, too, is humbled 
when the sun illumines the sky. Brahma-aanandha is the Sun. This does not mean that one 
should ignore starlight and moonlight or Vishaya aanandha and Vidhya aanandha---Aanandha 
derived from Nature and from spiritual experiential knowledge. They are steps, stages, samples. 
While valuing them as such, the goal of Brahma-aanandha has to be relentlessly pursued. 


How, then, can man earn that Awareness, that Aanandha? What Saadhana (spiritual discipline) 
has he to adopt? Though men are all equally subject to birth, life and death, though all are of one 
kind, why do they allow the Aanandha which is the right of each to slip away through hatred and 
conflict? Why is the demon prevailing over the Divine in man? The answer has been deluding 
man for ages. 


Well! Aham (ego) is the cause. The narrow limited self, the ego, is at the root of the evil. Probing 
the problem a little deeper, I would say that the nature of the food relished is primarily 
responsible. Food is of three qualities Saathwik, Raajasik, and Thaamasik (leading to purity, 
passion and inertia). Some consume Saathwik-Raajasik or Thaamasik-Raajasik food, or they 
change from one type to another, for better or worse. Since food alleviates or arouses, prevents 
or promotes emotions and passions, it moulds the behaviour, conduct and attitudes of men. 


Saadhaks have to be careful about food consumed 


Raavana and Vibheeshana, two brothers born of the same parents, had. diametrically opposite 
natures because of the food they grew upon. Raavana relished Raajasik food while Vibheeshana 


stuck to Saathwik. Fellow-feeling is difficult when the same quality of food is not preferred. 
When both live on Raajasik food, though they may have the same nature, friendship cannot last. 
Envy and hatred will soon break the bond. The Saathwik nature will free man from these evils 
and purify his mind, preparing him for the journey to God. For, God is Sathwa (pure). 


Many slide from the Saathwik nature into the Raajasik where the ego predominates. They slide 
away from God too, for where the ego swells in pomp and pride, God cannot reside. They may 
.parade other reasons for their losing hold of God but the' fault lies in their own self. 


What exactly is Saathwik food? Food that confers Aanandha to the body, mind and heart is 
Saathwik, that which sustains holy living; that which keeps one light, even at the end of the meal. 
The Saathwiks are satisfied with one meal a day. Raajasik nature demands continuous feeding on 
hot stuff tasting sour, salty or pungent. Thaamasiks appreciate cold, stale, acrid tastes. The 
grosser parts of the food consumed are eliminated. The less gross parts build up muscles and 
bones. The subtle parts make up the nerves and the mind. Therefore, Saadhaks have to be extra- 
careful about the quality of food they consume. 


Be clothed in divine qualities to approach God 


Pungency in food heightens feelings of pugnacity, aggression and vindictiveness in men, against 
those who oppose, disagree with or disappoint them. Such men are worse than scorpions and 
snakes, sharp swords or serrated saws. It is tragic that factional conflicts arise even among 
persons claiming to be devotees of God. Often, such men behave as if they are desecrating God 
by deserting Him. When their desires do not fructify as and when they arise, when their faults 
and failings are laid down before them in order to warn them, or when they are directed to give 
up the wrongs they are fascinated by, they turn away from God in a fit of fury! There are two 
types of men--the Amaraas (the godly) and the Asuraas (the demonic). The Raajasik persons are 
Asuraas. The Geetha directs us to adopt, as the very first Saadhana, the rule: Adhweshtaa Sarva 
bhoothaanaam ("Do not hate any single being"). To approach God, one must be clothed in 
divine qualities. When it is sinful to hate a fellow-being, what shall we say about' hating God? 
Live in the love of God--Sthithi-Mathi-Bhakthi (stability, awareness-communion). Devotion 
arises in the constant mind, not in the agitated, kaleidoscopic mind. Allah showers Grace only on 
those who surrender wholly. The purification of the senses of perception and the senses of 
action, the mind and the intellect and the sublimation of the ego-consciousness will happen 
spontaneously, once the attitude of total surrender is strengthened. That which we consume 
through the mouth is food. We consume also through the eye, the ear, the nose and the skin. That 
food too has to be Saathwik, purifying and not pungent or stale and corrupt. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 25 July 1983. 


Education is now sought after, more for securing a means of 
livelihood. 


The attempt of many parents and their children is to learn some 
skill which will give them a good job, in a factory or business 
establishment or bank, on a decent salary. 


Of course, man must live and live comfortably. So, it is necessary 
that some useful skill is mastered. But, man needs things much 
more satisfying, much more essential, than comfort. 


He must have faith in himself, so that he may respect himself. This 
Aathmavishwaas (trust in the Self) lies at the very root of joy. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


20. The human destiny 


GOD in the form of Man (Dhaivam manusha ruupena) declare the Scriptures! They describe 
God as the Viraat Purusha (Cosmic Divine Person), with 'thousand' heads, 'thousand' eyes, 
'thousand' feet that is to say, all heads, all eyes, all feet are His. While the individual Purusha 
(Person) is God installed in that body which is thereby a temple, the Purushothama (the Supreme 
Sovereign Person), is the sum-total of all the Purushaas and so has in Him all Of them. The 
human being alone can know the identity and the Bliss thereof. He is the crown of creation, 
divine in nature and unique in destiny. 


There can be no privilege without responsibility. So man has to observe very many regulations 
and restrictions and abide by duties and directions. The higher the status, the heavier the burden. 
The office of Prime Minister or President is a position of eminence and therefore, their duties too 
are of vast importance. Man, holding eminent status and possessing Divine capabilities, has to 
keep his vision broad and clear and his actions pure and beneficial. 


Man has to be ever alert to avoid sin 


The obligations that bind man can be considered under four heads: avoiding paapam (sin), 
escaping shaapam (curse), observing shaasana (law) and following Shaasthras (ethical codes). 
Let us consider sin. Birds and beasts do not commit sin; they have no need to be specially careful 
to avoid it. For they are free from unrestrained imagination, of cleverness in manipulation or 
desire to accumulate and possess. 


Man alone has these qualifications and the duty to use them for his own good and the good of 
others. Man alone is equipped with a conscience and the faculty of reasoning which can present 
before him the pros and cons of every step in thought, speech and action. When his reason tells 
him that a certain thought or speech or action is wrong and he sets aside the judgement, 
preferring the evil, the wrong and the low, he sins. When an insane person commits evil no court 
of justice punishes him; it is only when a person, capable of distinguishing good from bad, 
deliberately chooses the bad, that his act is pronounced a sin. Man has to be ever alert to avoid 
sin. 


As regards the method of escaping the curse of elders, one has to be equally vigilant. When a 
man behaves badly or rudely towards persons deserving veneration on account of their fullness 
in wisdom and virtue, he invites on himself the consequences of this denial of the essential 'man' 
in him which is God. Such action brings down a curse as an automatic consequence or as a 
willed reaction. Do not insult others; do not ridicule others; do not demean them in any manner, 
If you do, you are defying, distorting and destroying man's innate Nature, which is Love. In 
order to make such men recognise the crime committed against oneself and retreat from this 
unnatural course, the curse is pronounced. 


Man should control their greed and hatred 


Consider the behaviour of King Pareekshith which resulted in a curse. He was the Emperor, 
reputed and respected; he was highly learned; he was an earnest practitioner of spiritual 
disciplines. Yet, in a fit of anger, he placed around the neck of a hermit who was sunk deep in 
meditation, a snake that was dead! That was not a pardonable prank. As Emperor, his task was to 
be an example, a model, an inspiration for his subjects. Punishing him would be an effective 
method of teaching good conduct to millions. So, Shringi, the hermit's son, cursed him to die of 


snake bite at the end of the week. 


The sage Gauthama cursed his wife Ahalya for transgressing the limits imposed by the higher 
Self on the lower sell Man or woman, each one has to honour the glory of mankind and examine 
each thought, word and deed on the touchstone of Dharma (righteousness). Or else, one has to 
encounter a curse. 


The third obligation is 'obeying the Shaasana' (Law). When a stray dog enters the house, moves 
into the kitchen, guzzles the food kept ready for lunch and runs out breaking a few dishes and 
cups, it will not be dragged into court and forced to pay compensation. But, when a man does the 
same, the law takes hold of him and binds him. When a pig enters a field and damages the crop, 
no one arrests it and claims payment for. the loss inflicted. Animals have no moral responsibility 
to leave alone the property of others. They are not human beings who ought to control their greed 
and their hatred. When men are moved into inhuman ways, the law has to restrain and reform 
them. 


Shaasthras offer means of purifying the mind 


Next, man has the duty to observe consistently and sincerely the Shaasthras (codes of morality). 
The codes are framed for the guidance of living beings who can uplift themselves by their own 
efforts and determination. Others cannot utilise them or revere them as texts meant for 
instruction. However arduous and affectionate the training given to a tiger may be, it can never 
be made non-violent! One can feed a cat on milk and sweets for long but, when it sees a rat, it 
pounces on it and relishes its taste more than all the fine fresh food one has given for months. 


A tiger will not eat ‘poori' (leavened bread) however gnawing its hunger may be. It will eat only 
flesh. A beast has to be always beastly. But a vicious man can transform himself into a saint! He 
may be born and bred in wicked surroundings, but he can be shaped into a good person through 
the influence of precept and example. 


Ratnaakara, the robber, waylaid travellers and pilgrims and robbed them of their belongings. 
When some sages whom he attacked reacted with loving kindness, warned him and revealed to 
him the sacred path of devotion and dedication, he gave up his cruel profession and plunged into 
severe spiritual exercises which transformed him into a great poet-saint, Vaalmeeki. 


There is the example of the highway robber who collected the fingers of those whom he robbed 
and strung them into a garland round his neck. He was so proud of this horrid achievement that 
he named himself Angulimala. But, when he encountered the Buddha and listened to His 
compassionate counsel, his mind was cleansed and he became a faithful follower of Buddha. 


Man can be educated or nurtured into higher levels of consciousness. The Shaasthras offer the 
means of purifying the mind. Other living beings have no such help or encouragement offered to 
them; they have to plod on as of old. This is the reason why life as a human being is a unique 
gift. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, Gokulaashtami, 31 August 1983 


It is a hard job to maintain a false stand and so, it is always safe to 
be straight and honest. Do not take the first false step and then be 
led, on and on, to perdition. Truth is one's real nature and when 


you are yourself, there comes a great flood of joy welling up within 
you. 


When you deny yourself and deceive yourself, shame darkens your 
mind and breeds fear. You take the path of falsehood because of 
the Raajasik passions of lust, greed, hate and pride. 


Contentment, humility, detachment---these keep you on the path of 
Truth. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


21. Guidance for the Gurus 


ADORATION to the All-consuming Time--this is the prayer of the ancient poet Bharthruhari. 
Time is self-motivated. It halts for no one. We may pronounce the blessing, "Live for a hundred 
years" but it may not fructify. Death may call any moment. Why? Every moment, everyone is 
nearing death. No one can recall the time that has flowed by. So, man has to utilise the years he 
spends on earth for attaining the goal of life, conscious of the great responsibility and the great 
opportunity. 


Man is equipped with a wondrous instrument---the body so that he could engage in fruitful 
activity on righteous lines. The word Manush in Samskrith (meaning "man") indicates that man 
is essentially Manas (mind). The mind involves man in thoughts, thoughts lead man to action, 
and action brings about grief and joy. When one is not as healthy as he deserves to be, the reason 
has to be sought in the nature of his actions and thoughts. When these are sacred, sublime and 
holy, he will be healthy in body and mind. 


The mind is engaged in thought without rest. Constantly dwelling on one subject, attachment and 
relationship develop. Thus, desire is aroused; when it is frustrated, anger arises and in the frenzy, 
discrimination disappears. Harsh words end up in hard blows. Man widens the gap between ‘his' 
and 'theirs' every second. This duel is not genuine human nature. In the early years of life, man 
spends his days in pranks and play. Even while he loses himself in these carefree activities, youth 
creeps in and provokes him into wild antics and competitive exhibitionism. 


Three-fold activities of the human pilgrimage 


He brooks no opposition; he is extremely possessive and proud. He builds castles on the 
foundation of muscle and passion, of group and emotion, not on divine , Grace and righteous life. 
Meanwhile, age undermines him and he grows old. At that stage, he might lament over lost 
boyhood and lost youth. But, however much his repentance and regret, he cannot get those stages 
again. Man dies as boy, lives as youth, dies as youth and lives as old person. So too, he dies as 
Yelliah and is born with another name and form. This is how Nature works. 


While on the pilgrimage of life, man's activities are three-fold---Akarma, Sakarma and 
Nishkaama Karma---the Thaamasik, Raajasik and Saathwik types of Karma. Akarma: It starts 
with high hopes and much fanfare but at the first touch of disappointment, all activity is given up 
and the man shuts himself up for good. Sakarma: It is undertaken without discrimination. 
Whatever comes to hand keeps one busy. This is the Raajasik approach. The third type of Karma 
is Nishkaama, gladly done as duty, as worship, as grateful homage, with no eye on the benefit 
therefrom. 


Man has physical urges like hunger and thirst and needs like sleep and exercise. A person may be 
a scholar in many fields of knowledge or a famous figure crowned with diverse powers, but he 
cannot escape these urges and needs. But, man has also spiritual urges and needs. While the 
physical urges are transient and temporary, the spiritual ones have deeper sources and longer 
satisfactions. They clamour for purity and unity. 


Truth strikes root slowly, untruth spreads fast 


The purification of the mind is attained through humility, integrity and a sense of justice. The 
educational process prevalent now cultivates only the intellect of man; it does not unfold and 
cleanse the mind. An expansive mind is more laudable than an expert brain. One person 


shedding love is more desirable than a hundred hard-hearted companions. Reputation as a loving 
lovable person is to be striven for. Such reputation has its origin in little acts of love, tiny 
upsurges of compassion. When it expands and flows over vast areas, it becomes divine. Truth, 
too, is established in the heart from small beginnings growing steadily to purify all activities. 


Falsehood grows quick and wild. When Truth is yet putting on its shoes, Falsehood would have 
travelled round the globe. Untruth spreads fast; Truth strikes root slowly. No one can hurry the 
process. One can track and trap a ferocious lion and be proud of it. But, one cannot by one's 
heroism force a stalk to become a tree. It takes its own time to put forth branches, leaves and 
flowers, to fill the flowers with fragrance and to waft the fragrance to the four corners. This 
fragrance of the fundamental Divine nature in man is his true claim for greatness. 


Teachers are the Sun which encourages the lotus buds to bloom and scatter fragrance. Their 
conduct and counsel are the rays which unfold the virtues and talents latent in the hearts of the 
leaders of tomorrow. Teachers have to fill their own hearts with good thoughts, good ideals, 
yearning for good deeds and devotion to God. When their hearts are reservoirs of these qualities, 
the taps, when opened, offer these only and children, who slake their thirst at the taps, are 
inspired to be likewise. Students need study only for a few years, but the teacher has to keep on 
studying for years and years, in order to be an effluent Guru. When one lamp has its flame steady 
and bright, hundreds of lamps can be lit therefrom. 


Pursuit of the science of the spirit is essential today 


Do not condemn yourselves as petty pedlars of knowledge. You are the makers of the future of 
mankind. You can make it bright and joyful or mar it as dreary and dreadful. You can weaken or 
strengthen the foundations of life. You are the planners and engineers who lay the royal road of 
peace and prosperity. You are the ray of hope that illumines the dismal night enveloping all 
countries. You are the revealers of the Divine Power that animates every living being and 
prompts it towards self-sacrifice and self-knowledge. You mark out and build the proper steps 
for man's ascent to God. You direct the eyes of the pupils inward into the Reality and invite them 
to revel in that light. You hasten the holy process of ignoring and forgetting the superficial and 
advancing the Divine Consciousness, which is the reality of man. 


Gu (ignorance), ru (destroyer)--the word reminds you of the role you have assumed. The teacher 
is known through his pupils. They proclaim his sincerity and excellence. They are the witnesses 
for his erudition and endurance. King Bhoja once arranged a scholastic duel between two 
renowned Pandiths (scholars). When neither succeeded in defeating the other, he invited their 
respective pupils to continue the debate. But they too were engaged without end in meeting 
arguments with equally valid counter-arguments. So, the King had to honour them as replicas of 
their masters! To-day teachers have degraded themselves so low, that their own pupils dare 
correct their habits and practices! 


Gurus must be living examples of love and light 


Gurus imbued with divine love and understanding are urgently needed in every country. They 
are invaluable assets in every place at any time, for they have such strong faith in their mission 
and their ideals that they can never compromise or collude. We have this Camp in order to train 
such Gurus all over the world. Gurus must stand forth as living examples of love and light. They 
have to cleanse their minds of evil, the worst of them being "talking ill of others." This can be 
accomplished only through the cultivation of selfless Love. 


Constant recitation or remembrance of one manthra (sacred formula) is believed by many to be a 
method useful for cleansing the mind. But, the same manthra cannot serve the purpose for all. 
Can one size of bush-shirt fit all men? Those who identify themselves with the body-mind 
complex need an embodied God, an idol, image or picture, and a five-letter or eight-letter Name 
to fix on. "Dhaasoham" (I am your servant) will be such a person's spiritual attitude. So, the 
manthra will purify and strengthen him. It will destroy; egoist feelings. The constant thought of 
dependence will destroy pride of power or scholarship or authority over fellow-men, or riches 
and treasure. Nowadays, ninety-nine out of hundred persons suffer from egotism and they need 
the curative manthra "Dhaasoham." 


The manthra of Soham and Pranava 


Persons who have attained a higher stage believe that they are jeevis (distinct individuals). For 
these, the manthra can be "Soham" (I am He) so that the sense of distinctness can be eliminated. 
In fact even this manthra has a face of distinction, for it posits an "J" and a "He."" How can this 
manthra \ead one to the awareness of the one? The next higher stage is the Aathmic. When man 
reaches this level of consciousness, the idea of ‘J’ as different from ‘He’ disappears. That is to 
say, So (He) and Aham (I) fade away and Soham is elevated into OM. OM or Pranava is the 
Manthra for persons conscious of the Aathma in them. 


Youth today are enmeshed in the coils of the body-mind complex. So, they are engaged in acts 
prompted by pride, envy and ignorance. "Son! You are not the body; the body is only your 
vesture. That vesture has been given to you so that you may lead a beautiful, beneficial life. You 
should not pollute your years of life with ignorance of your reality. Remove that pollution, 
acquiring true wisdom." You must advise youth thus, so that they may become aware of their 
innate Divinity. No one has faith in any others today. Suspicion prevails in the relationship even 
of parents and children, wife and husband. The more educated a person is, the wider his 
suspicion. The reason is, education fills the brain, instead of fashioning character. 


Education has to develop insight along with skills. You have come here, to Prashaanthi Nilayam, 
from over thirty countries, spending enormous amount of money, devoting precious days for 
journey and stay. Make that stay supremely useful. Understand the importance of disciplined 
freedom in education. Students might ask, "Grant us the freedom that birds have in the sky or 
fish in the sea." But, birds behave as birds and fishes as fish. Instead, man clamours for freedom 
to behave as beast! When the brute in him overwhelms the human, God incarnates as man to 
warn and guide mankind on the path of genuine human values. 


Boys and girls must grow with confidence in these human values. Confidence promotes Love. 
Love fosters Peace; Peace nourishes Truth. Truth confers Bliss and Bliss is God. While dealing 
with children, do not be influenced by their creed or race, poverty or wealth. Look upon your 
task as a Saadhana, a form of worship, in fact, the highest form. In the Sai Organisation, no trace 
of conflict or contempt, of conceit or humiliation should be tolerated or encouraged. During 
these five days, concentrate on learning from the speakers and from one another and from the 
Prashaanthi Nilayam atmosphere the lessons of humility, tolerance and service, so that the. world 
can have peace, prosperity and joy. 


Discourse inaugurating Training Camps for 


Bal Vikaas Gurus, Prashaanthi Nilayam, 14th June 1983. 


22. The ego and the Avathaar 


BHAAGAVATH represents the essence of all the shaasthras (spiritual sciences), the truth 
proclaimed by all the Vedhas (ancient revealed scriptures ) and the goal to be aimed at. Bhagah 
means the omnipotence of Divinity. It also means That which is worthy of worship and 
meditation. Bha means effulgence. Ga means Making it shine. Va means all-pervasive. Another 
meaning of Bhagah is Sambhartha and Bhartha. Sambhartha is one who creates the Cosmos 
out of Prakrithi (Nature). "Bhartha" is the Protector of the created universe. Creation and 
protection are both covered by the term "Bhagavath." Not only all material things in creation, but 
also all qualities like fame, knowledge, honour, health, charity and sacrifice are properties of the 
Aishwarya (Divine). 


Emperor Bali, the grandson of Prahlaadha, was the repository of all great qualities. He was a 
righteous ruler. There was no want in his realm. On the advice of his Guru (preceptor), 
Sukraachaarya, he performed the Viswajith Yagna and became the ruler of the world. When he 
wanted to conquer Indhraloka (the Kingdom of Indhra), Indhra got frightened and sought 
Vishnu's help to save him. Vishnu came to Bali as a Braahmana lad, Vaamana, and sought from 
him the gift of three feet of land. Bali readily agreed to make the gift despite warnings from his 
guru that the person to whom he was making the offer was Lord Vishnu Himself. Bali felt that if 
the Lord of the Universe came to him for a gift, there was no greater honour for him than to give 
It 


Immediately the dwarfish Vaamana grew to cosmic proportions. By his first foot, he covered the 
earth. By his second foot he covered the heavens. He then asked Bali wherefrom he should get 
the third foot of ground. Bali begged the Lord to place His foot on his head. 


Vaamana Avathaara is the Divine principle in man 


While Emperor Bali felt supremely happy that the Lord's sacred foot had been placed on his 
head, Sukraachaarya was burning with anger. He was the kind of guru who did not practise what 
he preached. Hence he had only one eye. Bali was greater than his guru because he practised 
what he believed in. He was a true devotee of the Lord. He had only one defect--pride in his 
greatness. The Lord blessed him by destroying his ego. 


This ego exists in every human being. As long as it remains, man cannot achieve anything good, 
nor secure God's grace. Bali shed his ego when he told the Lord that he had no more land to give 
after the Lord had measured the earth and heaven' by two steps and that he was offering himself 
for the third step. "My ego had warped my mind. Lord, destroy that ego by placing your 
redeeming foot on my head," he said. The Lord by placing his foot on Bali and pressing him 
down to the nether world destroyed also his ego and thereby sanctified him. 


The three worlds penetrate each other 


The place where the Lord assumed the Cosmic form (Trivikrama) is known as Siddhaashrama. 
This siddhaashrama is in every human being. The intelligence in man is his spiritual essence. 
The Vaamana avathaara is the divine principle in man. The ego arising out of man's 
consciousness represents Bali. The navel in which Divinity resides is the Siddhaashrama. It is 
called Siddhaasrama because it is the place where all aspirations are realised. 


The three feet of ground Vaamana sought from Bali are: Bhuuloka, Bhuvarloka and Suvarloka. 
Bbuuloka means the entire world constituted by the five senses and the five vital airs. 


Bhuvarloka represents the subtle life force that is present in the atmosphere enveloping the 
world. It is the world of Praana (Life-force). Suvarloka is the Aathma (divine soul), the 
consciousness which permeates everything from the atom to the vastest thing in the Cosmos. 
These three worlds are not one upon the other. They inter-penetrate each other the Suvarloka 
permeates the Bhuvarloka and the latter penetrates the Bhuuloka. The three worlds represent 
symbolically the three bodies of man the gross body, the mental body and the causal body. 


Man must move forward from the gross body to the mental path and from the mental to the 
Aathmic State (Self-realisation). The inner meaning of the Onam celebration is that man must 
destroy the ego and achieve Self-realisation. 


Onam Day at Prashaanthi Nilayam, 22 August 1983 


23. Why the Avathaar comes 


DHEHO devaalayah proktho, Jeevo Dhevah sanaatanah---"The Eternal Supreme dwells in the 
temple of the human body as the newborn Jeeva. For this reason, all avathaars (diane 
incarnations) assume the human form. The scriptures have declared that the Divine submits to 
devotion. 


In the Geetha the Lord has declared that in Man He is the power of discrimination, the Buddhi 
(intellect). Man cannot achieve greatness by the acquisition of all forms of wealth. It is 
intelligence that makes man respected. One who does not exercise this power of discrimination is 
no better than birds or beasts, 


It is to raise man to a higher level that the Divine comes down as Avathaar. Avathaar means 
descent. To stoop down to lift up the child for coddling and to raise man, who is caught up in 
petty desires and trivial pursuits, Divinity descends to the human level and teaches how man can 
divinise himself. This is the teaching of the Geetha. All the great scriptures, the Bible, the Quran 
and others have originated for the same purpose. The scriptures, by themselves, cannot redeem 
man. They serve only as guideposts. They indicate the roads to be taken to realise the Divine. 


Pilgrimages do not wipe out the sins 


All Avathaars are Puurna Avathaars, have all the attributes of the Divine. But the shaasthras 
(revealed scriptures) have held that the Krishna Avathaar alone is the complete incarnation, with 
all the sixteen aspects. Despite His Omnipotence, Krishna was easily accessible to the devotee. 
He submitted Himself to the devotee. When we are filled with devotion, the Lord is ready to 
serve us as our servant. The Lord is ever prepared to subject Himself to any kind of difficulty or 
ordeal to protect or help His devotee. Many a devotee has sung songs in praise of Krishna and 
lamented the fact that he had not been fortunate enough to be born during His advent and 
enjoyed His divine music and witnessed His divine exploits. One devotee has decried the dull- 
witted disbelievers who cannot shed their petty desires and seek the bliss that comes from 
devotion to the Divine. 


Many devotees go on pilgrimages to Benares, Prayaag or-other sacred places in the hope that 
thereby they will be absolved of their sins. Pilgrimages are not the means to wipe .out sins. What 
is required is purification of the heart and the mind. If the mind is cleansed through saadhana 
(spiritual discipline), Divinity will reveal itself of its own accord. Saint Meera gave the same 
message when she sang a bhajan calling upon the mind to go to the Ganga and Yamuna. The 
Ganga and. the Yamuna she had in mind are not the rivers in Northern India but the inhaling and 
exhaling breaths in each of us--the Ida and Pingala naadhees. The central spot between the 
brows is the Prayaag, the place where the Ganga and the Yamuna converge and by concentrating 
on this spot Krishna can be discovered. This spot is described by Meera as cool, pure and 
undisturbed. Inhaling and exhaling symbolise what one should take in and what one should reject 
and the holding of the breath (Kumbhaka) signifies what one should hold on to namely, Divinity. 
One should take in the pure things and reject the impure. 


The Lord responds to the yearning of the devotees 


The Geetha has laid down three directives: do not be afraid of troubles; do .not forget God; do 
not adore what is false. It is by adhering to these three injunctions that countless devotees all 
through the ages have sought to realise the Divine through Saadhana. 


The Bhaagavatha shows how the Lord responds to the yearning of the devotees and assuages 
their anguish caused by separation from the Lord. When Krishna left for Mathura, the gopees 
(cowherdesses) were languishing in grief, unable to bear the separation. They were all the time 
looking towards Mathura to see when Krishna would return. One day, they espied a cloud of dust 
and imagined that Krishna had at last relented and was returning to Gokulam. They saw a chariot 
and a man seated in it. The chariot stopped but there was no Krishna in it. With their hearts given 
over to the Supreme Lord, the Gopees were not inclined even to look at the strange visitor, who 
was none other than Krishna's very dear friend, Uddhava. Krishna, who was aware of the agony 
the Gopikas were experiencing, had sent Uddhava to offer them solace and to cheer them up. 


The moment Uddhava got down from the chariot, he started delivering a long exhortation to the 
Gopikas. "Oh ye Gopikas !You are ignorant of the shaasthras. You have no wisdom. Like silly, 
dumb persons, you are pining for Krishna. If you know the shaasthras, you will realise that 
Krishna is ever with you. He resides in your hearts. Instead of taking delight in the Krishna that 
dwells within you, you are pining for the physical form of Krishna. This is due to your 
ignorance. I shall teach you the science of Yoga for which Krishna has sent me." 


Uddhava and the Gopees 


The gopikas did not consider it proper to speak directly to a stranger. They adopted the device of 
addressing a bee to give their reply to Uddhava. The gopees said: "Oh bee! These words (of 
Uddhava) are adding fuel to the fire that is burning in us because of separation from Krishna. 
Enough of these words." Uddhava then held out to the gopikas the letter Krishna had sent to 
them and said: "Here is Krishna's message to you. At least read that." One gopee immediately 
said: "Oh bee ! We are illiterate village folk. We are stricken with grief. Show us Krishna." 
Another gopee wailed: "We are being burnt by the fire of agony caused by Krishna's absence. If 
we touch His letter, it may be burnt to ashes. We dare not touch it.” Yet another gopee said: "The 
tears from our eyes will stain the pearl-like letters in Krishna's epistle. We cannot endure seeing 
His message." 


Uddhava then said: "At least listen to my message. I shall teach you knowledge of yoga." A 
gopika answered, addressing the bee, unable to control her grief: "Oh bee, we have only one 
mind and that has gone with Krishna to Mathura. If we had four minds, we could turn one to 
yoga, another to some other subject, and so on. But the only mind we had has been surrendered 
to Krishna. We have no room for any yoga lessons." Uddhava was stupefied when he realised 
their single minded devotion to Krishna. 


The essence of all the Vedhas and Shaasthras (ancient sacred scriptures) is single-mindedness. 
This single-mindedness results in one-pointed devotion to God. Uddhava reflected within 
himself that he had not cultivated the single-minded devotion which the gopees had 
demonstrated. He decided to return to Krishna. 


Raadhika's grief-stricken message to Krishna 


Among the gopees, the foremost devotees of Krishna were Raadhika and Neeraja. Before 
Uddhava left, he heard them address Krishna as the Raama-parrot and pleaded for a vision of 
Krishna to assuage their grief-stricken hearts. Uddhava asked Raadhika, who was lying 
unconscious on a sand-dune, whether she had any message for Krishna. Recovering her senses, 
Raadhika thought only of Krishna. She cried: 


Were you a tree, growing upwards, 

I would cling to you like a creeper; 

Were you a blossoming flower 

I would hover over you like a bee; 

Were you the mountain Meru 

I would cascade like a river; 

Were you the boundless sky, 

I would be in you like a star; 

Were you the bottomless deep 

I would merge in you like a river; 

Where are you, Oh Krishna ? 

Whither have you gone, Krishna ! 

Have you no pity, Krishna! Krishna ! 
Love of God is the means and the goal 


On seeing Raadhika in this piteous state, Uddhava's heart melted. He realised that Krishna had 
sent him on this mission to the gopees to make him learn what is true Bhakthi (devotion). 
Uddhava realised that Krishna had enacted that episode to show to him that even those well 
versed in the shaasthras had to learn the inner truth about true devotion from the one-pointed, 
unalloyed devotion shown by the gopees towards Krishna. Love of God is the means and the 
goal. This was the secret revealed by the gopees. They saw love in everything--in the music of 
Krishna's flute, which filled the world with love and flooded the parched earth with love. 


The Divine is in every one. But to realise it, there is only one way. It is to cultivate intense love 
of God. Only that day when one strives to develop such love for God is the day of Krishna's 
birth. Krishna is not born on every Gokulaashtami day. Krishna is born in us when we try to 
develop divine love as the means to overcome our bonds. To live up to the teachings of Krishna 
is the true way to celebrate His birthday. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 31August, 1983. 


24. Honour the mother 


THE mother's lap is the school for every man. It is his first temple. The mother is every man's 
primary wealth. To recognise this truth about one's mother is the duty of every person. There is 
no higher god than the mother. The father is one's treasure; the mother is his god. Instead of 
valuing such precious wealth and divinity, men engage themselves in all kinds of activities to 
acquire riches and positions. The father and the mother are inseparable like the word and its 
meaning. Everyone should cherish one's parents as embodiments of the Divine. The mother and 
father may be physically separate, but spiritually they are one. 


Even the distinction between man and women relates only to the physical body. The Indwelling 
Spirit in both of them is the same divine. In fact, every human being can be divided into two 
constituents. One is the body. The other is the Aathma (Divine Self). Hunger, thirst, sleep, work, 
etc., are qualities derived from the body. Truth, forbearance, sympathy, love and other qualities 
originate from the Aathma. If the truth is gone into, it will be seen that man is not the body, 
though he identifies himself with it. The physical body is common to all living beings. It is made 
up of the same five elements. It is subject to decay and death. Food, sleep, reproduction are 
common to all living things. It is the Indwelling Spirit in man that is immortal. That Spirit is 
Divine. Man strives hard in many ways to acquire worldly things. But he will not make the 
sacrifice needed to realise his Divinity. 


Role of women is crucial in cultivation of basic qualities 


We see in the world today disorder, violence and conflict. The world is like a sick man afflicted 
with many ailments. What is the cure for these ills? Man must shed his selfishness, greed and 
other bad qualities and rise above his animal nature. He must cultivate Charity (unselfishness) to 
achieve Purity. Through purity of hearts, men will achieve Unity, which will lead to Divinity. 
The mansion of human life should be built on these four bases. 


In the cultivation of these basic qualities, the role of women is crucial. Only dedicated mothers 
can offer to the nation children who will strive for a great future for the country. Truth, sacrifice 
and peace are predominant qualities in women. Women are concerned about the purity and 
welfare of the community. When his son - Abhimanyu died in the Kurukshethra war, Arjuna 
lamented that the war had been fought in vain as there was no one to inherit the kingdom. 
Subhadra, however, felt grieved that the death of a son while the parents were alive was the 
precursor of the Kali Age. She recalled that in the days of Raama no mother had to mourn the 
loss of a son. 


While the father's love was related to mundane desires, the mother's love was related to spiritual 
concerns. It is such broad-minded mothers who are needed today. Good mothers are more 
essential than good wives. A good wife is of value only to her husband. A good mother is a 
national asset. From ancient times, Indian scriptures have glorified the examples of great women 
like Maithreyi, Seetha, Saavithri. Their lives continue to be a source of inspiration to this day. 
We cannot afford to forget them. 


Baba's Inaugural Discourse at the symposium on 
"The Role of Women in Social Change" 
organised by the Kingdom of Mother Sai, September, 1983 


Be always saturated with prema; do not use poisonous words 
against any one, for, words wound more fatally than even arrows. 
Speak soft and sweet; sympathise with suffering and loss and 
ignorance; try your best to apply the salve of soothing word and 
timely succour. Do not damage the faith of any one in virtue and 
divinity. 

Encourage others to have that faith by demonstrating in your own 


life that virtue is its own reward, that divinity is all-pervasive and 
all-powerful. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


25. The triple debt 


EVERY man, irrespective of the country, race or period of time in which he is born, comes into 
the world burdened with three debts. The first debt is owed to the Divine. The second is to the 
Rishis (sages). The third is to one's parents. 


A debt is an obligation arising out of what one has received from others. We can easily identify 
these debts in the human body different divine forces are present nourishing and protecting it. 
This divine energy permeates the entire body; it is called the Rasa (Divine Essence). We owe a 
debt of gratitude to the Divine which has not only endowed us with this precious human body 
but which also sustains it. We shall be able to enjoy these gifts of the Divine only if we discharge 
this debt to the Divine. How is this to be done? It is by rendering service to other bodies 
saturated with the same Divine, by doing righteous deeds and consecrating all actions in the 
service of society. The debt to the Divine has to be discharged in full in this life itself or during 
many future lives. The earlier we repay this debt, the sooner we shall realise Divinity. 


Our sages have laid down guidelines for right action 


Next, the debt to the Rishis: By selfless investigations and experiments the sages discovered for 
mankind the paths to be followed for bettering our lives here and attaining mergence. They have 
laid down the types of right action that will help man to lead a good and worthy life and 
successfully strive for Self-realisation. These guidelines and codes of conduct have come down 
to us in the form of Shaasthras (spiritual sciences). The Shaasthras also deal with rituals and 
forms of worship for propitiating the Divine The sages have taught how man can proceed from 
the human to the Divine. Such codes have other names elsewhere. But, whatever the name, these 
are essential for human survival. 


When man strays from these codes, he is subject to many calamities. Man will have to pay the 
price now or later for violating these codes. Because the sages of yore have given man these 
precious guidelines for a righteous and sacred life, we repay the debt by respecting these codes 
and observing the injunctions laid down by them. 


Today, instead of honouring and following the shaasthras, people are dishonouring and violating 
them and committing many wanton sins in the process. When we follow the path laid down by 
the sages, we can lead exemplary lives and reach the full height of human potentialities. 


The third debt we have to pay is to the Pithru-runam (debt to the parents). A person desires to 
have a son and feels that without a son he cannot escape hell. This is not a correct interpretation 
of the debt to the parents. The ancients desired to have sons who would lead righteous lives and 
help the parents in discharging the debt to the Dhaiva-runa (debt to the Divine). Many of them 
performed yajnas (sacrifices) to secure such noble sons. They desired not only to acquire merit 
for themselves by having such sons, but also to ensure that the sacred traditions of the family 
were maintained and continued untarnished. In the old days, a father did not feel happy when a 
son was born; he was delighted only when the son earned name and fame by good conduct and 
righteous living. 


A child grows by following the examples of parents 


When a child is born, no one can know how it will turn out, whether into a good and noble 
person or a wicked and evil person. The father too should set a good example to the son and try 
to keep him on the straight path. It is by following the example of the parents that a child grows 


in life. 


It was to discharge his three-fold debt that Emperor Dhasaratha performed yaagas and yajnas 
(ceremonial sacrifices) and ensured the presence of his sons on those occasions. He sent them to 
great gurus so that they may learn the sacred heritage of the past, before they confronted the 
challenges of the world. He did not calculate that his sons should serve him in his old age. He 
had no selfish interest in rearing them. He desired sons for the sake of his spiritual well-being. 
The son owes a deep debt to the parents for the trouble and expense they underwent to bring him 
up on right lines. This is the primary duty of a son. 


The son is entitled not merely to a share in the father's worldly property. He is entitled also to a 
share in the godly life lived by the father. He must follow the high ideals of the father. If the 
father is given to evil ways, the son can acquire merit himself and reduce to some extent the 
effects of the sins of the father by cultivating good company, entertaining good thoughts and 
doing good deeds. The sage Vasishtha assured Dhasharatha that many of the sins committed by 
him had been wiped out by the numerous Dharmic deeds of Sri Raama, such as destruction of 
the Raakshasas and protection guaranteed to the Rishis. 


Two kinds of yajnas to redeem the three debts 


It is to discharge the debt to one's parents that rites like Shraaddha and Tharpanam (ritual 
offerings to the manes) are done. Only a few perform these ceremonies now. The ancients felt 
that it was sinful for children to be ungrateful to parents to whom they owed their bodies and 
their achievements. 


Yajnas and Yaagas (Vedhic rituals of sacrifice) are symbolic rituals designed to redeem these 
three debts. Yajnas are of two kinds: Antaryajna (internal) and Bahir-yajna (external). The 
internal yajna is the striving to realise the Divinity within. The Divine is in every one and it can 
be realised only through Dhyaana (meditation). The mind is the sacrificial altar. One has to offer 
as sacrifice on this altar all one's bad qualities. It may be asked how any bad quality can pollute 
the body-mind-complex when the Divine is the in-dwelling Spirit. But, it must be realised that 
this is not one's first birth in a body; many lives have preceded this. Man in Samsktith is called 
Maanava which means, Maa (not), nava (new)---" not new". 


Birth as man is the final stage in the upward evolution of the 840 thousand species of living 
beings. In previous lives, one might have been an insect, a worm, a bird or an animal. It is as a 
result of this that, despite the presence of the Divine, man displays now many animal qualities. 
For example, pride is not an innate human quality. It is the natural trait of a buffalo. If one 
displays pride, it means he has been a buffalo in previous lives and this buffalo 'quality inheres in 
the human. Some persons exhibit stupid stubbornness. This is not a human trait. It is the quality 
of a sheep. 


Reasons for man's display of animal qualities 


Sometimes some persons tend to indulge in petty thefts. This is derived from previous lives spent 
as a cat. Similarly, the vascillating and fickle nature displayed by a person may be attributed to a 
previous life as a monkey. Fickle mindedness is characteristic of the monkey. Some persons are 
incurably ungrateful. They indulge even in harming those who help them. This is not a human 
trait. How, then, is it present.in a man? It is because he must have been a serpent in a previous 
birth. The serpent is notorious, for emitting poison even when fed on milk. So, an ungrateful 
person must have been a serpent in some previous life. 


One should offer, therefore, at the altar of his mind as a sacrifice his stubbornness, thieving 
propensity, ingratitude and pride. This is the Inner Yajna. Unfortunately, instead of performing 
sacrifices of this kind people treat goats and fowl as offerings. As a result the bad qualities 
continue to grow in man. It is to eliminate this evil sense of ingratitude that external sacrifices 
like Yajnas and Yaagas have been recommended to man. Yajnas enable us to promote and refine 
the beneficent qualities in man. 


In the yajna Indhra is the principal deity generally invoked. Indhra is the presiding deity of the 
mind, which is the master of the senses. It is because the senses tend to dominate the mind, 
instead of being subservient to it, that Indhra is invoked in this yajna. Indhra has another name 
Puruhutha, that is, one who is invoked frequently. Rudhra is defined as the Supreme Lord, the 
Eeshwara of all the Indhriyas (sense organs). When a man has mastered all his sense organs, he 
becomes Eeshwara! When we wish to progress from .the human to the Divine state, the state of 
Rudhra, it has to be sought through Saadhana (spiritual discipline). 


The sole purpose of internal Yajna 


The sole purpose of the Anthar-yajna (internal sacrifice) is to see that the mind does not run after 
the whims and fancies of the senses, like a master pathetically carrying out the dictates of his 
servants. The man who is a slave of sensual desire is the world's bond-slave. One who has 
conquered desire is master of this world and the next. It is desire that makes one dependent on 
others. When there is no control over the senses, desire grows wild. 


Yajnas and yaagas are not undertaken to promote self-interest. They are performed for 
promoting the welfare of the world. Instead of emphasising the inner meaning and significance, 
of yajnas, most people pay attention to the external features. Pre-occupied with external forms of 
the yajna, people ignore the basic need to win sense-control, without which spiritual saadhana 
has no meaning. 


Evil desires should be mercilessly scotched 


One must constantly strive to get rid of evil tendencies. Inherited evil traits rooted in the mind 
must be given up at the sacrificial altar. Of these traits, the worst are hatred and envy. They arise 
from intense selfishness. They are qualities of the leopard and should not find place in a human 
being. Some people try to pretend that they have overcome anger, hatred, jealousy and pride. 


The devices adopted by such persons are only the cunning tricks of the fox. As these traits make 
their appearance from time to time, they should be immediately cast off. This calls for 
continuous internal yajna, as against the external yajna which is performed only once a year at 
one particular place. 


The internal yajna has to be performed at all times, in all places and under all circumstances. The 
sacrificial altar for this yajna is within each one of us. Whenever an evil thought or desire occurs, 
it should be mercilessly scotched. It is only by constant vigilance and continuous endeavour that 
Divine grace can be earned. Only when evil traits are banished can Divinity manifest itself in all 
its glory. This is the real purpose of yajnas ----to enable man to achieve purity in order to realise 
Divinity. 

Puurnachandhra Auditoriun, Prashaanthi Nilayam, 10 October 1983 


26. Conquest of the mind 


ENQUIRY into the nature of the Mind will reveal that it has no existence apart from the thoughts 
that arise through the sense organs. That was why the sages declared: "Sankalpa 
Vikalpaathmakam Manaha" (Thoughts and doubts constitute the essence of the mind). To bring 
the mind under control we have to free ourselves from the entire process of mental agitation. If 
we want to' take a bath in the sea, which is agitated by waves, we cannot afford to wait till the 
waves subside and the sea is calm. Likewise, it will be foolish to wait for the agitations in the 
mind to cease for experiencing Aanandha (divine bliss). 


Agitations are of the very nature of the Mind "Manana sthithihi Manaha" (The state of 
cogitation or remembrance is the Mind.) By constant rumination over one's sensory experiences 
the mind acquires a form. By relating the experiences to the "I" as the experiencer, the 
consciousness of a distinctive individual (the 'Ego) arises. From that, desires develop and from 
the desires the mind acquires a form. In a piece of cloth, when the threads are taken out, only the 
cotton remains and if the cotton is burnt the cloth ceases to exist. Similarly when desires are 
eliminated, the "7" and the Mind will go. 


It has been said that the destruction of the mind is the means to the realization of the Divine. The 
cessation of the mind can be brought about by the gradual elimination of desires, like the 
removal of threads from a cloth. Finally the desires have to be consumed in the fire of Vairaagya 
(detachment). 


Everything in the world is subject to change 


Look upon life as one long railway journey. In this journey it is not good to carry heavy luggage. 
There are stations on the way like Aarthi (suffering), Arthaarthi (desire for objects), jignaasu 
(yearning for understanding) and Jnaani (Self-realisation). The less luggage one carries the more 
easily and quickly one can get through various stages and reach the destination. The primary 
requisite, therefore, is the eradication of desires. 


Everything in the Universe has a form and a name. Of the two, the name is more important than 
the form. The form is liable to change every moment. The Vedhaantha declares that whatever is 
perceived is liable to perish ("Yaddhrishyam thannashyam"). There is nothing in the world which 
is not subject to change. A man's body also goes through stages of infancy, boyhood, manhood, 
and old age. Samsaara (worldly life) is like a tree with roots, branches, flowers and fruits. The 
Mind is the tap-root of this tree. If the tap-root is destroyed the tree with all its branches will fall. 
If the mind goes, the sense of separateness will go. 


Man's actions are related to desires and aversions. They are the cause of his joys and sorrows. As 
the Mind is the source of these actions, it is by cultivating pure and noble thoughts that one can 
engage in pure and noble deeds. All the world's ills arise from the evil thoughts and deeds of 
men. It is only when men change that society will change and the world will be reformed. 


Nothing can be achieved without faith in God 


Man does not use his sense organs in the right way. He has eyes, but does not see what is good. 
He has ears, but does not listen to what is good. There is only one way of correcting him. He has 
to be shown the spiritual path and helped to cultivate the virtues of Truth, Love and Self- 
sacrifice. He must be weaned away from selfish pursuits and from arrogance and pride. His 
mind, which is the real culprit, has to be cleansed of all evil. He believes in the false and unreal 


and does not relish Truth, Goodness and Beauty. He can acquire real peace and joy only when he 
turns his thoughts to God and away from the petty tinsel of the world. Without faith in God there 
is nothing that man can achieve, whatever his knowledge and wealth may be. 


Modern education does not teach a young man what is essential for making his life worthwhile 
and meaningful. His mind is loaded with a lot of useless information, but he knows little that is 
useful for daily living. Even in the spiritual field, there is a wide gap between verbal knowledge 
and real understanding of spiritual truth. People perform Japa, Dhyaana and Bhajana (repetition 
of sacred formula, meditation, and group singing of devotional songs), but there is no 
understanding of their inner purpose or what they are expected to achieve. 


All living beings have the Pancha Bhuuthas (five basic elements) Pancha Koshas (five sheaths) 
the Pancha Praanas (five vital airs), and the Panchendhriyas (five sense organs) in common. 
What is the form of these five elements? What is the power that sustains the five Koshas 
(sheaths)? Man does not enquire into these matters. He lives continuously in these sheaths and 
functions through the sense organs but what is the purpose of this life? What is the significance 
of human birth? These questions do not bother him. He is content from morning till eve to 
acquire one thing or another and is concerned about "My house", "My car", "My clothes" and 
the like. In this pre-occupation with the "7" and "Mine", the basic truth about the Divine that is 
the real nature of the "7" is not remembered at all. 


Realise that the mind is the cause of "my-ness" 


When a man calls his body, "My body" who is the owner or the indweller of the body? If he is 
not the body or the mind, what is he? Without understanding who he is, is there any meaning in 


talking about "my body", "my mind" and the like? Is there any sense in seeking to acquire 
various possessions without understanding who is acquiring them and for what purpose? 


Once it is realized that the mind is the cause of this "my-ness", and that it is made up of desires, 
then one will strive to achieve the state of Samaadhi (superconscious state of bliss during 
meditation) in which all agitations in the mind cease. It may be difficult .to achieve this state of 
yogic serenity. An easier way to still the mind is to concentrate all thoughts on God. When that is 
done, file calmness that comes in the state of Sushupthi (deep sleep) will be realised. It is a state 
of equanimity in which one looks upon pain and pleasure, joy and grief, with equal indifference, 
unaffected by them either way. In the same manner the identity of the Jeevi (individual. Self) and 
the Brahman (Omniself) has to be experienced. 


Puurnachandhra Auditorium, Prashaanthi Nilayam, 12 October, 1983 


My desire is that you should not censure other religions. Develop 
brotherly feelings for all. God is One; there are not many Gods, 
one for each tribe among men. 


Love is One, it transcends caste, colour and creed, if it has to be 
genuine. Truth is One; there cannot be two. For two can only be 
one occurring twice. The goal is One; for, all roads must lead to 
the One God. Why then should men quarrel and fight over the 
Eternal and the Absolute? 


Sri Sathya Sai 


27. Yajnas and the human predicament 


THE Dheha (body), the Indhriyas (senses), the Manas (mind) and the Buddhi (intellect) are the 
instruments through which man functions. The true nature of man can be understood only when 
the secret of each of these is understood. What is the real character of the body, the mind, the 
senses and the intellect? Once this is known we can discover the means to bring them under 
control. 


The first upaadhi (instrument) of man is the body. "The etymological meaning of the word 
Dheha is "Dhahyathi-ithi Dhehah" ("that which is burnt"). The burning does not refer only to the 
cremation of the body after death. In fact, the body is all the time burning on account of worries. 


The body is also called Shareera, which means "that which is subject to change and decay." 
From childhood to youth, from youth to old age the body undergoes many changes. The body is 
like a rented house. It is also described as the Tabernacle of God. This means that it is a sacred 
dwelling. Constant efforts are made to drive the tenant out of the house. Ultimately death evicts 
the tenant. Another name for the body is Kshethra (as mentioned in the Bhagavath Geetha). The 
word Kshethra has many meanings. It may be regarded as a Kavacham (armour) which protects 
the indwelling spirit. Kshethra also means that which is liable to destruction. It also means a field 
(of action). 


Make the body a fitting shrine for the Divine 


If the body is considered as a field its owner can reap only crops he cultivates in it. If he sows 
sacred seeds he will reap a harvest of merit. If he sows sinful seeds he will reap a harvest of sins. 
When the body is regarded as a shrine, it must be revered as the sacred abode of the Divine. 
Religious Kshethras are places of pilgrimage because they are associated with Divinity. Because 
the body is also the abode of the Divine it must be regarded as a Kshethra. 


In the temple of the body the Divine Spirit is installed. It can acquire purity and holiness only 
when it is purified internally and externally. By bathing in water the body can be purified 
externally. By speaking the Truth, the tongue is purified. Through study and penance, the spirit is 
rendered pure. The intellect acquires purity through Jnaana (spiritual wisdom). In these ways the 
body has to be made a fitting shrine for the Divine by pure thoughts, pure deeds and by 
meditation. Purity of mind, speech and body has been described as "Trikarana Shuddhi" (the 
triple purity.) 


The body should not be regarded as a mere conglomeration of the five elements. Looking at it 
externally, it may appear as a structure of bones, flesh, blood and nerves. But just as a temple is 
not a mere edifice consisting of brick and mortar but is the Abode of the Divine, the body should 
also be regarded as the dwelling of the Divine Spirit. It is, therefore, the primary duty of man to 
ensure that the body does not indulge in wrongful practices, and fall a prey to falsehood and un- 
righteousness. He should use the body to promote his higher human qualities and pursue the 
divine path. It is for this purpose that Yajnas, Yaagas and other religious rites have been 
prescribed. 


Some organs are not easily subject to control 


Next there are Indhriyas the sense organs. These senses pursue their own courses. They are not 
easily subject to control or regulation. They tend to go astray to any extent. The senses are called 
Maathras. Maathra means that which measures or determines the quality. The tongue, for 


instance, tastes something and declares whether it is sweet, sour or so on. The eye likewise 
determines whether something is beautiful and attractive or not. In this manner every sense organ 
in the human body judges the quality of the objects it experiences. Another meaning of Maathra 
is that it has to observe certain bounds or limits. 


The /ndhriyas have thus got both a judging quality and a limitation. The nose, for instance, can 
only smell but cannot take up any other function. The purpose of the limitation is that the nose 
should confine itself to the specific function of smelling what is pure or fragrant and rejecting 
what is impure. The ears, for instance, should listen to pure and holy matters and receive what 
delights the heart. They should not indulge in listening to words which cause pain to the heart or 
affect its purity. If the ears are used in violation of this rule and give heed to irrelevant matters 
and to evil gossip they become instruments for the commission of sin. 


The tongue, again, is intended to proclaim the glory of God and to speak the truth. Instead of 
being used for this sacred purpose it is employed for abusing others or causing pain to them. It is 
a perversion of the divine purpose for which it is given. 


Sorrows are the result of abuse of sense organs 


Because the Jndhriyas (the sense organs) are not used for the pure and sacred purposes for which 
the Divine has endowed man with them, they become the instruments for doing many evil things. 
All the sorrows and troubles man experiences are the result of abuse of sense organs. It is for this 
reason that in the spiritual journey one is enjoined Indhriya nigraham (to control the senses) as 
the very first discipline. 


However-wealthy, powerful or knowledgeable one may be, if he fails to bring his senses under 
control he will not be able to make purposeful and worthy use of his power or position. One who 
is a slave of his senses is displaying his animal qualities. One who controls his senses 
demonstrates the sacredness of the human birth. It is to develop the divine qualities in man and 
promote his purity in thought, word and deed that Yaagas and Yajnas have to be performed. 


Among the good qualities which man has to cultivate, the most important is thyaaga (sacrifice). 
Thyaaga is ordinarily equated with charity or generosity. 


There is a great difference between charity and real sacrifice. Giving away things like land, 
cows, gold, food or knowledge represents only an attempt to share with others what you have. 
By gifts of these kind one does not lose much. In fact many of those who are born in poverty and 
misery in this life are suffering the consequences of not exercising charity in previous lives. The 
Shaasthras (moral sciences) have laid down that the affluent should share their wealth with the 
have-nots. This kind of sharing is an inherent obligation of man, according to the Shaasthras. 
Samarasya (compassion) and Samanvaya (one-ness) towards all being have been regarded as 
two eyes for a man. 


Significance of Anga-puuja in ritual worship 


Thyaaga, however, transcends charity and compassion. It is the readiness to part with a smile the 
things which one loves, including one's life itself. This is true sacrifice and it is that kind of 
sacrifice that has been regarded as the means to realise Amruthathvam (immortality). The Vedhas 
have also declared that peace comes from thyaaga. Those who seek peace of mind, peace of the 
spirit and peace for the world or the calmness of the senses have to cultivate the spirit of 
sacrifice. One must try continually to see how one's wealth or talents, knowledge or qualities can 
be utilised to promote happiness among others. 


In the daily religious routine, persons are in the habit of performing what is called 'Anga Puuja'-- 
-offering the various limbs of the body to the Divine. But while uttering the Manthra, 'Nethram 
Samarpayaami' (I am offering my eye), if you merely offer a flower, you are missing the real 
significance of this Manthra. It means that you are offering your eye for seeing the Divine. 
Similarly, in the Homa (sacrificial offering in the fire) the Manthra is uttered, 'Hridhayam 
Samarpayaami' (I offer my heart). The real significance of this manthra is: "O Lord, this is not 
my heart. It is yours. There is only one seat in this heart and this is reserved for you. There is no 
place in it for anybody else, neither for father or mother, husband or wife, or teacher. You are the 
only one who can occupy my heart. Accept this heart as yours." Instead of uttering the manthras 
in this faith, nowadays the ritual is converted into a mechanical offering of a flower or something 
else. Hence the worship becomes a hypocritical formality. 


Yajnas are intended for people in all the worlds 


We speak of the heart as the throne of the Lord. But we seat on it all and sundry. The throne 
becomes ultimately a musical chair. How can the Divine be expected to come, and dwell in such 
a heart? The first thing one has to do is to' rid the heart of all the evil elements residing it. The 
heart is compared to a lotus. But' the lotus of our heart is infested with evil insects such as hatred, 
lust, greed, pride, attachment and envy. Until these pestilential creatures are removed and the 
lotus is cleaned by the water of Prema (Divine love) the heart is not fit to be offered to the 
Divine. During worship, we say' Suddhodhaka Snaanam Samarpayaami' (I am offering you a 
bath in pure water). What is the pure water that is implied here? It is pure unselfish love. Any 
offering made to the divine should be done not in expectation of any reward or for any selfish 
purpose but only to please the Divine. 


Thyaaga must be regarded as a Yajna (great sacrifice). What you offer should be within your 
capability. The person to whom it is offered should be deserving and should be capable of 
making proper use of what is offered. To make offerings beyond one's capacity to undeserving 
persons or to persons incapable of putting them to proper use is like offering a golden toy to a 
child or presenting a knife to a lunatic. It may have many undesirable consequences. 


The Rishis (sages) who prescribed Yajnas and Yaagas did not intend them for the use of a 
particular country, community or time. They are valid for any country, for any people, at 
anytime. The benediction at the end of the Yajna is "Lokaah Samasthaah Sukhino Bhavanthu" 
(May all the worlds be happy). 


These Yajnas and Yaagas must be preserved by us with appropriate adaptations for differences in 
place and time. What is essential is to adhere to the spirit and deeper purpose of the manthras 
which are employed in the yajnas. When the yajnas are performed in this way they will result in 
the purification of the spirit and lead us to the realisation of the Divine. 


Puurnachandhra Auditorium, Prashaanthi Nilayam, 11-10-1983 


Man being divine must have the divine all around him, all the time, 
in order to be alive; like fish, he must have the water of divine joy 
all around him. Instead, he is now seeking to keep himself alive by 
artificial respiration and borrowed blood. He is himself Amritha- 
swaruupa, and Aanandha-swaruupa (Immortal and_ Bliss 


personified). So, why should he strive to get Aanandha from 
outside? 


Sri Sathya Sai 


28. To Divinity through Sacrifice 


THE sacred and fragrant articles that are offered and the precious gems that are placed in the 
sacrificial fire are symbolic of the offerings which man should make in life. He should offer his 
pure heart and good qualities such as Sathya, Dharma, Shaanthi and Prema (Truth, Virtue, Peace 
and Love) to the Divine. The real spirit of giving to society and the community the wealth, 
knowledge and skills one possesses is the true Yagjna (sacrificial rite). Without the spirit or 
sacrifice the performance of external rituals has no meaning. 


Life itself is a Yajna. To make human life an oblation in the sacred fire of duties and actions is 
itself a Yajna. To get rid of one's bad qualities is Yajna. Every individual who seeks to lead an 
ideal life, to achieve bliss and attain self-realisation has to cultivate the spirit of sacrifice. Yajna 
is the means to lead one from sorrow to happiness, adversity to prosperity, darkness to light. 
Human life can be worthwhile only when it is based on sacrifice or the quality of renunciation. 
Thereby not only can it become meaningful but Divinity can also be experienced. 


Life does not consist in eating, sleeping and such activities. The Vedhaantha (concluding essence 
of Vedhas) has declared that the human goal is Moksha (release from bondage). What is this 
bondage? It is not association with wife and. children, with property or attachments and hatreds. 
Even the sense of ‘J’ and 'Mine' does not constitute bondage. It is the ignorance of one's true self 
that constitutes bondage. The process of liberation begins with the attempt to discover one's own 
Self. This Yajna is intended to reveal to man the truth about himself and lead him to the Divine. 


The Lord is both the performer and enjoyer of yajna 


From ancient times wrong conceptions about the purpose of Yajna resulted in sacrifice of living 
beings, and the true purpose of Yajnas was forgotten. Yajna is also called Adhvaram. Dhvaram 
means "killing". Adhvaram signifies "non-killing". Hence the inner meaning of 'Yajna is that in 
which there is no violence. All the Manthras (sacred formulas) used in Yajnas are aimed at 
achieving Aanandha (Divine Bliss). Yajnas must lead to Bliss and Self-realisation. Only when the 
import of the manthras is fully understood and experienced will there be Self-realisation. 


The Lord is hailed as the Yajnapurusha. He is known as Yajnabhruth, 1.e., the Lord of the Yajna. 
He is the Master of all that takes place in the Yajna. From this, the supreme significance of the 
Yajna should be obvious. The Lord is also known as Yajnakrith and Yajnabhuk. That is, He is 
both the performer and the enjoyer of the sacrifice. The Lord is thus the protector and the 
destroyer of the sacrifice. All the sacred things that are offered in the sacrificial fire, including 
the manthras (holy sacred formulae) and yanthras (ritual diagramatic representations), are 
accepted by Him. When each offering is made with the manthra, 'Swaaha', it means that it is 
being offered to the Divine. Hence, everything that is offered must be pure, sweet and enjoyable. 


We have to look upon our body as the sacrificial platform. Our Mind is the altar on which the 
offerings are to be made. Our desires represent the ghee that is poured into the sacrificial fire. 
Our hatred is the sacrificial animal. Our mental conflicts are the blades of Kusha grass. Our heart 
is the sacrificial fire. It is with these elements that life should be turned into a sacrificial Yajna. 
Every pure thought should be regarded as a 'Samidh' (holy twig) which is offered in the fire. 


Man should offer to the Divine his pure heart 


The essential significance of Yajna consists in the spirit of sacrifice. Knowledge or strength or 
wealth that is not used for the good of others is useless. The object of Yajna is to make man 


realise that all the powers given to him should be offered to the Divine to elevate one's life. 


To perform Yajnas and Yaagas in the true spirit no special sacrificial altars or priests are 
necessary. The external Yajna is only a reflection of the internal Yajna. Through the performance 
of the external Yajnas, by rituals, religious practices and righteous deeds, the Inner-Self is 
purified. At the time of 'Puurnaahuthi' (completion of the Yajna) many sacred and fragrant 
articles are offered in the sacrificial fire. Precious gems like diamonds, rabies, emeralds etc., are 
also put into the fire. Even pure silk cloth is offered. The significance of this is that man should 
offer to the Divine his pure unselfish heart and such noble qualities as Sathya, Dharma, 
Shaanthi, Prema (truth, virtue, peace, love), compassion and kindness for all beings alike. 


Cultivate discrimination between right and wrong 


The world has any number of wealthy persons, profound scholars and knowledgeable scientists. 
But if none of them has compassion and kindliness, their wealth or knowledge is of no avail. It is 
only when we resolve to offer all that we have for the promotion of the well-being of the world 
and the good of society, will we be embarking on real Yajna. Without faith in God and this spirit 
of sacrifice all actions will only result in evil. 


Man today has made considerable progress in science. He labours to acquire wealth, scholarship 
and skills of various kinds. What is the use of acquiring all these if they are not put to right use. 
The use of these things depends on the character of the persons possessing them. If they are 
good, these will be put to fight use. If they are bad, these will be misused. If wealth, knowledge 
or scientific skills are possessed by persons with Rajoguna (quality of passionate activity) they 
will be used for wrongful ends. If persons with Thamoguna (quality of inertia and ignorance) 
have them, they will be used purely for selfish ends. The persons with Rajoguna may some time 
or other reform themselves, but those with Thamoguna will use their talents and energies in 
sinful and anti-social ways. 


Man has, therefore, to cultivate primarily the sense of discrimination between right and wrong. 
The Gaayathree Manthra declares, "Dhiyo Yo Nah Pracho-Dhayaath." It is a prayer to the 
Gaayathree Goddess to illumine the mind. Gandhiji's favourite prayer was Sab Ko Sanmathi Dhe 
Bhagavan ("O Lord, bestow good sense on everyone"). Because today evil-minded men are 
active everywhere the world suffers from violence, disorder and confusion. 


Too many wealthy people nowadays prefer to hoard their wealth rather than utilise it for the 
good of society and for relieving the distress of the poor. They are behaving like a dog in the 
manger. It is high time every person who wishes to lead a purposeful and righteous life decides 
to engage himself in service to society and devotes all his wealth and energies to spreading 
happiness in the community. Men must realise that there can be no greater source of real bliss 
than Thyaaga (renunciation). 


Those who are affluent should help the distressed 


Look at the trees, the rivers and the cows. They are supreme examples of self-sacrifice for the 
sake of others. The trees grow and produce flowers and fruits for the enjoyment of others. A tree 
gives shade even to one who is felling it. The rivers keep flowing all the time to provide life- 
giving water to all living things. The cows offer the milk which is intended for their calves to 
man. If trees, rivers and cows can exhibit such exemplary qualities of sacrifice, it is deplorable 
that man, who has inherently noble qualities, should be lacking in the spirit of sacrifice. 


Bhaarath had the reputation for centuries of being the land of thyaaga, yoga, and karma 


(sacrifice, divine communion and right action). If today persons born in such a country have no 
sense of sacrifice it is a matter for shame. The educated persons and those who are affluent 
should try in every way to help the weak, the distressed and the poor in society. They must go to 
the relief of the sick and suffering. Those who go abroad to acquire scientific and other 
knowledge should come back to the mother country and use their knowledge for building up the 
national economy and serving their countrymen. 


Engage in service to people around you 


Instead of cultivating the higher human qualities we are developing selfishness and other 
undesirable traits. Many are engaged in looking at the faults of others and ignoring their own 
defects. The right attitude is to learn from the good qualities of others and correct one's own 
faults. If you do not like a person you may keep away . from him, but you should not go about 
decrying him. 


When you point your finger at the faults of others you must remember that three fingers are 
pointing at your own faults. 


There are many Saadhakas (spiritual aspirants) and devotees who go to Ashrams (monasteries), 
cultivate the company of elders and listen to their teachings and who imagine that they have 
renounced everything. However, if there is no change in their mental attitude and way of life, of 
what use is this renunciation? If you cannot shed your envy or likes and dislikes, what is the 
point in staying in an Aashram? Many Saadhaks are in the habit of moving from house to house 
and indulging in gossip. Is this the kind of life that should be led in an Aashram? Instead of 
devoting their time to spiritual and Godly matters, indulging in idle gossip is a gross abuse of 
one's life in an Aashram. It is more important to put into practice even one or two good things 
that one learns from a preceptor than listen endlessly to discourses. 


Your real wealth is the practice of Virtue 


Embodiments of the Divine! On this auspicious Puurnaahuthi day, offer in the sacrificial fire of 
your heart, all your defects and bad qualities such as envy, greed, and antipathy and take a 
resolve to cultivate good qualities. All the wealth about which you boast is valueless. The real 
wealth is the practice of Virtue. Good character is real knowledge. This knowledge is wealth 
which will not decline however much you may use it, and no one can filch it away from you. 


Today this Yajna has come to a close. This should mean that our spirit of sacrifice has achieved 
fulfilment. Henceforth, develop universal love and dedicate your self to the service of society. 
Life is constantly ebbing away. To utilise all your resources for the good of others is the way to 
experience real bliss. Whatever may have been your lapses in the past, begin a new life of 
dedication and devotion from today. Make the best use of the sacred atmosphere prevailing in the 
Aashram and engage yourself in spiritual saadhana (practices) and service to the people around 
you. 


On this Puurnathuthi day I bless you that you should find fulfilment by becoming integrated 
personalities, enjoying unalloyed Bliss. 


29. Unity is Divinity 


EMBODIMENTS of the Divine Spirit! The ancient 


saying, "All roads lead to Rome", has been vindicated today. It is not without great significance 
that people from many countries have gathered in this historic city. You have to realise that you 
have come here to learn things which you have never heard before, and to derive inspiration 
from new ideals about the human adventure. 


This Conference is not concerned with any one religion, nation, race, caste or individual. It is 
intended to reveal the essential Truth that underlies all Scriptures and to strive for the peace and 
welfare of all people through the establishment of Truth and Righteousness. 


The whole of mankind belongs to one Religion---the Religion of Man. For all men God is the 
Father. As the children of one God all men are brothers. This Conference is therefore a family 
gathering. It is not a meeting of nationalities and religions. It is a meeting of minds. It does not 
relate to any one culture or philosophy. It is concerned with the divine way of life that is implicit 
in the teachings of all religions. Its purpose is to see Unity in Divinity. 


All religions proclaim the Unity of Divinity 


The basic truth in all religions, irrespective of country or race, is one and the same. The 
philosophic ideas or the practices and methods of approach may vary. But the final objective and 
goal is only one. All religions proclaim the Unity of Divinity and preach the cultivation of 
Universal Love without regard to caste, creed, country or colour. Those who are ignorant of this 
basic Truth develop pride and ego because of their own religion. Such people are creating great 
confusion and chaos by fragmenting Divinity. To confine and divide the Infinite Divine into such 
narrow compartments is treason to the Divine. The basis for a spiritual, Godbased life is the 
indwelling Spirit--the Aathman (divine soul). The body is the home of Spirit. 


Life in society should also conform to this spiritual basis. Man, however, bases his life on the 
belief that the body alone is real. It is to rid him of this error that he has to be taught about Spirit. 
Mankind has to realise that both the individual and society are manifestations of the Divine Will 
and that the Divine permeates the Universe. Only by recognising this Truth can man give up his 
ego and lead a life of devotion to duty. Society should not become a cockpit of selfish 
individuals, but a community of divinely guided Individuals. 


With the progress of science man imagines that he is the lord of the universe and he tends to 
forget the Divine. Although man today has gone to the moon and is exploring outer space, if he 
were to consider the innumerable mysteries and wonders in creation yet to be known, he will 
realise that these are far beyond the limited capacity of mind and intelligence. The more man 
discovers the secrets and mysteries of the cosmos, the more he will realise that God is the creator 
and motivator of all creation. All religions are agreed upon this Truth. All that man can do is to 
strive through his limited intelligence and knowledge to understand the invisible and infinite 
Divine and learn to worship and adore Him. 


Service to Society is the means to promote Unity 


Instead of realising his innate Divinity, man is caught up in the prison house of his own material 
‘achievements. Greater than all his scientific and technological progress is man himself as a 
being endowed with the divine consciousness. By choosing to regard only the material world as 
real, it may be possible to bring about the prosperity of a scientific, technological and 


materialistic society for a time. But if, in the process, human selfishness, greed and hatred 
develop, as they usually do, society will destroy itself. If, on the contrary, the essential Divinity 
of man is realised, mankind can build up a great society based on unity and on adherence to the 
divine principle of Love. This profound change must begin in the minds of individuals. When 
individuals change, society will change. And when society changes, the whole world will 
change. Unity is the secret of social progress, and service to society is the means to promote it. 
Everyone therefore should devote himself to such service in a spirit of dedication. 


It should be realised that material comfort is not the sole aim of social living. A society in which 
the individuals are concerned only about material welfare will not be able to achieve harmony 
and peace. Even if it is achieved, it will only be a patched-up harmony for, in such a society, the 
strong will oppress the weak. Nor will an equal distribution of the bounties of nature ensure 
anything but a nominal equality. How will the equal distribution of material goods achieve 
equality with reference to desires and abilities? Desires have, therefore, to be controlled by 
developing the spiritual approach and diverting the mind from material objects to the Divine 
seated in each one' s heart. 


Divine experience is inherent nature of man 


Once the Truth of the Indwelling Spirit is recognised, there dawns the awareness that the world 
is one family. One is then filled with Divine Love which becomes the driving force for all of 
one's actions. Man tums away from the pursuit of endless desires to the search for peace and 
equanimity. By converting the love for material things into Love of God one experiences the 
Divine. This experience is not something beyond man. It is, in fact, a part of the inherent nature 
of man.. It is the secret of his humanness and his Divinity. 


Whatever one's religion may be, everyone should cultivate respect for other faiths. One who does 
not have such an attitude of tolerance and respect for other religions is not a true follower of his 
own .religion. It is not enough merely to adhere strictly to the practices of one's own religion. 
One should also try to see the essential unity of all religions. Only then will man be able to 
experience the oneness of Divinity. There should be no kind of coercion or compulsion in the 
sphere of religion. Religious matters should be discussed calmly and dispassionately. Do not 
entertain the feeling that one's religion is superior and another's inferior. Conflicts on the basis of 
religion should be totally eliminated. To divide men on grounds of religion is a crime against 
humanity. 


Man today imagines that he knows everything about Nature and the Universe. But of what use is 
all this knowledge if man does not know himself? It is only when he understands himself that he 
will be able to know the Truth about the external world. Man's Inner Reality cannot be known by 
exploring the world outside. When he turns his vision inward and realises his essential Divinity, 
he will acquire an equal-mindedness towards all beings. Out of that feeling of oneness he will 
experience the Bliss that passeth understanding. 


Message to International Symposium in Rome on the theme 


"Unity is Divinity," held on 30 and 31-10-1983 


God is Omnipresent; He is immanent in every being in equal 
measure. So, man must visualise Him equally in himself and in 
others. That is to say, he sees only God in all. So how can he injure 


others or fear that he will come to harm through others? This is 
the basis of the Indian ideal of Ahimsa (non-injury). 


Sri Sathya Sai 


30. Perpetual bliss 


Who can ascribe a form to Him who is beyond all 
bounds and shapes? 
One-can only laugh at those who babble that 
He is thus and thus and thus. 
He has no hands or feet or limbs or parts: 
How then can humans picture Him ? 
His radiance is that of a billion Suns and more: 
How can the mind hope to reach Him? 
'Tis formless Force--to grasp It whole 
Who can venture? Who can claim success? 
'Tis Aathma with no fixed Form, since Time began, 


Illumining Space and the boundless vast 


He, the Ever-existing with no birth, no death, 

Sans beginning, middle or end, 

Unborn, undecaying, deathless 

He is the Aathma, the Timeless, the Etenal Supreme. 


EMBODIMENTS of Love ! Since dawn this day, from every tongue, the words, "Happy 
Birthday" "Happy Birthdays" have been resounding. What exactly do these words mean? Are 
the words used with awareness of their significance, or, are they spoken as a conventional form 
of social etiquette? Such doubts do arise. 


The English word "happy" has as its equivalent in Thelugu Santhosham. We shall probe into the 
implications of the expression San-thosham. 'Thosham' signifies prasannatha (delight). The 
prefix ‘Sam' denotes that the delight has been won through righteous and honourable means, that 
is to say, through 'detachment' and 'sacrifice.' 


When discontent disappears delight is established 


One has to give up desires that enslave and imprison, that bring sorrow in their train. Desires can 
be grouped under two heads: desire for an object or experience that no one else has earned, and 
desire that the object or experience one has earned should not be earned by any one else! Both 
these desires are indeed ridiculous. What is desired is as illusory as one's shadow. The faster you 
run towards it, hoping to seize it, the farther it is from your reach. When you pursue desire, it 
flees; when you scorn its hold, it submits like the shadow that follows you when you turn your 
back on it. Desires are born of greed. When greed is weakened more and more, discontent 
declines in equal measure. And, when discontent disappears delight is established. 


Prahlaadha, as the Bhaagavatha text declares, was rooted in the faith in God Naaraayana and His 
Universal, Absolute Reality. His father, Hiranyakashipu, however, was drawn by external forms 
and the limiting names. Therefore, Prahlaadha was rooted in Aanandha (Bliss) wherever he was, 
in whatever set of circumstances. Hiranyakashipu was ever worried and anxious, caught up in the 
multiplicity of names and forms. 


Those who are in such bliss as Prahlaadha had will have an aura around them and an effulgence 
on their faces. People can derive joy watching their faces and yearn to have that experience again 
and again. The faces of the worried and the anxious will infect others too with similar feelings. 


In deep sleep man is in his native core 


Besides, Delight endows one with great power also whereas anxiety robs one of the strength he 
has. True delight cannot be acquired by effort or produced artificially or maintained by design. 
No course of Saadhana (spiritual effort) can be prescribed to enable one to gain Aanandha. For, 
one is, in fact, the very embodiment of Aanandha !But since he has failed to identify his truth, he 
is seeking it from outside, from the objects around him. For those who have realised that they are 
the Eternal, the True and the Pure Aathma, Aanandha is ever accessible. 


Aanandha is Brahman; the Bhagavathgeetha teaches this truth in many ways. The very name 
Prahlaadha has Aanandha soaked in it. 'Hlaadha' means Aanandha and the prefix 'Pra' indicates 
that the Aanandha is 'full.' Prahlaadha means 'Full Bliss'---"a person who is full of Aanandha." 
How could Prahlaadha attain that state? He gave up attachment to his name and form and sought 
the Aathma as the only reality and identified that reality with Naaraayana. 


Every man is privileged to taste this Bliss during Sushupthi (deep sleep). In that state, he is not 
conscious of his name and form, nor do any of his senses function. So, he is then in full Bliss, 
his native core, his very birthright. This is the reason why he seeks it so restlessly from the 
moment he awakes until the moment of sleep, unaware of the inner spring which is its unfailing 
source, engaging himself in the pursuit of knowledge and skills for earning a living. 


Knowledge, wealth, power and status are all capable of granting only worldly pleasure or joy or 
exultation. Of course, whatever the extent or nature of this joy, it must be realised that it is a 
amsha (particle) of the supreme Aanandha of the Aathmic awareness, the impact of Brahma 
Aanandha (the Limitless Vast). The mansion of a millionaire may have many evidences of his 
wealth but each is a particle of the Grace of Lakshmi (Goddess of Prosperity). Men may derive 
joy from their enormous wealth, deep scholarship, or physical prowess, but each of these is really 
a ray emanating from Brahmaanandha. The ray is reflected differently from different media but 
the source is One and the primal essence is one. 


The yearning to know is the sign of Chith 


Aanandha (Supreme Bliss) is immanent in every thing in Creation, for Aanandha is Brahman 
(the Universal Absolute). Everything is Sath (Being), Chith (Awareness or Consciousness) and 
Aanandha (Bliss), that is to say, Divine. Everything IS, the IS-ness is the Sath (the being) 
capable of Becoming. Next about Chith (awareness) : the capacity to be known and to know, to 
gain awareness and to grant awareness is Chith. When we take with us a child to a fair or market 
or an exhibition, it asks for answers to endless questions, What is that?" "Why is it so?", “What 
is its name ?" This yearning to know is the sign of the Chith. 


In spite of our seeing so many dying around us and heating about as many more deaths, though 
we witness the misery and the suffering of so many, we long for a death-less and sorrow-less 


life. We spend fortunes to lengthen our lives. That is the urge of the "Sath" in us. The other 
longing to know is the expression of the "Chith" in us. The third proof of our innate Divinity is 
the urge of Aanandha in us. Without exception, every one is motivated by this Aanandha urge. 


Purity of mind is enough to obtain Divine Grace 


However, these urges have each two aspects---the impression (internal) and the expression 
(external). Sath has, for example, the being and the becoming. The process of becoming is what 
the Gaayathri prayer asks for "Awaken my intellect, heighten and expand my awareness 
(prachodayaath)." Becoming is through expanding, manifesting wider and more varied forms. 
The Upanishaths declare, "He is everything that exists both inside and _ outside." 
Antharbahishcha thath sarvam vyaapya Naarayano sthithah (Naaraayana permeates everything 
inside and outside all this). He cast His look and it all happened. 


The Become is a reflection of the Will that urged the Being; so, the Being IS the Becoming. It 
changes from Is to Was; it is unstable, while Being is stable. Being is the screen and Becoming, 
the pictures that flit across the screen. When there are no pictures, who will be drawn to the 
screen? How can pictures be seen, when there is no screen? The fleeting and the fixed are 
inextricably dependent on each other. 


The objective world is but a series of momentary pictures impinging on the mind. The mind is 
active in the walking stage of the body. The body is built up by Anna (food), maintained by Anna 
and disintegrates through Anna. The body has five sheaths, the outermost one, the Annamaya 
Kosha (food sheath). It is known also as the sthoola (gross body). The next three sheaths, the 
Praanamaya (vital air), the Manomaya (mind), and the Vijnaana (intellectual) form the 
suukshma (subtle) body. The subtle body is active in the dream stage also. The fifth and the 
inner-most sheath is the Aanandhamaya (Ecstatic, the Blissful), the Kaarana (causal body). 


The expression of the urge of Aanandha is as Love and Delight. Delight is the product and 
projection of Love. The expression of Chith is awareness. The expression of Sath is Becoming. 
Divinity is the Unity that manifests in Diversity, the One as the Many. The One is the efficient 
cause as well as the material cause of the Many. The One is inherent in the Many and shines in 
the Many which It has become. The ONE is the source of the highest and the most lasting 
Aanandha. 


Brahmaanandha is native to Man, his very source 


The Aanandha we get when hunger is appeased by a meal is short-lived. Hunger afflicts us again 
before long. However sweet and tasty the food may be, it causes nausea when consumed in 
quantity. The mythological bird Chakora is said to feed on moonlight only but we can be sure a 
surfeit of that will certainly be unwelcome to it. Even nectar will cloy when one continues to eat 
it endlessly. 


Brahmaanandha, however, is different.. For, it is native to man, his very source and sustenance. 
The purpose of human striving, through stage after stage of spiritual progress, is to attain that. A 
fish placed in an artistic golden gem-studded bowl is miserable. It has no Aanandha, for it has no 
water. Water is its home, its real source and sustenance. Man too must reach his original home, 
however far he may wander. Thyaagaraaja sang: "Birds, big and small, before nightfall seek the 
tree where they can rest. I hold Your Feet In my grasp; save me, 0 Raama." The Bhaagavatha 
makes it more explicit, "For every living being, the best course is to attain the source from which 
it originated." 


Be reminding yourself "I am not different from God" 


There exist many flooded streams on the globe. Where has the water come from? The ocean, of 
course. Consider the impediments the streams have to overcome before they attain the source! 
The flooded stream of human life has originated from Brahmaanandha and it has to attain the 
source from which it has come away. In order to succeed, man must recollect the ecstasy of 
Brahmaanandha every moment, in every activity. 


Thyaagaraaja revelled in the Aanandha that poetry, music and scholarship can confer but since 
the Aanandha that learning can confer (Vidhyaanandha) was liable to weaken, he considered it 
only as a particle or foretaste of the Brahmaanandha he sought most the Aanandha derivable 
from the Universal Eternal Delight, the Nirguna Aanandha Brahman, That Aanandha is man's 
reality, for, man is God. 


God is neither distant, nor distinct from you. You are God. You are Sath-Chith-Aanandha 
(Being, Awarenessand Bliss Absolute). You are Asthi (being), Bhaathi (awareness), Priyam 
(bliss). You are all. When do you cognise this Truth? When you shake off the delusions which 
hide the Truth. If your yearning to experience Brahmaanandha, the Sath-Chith-Aanandha is 
sincere and pure, from this day, keep ever in your memory what I am about to tell you: 


(1) "Iam God; I am not different from God." Be conscious of this always. Keep it ever in mind. 
"I am God; I am God. I am not different from God." Be reminding yourself of this. Pray that you 
may not fail in this saadhana (spiritual exercise). 


(2) "Iam the Akhanda Para Brahman (Indivisible Supreme Absolute)." This is the second Truth 
to be established in the consciousness by unremitting repetition and prayer. 


(3) Lam Sath-Chith-Aanandha ("Being, Awareness, Bliss"). 
Divine Bliss is the goal to be ever kept in view 


(4) "Grief and anxiety can never affect me." Develop ' this Faith and convince yourselves of this 
Truth by repeated assurance and prayer. 


(5) "I am ever content; fear can never enter me." Feel thus for ever. Pray that this conviction 
grows stronger and stronger. Exhort yourself, "O self! Utter '0m Thath Sath', 'Om Thath Sath' 
"the threefold symbol of Brahman. As the physical body is maintained healthy and strong by the 
five praanas (vital airs), these five prayers will endow you with the "awareness of Brahman,” 
which is the same as "the status of Brahman Itself." 


Do not demean or condemn yourself as low or small or weak. The body is but a vehicle for the 
journey through life. Do not mistake it as your self and impose on yourself its ups and downs. 
You purchase a car and possess it for the sake of its usefulness, not for keeping it under lock and 
key in the garage. The body-car should be put to the best use, for attaining Brahmaanandha. The 
four goals of human life---Dharma, Artha, Kaama, Moksha (fight living, fight earning, fight 
desiring and release from worldly bondage) are the wheels of the vehicle; the wheel inside that 
steers these four is the mind. The Buddhi (intellect) is the switch. The air which fills the tubes in 
the tyres is Faith and the destination is Aanandha. 


Aanandha is the breath that sustains life. That is the goal which has to be ever in view, while 
navigating the ocean of one's life. Even the least trace of Aanandha that one derives is but a 


reflection of Brahmaanandha. One has to keep this in mind. Anything done or said or seen is but 
the prompting of the Brahman that is one's reality. Have faith in this fact. 


In order to develop and deepen this faith, certain spiritual practices can be undertaken. Do not 
feel separate from God and consider Him as the Giver and yourself as the Recipient. This smacks 
of commerce. It is wrong to plan for getting some wish granted in return for what you offer. God 
will not pay any attention to your material greed; He watches the heart and its contents. Believers 
in God have not understood God if they bargain with Him and clamour for worldly goods. 
Hence, from ages past, they have suffered misery. The Divine seeks and rewards only Divine 
qualities, virtues and conduct. 


The highest virtue is humility, surrender to God 


The body is transient and the joy it seeks and gets is equally transient. The Aanandha one gets 
through meditation on the Aathma is as lasting as the Aathma. When Godhead assumes a body, It 
too is unaffected as the Aathma. Nothing can confer as much Aanandha as virtue, neither wealth, 
nor material power, nor fame, nor scholarship. The highest virtue is humility, surrender to God. 
People speak of those who have no one to look after them as 'orphans' but God looks after every 
one. So, no one can be an orphan. God alone is the anaatha (orphan), for who can claim that he 
is God's guardian? 


Dedicate thought, word and deed to God. Do not treat some of your activities as done for God 
and others as done for yourself. They are both like the two halves of a pulse grain. The plant 
sprouts from the middle of the grain, drawing sustenance equally from both halves. The alert and 
the inert, the living and the non-living, the moving and the non-moving are all God. Strengthen 
this faith, live in this faith. This is the prescription for perpetual Brahmaanandha. 


Bhagavan's Birthday Discourse, Prashaanthi Nilayam, 
23 November, 1983 


The mother must herself prepare food for the home; for, food that 
is prepared with love and served with a smile is much more 
sustaining and strengthening than food cooked by a hired woman 
and served by a disgruntled refractory kitchen boy! 


Sri Sathya Sai 


31. Be exemplars of Sai ideals 


YOU, children of the Eternal! You are not lumps of flesh. You are embodiments of the Eternal. 
You are repositories of Bliss. Your hearts are shrines of the Divine. The whole of Nature is your 
playground; all the things in it are your play-things. Regard yourselves as masters of the 
Universe and not its bond-slaves. As long as you are bound to your desires, you cannot escape 
being subject to the material world. With all his prowess, Raavana could not save himself from 
disaster because he was a slave to his passions. Once you surrender to the Divine, nature 
becomes your servant. 


The boys and girls of today should realise this basic truth. They represent the future of humanity. 
They are the guardians of the nation's culture. The greatness and prosperity of the country 
depend on them. The nation's future will be determined by how the lives of the young children 
are shaped. Today the world is plunged in chaos, violence and wickedness. It is for the young 
people to see that these demonic forces are routed For accomplishing any objective two things 
are needed: Krishi (individual effort) and Kripa (Divine Grace). The two are like the negative 
and positive poles of a magnet. If there is only Divine Grace, but no proper effort on the part of 
the individual, the object cannot be achieved. Divine Grace is always there. We need not go far 
to seek it. The efforts made to secure it are called saadhana (spiritual effort). 


Children should learn to admit their mistakes 


Every person should possess four important qualities: Shaanthi (peace), Sathya (Truth), 
Nirahankaara (absence of egoism) and absence of Asuuya (envy). These four are essential. 
Suffusing all the four is Prema (love). These qualities are not got through studies or from a 
teacher or as a gift from someone. They can be acquired only by one's own effort. These noble 
qualities have to be developed from childhood itself. Only then will they stand in good stead in 
later years. 


The first quality is Sathvam. "Sathvameva Jayathe", says the Upanishath. (Truth alone 
triumphs). What is this Truth? It is adherence to what is true in thought, word and deed. Often 
many untoward situations arise which render such adherence difficult. Children, for instance, out 
of fear of punishment or scolding by parents or teachers indulge in prevarication or falsehood 
and avoid admitting the truth. This tendency results in due course in vitiating their entire life by 
making them lead double lives. Having regard, therefore, to their future, they should learn from 
their boyhood to admit their mistakes and speak the truth. There is nothing wrong if they are 
punished by their parents or teachers for their misdeeds. Through such corrective measures, they 
will learn to behave properly in their later years. If from the beginning you learn to speak the 
truth, you will find it easy. 


But once you take to lying, to return to the ways of truth is very difficult. Hence, when you are 
still young and your minds and hearts are pure and untainted, you must cultivate the habit of 
sticking to truth. By speaking the truth always, your minds will be filled with good thoughts. 


You should not give up truth, whatever difficulties you may encounter, whatever troubles or 
trials may come your way. This is the lesson to be learnt from the inspiring story of 
Harishchandra, who won undying fame because of his preparedness to sacrifice everything for 
upholding truth. Material prosperity or positions of authority may come and go. But the 
reputation for truth and integrity will last for ever. If you install truth and righteousness in your 
hearts, your lives will become eminently meaningful and worthy. 


Cultivate freedom from envy 


Next to truth, you must cultivate forbearance. Forbearance endows you with the strength to face 
"the slings and arrows of outrageous fortune." A man without forbearance easily succumbs to 
reverses and difficulties. 


Together with truth and forbearance, you have to cultivate freedom from asuuya. Envy is like the 
pest that attacks the root of a tree. It can destroy one's entire life. We may be enjoying many 
things in life---Knowledge, wealth, position, power and the like. But if the virus of envy enters 
our minds, it can pollute every thing. We should not give place to envy even in the smallest 
matter. If a fellow-student scores more marks than you, you should not feel envious. If others do 
better than yourself, you should feel happy rather than allow yourself to be consumed by envy. If 
some one is better dressed than yourself or is more wealthy, you should feel that he is enjoying 
what he has and you should be content and happy with what you have. To be free from envy is a 
divine quality. It makes you feel happy over others' happiness or success. 


Learn to make sacrifices for those in need 


And, then, there is Discipline. Without discipline, your life will be beset with pitfalls. Children of 
Sathya Sai Educational Institutions must set an example in discipline. In big gatherings, they 
should observe silence and order and restrain their enthusiasm. If children who have gone 
through the Bal Vikas course indulge in chatter and frequent clapping of hands, they bring 
discredit to the movement. Whatever the situation, you should observe strict discipline and obey 
the orders of your teachers or elders. You should also learn to make sacrifices for the sake of 
others in need. Sacrifice means going to the help of others to the extent of your capacity. If you 
are not in a position to help others, you must at least refrain from doing any harm. Even that is a 
form of sacrifice (giving up the tendency to do harm to others.) 


Those in power today are engaged in many activities which inflict burdens on the people and 
create hardships for them. But they are doing precious little to provide facilities for the 
improvement of children. Even the so-called developed countries are wasting crores of rupees on 
all kinds of projects, but they do not pay enough attention to the health and welfare of the 
younger generation. They try to exploit the young in one way or another for their own selfish 
purposes, but have no concern for the long-term future of these children. What the big powers 
spend on armaments for six days will be enough to keep in comfort lakhs of children in a whole 
year. 


Remember that children have tender hearts 


It is highly important to take care of the health of children. Good health is the basis of everything 
else in life. The condition of the children in the backward countries is pitiable. Most of them lack 
nourishing food, proper clothes and roofs over their heads. They are undernourished and weak 
and suffer from many ailments. Every day 40,000 children are dying on account of malnutrition 
in the third world countries. I wish the affluent people did something to help these hapless 
children. They should not be satisfied with their own prosperity and welfare. They have a duty 
towards those less fortunately placed than themselves. They should go to the help of the poor and 
the weak not in a spirit of condescension or of extending patronage. They must offer help out of 
genuine sympathy and fellow-feeling. They must regard such sympathy as one of the primary 
aims of meaningful living. 


Dear teachers! When you teach the children, you must remember that you are engaged in a noble 
task for the sake of the children entrusted to your care. You must feel that you are educating 
yourselves when you are educating the children. For instance, when you impart some knowledge 
to the children, your own understanding of the subject improves. Even when you study books for 
teaching the children, you also derive joy from the study. Hence you must always have the 
feeling that whatever you do for others is in reality a service done to the Divine that resides in 
every one. When teachers do their duty in this spirit, they will be imbuing the children with the 
spirit of Universal love. Remember that the children have tender hearts and innocent minds. Only 
if you fill their hearts with love will the world have genuine peace. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam is children's native home 


You have brought these children from distant places, away from their parents, out of your 
devotion to Bhagavaan. This testifies to your devotion. The children have put up with many 
difficulties and discomforts out of their devotion to Bhagaavan. They have all come to 
Prashaanthi Nilayam, out of their love for Bhagavaan. Prashaanthi Nilayam is their native home. 
Here they can experience a bliss they can find nowhere else. Bhagavaan is more than a mother 
for all of them. I want you all to go back with joy and with the feeling that you have spent a 
blissful period in your mother's home. All the expenses of your stay will be borne by the Sai 
Trust. You may use the money you have brought for the Bal Vikas activities. 


I bless everyone who has contributed to the success of this great conference the Sai Organisers, 
the Seva Dhal volunteers, the teachers and students, with long life and all health and happiness. 


Discourse for Bal Vikaas and Pre-Seva Dal Students, and 
teachers at Puurnachandra Auditorium, Prashaanthi 
Nilayam, 30-12-83 


32. Devotion and Divine Grace 


EVERY second is a new moment in your life. Do not wait for a whole year to celebrate the new 
year and make new year resolutions. Utilise every second to purify your heart and fill it with 
love. You will then realise that God is yours and you are with love. 


True devotion is the means to realise the Divine. Devotion means love of God without any desire 
for reward. Such devotion can be developed only through good conduct. There can be no 
devotion without righteousness. Purity of mind is an essential for enjoying Divine Bliss as purity 
of body is essential for bodily health. 


Higher than all the knowledge that can be acquired in the world is the Aathmajnaana (knowledge 
of the Self). There is nothing equal to the bliss that comes from Self-realisation. It is attained 
only when the ego-sense is destroyed and there is prayerful submission to the Divine. Prayers 
must issue not from the lips but from the heart. Prayers from the lips are like a telephone number 
call. They will not reach the person you want. Prayers from the heart are like a "particular person 
call." They will go straight to God. 


Prayers, again, are used for seeking fulfilment of material desires. Out of the millions who offer 
prayers, very few seek God Himself with pure hearts. The happiness derived from material 
benefits is lost when these are lost. Life is a constant succession of happiness and sorrow. To be 
free from these opposites one has to cultivate detachment. This detachment is Vairaagya. 


Relationship between nature, man and God 


In a life filled with desires, the pleasures one seeks are inevitably followed by grief and 
disappointments. All unrighteous actions lead to sorrow. It was for this reason that Buddha 
emphasised the need for discrimination. The, first prayer, "Buddham Sharanam Gachchaami" is 
a call for cultivating wisdom and discrimination, the Buddhi (intellect). But unless the power of 
discrimination is Used for doing fight action for the good of society it is of no use. Hence the 
second prayer, "“Sangham Sharanam Gachchaami" (I surrender myself to society). What is this 
right action that must be done? That is indicated by the third prayer: “Dharmam Sharanam 
Gachchaami" (I take refuge in Dharma). To reach your goal, the royal road is Dharma 
(righteousness). It is only when these three are combined--Wisdom, social service and 
righteousness that there is fulfilment in life. 


Everyone should realise the integral relationship between Nature, Man and God. They are 
inextricably interrelated. Take a simple example. Here is a tumbler. It contains water. It is on the 
table. The tumbler has been placed for the sake of the water. If one does not need water, there 
will be no need for the tumbler. If there is no table, the tumbler cannot be placed on it. You may 
ask the questions: Is the table important, or the tumbler, or the water in it? Water is important. 
The water needs the tumbler as a container. Nature is like the table. The Jeevi (individual) is the 
tumbler. The Divine exists in the form of Naara (water). There is no use for the tumbler unless 
there is water. 


"Naara" is the water that cools the heat generated by the agitations arising from the body, the 
mind and the life-spirit (the Adhibhouthika, Adhyaathmika Adhidhai-vatha factors). This Nara 
(human) is Naaraayana---the Supreme Universal Consciousness. Naaraayana is' present in every, 
one. If man did not have the cooling power of the Divine, he would not be able to bear the heat 
generated by the body, the mind and the vital air. 


How far is the Divine? 


Where is Divine? The shaasthras (revealed ancient scriptures) say the Divine is twenty feet away 
from the Brahmachaari (the bachelor). The reason is a youth suffering from the fever of 
adolescence cannot perceive the Divine. He relies on his mental abilities and the ; power of his 
muscles and heart. He has no faith in the power of Dharma or God. Hence, one who is remote 
from Dharma is also distant from God. 


For a Sanyaasi (the ascetic), God is said to be three feet away. Wearing the yellow robe and 
having a shaven head cannot make a man a genuine ascetic. He must have renounced all bodily 
attachments and all material desires. Although he may have renounced many things, because the 
sanyaasi (renunciant) has still some delusions regarding the body, God is said to be three feet 
away from him. 


Only in the case of the Grihastha (householder) is God said to be residing in his heart. But even 
if God dwells in his heart, till the Grihastha sheds vices like greed, hatred and envy, the Divine 
will not be visible to him. Attachment and ego will make him blindfolded. 


To secure the grace of the Divine, it is not necessary to seek knowledge, wealth, power or 
position. Purity of mind alone is enough. Every cell of one's body will be filled with the Divine 
when God is worshipped with pure and .single-minded devotion. To the self-sacrificing devotee, 
the Divine will be Omnipresent. 


Devotion has been reduced to a pompous show 


The Lord is ever ready to answer the prayers of the devotees. But what passes for "devotion" 
nowadays is only "deep ocean" (submergence in the ocean of worldly life). People talk about the 
"Divine," but are interested only in "deep wine." They talk of "compassion," but are concerned 
only with "fashion." They mouth the word "Co-operation," but indulge only in "operation." 
Devotion has been reduced to a pompous show. 


True knowledge can come only when one is confronted with an extreme moral crisis. This was 
the situation Arjuna faced when he was placed between the two opposing armies. Pareekshith 
faced a similar crisis when he learnt he had only one week to live. It is at times of such crisis that 
one thinks of God and seeks Divine help. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 31 December 1983 


