Sathya Sai speaks 


Sathya Sai Speaks---and, what do we hear 
When we listen, alert, in joy, to Him? 


We hear the Voice of the Vedhas, God's own Breath, 
The cheer that is showered by the epics of yore 

The soothing balm that heals our wounds 

The Counsel that whips us to waken and work 
Lessons which teach us the Aathmic science. 

From Him they heard from, then 


We hear the gracious words He spoke 
To many a saint and monk, many a seeker keen, 
In distant times and climes. 


We hear the parables of Galilee, of Arab shades, 
We hear the tales of twenty lands 

To probe us on the onward march to Him. 

We hear of prophets, Priests and Kings, 

Simple folk and sages, young and old--- 


We hear the echoes of Chaithanya's keerthan call; 
Of Moses, of Javadev, Meera, Kabir--- 
Echoes rebounding from His reciprocating Love. 


We hear, as we listen, temple bells and gongs, 
Conches and the drum, the choir resounding in the aisles, 
Filling fragrance, faith in the recesses of our hearts. 


We hear the first little stir, the cosmic sigh 
That caused this multimillioned maze. 


We hear the twinkle, the stellar swish, 
Of His Mighty Will that fills the sky; 


We hear the waves of eternity lapping our littleness--- 
We are eternal---when we listen to His Speech 
For, listening to that Voice, the Om that weaves the Universe, 
We merge...in Him 
We cannot but; He thrills us, enthralls us so. 
N. Kasturi 


1. Culture---Agriculture 


INDIA is a sacred land, whose glory has spread over all the continents, whose sons and 
daughters have won by their material and spiritual excellences eternal fame amidst all mankind. 
They have freed their motherland from the shackles of foreign rule; they have added to human 
happiness by their attainments in music and the fine arts. Even today, India has a name that is 
revered and held in high esteem. You have a great responsibility, for, you have to maintain and 
develop the splendour that was India. 


We have met here today in a spirit of prayer and saadhana (spiritual discipline), to dedicate 
ourselves for a new step in education. The objectives of true education are two and only two. The 
first and the most basic of the two is education for the provision of food, clothing and shelter, for 
the promotion of health and harmony in society, for avoiding pollution and promoting honesty. 
In the olden times, when the student underwent the basic training under the teacher, he learnt, 
before he was 15 years of age, to spin, weave and procure clothes for his own use; to produce the 
food he required; and to look after his needs for basic comfort. He was contented and happy, 
with simple habits which gave him ample leisure for saadhana, and contemplation of Nature. 
Everyone must endeavour to be self-reliant and self-sufficient, so far as food and clothing are 
concerned. 


Education should develop the culture of the mind 


The rulers of this land are scared of the growth in population and they are excitedly advocating 
wrong and dangerous means to curb the increase. But, they forget, that with every extra mouth 
that has to be fed, we are getting also two extra hands, and a pair of legs, besides a brain that has 
vast potential for development into a national asset We have no scheme to use the two extra 
hands and the precious little brain for national uplift and national prosperity. We encourage 
laziness, by making it the sign of affluence; we do not condemn it, wherever found. We have no 
strategy to maximise production and minimise waste, even in food. If only everyone in this land 
will consume Just the quantity of food that he needs and nothing more, there will be no scarcity 
at all. This country has never lacked in the wherewithal to feed her children. This is the land of 
Goddess Annapoorna (Food plenty). 


The second objective of education is the culture of the mind and the spirit. This too is very much 
like agriculture, which provides food and clothing for man. We want dhaanya (grains) to sustain 
the body; we require dhyaana (meditation) to sustain the spirit. In agriculture, you prepare the 
soil, plant seeds, feed the plants with fertilisers, and reap the harvest. In heart-culture, we have to 
plough the Arudhaya-kshethra (the field of the heart), remove the weeds and wild growth, and 
plant the seeds. The weeds are pernicious tendencies, attitudes and habits; the fertilisers are 
devotion and dedication. Water to help the plant grow is the quality of love. The seeds are the 
Names of God, which are deposited within the purified heart. The harvest which is the reward of 
all this spiritual discipline is Wisdom. 


Plant seeds of Love; reap the harvest of Wisdom 


Heart-culture has been the goal and aim of Sanaathana Dharma (Eternal Universal Religion), the 
ancient religion of India. It is essential for a happy contented peaceful life. This Dharma exhorts 
us to plant the seeds of Love and reap the harvest of Wisdom, for the sake of social harmony and 
national prosperity and the uplift of all humanity. Sanaathana Dharma makes you realise the 


Unity that underlies all the diversity that is apparent. The unity is the basis and the justification 
for loving all, with no desire for any benefit therefrom. 


But, Indians have developed so much cynicism and scorn about their heritage that they ascribe 
the discovery of the Vedhas (sacred-revealed ancient scriptures) and their compilation to the 
crooked designs of some Brahmins! Muslims revere the, Quoran as the Word of God; Christians 
revere the Bible as the word of God; but, Indians treat the Vedhic scriptural texts as negligible 
teachings of interested persons! And, they stray away from the right path into distress and 
discontent. Max Mueller said that what is not found in Indian culture is not found In other 
countries. But, as soon as Indians learn English or any other foreign language, they develop so 
much of ego that they start decrying their own ancient culture and adopting the manners and 
mannerisms of the alien civilisation. 


Everyone is at cross-purposes with the rest 


Gandhi said, "My India is the India of villages." The freedom that has been won and the 
prosperity that is looked forward to, can be ensured only when the villagers are free and 
prosperous. And, this depends in its turn on the freedom and prosperity of each family in the 
village. Now, there is no unity, no mutual co-operation, no love between the four or five brothers 
in the family; everyone is at cross purposes with the rest. How then can the village enjoy 
freedom and peace and prosperity? And, what to speak of the country, when the condition of its 
villages is so bad? 


Every person seeks positions of authority, without trying to deserve the authority by means of the 
qualification necessary to use it in the right way. Of course, if a person who has good intentions 
and full capabilities and the vision of the Divine, he can well seek authority and discharge it 
well. But, we seldom see any one thinking of one's duty; everywhere, people are after the 
acquisition of positions of authority. 


As a result, several malpractices have entered the field of education. Money is paid to gain 
admission Into schools and colleges, money Is paid to acquire marks and degrees. The teacher 
does not transmit taste, style, attitude or outlook; it is all a matter of books and more books. The 
student is left to gather these from outside the educational institutions. Moreover, more value is 
attached to Information and its collection; no attempt is made to gain transformation and to the 
correction of habits and characteristics How did the great artists who drew the frescoes of 
Ajantha and carved the temples of Ellora learn their trade? They did not attend any school; they 
learnt from the teachers, the master craftsmen, the Inspired artistes. 


Books cannot give the guidance and the inspiration for real good work. Also the worldly aspects 
must be harmonised with the spiritual aspects In order to live a full life. Then only can man have 
self-confidence and avoid the imitative path. Mental peace cannot be secured by blaming others 
and avoiding one's own responsibility. 


Fill your heart with love and light 


Today, we are establishing this Agricultural Polytechnic, so that those who study here may not 
depend upon others to give them a job but, so that they can earn a livelihood for themselves by 
their own skills and effort. This will be a spiritual discipline also and it will give them ample 
chances to develop their spiritual attainments too. Students here will be encouraged to practise 
working with others In mutual and productive co-operation. The five fingers of the hand have to 
come together so that a thing can be grasped firmly. Nowadays, you know they appoint what are 


called Committees for all kinds of works, a Committee for Water Supply, a committee for the 
supply of electricity, etc. But, they do not work smoothly; there are bickerings and factions. They 
come for tea and do not deliberate and determine anything. 


Mutual respect can be built on the faith that all are children of God and all are Divine. Then on 
that basis, there can be co-operation, and enthusiasm for work. Each will then do his best, 
knowing his duty and his responsibility. 


The future of the country depends on the skill and the sincerity of the youth. Therefore, the 
necessary enthusiasm and encouragement must be generated among the youth. All my hopes are 
based on the students, the youth. They are very dear to Me. They are faultless; It is the parent and 
the school that are at fault for all the waywardness and violence. They lead them into wrong 
directions. Instead of filling your heads with facts and figures, fill your heart with love and light. 
Have confidence in the vast powers of the Aathma (soul), which is your reality. Have faith in the 
Grace of God, which you can secure by prayer. 


Do your work with devotion as an act of worship 


While praying and using manthras, sacred formulae or such expressions, one must know the real 
meaning and significance of the words and their deep implications. One individual for example 
did not know the full implication of the word Shiva; he meant by that word, the Form of God 
who is supposed to live in Kailaash with his consort and family. He told me that Shivoham 
meant, 'I am Shiva' and was shocked when asked, "Then, what is Paarvathi to you?" 


Many people do japa (repetation of hole names) and join bhajans (group singing of devotional 
songs), but, they are not aware of the meaning and value of the words they utter mechanically. 
Elders who propagate manthras and pose as spiritual teachers do not themselves know the Inner 
meanings of what they recommend to others or hand on to their disciples. Shivoham means that 
you are Divine. 


In education spiritual values should be emphasised 


Man must be engaged in work; he must do It with faith and devotion, as an act of worship; In 
this way, he will derive wisdom. But, the education imparted today does not direct him along 
these lines. It is sterile instruction, as it is. I hope that in this Polytechnic, whose foundation stone 
I am laying now, will pay attention to these points also. Moral and spiritual principles have to be 
emphasised all along, even while merely material subjects are taught and learnt. I want the 
Committee in charge of this Institution to propagate the ideals of service, love and saadhana, 
which Sanaathana Dharma embodies. Even a small number of such Institutions will be enough 
in our country to serve as examples and guides to others. 


A College in every City is not necessary. We do not have several commanders-in-chief: we have 
only one, though soldiers are million or so. This one college in the city of Bombay, if it Is run in 
an Ideal manner, can spread the ideals of the Unity of Man and the Value of Love throughout Its 
vast population and even outside Its limits. 


Students who undergo training here, In this College, when they go to the other States will spread 
the ideals they have imbibed here. The role of the teachers is also important, for, if a student 
deteriorates, only he will suffer. We must try to raise in this College good teachers for similar 
colleges In future. The citizens of Bombay should endeavour to promote educational Institutions 
of this type and also institutions fostering the health of people, so that the land may have peace 
and prosperity. 


Now man is devalued into a machine 


Today, there is a great deal of talk that this country is lacking in peace. But, this is not right; for, 
the lack of peace of mind is an intensely Individual complaint and phenomenon. The country has 
not deteriorated at all! It is the individual that has to be cured; It is their thoughts and feelings 
that have to be corrected and cleansed. It is not possible for any one individual to change his 
ideas, his habits, his attitudes and Impulses. For example, we find that the price of every article is 
soaring sky high. The rulers of the and are devising various plans to bring down the price. But, 
this can succeed only through one means: raise the value of man, and the value of everything else 
will come down. Now, man, is devalued Into a machine. Man too has forgotten his worth. He is 
demeaning. himself into a beast and not realising that there is Divinity In him. Today, 
commodities are valued as essential, but, man is not so valued. 


If man is valued at his true worth, and treated as a Divine spark enclosed in the body, then, he 
will rise into new heights of achievement and produce all the necessities of life in profusion. He 
will not grab or cheat: he will be a good worker, a pure person and a sincere saadhak (spiritual 
aspirant). He will cultivate the inner vision and realise that he is not the body or senses or mind 
or even intellect. He will be full of prema (love) and self-confidence. 


It is not good for man to be constantly engaged in exciting things---exciting food, talk, books, 
films and games. They are raajasik (passionate) things that disturb and agitate the mind. Nor is it 
good for man to be engaged in cruelty---cruel thoughts or actions. 


Today, the foundation has been laid for this Agricultural College. I hope a beautiful building will 
come up here before long. I hope there will not be any misuse of money in wasteful expenditure. 
I hope students who are trained in this College will become efficient farmers, serf-reliant young 
men, who depend on their own skill, character and stamina for earning their livelihood. I bless 
you all. 


Bombay, 5-1-1975 


By good thoughts and by good ideas, you will become a saadhu. 
Saadhu does not mean one who merely wears an orange robe, 
shaves the head and wears Rudraakshas (holy beads). He who has 
good thoughts and good ideas is a saadhu. A saadhu is one who is 
a Sathya Sankalpa Swaruupa (embodiment of truthful thoughts). 


Sri Sathya Sai 


2. Not twice, but thrice! 


You are all sharing the joy of serving others, doing good to others, according to your capacity 
and skill. The main objective of the Sathya Sai Organisation, which you must always keep before 
you is to help man to recognise the Divinity that is inherent in him. But, this Divinity is latent; it 
is veiled; it is not always apparent to oneself or others. 


There is nothing wholly bad or wholly good in Creation. There are few who do not commit mis- 
takes; there are few who do not perform good deeds. Both good and bad, beneficent and malefi- 
cent, constructive and destructive, are ever present everywhere. You, as members of the 
Managing Committees of the units of the Samithi (Organisation), and as Members of the Seva 
Dhal (Voluntary Service Corps) and of the Mahila Vibhaag (Women's section) are unique, 
because, you have dedicated your talents and time to the service of others, and, ultimately, to the 
promotion of your own best interests. 


First of all, I want that you should give up the blind imitation of other cultures, other social sys- 
tems and other ideals. This tendency has now conquered 99 out of 100 people, in our country. 
Your conduct and behaviour, your dress and food habits, your sports and games, your methods of 
agriculture and industry, your art and architecture---all are borrowed from other societies. Even 
your intelligence follows the processes of other cultural groups. You are leading lives which 
have no roots in the past; it is guided and controlled by these other civilisations. 


Do not give importance to differences of religion 


To escape the pull of these alien attractions and material pleasures, faith In God as your Inner 
Reality and the source of immense power is essential. The Sathya Sai Organisation must 
recognise and reestablish this Truth---that the Aathma (Divine Self) is the Reality of everyone, 
however, distinct they may appear in physical form and mental equipment. When one lamp lights 
many lamps, all shine with equal brilliance. The Paramjyothi (the One Supreme Effulgence) is 
the origin and source of all the jeevan-jyothis (particularised effulgences). Ekam eva adhwi- 
thiyam: There is only one without a second: The same wind is referred to as breeze, whirlwind, 
storm, typhoon, hurricane etc. The same God is referred to by different Names. This is the very 
foundation of our culture. 


So, your duty is to emphasise the One, to experience the One, In all that you do and speak. Do 
not give any importance to differences of religion or sect or status or colour. Have the feeling of 
one-ness permeating every act of yours. Only those who do so have a place in this Organisation; 
the rest can best withdraw. 


The Ever present God notes all that you do 


You have to re-establish the moral outlook and the righteous behaviour in this great Country. 
That is the tradition appropriate and native to India. However, do not look down upon the 
cultures of other countries; do not try to discover faults on other cultures and decry them. The 
Bhagavath-geetha advises that you should be "“adhweshtaasarva bhuuthaanaam," not 
condemning or hating any being. 


You have been in this Organisation since 7 or 8 years. It is time for you to ask yourselves, 
whether you are in it out of compulsion or of your own free will; whether You are giving It the 
best you can, in efficiency and enthusiasm. Has the work been exhibition-oriented or has it been 
genuine? Is your faith in the rightness of Service patent in every act of yours? 


Let me tell you that if you serve with your whole heart, the result will be Aanandha (Divine 
Bilss) for you; half-hearted work will give only superficial joy or fame. Remember that the God 
you worship by this work is resident in your own heart. Others may or may not see; but, the ever 
present God sees and notes all that you do or feel. He meets out to you the consequence, in full, 
of whatever you do or feel. 


There was a rich man once who owned a rice mill. He heard a Pandith (scholar) expound that the 
service that God appreciates most Is the gift of food to the hungry. So, he decided to serve food 
to the poor in his village. But he had no mind to use good varieties of rice for the purpose. He 
felt that any rice is good enough for them. So, he got the rice that was rotting In his godown---he 
did not care even to remove the worms that Infested it; he cooked it and served it to the hungry 
poor, who ate it and suffered many IIIness as a consequence. His wife expostulated with him and 
told him that good food given to 10 persons would be more meritorious than bad food given to 
hundreds! But, he was In no mood to listen to sound advice. 


Everyone has to suffer for the injury he causes 


The wife therefore hit upon a plan to him. She placed on his plate every day food that was rotten 
and full of worms. When he' grew angry and castigated her, she replied, 'The Pandith said that 
everyone has to suffer for the injury he causes others. You have to eat, in the other world, rotten 
food, full of worms. I am giving that type of food to you, even now, so that you may get used to 
it. It will. help you to eat the consequence of your evil deed." At this, the husband realised his 
iniquity; he repented for his wrongs and learnt better ways of service to the poor. 


When you visit the patients in a hospital serve the patients with a full heart, sincerely and to the 
utmost extent possible. I must say that the service programmes you have undertaken In Bombay 
City are being carried on very well. They can be the ideals for other clues to follow. 


But, do not put a full stop; have only a comma. Move on with greater and greater enthusiasm, 
and achieve more progress in all directions. Service is a life-time programme, it knows no rest or 
respite. This body has been given to you so that you may devote its strength and skills to the 
service of brother-man. Serve man, until you see God in all men; then, what you do will be 
elevated as Worship. 


God is love and can be reached and realised through love. God is truth and can be reached and 
realised through truth. But, are you concentrating on the development of love and truth? 


The tender age is the best for religious instruction 


I must say that the Mahila Vibhaag. is evincing greater enthusiasm and love in their work---the 
Baala Vikaas (children's section)classes, for example---than the men, in the Samithis. This is, I 
know, because the men have not got as much leisure to devote to Samithi activities; but, they can 
use the available time in sacred ways and to greater benefit. The kind of Seva (service)which the 
women are doing in the Baala Vikaas is very useful, for it ensures a good future for our country, 
The children are trained in a very fine manner. These children will bear the burden of the 
country, better and more intelligently, with more attachment to the culture and traditions of 
Bhaarath. 


Tell the children what they cannot learn by themselves, by observation, namely, the stories of 
Raamaayana, the Bhaagavatha, and the Mahaabhaaratha. Tell them also stories from the Bible, 
the Buddhist texts, the Zend-Avesta and the Quoran. That a horse has four legs is a fact which 


one need not teach the child; it can discover it in a moment. What is not known to the children 
are the stories and verses that embody oar culture. 


Do not be deterred by people who say that the information and inspiration you give will be too 
much of a burden on the tender minds. It its only grown-ups that would find learning new facts 
burdensome; the tender age is the best for this kind of instruction. Tell them the Importance of 
OM and its significance, as the basic sound of all creation. It is meaningful symbolic sound; it is 
quite unlike the useless jargon which children learn today, in the very first lesson at school; Ba 
Ba, Black Sheep! Ding Dong Bell; the Pussy is in the well! 


Aim at the promotion of Faith in God 


The Seva Dhal members must spend their leisure time in sath-sang (good company) and not 
waste even a moment in frivolous play. Take some good books and read them out to illiterate 
brothers and sisters, spread the Message of our culture among all those who have no chance to 
know about it. Do this service to the slum-dwellers, the people who live in hutments, and the 
villages. The city dwellers are used to silly story books and novels that drain their brains and 
plant evil thoughts in their minds. But the poor in the villages and in the huts will welcome you 
and listen to the stories and lives of saints and Divine Incarnations. Transmit to these people the 
sacred texts of all religions and the lives of the Saints of all faiths. 


Do not imagine that your task is to propagate Sai and speak of Sathya Sai and His Message. This 
is not right But, through the nine of Sathya Sai and the emphasis on the message, aim at the 
promotion of Godliness and of Faith in God. Create the spiritual attitude; promote spiritual 
discipline. It does not matter what Name you use, or what Form they concentrate upon. Through 
some Name and some Form, lead them into the path of Faith and saadhana (spiritual discipline). 


Just now, some among you felt that the Sun is scorching the spot where I am and you wanted to 
do something to avoid it, But, this is happening to many people here, and you should not be 
content with measures to prevent the Sun from hurting one individual. Seva Dhal must care for 
the comfort of all. There is the Aathma in everyone. This body is for you and all these other 
bodies are also Mine. 


Your Prema, your shraddha, your bhakthi {love, steady faith and devotion) have persuaded Me 
to come over to Bombay, twice a year! If you promote these virtues even more, in a still larger 
measure, I will come to Bombay not twice, but thrice a year, and give you Aanandha (divine 
bliss). I give you blessing for all the Seva that you have undertaken and all the love you are 
sharing with others. 


Bombay, 6-1-1975 


The real saadhu is he whose deeds are in accordance with the 
words of advice he utters. Devotion cannot tolerate in the devotee 
the slightest trace of envy or jealousy. Make your daily life holy 
and pure. Render your life worth-while through service to man and 
service to society. That is the most important aspect of 
surrendering the self. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


3. Parents beware! 


SEEING this Rally and listening to the Marching Song, and witnessing the other items you 
presented, I can now say that what happened this morning is not the rise of the Sun, but, it was in 
fact the Rise of Aanandha (divine bliss). People, are talking about the glory of India's past- they 
go on praising endlessly about the reign of Raama, or in recent times of Ashoka, or Krishna 
Dheva Raaya. They try in vain to assess the present in terms of the past; they close their eyes to 
the dismal present and dream about the past. If children are put into the right path, and guided 
along the path that you are now treading, Raama Raajya can again be established in this land. 


Every child of this land has four debts to discharge---reverence to mother, respect to the father, 
obedience to the teacher, and adoration to God. Besides these, every child must learn to live in 
peace and love with other children and other families. The idea that one can live for oneself and 
that one need not worry about the wants and weaknesses of others has to be removed quite early 
in life, by the Baala Vikaas Gums. Encourage the child to cultivate the pleasure of 'togetherness." 
They will enjoy it; and, you will be sowing the seeds of social peace. The seeds will grow into 
Universal Peace and Universal Bliss. 


Share with others the good things you are given 


Life is like a train journey. You, young children have a long way to go; but, the elders have to 
alight from the train pretty son. You must learn to make your journey comfortable and happy. Do 
not carry heavy unwanted luggage, with you. That' will make the journey miserable. Do not 
indulge in faultfinding and in picking quarrels with others. Don't desire to have the best things 
for yourselves only. Share with others around you the good things you are given. Anger, hatred, 
envy, jealousy, these are the heavy luggage I asked you to avoid taking with you in the journey. 


I must give the elders, the parents who are here in large numbers some advice. Do not set bad 
examples for these children to follow. If you are truthful, just, be calm under provocation and 
full of love in all your dealings with others, these children too will grow up in sathya (truth.), 
dharma (righteousness), shaanthi (peace) and prema (love). If you tell your son, when you are 
actually at home, to speak through the telephone, when some one is calling, to reply that father is 
not at home, you are sowing a poisonous seed, which will become a huge tree. 


Parents should be good examples to children 


Let me tell you a story to illustrate the danger of such small beginnings. A mother carried her son 
on her shoulder, when she went to the market. A woman with a basket of fruits passed by her the 
child lifted a banana from that basket and started eating it. The mother noticed it, and when she 
was told that he had cleverly lifted it from the basket of a passing fruit seller, she complimented 
the son on its smartness. This made the child indulge in petty thieving and picking pockets, as it 
grew into a boy and in actual house breaking and dacoity, Once during a dacoity, he committed 
even murder, and when he was caught and jailed, he expressed a wish to see his mother before 
being hanged. The wailing weeping desperate mother was brought before him. She was sobbing 
at her son's fate. The son asked her to come closer to him; suddenly he tried to strangle her, and 
the guards separated them. The son said, "she deserves the punishment; for, it was she who 
brought me to this doom. Had she reprimanded me when I stole a banana when I was a child of 
two years instead of complimenting me, I would not have fallen into this evil way." 


Parents set bad examples uttering falsehood, scandalising others, gambling, drinking, behaving 
violently, inflicting injury, becoming addicted to night-clubs, pictures and drinking parties, quar- 
relling at home after arriving home past mid-night. How can children used to such low sights and 
sounds learn to become bright fresh flagrant flowers of the Sanaathana Garden of India? 


Many such parents do not allow their children to join the Baala Vikaas Classes, or to attend 
bhajans and Sathsangs. If the children clamour at home that they may be permitted, they shout at 
them, and call them mad. They say that religion and God are only for idlers or old senile people, 
and that the path will lead them on to Sanyaas (mendicancy), which is a calamity to be avoided! 
They reverse the very values of life. Parents must correct themselves before they try to correct 
their children. 


Children! Learn the best teaching of all faiths, put them into practice. Chant the Name of God 
with your whole being. Imbibe the noble qualifies that those Names represent. Purify yourselves 
and purify the world. That is My blessing. 


Dharmakshethra, 6-1-1975 


The Gaayathri manthra has in it the validity of the Vedhas. It 
contains the essence of Vedhic teachings. Each of the four Vedhas 
has a core axiom (Mahaa Vaakya) enclosed in it: Thath thwam asi 
(That thou art), Prajnaanam Brahma (Consciousness is Brahma), 
Ayam Aathma Brahma (This Self is Brahma) and Aham 
Brahmaasmi, (I am Brahmam). When all these are synthesised, the 
Gaayathri emerges. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


4. Naaraayana seva 


THE gift of food is the noblest of all gifts. You have today arranged the feeding of a large 
number of people and thus justified the name of this village. The years of life allotted to man is 
very short; the world in which he lives is very wide; time extends far behind and far beyond. 
What little man has to do here has to be done quickly, at the place that is assigned to him within 
the time that is allotted to him. And, man has such a formidable task before him; it is to fulfil it 
that he has come as man, exchanging for this human habitat, all the merit he has acquired during 
many past lives. The task is no less than the manifestation of the Divinity latent in man. The 
easiest and the most pleasant means by which this can be accomplished is seva---the service of 
man, done in a spirit of dedication and devotion. And, in villages like this, Seva (service) is a 
potent and profitable discipline. And, the best type of seva is feeding the hungry. The first step in 
this discipline is the establishment of mutual help and co-operation in all seva activities among 
the residents. This will ensure peace, security and prosperity for the village. 


Pollution of character is spreading in cities 


A single homestead cannot make a village; many have to cluster together and live as one family 
in order to constitute a village. And, for such seva as you are doing, each homestead and every 
member thereof has to lend a helping hand and achieve success in the common venture. The 
physical strength, the monetary resources, the intelligence of all have to be pooled in order to 
make the project succeed. This garland has not happened out of a single flower; many flowers of 
different hues and fragrances have strung themselves around the string in order to achieve the 
common aim of decorating the picture of person. No one in the village can stand apart and say, 
"This work is not mine; it is the responsibility of that man or this group." 


For, today, the Cities have taken a turn towards confusion and conflict; they have no peace, no 
security, no calmness. It is all agitation, anxiety, fear, faction and suspicion. It is only in villages 
like yours that a modicum of quietness, fellow-feeling, tolerance, and truth can be found. The 
pollution of character that is spreading in cities is fast invading the villages also. The villages 
should not yield to the temptation of imitation and invite catastrophe 6n themselves. They must 
appreciate the ancient Indian ideals of simplicity and sincerity, service and spirituality-oriented 
living. You must curb greed and anger, envy and pride, and live in amity and the spirit of 
brotherhood. Then India will be happy and prosperous. Each one must carry out the duties of his 
role in a worshipful attitude. 


Deserve the Grace of God by helping the weak 


I see that only a few young persons and elders are running about and carrying on the various 
tasks this function entails. This is the case in most villages. If all do not share in the cost, the 
village cannot benefit. Life has been bestowed not for just eating and digesting, roaming and 
reclining, but, for a far greater purpose---the realisation of the Divinity in us, in all that exist 
around us and even beyond all things that strike our senses, To waste such a life in vain pursuits, 
and in mere sense-pleasures is not the sign of an intelligent person. Deserve the Grace of God by 
helping the weak and poor, the diseased and the disabled, the distressed and the downtrodden. 
Do not laugh at others or take delight in insulting them or in carrying tales demeaning them. 
There is no more heinous sin than hurting the feelings of others. Man must develop two qualities: 
Fear of sin and devotion to God. 


To cultivate devotion to God, always endeavour to mix with good persons, engage yourselves in 
Naamasmarana (in the early hours of the day, join the choir groups that sing the names of God 
and move along the streets thrilled with the joy that wells up when you do so). You have a few 
temples in the village, make them active, and alive. Gather there for an hour each day and sing 
bhajans (group singing of devotional songs on Lord's Names and glory}. Why waste time or 
even pollute time, by talking ill of others? The eye, the hand, the nose, the head, the stomach, 
each looks different; each does one special task; each has different name and function. But they 
subserve the Interests of the one body to which they all belong, they do not work at cross- 
purposes, do they? So too, each of you is a limb in the body called the village. Do your work 
without a murmur; work in full co-operation with all. The village can be healthy and happy only 
then. Love, love alone can bind you to others and to God, who is the very embodiment of love. 


You are referring to the gift of food as Anna-dhaana (the charity of food). But, no one has the 
authority to give In charity what has been given by God or be proud of it or even to feel that he 
has given something In charity. God gave the rains, God fostered the sapling and God ripened 
the grain; what right have you to call it yours and give it in charity? It is not dhaana (charity) that 
you do; you are only offering gratitude to God; you are sanctifying the grain you have harvested 
by offering the food prepared out of it to these Naaraayanas (Gods in human form). Call it 
Naaraayana Seva! That will be more correct. Anyway, since you are doing it with love and 
humility, in spirit of Divine worship, I have come to your village to bless you. Do not cast all 
responsibility on a committee, or a group of enthusiasts; join them wholeheartedly and offer to 
share the burden. I want everyone to join in this Naaraayana Seva and that it should be done, not 
once a month as now, but even at more frequent Intervals. 


Sore-Hunise Village, 28-1-1975 


5. 'Youth Guides' for youth 


WELL-WISHERS of Youth! Instructors of Youth! Young men of the College! When you look 
deep into the theory and practice of modern educational institutions and compare them with what 
we know of the theory and practice in ancient Indian-educational institutions, you will be 
shocked at the vast difference in the two systems. The ancient schools aimed at self-knowledge 
first and knowledge of the objective world as a corollary. Truly, that is the sign of the educated 
man---his awareness of his own reality. How can a person be termed educated, when he does not 
distinguish between the really real and the relatively real in himself as well as in the outer world? 


Among the educated, we do not find signs of self-knowledge; nor do we see another quality that 
we expect every human being to have, namely, the quality of mercy, of sympathy or compassion. 
The 'un-educated' have this quality, more than the 'educated!' 'Education' seems to harden hearts 
and squeeze out the feelings of pity and piety. Many species of animals are soft, and tender in 
their habits and nature. The deer, the elephant, the cow, the horse---these live on Saathwik 
(pure)food and behave in a Saathwik manner; so, they are adored and even worshiped by man. 
Tigers, bears, hyaenas and other wild animals are feared by man and driven by him into the dark 
recesses of forests. The wonder is that the wildness, the cruelty and the terror-inflicting attributes 
of these beasts are developed, and exhibited by man himself! Man prides himself as the crown of 
creation; he declares that he has in him the spark of the Divine. But, he ignores it or suppresses it 
and revels in displaying the qualities of the ferocious beasts of the jungle. 


Man has become the lair of cruel habits 


Imagine the fate of the cows, when a tiger enters the manger. Can they survive the invasion? So 
too, the 'cows' of Truth, Justice, Peace and Love cannot survive in the human heart when the 
'tigers,' namely, greed, anger and pride enter and play havoc. Today, the human heart, (especially 
the hearts of those who are 'educated') has become the lair of wild desires and cruel habits, 
Rajoguna (restless) has overwhelmed the saathwik (pure) traits. 


A blind person cannot see the travails of others; nor can a deaf person be moved by the groans of 
a man in pain. The sight of suffering softens the heart; stories of distress urge one to rush to the 
rescue. But, education, as imparted now renders men indifferent to the sufferings of others, blind 
and deaf, in fact. Things are even worse, for educated persons under-going education in colleges 
and schools now inflict harm and pain, cause loss and injury, and revel in violence; and 
apparently enjoy doing so! Observing this downfall in standards, one is tempted to doubt 
whether these are men, or, beasts in human skin! 


Students of today are the teachers of tomorrow 


Embodiments of the Divine Aathma (Divine Self)-Yours is the responsibility to cherish and 
develop the ancient culture of this land. Bhaarath is the land of Love, of yoga (divine 
communion), of spiritual search, and of joyful sacrifice, of the lower self to promote the interest 
of the higher self. But, this day, Bhaarath is afflicted with the poverty of all these precious 
qualities. Greed, anger, hatred and other evil traits have displaced the traits of love, brotherhood 
and compassion. In the educational field, too, the evil has grown. Educational institutions are the 
nursery for tradition, loyalty to culture, and ideals of service to society. They train youth to 
benefit by the experience of the previous generations and to march on towards victory in the 
campaign to master this world and the next. 


Therefore, I desire that the youth of the land must make the fullest use of these precious years, 
when they are at College, to learn and practise the culture of this great land, they should not 
fritter away this crucial period In their lives, indulging in wasteful and wild adventures causing 
loss and pain to others. The students today are the teachers of tomorrow's colleges; they have to 
shape the destiny of this land, through their precepts and example. You cannot be young for 
long. Every day you are moving nearer and nearer to the 'age' when you have to take up the 
burden of running a home, and running the country. If you relish the infliction of loss and 
damage, of suffering and pain, today, surely you cannot complain when later, you have to 
encounter those very evils at the hands of the youth of those days. 


Wisdom grows where only humility prevails 


Wisdom flashes like lightning amidst the clouds of the inner sky; one has to foster the flash, and 
preserve the light. That is the true sign of the 'educated' person. Do not believe that mastery of 
many tomes make you wise. Wisdom can grow only where humility prevails. It thrives when 
man is afraid of vice and sin, and is attached to the Divine,. in himself and in all else. The crisis 
of character which is at the root of all the troubles everywhere has come about, as a result of the 
neglect of this aspect in education. 


I shall illustrate this by one little example. The Universities lay down the rule that a student is 
entitled to a degree, when he gets thirty marks out of a total hundred prescribed for a question 
paper. This means that you can get the distinction of being an ‘educated person, even if you 
commit seventy mistakes! When such a degree holder gets a job on the basis of having 
committed seventy mistakes(!), he easily slides down, by force of circumstance, into a hundred 
mistakes out of every hundred tasks that he has to do. Naturally, the country suffers and people 
bemoan the educational system. Education today has to move haltingly and half-heartedly 
through a series of strikes, gheroas (lock-ins), and other interruptions and so, students are seldom 
able to carry out their primary duty of study. Later on too, when they become responsible 
officers, they easily tend to neglect the duty that is primary to them at that stage. 


While you are students, you must feel that study is your first and only duty. Be witness of what is 
happening outside the classroom; do not rush out and get distracted. Try to identify the One in 
the many; become strong, physically, mentally and spiritually; imbibe as much as possible the 
wisdom that has been gathered in the past; cultivate the skills by which you can serve society. 
The heart soaked in compassion is verily the Altar of God. 


If you forget these ideals and allow greed, conceit and hate to take root in your hearts, you 
are only lowering yourselves to the level of the beast. As a first step in educational progress you 
must revere your parents and have gratitude and love towards them. It is through them that you 
have this wonderful chance of life on earth. They are the custodians of culture, the earliest 
teachers who instilled virtue into you. In this College, the ancient ideals of Truth, Righteousness, 
Equanimity and Love are held before you, all the time. I am sure you have imbibed them, and I 
bless you that you by your example, propagate them wherever you are. Have compassion in your 
hearts for the unfortunate brothers and sisters, who are unlearned, ill or suffering. Try your best 
to open their eyes, to cure their ills and to alleviate their distress. That is the message I wish to 
give you this day. 


College day, Brindhaavan, 23-3-1975 


6. Advice to seekers 


IF somebody says Sai Baba's powers have been given to him, then we run to him. Sai Baba's 
powers are such that they are not given to anybody else. Nobody has the ability to take powers 
from Sai Baba, nor the ability to give them to someone else. Sai Baba's powers are not given like 
that, and you should not be led away by such statements. Each one's power is within him; it is 
not possible to give such power to another person. In this manner, by allowing a weak mind to 
get control over us, if we begin running from place to place, when are we going to get strength of 
mind, and control our own mind? We must be able to follow one thought, one path. One does not 
have to search for spiritual power, going around the world and spending a lot of money. Be in 
your own house, develop it in yourself, such spiritual power is in YOU! You don't have to run 
for it here and there. God is not external; God is not outside you; God is inside you. 


You are not a man, you are God yourself. You are not one person, but three, the one you think 
you are (physical); the one others think you are (mental); and the one you really are spiritual is 
God. Don't be under the delusion that God Is somewhere and you have to search for Him. God is 
in you, and when you are able to realise that, and when you are able to develop the spiritual 
power from within you, then you will see God. You are going in the path of worldly 
consciousness. When you take the path of superconsciousness, you will get realisation, and you 
will be able to see the Truth. 


Give up the continual wandering of the physical body 


The first thing you have to do is to develop self-confidence. It is such people who have no 
confidence in their own self who begin to wander about and to waver, and take to various 
different paths. When you take your body to different places, and when you go about moving 
aimlessly, the mind also goes to different places. The first thing is to steady your physical body. 
If the body is moving all the time, then the mind is also moving. If you have a container filled 
with water, if the container is continually moving, then the contents will continually be moving. 
So in this context, we should not keep moving our body and our limbs in an aimless manner; this 
is very essential part of our practice of meditation. We should sit quiet and the body should be 
steady. 


Why do we ask people to sit straight and to sit quiet in meditation? Because when the body is 
straight and quiet, the mind inside is also straight and quiet. If you cannot control your body, 
how can you control your mind? The FIRST thing is to control your body by having all the limbs 
and body organs in a steady manner. The basis for the mind wandering is that your physical body 
is also continually wandering. So the first thing you have to do is to give up this continual 
wandering of the physical body. 


Difference between concentration & meditation 


Many people thing that concentration is the same thing as meditation, but there is no such 
connection between concentration and meditation. Concentration is something which is below 
your senses, whereas meditation is something which is above your senses. But many are under 
the false impression that concentration is identical with meditation, and they take to a wrong 
path. Concentration is something which we use involuntarily in our daily, normal, routine life. 
dust look at this, I am now reading the newspaper. My eyes are looking at the letters. My hand is 
holding the paper. My Intelligence is thinking now. Mind is also thinking. Thus when the eyes 
are doing their work, the hand is doing its work, when the Intelligence is doing its work, and the 


mind is also doing its work, then I am able to get the contents of the newspaper. It means, if I 
want to get at the matter that is contained In the newspaper, all these enumerated senses are 
concentrated and they are all. coordinated and are working on the newspaper. 


Not only this, if one wants to drive a car, unless one has concentration, one cannot drive a car on 
the road. All the normal routines, like walking, talking, reading, writing, eating, all these things 
we do only as result of concentration. If concentration like this is part and parcel of your daily 
life, then what is that we practise to get concentration? What we have to practice is something 
which is beyond these normal senses. We must rise from being below the senses (that is the state 
of concentration) to the senses (that is, the middle position, called contemplation); and from there 
we must rise above the senses, that is called meditation. 


Between concentration and meditation there is border area which covers both and that is the area 
of contemplation. To be In that area of contemplation is to free yourself of worldly attachments. 
If you break away all the worldly attachments---all the routine attachments in the world---then 
you will enter the region of contemplation. When you have completely broken away ALL your 
attachments, you break through this area of contemplation and you get into the area of 
meditation. 


First develop confidence in your own self 


These steps can also be described as starting from self-confidence, and then getting self- 
satisfaction and then self-sacrifice, and the last step is self-realisation. The ultimate step of self- 
realisation depends upon the base of self-confidence. You must therefore develop as a first step 
confidence in your own self. Without having and developing confidence in your own self, If all 
the time you are talking of some power being with someone and some other power being with 
someone else, if in this way you travel all the time and depend upon power which is with 
someone else, when are you going to acquire any power and confidence in your own self. Peace 
and bliss are within you they are not something which is external to you. You may think of going 
to the Himaalayas for getting peace. Yes, your body may go to the Himaalayas for getting peace; 
but your mind may be left behind in the city. How are you going to get peace? You have brought 
your body to India; but still, if you have the same habits which you are used to in America, what 
is the use of bringing the body to India? Body is not the essential thing. The transformation 
should come in your mind, the change should come in your mind. 


Many people collect a lot of information, they take a lot of information, but they do not use It to 
bring about a transformation of their own self. Information is useless, but the transformation in 
you is important. You can go on mentioning the names of many eatables. Are you going to 
relieve your hunger on this way?. But even if you actually eat one thing only in practice, you are 
going to relieve your hunger. Therefore, instead of saying so many things in your talk or in your 
speech (all that is simply book knowledge), if you are able to put into practice one of the things 
you say, that is going to be useful. 


Brindhaavan, Good Friday, 28-3-1975 


If you have the inclination to do good work, God will give you the 
time to do good things. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


7. Give them their due 


IT is the bounden duty of every son and daughter of this land of Bhaarath to implant in the hearts 
of every child of this land the basic lessons held precious by the founders of Bhaaratheeya 
Culture. This should be the very first vow to be carried out by every parent, every teacher and 
every person who dedicates himself to the service of human welfare. For, Bhaaratheeya Culture 
is the precious heritage of the whole world, and of every human community therein. The lesson 
that the Aathma (Divine Principle), resident In everyone is the real core of the Universe and that 
It is the supreme sovereign of the Cosmos will certainly bring together all mankind and ensure 
Peace and Harmony among the nations. Of what avail is life when the Truth is not known? Why 
deprive children of this great treasure and look on, when they lead dry fallow lives? Every 
person has to try to know his own Truth and lead his child into that awareness. 


What is happening today is quite the opposite! Parents, teachers and leaders are inflaming the 
passions of young minds and encouraging them to Indulge in violent deeds. The very people who 
preach the message of Peace, who talk of the basic principle of child education, who harp on 
love, harmony and mutual love, and who elaborate on the principles of social progress and 
national uplift are themselves undermining these hopes by their example. 


Elders must lead exemplary lives of simplicity 


Bhaaratheeya Culture emphasising humility, sincerity and unity is the best cure for such emo- 
tional errors. More than the pursuit of luxurious life or competitive comfort, the acquisition of 
wealth or power, which are all liable to quick decline, the ideal of simple living and high 
thinking laid down by the sages of India will lead to happy lives and greater social peace. 


You must have experienced the thrill of witnessing the plays enacted now by the children of the 
Sathya Sai Baala Vikaas children. The plays were inspiring and instructive; the acting was 
appealing and attractive; the meaning, has gone deep into the hearts of the children, as well as 
the elders who witnessed the plays. But, let me tell you, this is not enough. Along with the Baala 
Vikaas, the elders too must experience Vikaas (flowering or development), and lead exemplary 
lives Of simplicity and sincerity, of spiritual discipline and steady discipline. Children are 
wayward and vile, today, since they have no other examples to follow. Learn the lessons of duty, 
devotion and discipline from the lips of these children; let each child be a ray of sunshine in the 
home, shedding light and love. Let the child's desire to serve other children and the defectives 
around be an inspiration to you. Children do not say one thing and do the opposite. They are very 
straight forward and innocent. Imbibe this nature now from them, for elders have strayed far 
from that ideal. 


The signs are favourable. The fame of this country will not diminish; it will only grow, with the 
coming days; very soon, India will be free from fear, and will soon regain her old position as the 
preceptor for mankind. 


New Delhi, 31-3-1975 


Instead of saying a hundred things, it is better to do one thing 
properly. Sanctify your life by doing selfless work. For the person 
who talks a lot, there is no time for work. For the person who is 
engaged in work, there is no time for talk. 


Instead of wasting time in your words, use your time in service to 
mankind which is service to God, all the while repeating the name 
of the Lord. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


8. The middle path 


THROUGH saadhana (spiritual discipline), continuous and consistent, man can control the 
vagaries of the mind, which by their variety and vanity cause disappointment and distress. 
"Saadhana can achieve what appears impossible," says a Thelugu proverb. 


What is required is the awareness of the vicious game that the mind plays. It presents before the 
attention, one source after another of temporary pleasure; it does not allow any interval for you 
to weigh the pros and cons. When hunger for food is appeased, it holds before the eye the 
attraction of the film, it reminds the ear of the charm of music, and it makes the tongue water for 
the pleasant taste of something that it craves for. The wish becomes very soon the urge for 
action, the urge soon gathers strength and the yearning becomes uncontrollable. The burden of 
desires gradually becomes too heavy and man gets dispirited and sad. Train the mind to turn 
towards the intelligence for inspiration and guidance, not towards the senses for adventures and 
achievements. That will make it an instrument for reducing your vagaries and saving time and 
energy for more vital matters. 


You are all ‘living cells' in the Body of God 


Desires when fulfilled breed further desires; when unfulfilled, they lead to further instalments of 
life on earth, in order to calm the urge. The only method by which the delusion of desire can be 
destroyed is to dedicate all activities to God and engage in them in a spirit of worship; leaving 
the consequences to Him and ceasing to attach yourselves to them, Look upon everyone as the 
embodiment of the Divine and worship each, as such, by offering love, understanding, and 
service. Only the blind will be indifferent to. the dismal condition of others; only the deaf will be 
unaffected by the sobs of others. In fact, there are no 'others!' You are all, ‘living cells' in the 
body of God, each performing its individual function to promote His Will. 


The joy one gets while promoting another's joy is incomparable. Your heart must melt in 
compassion when the eye sees another person suffering. That is the sign of the Saathwik (pure or 
noble) individual; the Thaamasik (Ignorant) individual will be Indifferent, he Is too dull, too 
bovine, to be affected. The Raajasik (passionate) man will rush to punish the person who caused 
the suffering and might even forget to relieve the misery of the person affected! Callousness is 
the root cause of all the cruelty that defaces the Divine Nature of Man, in all the lands on the 
earth. 


There are thousands of Bhajana Mandalis (groups for devotional singing), under the auspices of 
the Sathya Sai Seva Samithis active all over the world. They hold Bhajana Sessions for about an 
hour, once or twice a week, and disperse thereafter. They sing the glory of God, under various 
Names and in various forms, and are elated by that experience. 


Avoid excess in all places 


The purpose of this type of loud, congregational prayers is different from the silent individual 
prayers. It is a joint, concerted and mutually helpful effort of Saadhana to overcome the six 
internal foes of man-Lust, Anger, Greed, Attachment, Conceit and Hatred. These nocturnal birds 
infest the tree of life and foul the heart where they build their nests. When we sing aloud the 
Glory of God, the heart is illumined and they cannot bear the light. Besides, the voice that rises 
from many throats frightens them and they fly away. 


It is advisable to all to allow the Middle Path. "Athi Sarvathra Varjayeth" is an ancient axiom; it 
means, "Avoid excess, in all places." You must respect the limlts set by the experience of ages 
in the sacred texts. They act like embankments that curb the flood waters; they direct the. raging 
passions towards harmless channels and save you from ruin. Of course, man has elementary 
needs- Physical, Mental and Intellectual, these have to be fulfilled in some measure. But, there is 
no need to encumber oneself with unwanted food, superfluous furniture and multi-roomed 
mansions. Luxury enervates and enslaves. 


Leaders of people have to set an example in this respect, for men usually try to Imitate and 
emulate. Example is more effective than precept. An ounce of practice is worth more than a ton 
of preaching. That is why I declare "My life is My message." You must transform your lives 
into examples of the ideal you preach. Parents must set good examples for children; teachers 
must set good examples for students; leaders must set good examples for those whom they 
expect to follow them. Preaching austerity and practicing luxury will only reveal one's 
hollowness. 


Choose God as your leader and guide 


Parents talk of honesty but they utter lies in the presence of children and even encourage them to 
speak falsehood. The father, while at home, asks the child to tell the unwelcome visitor that he is 
not at home! The child is thus taught his first lesson in prevarication, by the father himself. There 
is no use blaming him if he grows into a social menace. 


Really speaking, the best way to gain happiness is to choose God as the leader and guide. Then, 
He will guide and guard, from the heart itself. Emperor Shivaaji once sent some persons from the 
Court to Saamartha Raamdhaas, his preceptor, with a large quantity of provisions---grains, 
clothes, sweets and vessels. He asked them, "For whom have you brought these and why?" They 
replied, "For you. You have no one who can provide for you, and so, Shivaaji Maharaaj has sent 
all this." Raamdhaas laughed and said, "I have Providence itself to provide for me; God alone 
has no one to provide for Him. Ask Shivaaji to send these things to God!" 


Now, there lsa wave of anxiety spreading over the world as a result of rising prices, and attempts 
are being made frantically to bring down the level. The fundamental cause for the rise in prices is 
the decline in the price of man. Man must realise his pricelessness; he should not regard himself 
as a cheap nut or bolt, that has no higher purpose in life. He should know that he is the 
imperishable unconquerable, Aathma (Soul) and the body is only a vehicle for the Aathma. 


Love based on the innate Divinity is absent 


Everyone should respect all others as one's own kin, having the same Divine spark, and the same 
Divine Nature. Then, there will be effective production, economic consumption and equitable 
distribution, resulting in peace and promotion of love. Now, love based on the Innate Divinity is 
absent and so, there is exploitation, deceit, greed and cruelty. If man becomes aware of all men 
being 'cells' !n the Divine body, then, there will be no more ‘devaluation’ of man. Man is a 
diamond; but, he is now treated by other men and by himself as a piece of glass! 


Man can realise his mission on the earth only when he knows himself as Divine and when he 
reveres all others as Divine. And, man has to worship God in the form of Man. God appears 
before him as blind beggar, an idiot, a leper, a child, a decrepit old man, a criminal or a madman. 
You must see even behind those veils, the divine embodiment of love, power and wisdom, the 
Sai, and worship Him through seva (selfless service). 


God cannot be identified with one Name and one Form. He is all Names and all Forms. All 
Names are His; all forms are His. Your Names too are His, you are His Forms. You appear as 
separate individual bodies because the eye that sees them seeks only bodies, the outer 
encasement. When you clarify and sanctify your vision and look at them through the Aathmic 
eye, the eye that penetrates behind the physical (with all its attributes and appurtenances), then, 
you will see others as waves on the ocean of the Absolute, as the "thousand heads, the thousand 
eyes, thousand feet" of the Viraat Purusha (Supreme Sovereign Person) sung in the Rigvedha. 
Strive to win that Vision and to saturate yourself with that Bliss. 


New Delhi, 1-4-1975 


You come to Puttaparthi, secure a picture, and taking it home, 
begin worshipping it every day or every Thursday; but, all that is 
simply sathkarma---good activity. They won't take you far. 


You must also develop sath-guna---virtues, good habits, good 
attitudes, good characteristics, a good character. Otherwise your 
life is a chain of pluses and minuses, one cancelling the other out, 
totalling up to a mere zero. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


9. Himaachal 


PEOPLE of Himaachal Pradesh! Lord Shiva resides on the Himaalayas, as the Puraanas 
(mythological legends) declare. The inner meaning of this declaration is- Lord Shiva lives in 
hearts that are as pure, as white and as cool as the snow (Hima) and also as steady and unmoved 
(achal) as these mountains. Your surroundings, therefore, are teaching you a lesson whenever 
you turn towards them. They exhort you to be pure, unblemished, comforting to the distressrd 
and unmoved by either luck or misfortune. You must have won nativity in this region, as a result 
of the merit earned in many previous lives. 


Man has to become aware of his genuine nature and be established in that. Or else, he ceases to 
be entitled to that name. When fire does not burn or when water does not flow, can they lay 
claim to those names? Genuineness consists in being true to the deepest core. 


Man has Truth as his nature. That is to say, you can rely on man's behaviour being always true; 
he will speak out only what he feels to be sincere; he will act according to his words; his thought, 
word and action will be consistent and complementary. If in any one case, this concordance is 
absent, then, the person is a man only in outer form. He is worse than a beast, for, beasts are free 
from the burdens of thought and speech. 


The intelligence has to be kept sharp and clear 


All things in Creation are subject to the law of change and man too is subject to his law. But, 
man should use the law for progress, and not for sliding lower in the scale. Dharma 
(righteousness)is the norm, which he must adhere to, so that he changes from good to better and 
from better to the best. Dharma Is that which is 'worn;' man must wear the apparel of Dharma so 
that he is saved from the cold winds of ego. Man has been endowed with buddhi (Intellect), so 
that he might at every turn decide what is beneficent for observance and what is detrimental. 
Gandhi while going through hate-ridden regions, prayed, "Sabko san-mathi dhe Bhagavaan!" (O 
Lord! Give everyone good mind!). The Intellect has to be kept sharp, clear and straight. 


There are four directions in which the intellect guides man: (1) Swaartha-sukha-buddhi. This 
indicates the fully egoistic nature, where the Individual does not care for even his wife and 
children, but, is eager to fulfill his own needs first and foremost. Then, we have (2), the 
Swaartha-paraartha-sukha-buddhi, this allows some consideration for the happiness of others 
also. Birds feed their young and undergo great exertion to bring them up. The next variety is (3) 
Paraartha-buddhi. Those who have this, seek for others as much happiness as they seek for 
themselves. They are prepared to undergo any trouble to secure for others too what they feel will 
grant them happiness. The next is (4) Aadhyaathmic-buddhi (spiritual intellect). This leads man 
ever on the path of renunciation and service, for, they alone lead to Spiritual advancement. 


Develop the vision to see the One behind the many 


India was for long centuries the guide and Guru (preceptor) of mankind, because people’ 
cultivated this type of spiritual intelligence. Today it .has yielded place to falsehood, hypocrisy, 
injustice, and greed. The Aadhyaathmic intellect recognises the Unity of creation and so, what 
the other person feels is felt by the individual too, to the same degree. This vast gathering of 
people will appear to the Aadhyaathmic Intellect as a garland of multi-coloured flowers strung on 
the one single thread, God. Develop this vision; see the One behind the many; see the 
Brahmasuuthra---the string that runs through each flower. 


When you win the Love of God, His compassion will flow unto you. Love gives and forgives. 
Ego gets and forgets. When your son steals some money from the house, you do not hand him 
over to the police; but, when your servant steals a spoon, you have no such qualms. For, you 
have no love for the servant. 


Live without hating others, condemning others, and seeking faults in others. Vyaasa, who wrote 
eighteen voluminous Puraanas summarised all the Puraanas in one single line of a small 
couplet: "Doing good to others is the only meritorious act; doing evil is the most heinous sin." 
When you feel you cannot do good, at least desist from doing evil. That itself is meritorious 
service! Do not try to discover differences; discover unity. Creeds, castes, country of origin may 
differ but the inner hunger is the same for all men. Understand that the purpose of life is to know 
the Embodiment of love, namely, God, through love, and demonstrate through your own Love 
that you have known Him. 


The limbs of the body have to work In unison for the common purpose of sustaining the body 
and keeping it fit for its prime mission. If one limb quarrels with another or refuses to cooperate 
or help, the entire body, Including the refractory limb, will suffer. When you see a thorn on the 
road the feet move away; the eyes saw and immediately, sympathetic vibrations warned the feet. 
The love and cooperation between eye and feet come from the Aathma (divine spirit) within and 
the love which is its very nature, dust as your body is kept safe and secure by love, may the 
country also be kept safe and secure; for, It has a great mission to fulfill, as the guide and Gum of 
mankind. 


Simla, 4-4-1975 


If it is good and will harm no one, go ahead. If it is not good, put it 
aside. If not sure, do nothing until sure. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


10. Thirty-five and sixty-five 


THE future of India lies in your hands. You are fully aware of the characteristics of this Kali 
Yuga (age of conflict) we are passing through. You find around you injustice, irregularities, 
immorality and untruth with all their devilish attributes and atrocities. But we have to march 
ahead in spite of all these with a quiet, tolerant and benign attitude towards life. Almost all the 
fields and walks of life are polluted with these poisonous feelings, but the field of education 
being the most prominent organ, needs our special attention. We should first enquire and try to 
find out why the parent or pupils or their teachers are taking active part in these anti-academic 
activities. The main reason for this disorder is that the human mind is haunted and dominated by 
two devilish blemishes, viz., selfishness and ambition. These forces are standing In the way of 
human beings in realising the human values which go to make up humanity. It is not becoming 
of a man to exchange his valuable life---as precious as gem---for worldly desires and ambitions 
which are as worthless as a coalstone. Man becomes Immortal neither by deeds, nor by progeny 
nor by wealth. What makes him eternal is the spirit of sacrifice. So we should try to make our 
lives meaningful by sacrificing personal comfort for the sake of our fellow beings. 


The student today is a seeker of worldly pleasures 


Today when we find our educational trends going astray and causing anxiety to parents and 
society, we need to reiterate our old values, according to which an education based on our 
cultural heritage can alone lead one' to real education---Aathma Vidhya---the state of self- 
realision. Every Indian will have to recognise the culture based on Vedhic philosophy. You will 
know how restless and agitated the youth of' India is today trying to rob every thing with all 
pride and no achievement and thus getting involved in meaningless pursuits. 


The student of today is not able to realise what he should primarily be concerned with. It is only 
in name that he is a Vidhyaarthi--a seeker of knowledge. In practice, he is only a vishayaarthi--- 
a seeker of worldly pleasures. 


It is the duty of every human being to understand and respect his parents. Similarly, in a nation it 
is the duty of every national to assimilate and appreciate the historical and cultural background 
of his nation and consider these two factors as his father and mother. In fact, one who is ignorant 
of the historical and cultural heritage of his country is like a stupid person who has no knowledge 
of his parents. We have therefore to make manifold progress in the Field of education today to 
keep pace with the general advancement that is taking place. But we are ignorant of our great 
classics and scriptures like Raamaayana, Mahaabhaaratha and Bhagavath Geetha. 


The end of education is character 


Once a District Educational Officer was inspecting a school. He asked the teacher to find out 
from one of his pupils as to who wrote Raamaayana. The pupil innocently replied, "Sir, ! never 
wrote it; perhaps you might have written it." Then the teacher found himself in a miserable plight 
and turned to the Inspecting Officer to assure that he has not done so and tried to enquire if the 
officer had by any chance written the work. The District Educational Officer referred the matter, 
to be safe, to the Vice-Chancellor, who finally observed that some Brahmin must have done it 
and advised the officer concerned to close the issue. This means that the state of affairs in our 
educational field today is so pitiable that our students, teachers, inspecting officers and Vice- 
Chancellors are all sailing in the same boat. Nobody knows about the author of a work-like 
Raamaayana. In these circumstances we are not justified in calling ourselves educated. We are 


wasting our precious time on imitation. The end of education is character and the end of 
knowledge is love. 


Education does not mean mere knowledge of books and acquaintance with them. If we 
concentrate on book knowledge at the cost of practical application, we will be spoiling the name 
of education itself. In olden times, only those who secured hundred per cent marks were allowed 
to pass a test, but now, thirty-five out of hundred will enable a person to get through an 
examination. That means, a student is allowed to commit 65 mistakes out of hundred. If a student 
is allowed to make 65 per cent mistakes when he has full time and energy at his disposal there is 
no reason why a grown up not be given the margin of committing 100 per cent mistakes. It is 
therefore the duty of each and every student to attain hundred per cent perfection in his 
knowledge. If he cannot do this as a student in spite of his advantages of age and energy, he will 
not be able to do Justice to his work when he takes up a job and assumes false notions of prestige 
and dignity. 


Charity makes man happy in both the worlds 


Moreover, education should lead one to humility, which in turn equips him with all the eligibi- 
lity. Eligibility provides him with necessary material wealth, which again enables him to do 
some charitable deeds. Charity makes him happy both in this world and the other one higher than 
this. 


Today we think of our rights and responsibilities. On one side we have the Individual freedom 
and fundamental rights, and on the other we have our responsibilities and duties to be performed. 
We are no doubt anxious about our individual freedom in the same proportion. We should do full 
Justice to our social obligations and establish the reputation of our country and Its culture. The 
colleges today are not paying adequate attention to this cultural aspect. It therefore became 
necessary for us to establish Sathya Sai Colleges with special objectives pointing to this end even 
though there are thousands and millions of colleges all over the world. A Sathya Sai College is 
not Intended to prepare graduates who carry their degrees like begging bowls going from door to 
door begging for a job. These colleges are being established to promote a sense of self-reliance 
and a spirit of service to society and humanity at large. Man cannot live In isolation like a drop 
of oil on water surface. He is a product of society. He has to live In it, grow with it and work for 
it. Human birth is supposed to be a rare one, not easily granted to the animal world. 


Everyone should have the feeling of 'one nation' 


We who are crossing the ocean of Samsaara (the chain of birth and death) need to cultivate the 
art of swimming through Bhagavath chinthana (contemplation on God). However, learned we 
may be, if we do not have this training and cultivation, we are bound to sink. Life is a boat which 
enables us to cross the ocean of Samsaara with the aid of meditation on God. 


A country needs an ideal as a human body requires recoupment. Body is an assembly of various 
organs. No single organ can constitute a body. When the various organs get separated, the human 
body gets weakened and even loses its existence. Similarly, if a nation is split up into different 
parts, It gets disintegrated. There may be different states in a nation but there should be feeling of 
‘one nation' throughout the country. We should develop a habit of visualising unity in diversity 
and not diversity in the unity that is divine. God is everywhere and in everyone. The whole 
universe is inhabited by Him. One should find God in every object. These are the Ideals we find 
In our scriptures. 


There are bulbs of different colours and their voltage also differs. But whatever the colour and 
whatever the voltage, current that flows is the same. This kind of thinking is highly essential 
today. In our culture, we respect our father and mother as God. It is only when we respect our 
parents, that we can expect our children, in turn, to respect us. There is reaction, resound and 
reflection, for everything in the world. 


We assign a special place to women in India 


The young girls who study in this College today will become mothers tomorrow. It is therefore 
necessary that they should equip themselves with all the culture, learning and wisdom that they 
need in their future lives. In India, we assign a special place to women. It is therefore all the 
more important that the girls who are studying here should train themselves in such a way that 
they can live up to the Ideals and aspirations of an Indian woman. 


We consider women as Grihalakshmi, Dharmapathni, and so on. A woman has to maintain her 
house. She is not only the house wife, but on her depends the glory or otherwise of the whole 
country. That is why we say this is our motherland. It is in this spirit that we refer to our country 
as Bhaarathamaatha (Motherland). We also find that women are given the first position when 
they are associated with their counterparts as Seetha-Raama, Lakshmi-Naaraayana, Raadhaa- 
Krishna and Paarvathi-Parameshwara. It is only to establish this prominence given to women in 
our country and to train our young girls on these lines that we took up the task of opening such 
colleges. 


I expect the young girls studying in this college to cultivate such good qualities which will bring 
name and fame to the native homes and also to those where they proceed after marriage. The bad 
habits and vulgar behaviour that we find in most of the young girls today should not find a place 
in the girls of this College. The girls of a Sathya Sai College should maintain the ideals of the 
institutions and keep the prestige of their homes, their society and their culture. It is only then 
that the purpose of establishing this college can be served. 


Jaipur, 10-4-1975 


Rig Vedha teaches the lesson of serenity. Peace is like rose water 
scent; when it is sprinkled on you, smell it but don't drink it---that 
is to say, accept it and thrive on it. 


Blame is like a medicine. Examine yourselves whether you have 
the illness and if you have, accept the blame and benefit by it. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


11. Raamaayana for everyman 


THE Raamaayana is a guide book, a sacred text, an inspiring scripture, for everyman in all lands, 
at all times, whatever his creed or condition might be. For, it imparts poise, balance, equanimity, 
inner strength and peace. Peace is the best treasure, without which power, authority, fame, 
fortune are all dry and burdensome. Thyaagaraaja has sung that there can be no happiness, 
without inner peace. 


To earn this peace and to be unshakably established in it, man must develop Abhyaasa (steady 
practice) and Vairaagyam (full detachment). From birth to death, man is the slave of habits and 
practices. One must examine these and rely more and more on those that lead him towards 
subjective joy rather than objective pleasure. Subjective joy can be acquired by harmony in the 
home, mutual co-operation among the members of the family and community, acts of service to 
others and concern for the welfare and prosperity of the society in which one is living. 


The Raamaayana holds up the ideals to be pursued by the father, the son, the mother, the brother, 
the friend, the servant, the master, the teacher, the pupil, etc. The happy home is the basic cell of 
the national organism. It ensures a happy world, for mankind is one family, and if any one unit is 
sad or struggling in distress, how can, the rest be safe or satisfied? 


There is no object without fault or failing 


Vairaagyam (detachment) does not imply renunciation of family ties and fleeing into the 
loneliness of the jungle. It means our giving up the feeling that things are permanent, and capable 
of yielding supreme joy. The mind plays tricks with man and believes that some things are good 
and some bad, some eternal and some transitory. You might have a plateful of nice eatables 
before you and they might appear to be delicious and fine; but, if the cook announces that a 
lizard had fallen into cooker when it was on fire and has been boiled alive, all the fascination for 
the' food disappears in a trice! There is no object without fault .or failing; there is no joy that is 
unmixed with pain; there is no act that is not tainted with egotism. So be warned and develop the 
detachment which will save you from grief. 


The Raamaayana instils this wise, valid, valuable detachment, or thyaaga (sacrifice). Raama 
gladly journeys into the forest as an exile, the moment he knows that his father's wish was that he 
should do so; and, remember, he was to be crowned Emperor just that moment by the very same 
person who ordered him to go into exile. When those who have full powers and claims, renounce 
positions of authority in the Raamaayana, we see today persons with no powers or claims, 
clamouring to occupy position of authority! 


The lesson Raamaayana teaches about Duty 


Duty is God, that is the lesson the Raamaayana teaches. The word duty is today used to indicate 
the methods by which one exercises his authority. No. Duty is the responsibility you have to 
respect and revere others and to serve them to the best of your ability. You claim to have the 
freedom to walk, waving your walking stick around you; but, the man coming behind has as 
much freedom to use the road as you have. To exercise your freedom so that you do not limit or 
harm the freedom of others---that is the Duty, which becomes Worship. 


When Raama, Seetha and Lakshmana reached the banks of the Ganga, Sumanthra, the aged 
Minister of the Court who had taken them so far in the Royal Chariot, could not follow them; he 
had in duty bound to return to the Capital. So, he turned back with tearful eyes; Guha rowed 


them across the river, they entered the forest and started walking in single file through the thick 
jungle---Raama, Seetha in the middle and Lakshmana following behind. They reached the 
hermitage of Vaalmeeki soon; when the Sage came forward to welcome them, Raama asked him 
to indicate a place where he can reside. Valmeeki said, "We sages reside in You; you reside in 
us. Where else can I request you to reside? Though you have assumed this human form, "You 
give yourself away by the Beauty that shines in You." 


Man is doomed when evanescent overcomes him 


The Beauty of Raama was the Beauty of Inner Peace, the Splendour that fills one when he is 
conscious of living in Dharma (righteousness). Raamaayana teaches also the need to give up the 
false identification with the body. When Raama saw Thaara wailing over the corpse of Vaali, he 
gives her lessons on the evanescence of the body and the foolishness of identifying a person with 
that vehicle he uses for the purpose of his journey to Divinity. 


When desire for the evanescent overcomes man, he Is doomed; he becomes distant from the 
goal. Consider Seetha. She renounced everything that she thought would give her comfort in the 
palaces of her father and father-in-law and preferred to follow Raama into the forest. So, she 
secured the Proximity and Presence of the Lord. But, alas, when she saw the false form of the 
Golden Deer, she yearned for it, and sent both Raama and Lakshmana after it, so that she might 
fondle it and feed it and have it as a pet. What was the result of this fatal desire? She was forced 
to live far away from the Lord and to pine for Him in great anguish. 


When Raama Is installed in the heart, everything will be added unto you---fame, fortune, 
freedom, fullness. Hanumaan was a mere monkey leader until he met Raama; he was a minister 
in the court of his master; but, when Raama gave him the commission to seek Seetha and sent 
him, that is to say, when Raama was Installed in his heart as guide and guardian, Hanumaan 
became immortal, as the Ideal Devotee. 


The Raamaayana has a deep undercurrent of significant meaning. Dhasharatha means, he who 
rides in a chariot of ten, that is to say MAN. He is tied up with three Gunas (qualities), or three 
wives, as in the Raamaayana. He has four sons, the Purushaarthas---Dharma (Raama)Artha 
(Lakshmana), Kaama (Bharatha), and moksha (Sathrughna). These four aims of man have to be 
systematically realised, always with the last one, Moksha, clearly before the eye. Lakshmana 
represents the Buddhi (Intellect) and Seetha is Truth. Hanumaan is the Mind, and it is the 
repository, if controlled and trained, of courage. Sugreeva, the master of Hanumaan is 
Discrimination. With these to help him Raama seeks Truth and succeeds. That is the lesson of 
the Epic to everyman. 


Ideals underlying the ancient culture of India 


The culture of this land is based on the high ideals of Righteousness enshrined in the Raamaa- 
yana and the Mahaabhaaratha, in both of which God has led mankind in the garb of man. There 
is a story of Alexander the Great, which illustrates the glory of Indian Culture. It seems 
Alexander used to go incognito to the villages around his camp, in India, in order to learn the 
habits and manners of the strange new land into which fate had brought him. One day, he found a 
man pleading with another to accept a pot of gold, which the other was refusing even to look at! 
He came to know that the pot of gold was discovered under the soil of the field purchased by the 
man from the man who refused to accept it. The buyer argued that he had bought only the land 


and was therefore not entitled to own the pot of gold; the seller said, he had no more right for 
anything found on or in the plot, that he had sold. 


Alexander watched this contest for some time; both did not yield. At last, the village elders were 
called in to decide the issue. And, even as Alexander watched, the elders found a happy way out- 
the buyer's son shall marry the seller's daughter and the pot of the gold shall be given to the bride 
as dowry! Alexander felt elated at the heights to which human virtue could rise; he was also 
ashamed at his own adventurous ambition to conquer another's property by force of arms. The 
ideals underlying the ancient culture of India have to be studied and practised by every Indian at 
least, so that the world might have the benefit of the great examples this can provide. 


Turn your sight inside, to purify and clarify 


This day, when you are celebrating the birth of Raama, you have to dedicate your activities to 
these ideals propounded in the life of Raama. The fact that you are alive this day is a blessing, 
for, you can know of these ideals and also the means by which you can realise them in actual 
daily life. There are many who spend much time in mechanically reciting the name Raama or 
systematically reading the entire Raamaayana according to a fixed time-table, or who worship 
the images of Raama, Seetha, Lakshmana, and Hanumaan, as a daily ritual, with pomp and 
pedantry; but, like the person who puts a foot forward only to draw it back again these persons 
do not progress at all, though years might elapse. Without gaining purity of thoughts and 
intentions, compassion and the urge to serve, these outward expressions and exhibitions are but 
ways of cheating the society which applauds you as a great devotee. Your sight must become 
insight; it must be turned within and used to purify and clarify. 


People talk glibly of Saakshaathkaara (Vision of the Divine), the vision that liberates. The See- 
er and the Seen have to merge and become One and experienced as One only, without a second. 
That is the Saakshaathkaara that is worthwhile. You may have a fruit. You may earn the fruit of 
thapas (penance) in your hand. But, unless you eat it, digest it, and make it part of your own 
nature and derive strength therefrom, you are not saved at all. Merge info the Divine which you 
really are; that is the consummation. 


In order to reach this goal, you have to proceed far. First examine your present equipment; find 
out its defects, for example, whether it is damaged by egotism, greed, insincerity, waywardness 
and sloth. For, with these faults, it is difficult to concentrate on thoughts of God, either within or 
without. You must also cultivate the positive quality of Prema (Love) for the Embodiment of 
Prema can be realised only through Prema. That is the message the Raamaayana gives all those 
who study it with sincere desire to learn. That is the message I wish to give you today. 


Raamanavami, Brindhaavan, 20-4-1975 


12. Why I love villages most 


THE Sun is not the only gift that has dawned on this village this day; Aanandha (divine bliss) too 
has dawned. For, I have come to make you aware of the Aanandha you are. Aanandha is the 
home from which you have strayed away! It is your place of Nativity. You seek your home 
elsewhere and so, you are afflicted by distress and disappointment. Know that Aanandha is your 
Nature, your sustenance, and your goal. 


Villages are the places where this knowledge comes easier to man, and takes deeper roots. That 
is the reason I love villages most. For, the virtues of detachment, uprightness, honesty, and 
sincerity which are essential prerequisites for acquiring this awareness are surviving, in however 
attenuated a form, only in villages this day. They have disappeared from towns long ago. Of 
course, you have your troubles and handicaps; but, certainly, you have less obstacles to 
overcome, when you decide to lead the good life and attain the awareness of your Divinity. 


Man's body is essentially the receptacle of God 


Why is man-afflicted today with fear and anxiety? Are we to search for the reasons outside us or 
do they he with us? The reason lies in the false emphasis we have laid on things of the material 
world, ignoring things of the spirit. The body that man bears is essentially the receptacle of God. 
It is a temple, where God is installed and where God is the Master. It does not deserve all the 
attention you now pay to fulfil its urges, needs and whims. It is equipped with very valuable 
instruments which can help you in the journey; but you seldom use them! The senses bring you 
impressions from the outside world, but, you do not evaluate these impressions by the touchstone 
of a clear reason or a balanced mind. You do not proceed from one step to another in the march 
towards the elimination of the ego and the emergence in to the One. City-dwellers are buffeted 
by storms of passion and emotion, and they are hunted or haunted by phantom desires and wild 
imaginings. They have neither the inclination nor the insight to dedicate their time, their skills 
and their activity to Divine ends. 


The Divine is the core, the essence of your being. God is everywhere; when He is recognised and 
adored as the Indweller of your body, it becomes a Temple, and it is no more a burden. God is 
shining, announcing Himself through you; He is expressing Himself through every thought, word 
and deed that emanates from you. 


Go deeper within, where the treasure is stored 


In the temple that is built and put together, we have an idol that is sculpted and moulded by man. 
But, in this temple that is gifted by God, God shines in His own Light, and manifests in His own 
Glory as Love, Power and Wisdom. He shines and manifests thus not only in a single body, but, 
in all bodies. He is the Indweller in each; so, when you insult, injure or inflict infamy on another, 
remember you are inviting the pain to visit your own self, for, the other is none other than your 
own self. 


Seek the gem of Divine Knowledge within you, just as precious stones have to be sought in the 
bowels of the earth. Now, what you seek is trivial trash. Go deeper, where the treasure is stored. I 
know you have, in this village, as in most villages, a big chariot festival, when the replica of the 
Installed Idol’ the processional Form, is taken round the entire village with great pomp and 
paraphernalia. The wheeled chariot or the palanquin is decorated with reverent attention; bands 
of musicians and dancers are engaged to precede the chariot; many come to the festival to admire 


the decoration of the chariot; more are interested in the songs and dances, the songsters and the 
dancers; only a handful are drawn by the idol which is the central figure of all the gaiety and 
adoration. 


The human body too is a temple chariot; the Aathma (divinity)is installed therein; and it is 
dragged by emotions, impulses, passions and urges along the streets of desire. Success and 
failure, joy and grief, gain and loss, are the dancers who accompany this procession of Life. 
Here, too, many pour their attention only on the chariot, its height, its decoration and its 
progress. Many others are concerned with the dance of dualities, the pain-pleasure duet, that is 
part of the procession. Few pay attention to the Aathma, the Crown and Consummation of human 
existence. 


Develop the habit of listening to the Inner Voice 


But, sages and saints have known that the most noteworthy achievement of the senses of man is 
the glorification of the God within. "They are not eyes, they are but globules of glass, that do not 
earn a vision of God," says one. "They are not ears, they are but muscular protrusions that do not 
relish the praise of God," says another. Suurdhaas condemns the hand that does not worship God 
and calls such hands, sucks of wood. The world and Its attractions may appeal to your instincts 
and impulse but, God draws out your Love, as no worldly thing can. Develop the inner Vision, 
the habit of listening to the inner Voice, and you are assured of unshakeable peace and infinite 
joy. 

In the village, you are ever in contact with God, His Grace, His tenderness and His Love. In the 
cities, life is more superficial. You may not have the benefit of the radio or the electric current; 
but, you can hear the birds sing at Sunrise and you can bask in the bright Sun underneath the 
pure blue sky. When you get the twin gifts of medical care and schooling facilities, you need 
nothing more for marching onwards to happiness and peace. But, I find that in several villages, 
the behaviour of some one person or some one family disrupts life and breeds fear, faction and 
fighting. This can be cured only by the potent drug called Love. The forces of brotherhood, 
mutual help and sympathetic understanding have to overpower the sinister influence of these 
individuals and promote unity and strength. 


Heart and spirit of man have to be fed and fostered 


Many leaders of this country are promising to provide a quantity of food, some kind of dwelling, 
and a few yards of clothing to everyone so that people may be happy. They also promise to each 
sufficient schooling so that they may write and read letters, and grasp the news from the papers. 
But, these cannot ensure peace, for, man is not merely a bundle of bones and muscles; he is 
equipped with a heart and a spirit and these have also to be fed and fostered. 


Men may have superabundance of food, clothing and houses; but, their hearts may be dry and 
their spirits gloomy. Sense-control, self-confidence, contentment, absence of hatred and greed--- 
these are far more precious as possessions than land, money, or houses. The Seva Samithi that 
has been started in your village, with its subsidiary units of Mahila Vibhaag, and Baala Vikaas 
(all Sai Organisations) will sow the seeds of these disciplines and promote peace and happiness. 


Above all, cultivate unity and brotherhood. A single fibre of hemp cannot bind even an ant; 
thousands rolled into a rope can tame a wild elephant into quiet submission. In unity lies strength 
and prosperity. Unity in tile villages can usher in a new era of joy and prosperity in the entire 
nation. 


Make the temple of Vinaayaka inaugurated today the hub of this new movement. The temple is 
to the village, as the heart is to the body. You have all joined to build it and bring it into being; 
continue to reap its benefits together and to share its light together. With the Grace of God, what 
seems impossible can be achieved quite easily. All are children of God; do not injure anyone, 
for, that injury will react on you quite soon. You reap as you sow; you cannot grow a fruit-tree 
when the seed you have planted is that of a weed. 


Time spent on thoughts of God is rewarded 


There are some ignorant persons who laugh at bhajans and other acts of worship and characterise 
them as waste of valuable time! These persons might laugh at your pouring bags of paddy seeds 
on slushy fields and condemn that act too as waste of valuable food material! But, you know that 
for every bag of seed, Mother Earth will give back, in a few weeks, grain tenfold or even 
twentyfold. Time spent in thoughts of God or adoration of the Divine is indeed well-spent, for, it 
rewards you with a rich harvest of mental peace and courage. 


When thieves attack the neighbour, you become alert and keep vigil; you feel that it may be your 
turn next. So you must see that thieves do not enter the village. For, then, all can be safe and 
secure. Your neighbour's loss is as much your own. Do not inflame your anger and blow it into a 
conflagration which may destroy the entire village. Be cool, calm yourself. Take a glass of cold 
water and lie down quiet for a while, till the fury loses its heat. Do not fly into a passion and 
throw vulgar abuse at the person you dislike, And be careful; do not indulge in behaviours and 
start imitating them before your children; for, they will learn these behaviours and start imitating. 
You cannot easily correct them later. 


Make all efforts to remove evil from your heart 


Goodness is Godliness. Never talk ill of others; spend your time in showering love and in mutual 
help. Wake up early and sing the glory of God in group bhajan moving along the roads and 
cleansing the atmosphere, polluted by anger and hatred. Let the air you breathe be free from evil 
vibrations. When you mention the sky you point your finger upwards, to indicate that it is there. 
But the sky is here also. It is one of the five elements, the Panchabhuuthaas. Its sign and symbol 
is sound; wherever sound is, there, we can infer, is the sky. There is an inner sky also, the 
Aakaasha in the Heart. Just as the Sun and Moon in the outer sky are hidden by thick masses of 
cloud, the Sun (Intellect) and Moon (Mind) in the inner sky are also hidden and suppressed by 
thick clouds of vice and evil. So, make all efforts to remove these clouds, by the strong gale of 
Devotion to God. 


When you cook any item of food, in a copper vessel, however fresh and fine the vegetables are, 
however clean the dhaal (lentils) and salt, however free from grit and dirt the tamarind fruits, if 
the vessel has no lining of tin, the food made therein will turn into poisonous stuff. You all know 
this truth. The heart too is a copper vessel where you prepare various types of food for yourself 
and others. See that it has a good lining of Love; or else, it too will cause harm and pain, to you 
and the rest. 


Conquer anger by means of fortitude 


Love...Love...Love...First...Love, as long as Life lasts. For Myself, I can say, I shower more 
blessings on those who decry or defame Me than those who worship and adore Me! For, those 
who spread falsehoods about Me derive joy therefrom; I am happy that I am the cause for their 
exultation and joy. You too must accept this line of argument and be very happy when someone 


derives joy by defaming you. Do not respond by defaming that person; then, the chain of hatred 
will bind both and drag both down. Life will become a tragedy. Conquer anger by means of 
fortitude; conquer hatred by love. Do not feed anger with retaliation; do not feed hatred with 
fury. 


Forget and forgive all that has happened amongst you until this very moment; start a new chapter 
of Love and Brotherhood from now on. The Professors and the students of the Sri Sathya Sai 
College are ready and eager to come to your help, whenever you need it. Some young men from 
this village are students of this College; when they come home, you must remind them of the 
ideals of service and reverence that we are Instilling into them. The College is trying to help 
them not only to earn a University degree but also to become skilled and enthusiastic servants of 
the weak and the disabled, and efficient citizens of the. nation. They should not behave like the 
half-educated haughty youth, who wander the streets with a transistor on their shoulders, 
pursuing the vanities of the world and running into debt and dissoluteness. They should preserve 
and develop their ancestral patrimony; (not only land and riches; also, heritage and culture); they 
should be assets to their parents, the society and the nation. They should not exploit the 
innocence and ignorance of the very parents who have sacrificed their everything in order to 
send in them to college and maintain them hostels. Send your sons to the College; there they can 
learn to escape these temptations and to be useful and efficient for the task of preserving Indian 
culture and spirituality. Encourage your sons to realise the meaning of My Mission and to 
become fit instruments for spreading, by the example of their lives, the Message which I have 
come to give mankind. 


Panathur Village, 28-4-1975 


Illness is caused more by malnutrition of the mind than of the 
body. Doctors speak of vitamin deficiency; I will call it the 
deficiency of Vitamin G, and I will recommend the repetition of the 
Name of God, with accompanying contemplation of the glory and 
grace of God. That is the Vitamin G. That is the medicine. 


Regulated life and habits are two-thirds of the treatment, while the 
medicine is just one-third only. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


13. The basic error 


You may have cows of different breeds and bands, colours and continents, but the milk they give 
is everywhere the same in composition! You may get gold from different places and engage 
different goldsmiths to make for you different types of ornaments but the basic substance does 
not undergo any diminution in value. It remains gold for all time. Living beings belong to widely 
different species but, the Spark of Life, the Jeeva (individual being) in each is the same. God is 
the goal of every prayer, in whatever language or dialect it is spoken. You may see people 
kneeling or prostrating, with folded palms or arms extended, in church or mosque or temple but 
they are all asking for help, succour, strength, wisdom, security or happiness from the 
inexhaustible reservoir of happiness, wisdom and power, God. But, people in their pettiness, do 
not recognise this basic truth, they pride themselves on their holiness and disparage the others, as 
having gone astray! They do not have mental peace themselves, nor do they allow others to live 
in peace. Such is the stupidity of the fanatics. 


It is good and helpful to have an enemy 


Ignoring the unity of all mankind in the Aathma (divine soul), man relishes in quarrels and 
factions. He classifies some among his contemporaries as his friends and some as his foes. He 
manufactures duality where basically there is only unity. It is his own likes and dislikes, 
prejudices and passions that is reflected back, that creates all this reaction of love and hatred, all 
this resounding echo of factiousness and friction. Friendship and enmity arise from your heart; 
they are labels fixed by you, not marks which other people are born with. The same person is the 
thickest friend of one man and the mortal enemy of another---both because of his one act or one 
word! 


Of course, it is best that you do not develop too much attachment with others and get entangled 
either through the silken bonds of friendship or the iron chain of hatred. But, if you ask Me, it is 
more beneficial to cultivate enemies. Kabeer has stated many times that it is good and very 
helpful to have an enemy that is ever eager to criticise you for your faults than a friend who will 
cast a blind eye on them. The enemy takes delight in abusing you and it is said in the Puraanas 
(mythological legends) that, as a consequence, he goes on diminishing and wiping off from your 
account the demerits you have to live out in misery. The faster and fouler his abuse, the sooner 
and better are your future prospects brightened. The enemy absorbs your sins and their effects. 


Moreover, since you are always aware of the enemy and his tactics, you are alert not to give him 
any chance to point his finger of scorn at you. He is your censor, corrector and conscience. Be 
thankful to him who talks ill of you, for surely, he is doing you very great service by examining 
your every act on the touchstone of morality, truth and righteousness. 


Most people live superficial lives 


But, the best path for Saadhak (spiritual aspirant) is to transcend all dualities and recognise the 
oneness of the Aathma behind and beyond the diversities of Nature. Mistaking the One to be the 
Many is the basic error that has led man into pain and misery. He sees multiplicity, he engages 
himself in manifold activities, he is pulled in many directions, he is distracted and distressed. He 
has no time to meditate on the One Basic Truth. He is confused by the kaleidoscopic 
transformations. He is tossed between hate and love, attachment and repulsion. 


Only recently when I was touring the Delhi area I asked some persons who came to Me with the 
complaint that, since they did not attend 60% of the bhajans, the Committee meetings, etc., their 
names are threatened to be removed from membership. "Why could you not attend even that 
number of meetings?" You will be surprised at the reply they gave Me. "Swaamiji! We have no 
time even to die!" That is the plight to which this fundamental ignorance of the One (that appears 
as Many) has driven people. 


Man does not delve deep into the significance of all that happens around him. Siddhaartha, who 
became the Buddha, had that urge to know and inquire. Most people live superficial lives. They 
are like logs of wood tossed up and down by the waves of the sea, insensitive, dull, Thaamasik. 
Haste lands them in waste; waste increases worry. They have no time to sit and meditate on the 
reality of their own existence, their own knowledge and their own joy. If that is done, they can 
contact the source of all existence, all knowledge and all bliss. They don't take even the first step 
towards their self-inquiry. How then can they derive self-satisfaction, at their vastness, 
indestructibility, infinite power and wisdom? 


Duty must be done with skill, sincerity and love 


You have it in your power to make your days on earth a path of flowers, instead of a path of 
thorns. Recognise the Sai resident in every heart and all will be smoothness, softness and 
sweetness for you. Sai will be the fountain of Love in your heart and in the hearts of all with 
whom you come in contact. Know that Sai is Omnipresent and so, He is present in every living 
thing and you. Adore everyone as you adore Sai. Allow the other man as 'much freedom as you 
like to enjoy; do unto him just as you would like to be done to you. Don't do unto him anything 
you don't like to be done unto you. That is the sum and substance of Saadhana (spiritual effort). 


One individual goes along the road swinging his walking stick merrily. He is quite happy with 
himself and his conditions. He has every right to do so. But, he has to remember that others are 
also walking along the road and have every right to do so. So, his stick should be so swung that 
no harm or injury is inflicted on other rightful users of the road. Your freedom is restricted by the 
freedoms you have to grant to other members of the Society in which you live and thrive. As a 
matter of fact, if there was no other person, you have no duties at all. Duty arises when you have 
another person to deal with. You have a duty so far as the other person is concerned and he has 
the responsibility to see that he deserves that duty which you feel bound to fulfil towards him. 
Duty must be deserved by the other; it must be done with skill and sincerity and love. This is 
easy if you feel that your duty is part of your worship, that you are offering it to the Sai in the 
other person. Your duty is to your own self, the Sai that is your real core. 


Be aware of both your duties and responsibilities 


You will be false to Sai if you delay doing it, or do it clumsily or half-heartedly. Your station in 
life, your position of authority, your account, your kinship with others, your status as father or 
son, husband or wife, master or servant, teacher or pupil, each has its own Swadharma 
(individual morality and duty)---both of duties and responsibilities. Abide by them; be aware of 
them always. Bhaaratheeya Culture has emphasised this in every scripture and every epic. 


Begin your Saadhana by offering the joy of the Jeeva (individual being) to the Dheva (divine 
being)! Of course, Dheva does not need the offering of joy made by the Jeeva. The waters of the 
lake do not need fish swimming in it; its joy is not lessened by their absence. But the fish need 
the waters. Do not be led to believe that God will be feeling a void, if there are no devotees or 


worshippers! The person with devotion in the heart, with the thirst for Truth in his brain, with the 
yearning for surrender in his mind, will certainly feel lost if there is no God whom he can 
approach and adore. 


Be eager to do your duty as best as you can 


Faith in God is to be translated into action. It is an imperative act of worship to discharge 
faithfully all one's duties and responsibilities. It will be dangerous if the right work is not done 
by the right person at the right time. You must be eager to do your duty as best as you can. 
Maintain your own self-respect, by this attitude and by this sense of obligation. You must also be 
vigilant about the honour and reputation of your family and fore-fathers. 


There was a washerman in a village, who belonged to the family that washed the clothes of its 
residents, since generations. It was his hereditary profession. Every one, high and low, rich and 
poor, gave their clothes to him for cleaning and ironing. He had two donkeys to bring the soiled 
clothes from the house to the river and to carry the burden of the washed clothes from the river to 
the streets and the houses of his customers. He had also a dog to watch over the washed clothes 
hung for drying in the open spaces by the side of the river. 


One day, the washerman had to wash a big lot of silken sarees and dhothis because of a marriage 
in the house of the richest man of: the village and he had kept them all nicely washed and ironed, 
in one of the rooms In the hut. It was night. The dog and the donkeys were in the backyard, of 
the house, dozing off. The washerman had, in his anxiety to get all the clothes washed, had 
forgotten to feed the dog that evening and the poor animal was both hungry and angry. So, when 
a thief stole past him in the darkness and began breaking into the hut to steal the silken clothes, 
he kept mum. 


The donkeys noted this and were upset because their master was being robbed right before their 
eyes. So, they raised a hue and cry, braying their loudest. The washerman was awakened by the 
noise; he came out of the house, red in the face, because the donkeys had disturbed his sleep. He 
took up a cudgel and beat up the donkeys mercilessly! They suffered because they took upon 
themselves a duty that did not rightfully belong to them. It was not their Swadharma. 


Humility, Forbearance, Sincerity---these are the primary virtues of a genuine son or daughter of 
Bhaarath. Your duty is to cultivate these and make the City of Bombay, which is the stomach of 
Bhaarath, healthy and clean. Then only can Bhaarath be happy. That is why the Dharma 
kshethra (Mansion of Morality) and the Dharma Stuupa (Monument of Morality) have both been 
erected first in your City. 


Dharmakshethra, 11-5-1975 


More than listening to a hundred lectures or delivering them to 


others, offering one act as genuine service attracts the Grace of 
God. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


14. Four F's 


THE process of education must render the individual a happier and more useful person; it must 
also make him a better citizen,: able and willing to further the progress of the nation to which he 
belongs. It must give up its present emphasis on the grant of degrees which are serving only as 
bowls, with which the graduates roam about the country asking for jobs to be deposited in them. 


Today, we hear a great deal about 'duty' and the responsibility to perform the duties concerning 
each group. This is all to the good. But, the connotation of the words is not properly understood. 
The student thinks that his 'duty' is only to be punctual when he attends college or school, and to 
be attentive during the lectures and other academic exercises. The teachers too consider their 
duty done, when they attend during prescribed hours and perform the assignments allotted to 
them. 


This misconception has to be given up. Education has to be welcomed as a Saadhana (spiritual 
discipline) for the establishment of Shaanthi (peace)In the individual heart as well as in Society, 
including the Human Commonwealth. Education is a spiritual endeavour, over which Goddess 
Saraswathi presides. Saraswathi is the Shakthi of Brahma, the First Member of the Trinity, who 
is the source and sustenance of all creative activity. Gaayathri---the vital Vedhic manthra, which 
prays to the Source of Light, to illumine the Intellect of the aspirant---is also a facet of that 
Shakthi. 


People have now ignored Saraswathi & Gaayathri 


The Gaayathri manthra (Vedhic prayer to illuminate the intelligence) is a universal eternal call 
from the heart of man to the embodiment of Love and Light. It is the very basis of the 
educational effort in all lands and at all times. But, people have now ignored Saraswathi and 
Gaayathri; they have installed, Lakshmi, the Goddess of Wealth, in the altar of Education. The 
emphasis is on soft furniture, soft curricula, soft tests, and soft treatment for the idle and even the 
mischievous. The aim is to draw as much as possible from the common pool, not to contribute 
one's best and most of it. The teachers and the students try to do the minimum so far as teaching 
and learning are concerned. 


This College is run on far contrary principles. Here, the emphasis is on giving and forgiving, not, 
on getting and forgetting those who gave what you got. We also encourage service, especially 
among the illiterate and the needy, in the villages around. We try to highlight the responsibilities 
of youth, rather than rights. The right is earned only by the proper discharge of the 
responsibilities. When duty is shirked, you have no right to ask for your rights. 


In the observance of Swadharma lies progress 


Remember that the years that you spend in this College are the most precious in your lives; if 
they are wasted in indifference or positive idleness, you will have to rue for it, all the rest of your 
lives. And, being in this College is the highest piece of good fortune and, if you do not rise up to 
our expectations through negligence or waywardness, the loss is Irreparable. 


You will learn here the valuable lessons of detachment, loving service, fraternity, humility, 
sincerity, fortitude and fearlessness. Treasure them, for, they will serve as reliable props when 
you enter the world of action. 


In College, you will be marching from smaller truths to bigger truths, until you are taught the 
know how to reach the Ultimate Truth. There is no false doctrine, as such. What is so called is 


only the result of ignorance. No falsehood is deliberate; it is only truth clothed in fog or fumble. 
You discard the foggy, vision and attain clear vision; and that reveals Truth. You give up 
fumbling knowledge and attain free, full, clear understanding. That is the purpose of all this 
teaching, all this curriculum. 


You are now at the initial stage of a long journey. You have to equip yourselves better for it. You 
must know where it leads. Beware of the distractions on the way that might tempt you to alight 
from the railway train and lose your goal. Be steady in the faith which will smoothen the journey 
for you. Have confidence in the teachers who will guide you, and in God who decides your 
destiny and confers strength and sustenance. 


Do not disturb your journey and delay it, by resorting to wild. upheavals of anger or discontent. 
Your Dharma (prescribed duty) as students is to study. It is the Dharma of teachers to teach. In 
that Swadharma (performing one's duty that accords with one's nature) lies security, progress and 
peace. Every moment spent in these fallow pursuits is a moment lost, or a moment that inflicts 
even damage. 


Today's students are the makers of tomorrow 


Remember you are the makers, the leaders and the guides of the India of tomorrow. Your 
shoulders have to be stronger than those of the present generation of leaders, for, as the years roll 
by, the burden is becoming heavier. Your hearts must become more expansive, your intelligence 
must become sharper and clearer, for, you have great things to do, for your own selves and for 
humanity. 


You must prove to be fine examples of the educational system that India has to adopt for her 
progress and for the progress of mankind. Therefore, imbibe the ideals of Duty, Devotion and 
Discipline during the years you spend here. Devotion must be tested in the crucible of Discipline. 
It must be directed along the lines of Duty. Dharmaraaja, the eldest of the Paandavas, was the 
very embodiment of Devotion to the Lord Krishna. But, he had on both sides of him, Duty in the 
form of Arjuna and Discipline in the form of Bheema. So, he was able to defeat his enemies and 
crown himself Emperor. 


Do not stuff your heads with the trivialities that fill the columns of periodicals, or absurd details 
of the personal lives of stars in any field. Don't get excited with external events; or, depressed 
with events that appear like failures. Keep your head high over the flood waters; do not be 
carried away like stalks of straw. 


Every student must cultivate Devotion and Faith 


I appreciate the student who is not merely academically efficient, but, is also, full of Bhakthi 
(devotion) and Prema (selfless love) towards all. The student who secured the First Rank in the 
University Examination is, I am glad to say, named Premaa-nandha! When the results were 
announced and it became known that he had secured this unique distinction, the students 
gathered around him and pressed to give them 'sweets.' I too asked him for sweets! Do you know 
what his reply was? He held my hands, and said, with a flash of joy in his eyes, "Baba! You are 
sweetness itself; how can I give you sweets?" 


Devotion and faith such as this must be cultivated by every student. Be as devoted and 
disciplined as Arjuna. Be as intelligent and strong as Bheema. Be steadfast and sincere, like 
Dharma-raaja. Then, no harm can come to you; you will achieve victory in all your efforts. 


There are four F's that you will have to fix before your attention. (1) Follow the Master, (2) Face 
the Devil, (3) Fight to the End and (4) Finish at the Goal. Follow the Master means, observe 
Dharma. Face the Devil means, overcome the temptations that beset you when you try to earn 
artha (wealth or the wherewithal to live in comfort). Fight to the End means, struggle 
ceaselessly; wage war against the six enemies that are led by kaama (lust). And, finally, Finish at 
the Goal means, do not stop until the goal of Moksha (Liberation from ignorance and delusion) Is 
reached. The F's are fundamental for the pursuit of the four Purushaarthas---Dharma, Artha, 
Kaama and Moksha. 


I shall be ever with you, wherever you are, guarding you and guiding you. March on; have no 
fear. 


Sathya Sai College, Brindhaavan, 6-7-1975 


You must become an Aartha, torn by intense suffering to sense the 
Lord. Suffer the pangs of distress. You must realise that mere 
suffering is fruitless, without the knowledge of the path to attain 
the Lord. That is to say, you have to be transformed into a jijnaasu, 
a spiritual Seeker. 


Analyse the four Purushaarthas (four goals of life) and realise that 
Moksha (Liberation) is the goal, the culmination. Start craving for 
that, as an Arthaarthi, the lover of the truest Gain. Seek that which, 
when secured, all else is secured. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


15. The company you seek 


KAMAL Sahaani, of the Second B.Com. Class of the College spoke now, using fine simple 
appropriate words, on the human body and the purpose for which it has been given to you. He 
said that the world is a stage and that the body is a costume that one has to wear in order to act 
the role that God has allotted to you in the. play produced and directed by Him. 


This is a correct interpretation. But, when you are allotted a part, your duty is to do it well and 
earn the appreciation of the Director. 


The stage on which you play your role is an inflnitesimal dot when compared with the vast 
unlimited Cosmic Space. The time when you strut about the stage in this costume or any other is 
also inflnitesimal. Deepak of this College acted as Shankaraachaarya on the stage at the 
Shanmukh-aanandha Hall, Bombay. But, his Deepakness was not lost thereby; even while he 
was Shankaraachaarya, he was Deepak. His Shankaraachaarya-hood was but a temporary phase. 
So too, the Aathma (divine soul) is the eternal truth; the body which it dons is temporary and the 
role It Induces is also short. Or, to Illustrate this in another way---the time spent In dreams is 
infinitesimal, when compared with the time spent awake. The 'waking' stage is the representative 
of the stage of wisdom and illumination, of the Aathma; the dream stage is the representative of 
the 'Ignorance-wisdom' hazy stage of human life. 


God by very nature, attracts man near to Him 


The question may legitimately be asked, why or how did this eternal Universal Aathmic principle 
take up residence in this temporary, particularised Body box? Well. You do not keep diamonds 
In a diamond casket, do you? If you do, the robber would be doubly benefitted. You keep It in an 
iron box only. Of course, the iron box or safe will be artistic and charming, for, the container is 
chosen to suit the value or sanctity of the thing contained. To drink milk or some such beverage, 
you select a clean attractive tumbler or cup. But, for a spittoon, Inferior metals or mud is felt 
ample. 


The Body is a chalice, wherein you collect the nectar of Divine Grace. That is the prime purpose 
for which it has been gifted to you. For, without a cup or chalice, a casket or jug, how can the 
nectar be taken? Raso vai sah, say the Vedhas: "He is sweet-nectar, no less." And When His 
Grace is showered, the body is thrilled. The body has to be kept ever clean and pure, unaffected 
by dirt, disease, distress, or defeatism. Nara and Naaraayana (man and God), are like iron and 
magnet. God by His very nature attracts man near, for in man, there is the Divine. When the 
magnet fails to attract the Iron piece, the Iron foolishly concludes that the magnet has lost its 
power! The real fact is the piece of iron is too thickly covered by rust and dust. It does not realise 
its own defects; it rushes to blame God (the magnet) or even to deny Him! 


The company you join must be purer than you 


The easiest and the most fruitful method of keeping yourself free from dust and rust, is the 
Sathsang (holy company). The company of the good and the godly will slowly and surely 
chasten and cleanse the persons prone to stray away from the straight path towards Self- 
Realisation. Care has to be taken to see that you select and stick to the proper company. A cup of 
water has no cash value; but, if it is poured into ten cups of milk, it acquires the value that people 
attach to milk! If on the other hand, one cup of milk is poured into ten cups of water, it loses the 
value It had and is condemned as useless. So, the Sathsang you join must be purer, more 


venerable, and sticking to higher ideals of virtue and truth than you yourselves. When a smoker 
joins a group of non-smokers, there is every likelihood of his giving up that bad habit; but, when 
a non-smoker falls into a den of smokers, he is certain to become a victim soon! Such is the 
subtle influence of the company one keeps. The company you join must be qualitatively and 
quantitatively greater and higher than the one in which you are now caught. 


There are precious gems of wisdom within your hearts, which require excavation, in order to be 
of any benefit to you. Intelligence is the Instrument you have to use, in order to gain them. At the 
very start, you will encounter a boulder barring your way---that is the body conciousness, the 
Ego. Desires are the loose rocks that have also to be dug out and kept aside. Then, you come to a 
bed of sand---good thoughts, good words, good deeds; when this stratum is reached, you are 
nearing success. If you keep on in Sathsang, everyday, your hearts will maintain their purity 
unimpaired; but, if you seek one, only off and on, it will be difficult to win Grace or particles of 
it, for, the vessel will be tarnished and untidy. In your own households, you must have noticed 
that a vessel in dally use is bright and clean; but, vessels stored and used only now and then will 
have to be scrubbed with great vigour to become bright. 


You must take all the trouble and welcome all the patience needed, to seek Sathsang and remain 
therein. For, It is not being born a man that is the sign of the glory; It is living as a man that 
confers the dignity. 


Brindhaavan, 7-7-1975 


The secret of perfect health lies in keeping the mind always 
cheerful---never worried, never hurried, never borne down by any 
fear, thought or anxiety. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


16. Full minus full 


That is Full; This is Full; When Full is taken from the Full, Full remains---this is the 
Upanishathic axiom! The Divine is Full; Creation is Full; even when Creation happened and the 
Cosmos appeared to be produced from the Divine, there was no diminuition In the Fullness of 
the Full. Fullness is the attribute, the nature of the Supreme. It cannot’ be diminished by the 
process of creation of the Cosmos. Why is creation also called the Full? Because, it came from 
the Full. 


You go to the bazaar to purchase a kilogramme of jaggery. The keeper of the shop brings from 
his store a big lump, and he slices off a portion, weighing about a kg; he then weighs It and gives 
us, in return for the price amount, one kg. of Jaggery. We sample a piece from the big lump and 
we expect the portion to behave as sweetly as the original lump. We go home and take a little to 
prepare the sweet drink called paanakam. The paanakam is sweet; the kg of jaggery and the 
mother lump---all are equally sweet. Fullness is the quality of the Divine; it is found in part or 
portion or in half or whole. Quantity is not the criterion; quality is In the visible world that has 
been taken from the substance of the Divine, this quality is found equally full. We shall not 
consider the world as anything less than God. 


God is in the world, in and through everything 


Of course, there are scholars who proclaim that the world is a hollow zero, that it has no latent or 
potent strength, being but a dream and a delusion. This is a sign of the blindness of Ignorance. 
God is very much in the world, in and through every thing in it, with no exception. In the Geetha 
the Lord announces, "I am human among living beings, the cow among animals, the lion among 
beasts, the cobra among snakes, the eagle among birds, Prahlaadha among Raakshasas. No item 
is discarded as not worthy of God. There is no body that He does not activate, no Form that He 
does not reside in. He is fragrance, brilliance, sweetness and taste, intelligence, valour, austerity, 
fame, contentment---an desirable and even undesirable things and qualities. One can acquire 
unalloyed bliss only by knowing this universal all inclusive glory of the Lord. 


There are four stages in securing the Grace of the Lord, by this means: (1)Attaching the mind to 
God: (2) Loving tile Form of God to which the mind _ has been attached: (3) Installing that Form 
in the heart and (4) Dedicating all that one has and does to the Form so installed. You have a 
great example of one who successfully travelled through these stages and realised the Goal of 
Life, in the Mahaabhaaratha, namely Ekalavya. Though Dhronachaarya refused to accept him as 
his pupil, Ekalavya attached himself mentally to him as Guru (preceptor); he Installed him in his 
heart; and finally, he offered at his feet all the skills and fame that he had won through the grace 
of Dhronachaarya! 


The three grades of intelligence 


It has become a routine affair---this observance of the Festival of Guru Poornima. This day, the 
Guru is. adored, and Gods are worshiped, praised and propitiated by song and feasting. But, are 
these enough, let Me ask. The observance can 'yield fruit, only when the deeper significance of 
the Day is grasped and meditated upon. Gum is the person who destroys the darkness of 
Ignorance by his own illumination. Most Gums have only feeble, borrowed light; the removal of 
darkness has to be complete, with no trace of lurking shadow. Like the Full Moon that happens 
every year on this Day, the mind of man has to be charmly fair, cool and full. This gift of Light 


can come only from God, for, he is self-illumined; He Is the source of Light for all planets and 
stars, as well as for all beings. 


In Vedhaanthic vocabulary, Chith and A-chith are two terms set against each other, compre- 
hending between themselves, the Created Universe. Chith means 'Intelligent' and A-chith means 
‘non-Intelligent.' There are no two opposites like this. There are grades, slowly passing from one 
to the other, from the less intelligent to the fully intelligent. In fact, there are three grades, not 
two! 


The first is: Shuddha thathwa, the second is: Mishra thathwa and the third is: Vaasana thathwa. 
(1) The Shuddha thathwa is what Christ referred to as the Kingdom of God. It is far beyond the 
reach of Mind, it is the realm of pure equanimity. (2) Mishra thathwa is this earthly kingdom, 
alternating between repose and activity, sloth and adventure, Thamas and Rajas. While the first 
is spoken of as the Nithya vibhuuthi (the ever-lasting Glory of the Divine), this the second is 
spoken of as Leela vibhuuthi (the scene of the ever-changing ever-fresh sport of God). (3)This is 
the region of inactivity, ignorance and inertia, the Thamoguna. 


The Vedhaanthic point of view 


The Universe is the Field where God sports. Be aware of this fact, every moment of 
consciousness, and there is nothing more you need for a happy existence. For, you will then 
contact God in every thing through every thought at every place and at every moment. His Leela 
is evident in the smallest flower and the most distant star. The joy that you can derive from the 
contemplation of these proofs of providence is indescribable. Krishna has said in the Geetha that 
He is ever by the side of the joyous being. Be joyful yourself and make others too share in that 
joy. To limit oneself and be happy while self-centred, is bad. 


The third stage is called Vaasana thathwa. This is where your narrow selfish will takes charge of 
you, and enslaves you. Vaasana is the ingrained force of aeons of enslavement to the senses. 
You have to overpower its subtle impact and liberate your will from Its hold. 


Cultivate the attitude of un-attachment, of indifference, of bypassing the urges, through prayer 
and systematic practice. This will lead you to Dharma (Righteous behaviour)and Truth; you are 
then entitled to the Dharma sthambha, or Sathya sthambha (the Pillar of Righteousness or 
Truth). This is also referred to as the Vedhaantha point of view. Vedhaantha does not mean, 
running away from home and the company of men and escaping into the solitude of the jungle. 
(Home is certain to haunt you, wherever you may take refuge). It implies recognition of all this 
(the idham) as Divinely Poornam (full). and dedication of all thoughts, words and deeds to the 
Divine. When you have the Vedhaanthic Vision, the place where you are will thereby be Kailaas 
for you. 


When Leela entices God, it takes eight forms 


The Sun cannot illumine God; God is the source of the illumination of the Sun. The waves can 
say they belong to the Sea; but, they cannot claim the Sea belongs to them. The individual can 
say, "I am Yours" to God; he cannot say, "You are. mine" to God. God is the support; you are the 
supported. The Nithya-vibhuuthi is the support of the Leela vibhuuthi; the Sea is the base on 
which waves happen. When Lee/a entices God, it takes eight forms: Shuddha Brahmamayi (the 
absolutely Pure), Charaa-charamayi (the moving and the non-Moving), Jyothirmayi (the 
Luminous), Vaangmayi (the Vocal), Nithyaanandamayi (the ever-blissfull, Parathpa-ramayi 
(transcending this world and the next) maayaamayi (enrapturing by its delusive charm) and 


Shrimayi (resplendent with wealth). The attributeless God assumes the Mind, the Intelli- gence 
and the Ego, and the magnificent Lee/a is inaugurated! 


The experiences of the waking stage are laid aside when dreams start; dream experiences 
disappear when sleep supervenes. Being too Is lost in becoming. Christ said, "Life is lost In 
dreams." But, whatever is experienced in any of these three stages, they happen on the basic 
Truth, that is, God---just as, all the fear and anxiety, the activity to beat and kill the serpent, is 
based on the rope that was ignorantly mistaken for a snake. 


Let your Love enfold all things and all beings 


So, man must endeavour to escape from this delusion and reach the state of fully Illumined 
wisdom. The best spiritual discipline that can help him to do so is Love. Foster the tiny seed of 
Love that clings to 'me' and 'mine,' let it sprout into Love for the group around you, and grow 
into Love for all mankind, and spread out its branches over animals, birds and those that creep 
and crawl, and let the Love enfold all things and beings in all the worlds. Proceed from less Love 
to more Love, narrow Love to expanded Love. The statement, "From untruth to Truth" is not 
correct. The progress Is always from the lesser Truth to Truth which is God. 


This is a story about the Gods. It deals with the greed of men. It was a fine day in Heaven; 
Sriman Naaraayana and His Consort Lakshmi were talking away the hours, when Naaradha, the 
wandering minstrel, entered and attracted their attention. Naaraayana asked Naaradha whether 
the denizens of the Earth were happy. Naaradha replied that since they worshipped Him and won 
His Grace, men everywhere were quite happy and prosperous. 


At this, Lakshmi (who was the Goddess of Wealth) was afflicted with Jealousy and anger for, 
Her share in conferring happiness on man was not acknowledged. She challenged Naaradha to 
prove that Naaraayana was more adored than Herself down on earth. 


Goddess Lakshmi accepts a challenge 


Naaraayana accepted the challenge. Donning ochre robes, He transformed Himself into a monk 
and went down amongst the villages and towns, preaching the Path. Thousands flocked at these 
meetings and listened to the enchanting oratory. They followed Him from place to place and 
adored Him with effusive enthusiasm. He was being carried along on a huge wave of devotion 
and adulation. 


Lakshmi saw this and could not contain herself: She was overwhelmed by envy. So, she too 
donned the Sanyaasi (ascetic person)robe and came down to the very region which Naaraayana 
had conquered for Himself. The people were drawn towards Her by the effulgence of Her 
presence, many came away from the meetings addressed by Naaraayana to bask in Her Presence. 


A few invited Her to their homes for dinner. She agreed but, declared that it was a vow she had 
Undertaken, not to eat out of plates other than her own. She said, she would bring Her own plate, 
cup, drinking vessel etc. The host was only too glad to comply with Her request, for, that helped 
him to overcome one bother among many! 


Lakshmi took with Her when She went to the houses of Her hosts, a plate of gold, a cup and a 
water-vessel, all three of gold! The host admired and adored Her the more for this display of 
pomp and wealth. But, he was astounded and delighted, when, after dinner, Lakshmi said that 
she was leaving the plate etc., at the host's home, since that too was part of her vow! 


When the news spread that it was highly profitable to Invite Lakshmi to Dinner and to adore Her, 
there was a huge clamour for Her Grace and millions deserted Naaraayana's Discourses and 
hovered around the Giver of Gold. People prayed to Naaraayana to go back to whence He came, 
for, they had no time to receive' Him or listern to Him. Lakshmi was monopolising their 
attention! 


So, Lakshmi came back to Heaven, to meet Naaraayana who was already there. She asked 
Naaradha, "Who is being worshiped more, Naaraayana or Lakshmi?" 


Righteous activity is prompted by Truth 


Naaradha replied with another question: "Whom are You worshiping, please?" Lakshmi 
answered, "Why? I worship Naaraayana." Then, said Naaradha, "Know that it is Naaraayana's 
Grace that is helping you to bestow those gifts of gold, which make men worship you." 


Lakshmi's pride was humbled; but, man's foolishness continues. He worships Vasudheva (mere 
earthy riches), not Vaasudeva (indwelling divinity), Lakshmi, not Naaraayana! 


Righteous activity is prompted by Truth. Truth is the basic teaching of all Faiths. Also, Morality 
and Love. These three have come to establish. This day is Guru Poornima. The morning I laid 
the Foundation for the Pillar of Truth, which supports and sustains the twin virtues of Love and 
Morality. In the Vedhic Rite of sanctifying the spot where the Pillar will be erected, you must 
have noticed that nine different grains that grow on the earth and nine precious gems that are got 
from under the earth were used. These represent the Nine forms of Bhakthi (devotion), the Nine 
stages in man's journey to God, the Navavidha-bhakthi. Of these, the most vital is Seva (selfless 
service) to fellow-beings. I exhort you to dedicate yourselves fully to this task and live in the full 
cognisance of this primary duty to your own self-service. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 23-7-1975 


It is always preferable to approach God for the fulfilment of wants, 
rather than cringe before men, who themselves are but tools in the 
hands of God. In His own silent way, God will transform, the mind 
and turn it towards saadhana and successful spiritual pilgrimage. 
He cannot allow his children to lose their way and suffer in the 
jungle. When you approach God and seek his help and guidance, 
you have taken the first step to save yourself. You are then led to 
accept His Will as your own. Thus, you achieve shaanthi (Absolute 
Peace). 


Sri Sathya Sai 


17. My wish, My vow 


THIS day is a meeting between the past and the present, as all days are; for, we, In this College, 
are wishing well for those who have passed out and welcoming those who have just joined the 
classes. All moments are moments of crisis, when crucial decisions are urgently needed. Life is a 
struggle between the forces of good and evil, of joy and grief, of success and failure. 


The doubt may arise whether, in the face of this perpetual fight, man can ever escape from the 
bonds of duality. Is it after all a vain hope, or a tantalising prospect or is it the sport of God? It is 
really the inescapable destiny of man, and it Is to prepare you for this destiny that this College 
has been established. 


The student who spoke a few minutes ago said that the perusal of a load of books cannot be 
education. Yes; it has to tend the body, mind and spirit, in addition to the intelligence. It cannot 
be confined to the four walls of a building. The Universe is a University for those who care to 
watch and learn. Awareness is life; so, the farmer, the carpenter, the smith, the sculptor, the 
merchant, all have the need to be aware of their duties and responsibilities, their skills and 
standards, which education must foster and fix. 


Spiritual education is part of all types of education 


Education is no book-worm affair; the process must include the study and appreciation of all 
trades, professions and guilds. It must encourage the acceptance of the good and the rejection of 
the bad. Spiritual education is not a distinct and separate discipline; it is part and parcel of all 
types and levels of education, In fact, it is the very foundation on which a lasting edifice can be 
built. Secular and spiritual education are like the two halves in the seeds of pulses; the germ that 
sprouts is in between; It is fed by both. 


The feminine is the foundation on which a peaceful and happy world is to be raised. When 
women are true and brave, kind and compassionate, virtuous and pious, the world can have an 
era of peace and joy. Youth has the capacity to grow into strong straight Saadhakas (spiritual 
aspirants), who can scale the heights of spiritual adventure; but, it has no proper guidance. On 
the other hand, youth has evil temptation; evil example and evil advice are spread around on all 
sides, most attractively. 


There are two evil sirens that entice them into futility and frivolity, diverting them along the 
paths of ruin. One of them is called, Dame Cinema and the other is named, Dame Novel. The 
film contaminates and corrupts; it pollutes young and innocent minds; it teaches crime, violence 
and greed; it destroys the basic human-ness and degrades it into bestiality. Even ochre-robed 
monks are steadily dragged down to sin by Its Insidious influence. 


To-day's education has no life-line 


Dame Novel too corrupts equally, with salacious pictures of bestiality. They both lead the young 
away into the wilderness of vice. They do not know, nor do they care to know, how to shape the 
young into self-reliant, self-confident, self-knowing citizens. The vital need is ignored. 


There was a student once who held out his palm before a palmist for scrutiny. He examined the 
lines with care and announced that he would advance very much In education. The student was 
very happy. He predicted that he would amass large sum of money; the student's Joy knew no 
bounds. He declared that the lines indicated fame along with fortune. This filled the cup of Joy to 


the brim; it could hold no more. Then, the palmist announced that the 'life-line' was short and it 
ended abruptly, quite quick! The student fell in a faint. 


Education too has no life-line, now; it does not ensure the skills and attitudes essential to live a 
life of peace and contentment. It is not 'full,' nor does it function in a comprehensive manner, 
taking all the needs and goals into Its orbit. It is satisfied now with cramming books, reproducing 
from memory, research into trivialities and awarding degrees which mean nothing special: And, 
its products parade their purposelessness, shouting that God Is dead and that virtue is a 
superstition. How can man exist without God, or God apart from man? There can be no garland 
without the string that runs through the flowers; there can be no men without the Inner kinship 
that God ensures for each. He is the Brahmasuuthra---the Brahman String, invisible, but 
inevitable. 


Millions of rupees have been spent on this College, not with a desire to add one more to the 
hundreds of colleges scattered all over the country, but, to train a generation of women who 
know how to live the ideals treasured in Bhaaratheeya Culture and who will uphold the dignity 
and destiny of womanhood. 


Expansion is the keynote of education 


The reason which prompted the establishment of this college is the need for women who as 
mothers will foster the expansion of love to include fellow beings everywhere. The first step for 
this expansion is the home, where you must revere and please the parents who gave you this 
chance to live and learn. If you ill-treat them or inflict grief on their minds, how can you ever 
gladden others by service and understanding? Expansion is the keynote of education. You know 
that when a balloon is blown, it bursts and the air Inside it merges with the vast limitless expanse 
outside. Your love too must fill your home and your society, and finally, burst even those bonds 
and become world-wide. A drop of water held in the palm is soon evaporated; it is too much 
alone. But, drop it Into the sea; it survives as a part of the sea. It assumes the name and the taste, 
the majesty and might of the sea! 


Cultivate Love; sow the seeds of love in all hearts. Shower Love on the desert sands, let the 
green shoots, the lovely flowers, the luscious fruits, the sweet harvest of nectar be earned by 
mankind. That is My Wish, My Mission, My Vow. When you earn a degree and go out of" this 
College, do not ask, "What is the country giving me?" ask rather, "Now, what can I give to my 
country?" 


"Reverence offered at the feet of parents reaches Me" 


Students, when they find distress or despair anywhere, do not now set about to reduce it. They 
pour oil on the flames and relish the damage they cause! My aim in starting and running this 
College is to train here the Ideal mother, the Ideal sister and the ideal wife, the Ideal woman, in 
fact. The curriculum which is followed in order to prepare you for the University Examination is 
just a bait to draw you Into this higher curriculum of character formation and development of 
Universal Love. The acquisition of a few bits of information without the transformation that is 
necessary is, for you, a matter of pride, though there is very little Justification for the same. 


The earth is but a speck in the vast Cosmos; India is a minute portion of that dot; Ananthapur is 
microscopic particle therein and you are one of the many lakhs of human beings living here. 
What reason have you to thrust your pride on the attention of others and feel superior? 


Women students and teachers have to be ever vigilant that they do not attract the eyes and 
tongues of young men by their dress, movements, laughter or behaviour. Be a little behind the 
times, it does not matter; it is better than adopting fashions that outrage the traditions and 
conventions of this country and Its culture. 


Do not bring dishonour to your parents or disappoint them by acting contrary to their dearest 
plans. The reverence that you offer at the feet of your parents is, let Me assure you, reverence 
that reaches Me. There are some special lessons and items laid down in this College to instil into 
you faith and spiritual discipline. Teachers and students much show special interest in them, for 
they are the unique features of this College, designed for your good and the good of the country. 
Teachers too must be examples of sincerity, simplicity and mutual co-operation and love; they 
too must evince interest in prayers, and other Items of spiritual importance. 


Ananthapur, Sathya Sai College for Women, 25-7-1975 


Attachment, affection, interest---these will create prejudice, 
partiality, illusion, they hide the Truth; they dull the intelligence. 
Raaga is roga (attachment is a disease), so far as the enquirer is 
concerned. One does not become a Yogi to have Raaga (affection); 
he must be free from favourites, fancies and fondness. Once you 


attach yourself to some person or habit or mannerism, it will be 
difficult for you to shake them off- 


Sri Sathya Sai 


18. No bumps, no jumps 


IT seems a person once saw a man struggling for life in the deep waters of a lake. The fellow 
could not swim and was really helplessly floundering. But without the least compunction of 
sympathy and without making the least effort to save him, the onlooker had the audacity to ask 
him, "Tell me, how deep is the lake?" Such is the behaviour of most people now-a-days. These 
persons are sunk In thamas---they are too wooden and dull, too hard and impervious. It is only 
when man gets rid of thamas {sloth and inaction) that he can rise Into rajas---the sphere of 
activity, emotion, devotion, compassion and service. When he rises higher into the saathwik 
stage (poised state of contemplation), the activity gets elevated into saadhana (spiritual 
discipline) and the effect is more spiritual. 


I find here thousands of young men and women, members of the Seva Dhal, gathered from all 
the states of India. This is the third All India Conference of the Sri Sathya Sai Seva Dhal. It is 
time that we decide to assess what has been the achievement so far, whether the basic purpose 
for which the Dhal was planned is being realised. We have had reports from various State 
Conveners of Seva Dhal of many types of work that is being carried out by the units of the Dhal. 
Let Me tell you that mere execution of some duties enjoined on the Dhal by the rules cannot be 
recognised as bhakthi (devotion or dedication). Duty done without love is deplorable; duty done 
with love is desirable. But acts of love that emanate from a person because it is his nature and not 
because it is enjoined on him as a duty he has to fulfill, is really Divine. 


"Your seva brings you nearer to Me" 


Let Me impress on you another point. Every convener repeated the report of every other; there 
was more imitation than originality in ideas and programmes. Doing something because it is 
being done elsewhere is a sign of ignorance. The programmes must satisfy a local need, solve a 
local difficulty. They must arise out of felt needs and should be adapted to local conditions. It 
must be taken into consideration whether the place concerned is urban or rural, industrial or 
agricultural, a pilgrim centre or civic extension, a developing area or a sinking economy, a tribal 
settlement or a hill station. 


The person who borrows some idea from another region and executes it might feel satisfied that 
he has achieved some concrete programme. But do the people whom he tried to benefit feel 
better and happier? That is the test. Do not think of the fame or praise you win; think of the good 
that people derive. Do not crave for publicity; crave for the joy that shines In the faces of the 
people whom you help. Seva (selfless service)brings you nearer to Me. The flower that is your 
heart gets fragrance by means of the seva you do, and so it becomes more acceptable to Me. 
Love is the essence of that fragrance. 


In seva there can be no high or low 


Through seva you realise that all beings are waves of the Ocean of Divinity. No other saadhana 
can bring you into the incessant contemplation of the One-ness of all living beings. You feel 
another's pain as your own; you share another's success as your own. To see every one else as 
yourself and yourself in every one, that is the core of the saadhana of seva. Again, seva makes 
the ego languish for want of food. It makes you humble before the suffering of others, and when 
you rush to render help, you do not calculate how high or low his social or economic status is. 
The hardest heart is slowly softened into the softness of butter by the opportunities that the Seva 
Dhal offers. 


Seva is prescribed as one among the nine steps towards Realisatlon. You must therefore be 
earnest about it and welcome all chances to serve the old, the sick, the disabled, the diseased and 
the distressed. Holding a fruit in the hand is just a preliminary step; eating and digesting must 
follow, so that you may be healthy and happy. So, too, wearing a scarf and badge round the neck 
is but an indication of the joy that is within reach when you actually serve. Your Seva will be 
Judged with reference to the mental attitude accompanying it. So, whatever work Is allotted, do it 
with fervour, understanding and reverence. In seva there can be no high or low, for Sai is in all. 
Sai receives your seva, to whomsoever you may offer It. Do not be sad that you have been posted 
on some duty that keeps you far from Me. Know that I am nearest to him who calls on Me and 
sees Me in all beings. 


Love is the solvent for the hardest of hearts 


The world today is torn Into factions and groups that hate and hack each other. No method is 
considered too cruel If the aim is to destroy one's enemy. No one is aware of the innate Unity, 
the ever-present current of Divinity that animates every single living being on earth. You have 
the role now of demonstrating that all is not lost, that there are still people who believe in Truth, 
Righteousness, Peace and Love, that acts of loving service rendered in a spirit of humility and 
reverence are still making people happy, and that the day when the brotherhood of man and the 
Fatherhood of God will shine bright and beautiful is drawing and dawning near. 


All efforts are now being concentrated on the production of more food, the building of more 
houses and the manufacture of more cloth. But what is most needed today is a total effort to 
make man manifest more tolerance, more humility, more brotherliness, more compassion and 
deeper awareness of the springs of joy and peace that lie within the heart of each one. This 
country, Bhaarath, must be In the fore-front of this spiritual adventure. 


Love is the solvent for the hardest of hearts. Without love, free, full and selfless, no spiritual 
saadhana can succeed. Without it, bhajan (group singing of devotional songs on Lord's Names 
and Glory) is waste of breath, sathsang (holy company) a waste of time and meditation a self- 
deception. Bhajan, sathsang and meditation done with a mind soaked in love, can confer peace, 
joy and wisdom. When the rain drop falls into the sea, It gets the name, form and nature of the 
sea. So, too, when the individual merges in the vast concourse of humanity and feels one with 
all, he is endowed with the name, form and nature of Divinity. Whatever you do as service, to 
whomsoever you offer the act, believe that it reaches the God in that person: /shwarassarva 
bhoothaanaam. So it is Ishwaraar-panam (dedicated to God). 


Destiny of nations hangs on the youth 


You have Joined the Seva Dhal at the most important period of your lives, for youth is a stage of 
life when self-control, self-examination and self-effort are most needed and least exercised. What 
a mighty potential for progress is wasted by the empty vagaries of the youth today. If only the 
courage, the optimism, the strength and the imagination of youth is channelised into constructive 
channels, how soon the human community can attain peace and prosperity. 


The youth are drawn easily into wild adventures, acts of bravado and exhibition of group 
fanaticism. They are given to sudden changes of passion or emotion. All over the world they are 
being swayed on the waves of anger and adventure. The destiny of nations hangs on the direction 
the youth will take In these turbulent times. They should not be led into the paths of hypocrisy, 


deceit or greed. They must act the way they speak and speak the way they think. They should 
think good thoughts, speak good words and do good deeds. That will give inner Joy and 
contentment. That will make them worthy sons and daughters of this ancient land. 


Be eager and alert to render service 


Within the next few days you, members of the Seva Dhal and of the Volunteer Force gathered 
here from all the states of India and even from beyond the seas, have a number of service 
assignments facing you. You have to shoulder heavy responsibilities and execute various duties 
in the spirit of saadhana, which enjoins you to revere duty as God and to engage in work not as 
dreary drudgery, but as worship of the Lord Himself. You have dedicated yourselves to seva, 
which has to be saturated In selfless love. 


The service that you render must reward you, not only with your satisfaction, but with the 
satisfaction and relief of those whom you serve. When those whom you serve are not relieved or 
made happy thereby, of what avail is your elation or exultation at the help you have been allowed 
to offer? You should have the joy of the recipient as your objective. Do not sit back and talk of 
your having done what is expected of you, but try to discover whether your act of service has 
really been worth-while, whether it has been intelligently rendered with full appreciation of the 
peculiar circumstances of the individual who needed it. Do not feel that this is an obligation 
imposed on you by the rules of the Organisation or by the person nominated as your leader. Do 
not feel that the scarf and badge that you wear are impediments to freedom. They are reminders 
of the high mission to which you have been initiated, the keys to your Realisation of reality 
through the saadhana of seva. Even when you do not wear the scarf or parade the badge, you 
must be eager and alert to render seva to fellow-beings who need it. 


Soft speech adds sweetness to living 


Man is endowed with the equipment of senses, reason, feelings, passions and detachment, so that 
he may keep away from the enticement of pleasures and spend his life in helping, serving, 
sustaining and saving his fellow men. He has to live in seva, not bhoga (enjoyment). The badge 
on the chest helps to keep off the ego thumping inside, to broaden the heart and to focus all 
attention on the Lord resident therein. It is like the wheeled stand which helps the child to walk. 
It has to be revered until you transcend it and feel that all mankind is your kin. The badge should 
not be impurified by your indulging in deleterious habits such as impulsive anger, selfishness, 
flippant conversation, smoking, drinking, gambling or loitering in un-sanctified places. 


Do not wag or argue Just for the sake of argument. Let your words be few, fair and felicitous. 
Soft speech adds sweetness to living. Even when you are engaged in discussion amongst 
yourselves, be short of speech and polite in behaviour. Some amongst you have been selected as 
leaders and guides; carry out their Instructions without demur or dimunition. If you feel any 
doubt, regarding the propriety or advisability of those Instructions, talk them over with the 
leaders alone, in a spirit of friendliness. But do not disregard to modify those Instructions at any 
cost. The leader has to pay attention to the overall situation which may not be so clear to you. 
People from more than 45 countries from all parts of the globe are coming for the World 
Conference. So any failing or fault in your faith or in the fulfilment of the duties assigned to you, 
will reflect on this great nation. 


Service is the best school for training in leadership 


Bhaarath is the land where the triple saadhana of Discipline, Devotion and Duty was first laid 
down, and where it has had the largest number of votaries through the ages. So you have to 
demonstrate to the visitors that the lesson is still very much honoured and observed in this land. 
Not only this, you have to maintain the fair name of the Sri Sathya Sai Seva Organisation. On the 
one hand you have the call of the motherland and on the other, the command of Sai, who is no 
less than the Mother Herself. 


Ganesha is reputed to have two Mothers---Gowri and Ganga. Gowri is one daughter of the 
Himaalayas, who is merged in the left half of the body of Shiva. Ganga is another daughter of the 
Himaalayas who has her place in the matted hair which forms the crown of Shiva. You, too, have 
two Mothers--- Bhaarath Maatha and Sai Maatha. You must emulate Ganesha not in the 
quantity of food eaten, but in His aspect as Vinaayaka, for to become a Vinaayaka, a special type 
of leader, you have to be for long an earnest and enthusiastic servant engaged in selfless, loving 
service. Service is the best school for training in leadership. You should eliminate in that school 
all traces of disgust, anger and impatience. Pride and personal prejudices will try to put spokes in 
the wheel as you go to serve the distressed and the diseased. But you should never give up faith 
In the right path you have chosen. Remind yourself that you are a saadhaka (spiritual aspirant) 
and that seva is the spiritual path that you have ventured upon as the easiest and the best. 


When you mix with volunteers and others who have no deep faith or sweet experience of the 
value of seva, you may get caught up in conversation that might shake your conviction. Do not 
allow their superficial Judgement to undermine your steadfastness. Keep away from such 
persons; let them test their doubts on the touchstone of their own experiences of seva. Take their 
disbelief indifferently, and allow them time to realise and overcome their doubts by their own 
will. 


Be inspired as humans, not fitful as beasts 


Discipline entails the strict observance of rules and regulations and directions. The sense of duty 
can yield results only when discipline is observed, and devotion to Sai and the Message of Sai is 
the basis for the sense of duty which keeps you ever bound to discipline. Do not be part-time 
devotees, leading one kind of life when you wear the scarf and badge and another kind of life 
when you have removed them. Be ever saadhakas and sevakas (servitors). Do not forget, do not 
modify. In the path of service that you have chosen, there should be no bumps of doubt or Jumps 
of deviation. Move on steadily and bravely, with your eyes fixed on the Goal, the Grace of the 
Lord. Be Intent on the development of the man-mind. Not the monkey-mind. Do not hop about 
from decision to Indecision, from acceptance to denial. Be alert and inspired as humans, not dull 
and fitful as beasts. Above all, cultivate love, express love, move among other Seva Dhal 
members with love. Let love be your very breath. Let the sum of love help the lotus of your heart 
to blossom. May you be victorious in all your undertakings of service. That is My blessing for 
each one of you. 


Poornachandra Auditorium, 14-11-1975 


Bhaktha (devotee) is like the needle which is always drawn 
towards the magnet. But the needle has to be near enough; it has 
also to be clean enough. You stay far away and complain 


that Grace has not comet You do not scrape off, by the process of 
repentance, the mud and rust that prevent attachment. 


You come near for some time and stray away into the distance. I 
don't mean physical distance at all. You may be physically far, but 
mentally by My side. I do not measure distance in miles or metres; 
Iam with you, in you, beside you, ever; only you have to be aware 
of Me and make use of My Presence. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


19. The message of love 


A PERSON who has mastered-Vedhas (ancient spiritual revelations) and Vedhaantha 
(metaphysics of the Supreme Reality) might be honoured as a Pandith (learned scholar). Another 
might be praised for his brilliant writings in both prose and verse. But if such scholars have 
neither purity of consciousness nor elevating Ideals, their capacities will result in more harm than 
good. They will promote neither happiness of the people nor peace in society. They will pass 
through life without the awareness of Its sanctity or sublimity. The Lord blessed the boy Dhruva, 
appreciating his Innocence and his steadfast faith in Him. The Lord saved Prahlaadha from direct 
disasters planned by his own father, for the boy had surrendered to Him and placed unshakeable 
trust in His Mercy. The Lord showered Grace on Kuchela who suffered from agonising poverty 
because he never once faltered in his devotion to Him. The Lord is the refuge of all who seek 
refuge, the saviour of all who have to be saved. He is the Embodiment of Sath-Chith-Aanandha 
(Being- Awareness-Bliss Absolute). He is now at Puttaparthi as the Effulgent Emperor over the 
region of Truth, Goodness and Beauty. 


Today man's behaviour is really artificial 


Life sustained by food is short; life sustained by the Aathman (Divine Spirit) is eternal. Do not 
lay claim to long life, but to Divine life. Do not pine for more years on earth, but for more virtues 
in the heart. The Buddha knew and made known to the world the truths: Everything is grief. 
Everything is empty. Everything is brief. Everything is polluted. So the wise man has to do the 
duties cast upon him with discrimination, diligence and detachment. Play the role, but keep your 
identity unaffected. Have your head in the forest ashram (retreat), unaffected by the aimlessly 
rushing world. But it is your duty, a duty you cannot escape, to fully engage yourself in your 
work, unconcerned with loss or gain, failure or success, slander or praise. The Geetha instils this 
very lesson In you: "Whoever does upaasana with no thought other than Me, him I shall have 
with Me; I shall bear his burden now and forever." The Geetha says, "Keeping Me ever in 
memory, engage yourself in the battle of Life." 


This 'Me' to which Krishna refers is not something outside you or extraneous to you. It is your 
own Divine Reality which you can cognise in the silence of your own dhyaana (meditation), 
when you shut out of your awareness the distraction of the senses, the mind and the ego. You can 
take refuge in the calm coolness of your heart where He has installed Himself as the Charioteer. 
You must only engage yourself in work that is purifying, with an attitude that sanctifies. Most 
people do not know how to set about on this most rewarding adventure. They waste their lives in 
sorrow, wading through disappointment and despair, for they cling to something as theirs and 
treat something else as belonging to others. They grab and grieve, and labour to acquire and lose. 
Desire multiplies desire, and man sinks deeper Into discontent and distress. The behaviour is 
really artificial; lt does not conform to man's real nature, the prompting of his Aathman, which is 
Divine. In the universal, eternal sea of change, the Aathman alone is above change. 


All differences are apparent, not real 


In creation, in the objective world, no one article is like any other. No two human beings are 
similar in every respect; there is some twist or turn which distinguishes one from the rest. Each 
has his own peculiar experiences. Immense diversity prevails. Nor is an individual the same for 
any length of time. The infant changes into a child, then into a boy, an adolescent, an adult, and 
soon becomes middle-aged, old, decrepit and, finally, senile. 


In one single day the Individual Is changed into a wakeful person, a dreamer and a sleeping log! 
So man must seek refuge in the changeless, the Paramaathman (Supreme Reality), from which 
all variety emerges, and into which it merges. Then only can be secure peace and contentment. 
The past is past; do not lose time looking back on the road you have traversed. Look forward, 
deciding to march on with confidence and courage. Take the first step NOW. Tomorrow may be 
too late. 


Repeat to yourself the truth that the world is as much God as heaven is. There are no two distinct 
entities or categories called material and spiritual. All distinctions are apparent, not real. Sai has 
drawn the old and the young to Himself and every one of them has Sai in his heart. The 
scriptures of different creeds---the Bible, the Quoran, the Upanishaths (philosophy of the 
vedhas, the Zendavestha---appear different, but their aim is the same: to establish the 
Brotherhood of man and the Fatherhood of God as the basis for the peace of mankind. No creed 
need put on airs of superiority as each is shaped by the compulsions.of time and space, of 
language and levels of experience. You are all members of the Sai Family, bound by the religion 
of Love. Though ostensibly you profess to belong to different faiths, faith in Sai has removed the 
barriers in your minds. Love is God. Live in Love. 


Love must express itself as service 


Your Aathman, which you mistake to be your body, your senses, your mind, your intellect, etc., 
can have no sorrow or Joy. It has no death, no birth. It is eternal and unchanging. What you 
judge as joy or sorrow is only like a passing cloud which cannot affect the splendour of the Sun 
or Moon. Know that such emotions follow one another when the wheel of life turns round from 
moment to moment. The sea has water that cannot quench thirst, but it has also pearl and coral. 
You have to get toughened by the hammer strokes of Joy and sorrow until you are unaffected by 
the vicissitudes of fortune. 


This year you have named My birthday the 'Golden Jubilee' of the Avathaar (divine Incarnation), 
and gathered in vast numbers from all parts of the world. I am sure you have benefitted by the 
Sathsang (holy company). I do not accost one particular date in the calendar as My birthday, for 
I consider the day when Divinity blossoms in your heart as My birth-day in you. Therefore each 
of you should individually celebrate such a day as My birthday. The day when you resolve to 
practise My advice, to follow My directives, to translate My message into acts of service, and to 
engage in saadhana---that day is My birthday for you. The 23rd day of November which you 
now honour as the day on which I was born, is only like any other day if you celebrate it in a 
routine, ritual fashion. Adore man; the adoration reaches Me. Neglect man; you neglect Me. Of 
what avail is it to worship the Lord and to suppress man, His counterpart? Love for God must be 
manifested as Love for man, and Love must express itself as service. 


Through Love alone---Love acquired through saadhana, and shared with all as saadhana---can 
peace be attained, by the individual as well as by the nation. My Life is My Message and My 
Message is Love. That explains why you have gathered hither in hundreds of thousands. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 23-11-1975 


20. Why organise? 


THE task before mankind is to plant the seeds of Truth, Righteousness, Peace and Love in the 
heart made ready for their reception, to foster the saplings and watch over them with love and 
care until they grow into trees yielding a rich harvest of sweet fruits, and to enable all to share in 
that sustaining repast. Sages who had succeeded in this beneficial culture have laid down the 
means and methods, the steps and slips, the helps and hindrances, that men have to consider 
while engaged In this task, and millions have benefited by their counsel. But never before has 
this become an organised movement in which the entire humanity was involved. Unless it 
becomes so, there can be no liberation from fear, anxiety and injustice. 


The sages of India knew that man was fundamentally Divine. They sought to make man aware of 
his inner Reality and expand that spark of Divinity into Light that can illumine the individual and 
society in the splendour of love. 


Renunciation alone leads to Immortality 


As a first step they advised the discarding of violence which has egotism and greed as its roots. 
The Vedhas (ancient sacred scriptures), the Shaasthras (spiritual sciences), the Epics and the 
Puraanas (mythological legends) that they collated or composed, carry this message. Man is 
afflicted by misery since he is caught in the coils of never-ending desire and all consuming 
greed, Casting off these trammels, man has to march on towards the goal of realising God which 
is his Innermost Truth. The swimmer has to push the water behind him so that he might proceed 
forward. So, too, while attempting to march forward, man has to push back from him the evil 
thoughts, habits, deeds and Impulses that crowd into him. The Sathya Sai Seva Organisation has 
to teach this lesson, not by precepts elaborately described in elegant language, but by example 
that spreads conviction, Instils faith and assures success. 


Members of this Organisation must be examples also of the joy that can be derived from 'giving 
up' rather than from 'accumulating.' The Upanishaths proclaim that "Renunciation alone leads to 
Immortality". Thyaagenaike Amrithathwam anasuh. In spite of this man looks for ease, yet reeks 
with 'dis-ease.’ He pursues bhoga (enjoyment) and is rewarded with roga (disease). Saint 
Thyaagaraaja the great mystic singer, had realised that Sannidhi (Treasure house of the Divine) 
is far more preferable to nidhi (treasures of men). The most desirable treasure is Truth- 
Righteousness-Peace-Love. 


Truth about oneself is to be learnt first. When man does not know his own Truth, how can he 
judge others or deal with others? When man knows that he is the Indestructible, Eternal 
Aathman, he is free from fear. Truth can shine forth only from a purified mind and a clarified 
intellect. The units of the Sathya Sai Seva Organisations must be ever active in following and 
observing the disciplines laid clown for these two processes. Man has to overcome the animal in 
him. The pashu (beast) his to be laid low and the Pashu Pathi (Master of living beings, God) 
installed In the heart. This aim has to be constantly borne, in mind by the organisation and 
its members; the journey towards it has to be steady and fervent. 


Sai devotees must free themselves of all prejudices 


Patience, tolerance, fortitude, equanimity, fraternity---these, will prove invaluable equipment 
for the pilgrim. Do not distinguish between one fellow-pilgrim and another on the basis of caste, 
creed or colour, and do not divide them Into friends or foes. Recognise only the common traits, 


the uniting efforts, the basic Divinity. Rich and poor, scholar and illiterate---these are distinctions 
that do not hold good for long, for they are but outer frills. A flower radiates fragrance and 
charm, whether held in the right hand or the left. It does not limit that gift to some and deny It to 
others. Everyone who comes near, is blessed. The members of the units of this organisation 
must be ever engaged in the twin processes of purifying the mind and clarifying the intellect. 
They have to free themselves from all prejudices and misunderstandings. They have to speak 
softly and sweetly, and give every one the respect and attention due to them sincerely. Humility 
and tolerance must characterise the behaviour of a Sai devotee. When the wind agitates the 
serene waters of a lake, wavelets dance all over its face, and a thousand Suns sparkle. When calm 
descends, and the waters are still, the shadow of the Sun Within the lake is one full image. 


Seva should not be tarnished by pride 


When one fixes one's entire attention on the sun instead of on the images and the water that 
caused them, there is only the one sun that is real. The sparkling little images in the agitated lake 
represent the symbol of dhwaitha (duality); the complete image in the depths of the serene lake is 
the symbol of visishtaadhwaitha (qualified dualism); the one Sun which is reflected as one or 
many is the Adhwaithic (non-dualistic) Truth. This fact is clearly, revealed in the three, 
statements made one after the other by Jesus: "I am the Messenger of God," "I. am the Son of 
God," and "I and my Father are One." The three statements are revelations of the dhwaithic, 
visishtaadhwaithic and adhwaithic points of view. 


The Organisation must help people to realise the Unity behind all this apparent multiplicity 
which is only a super-imposition by the human mind on the One that is all this. The Vedhas 
proclaim that God is One, that the Goal is the same and that Truth stands Self-revealed when the 
Goal is the same and that Truth stands Self-revealed when the veil of the world is cast away or 
torn off. 


One simple way to realise this Unity is through seva (selfless service), seva that is not tarnished 
by a superiority complex, or by pride or even by a sense of duty towards the organisation with 
which you are bound. Revere the dweller within, not the house where He resides. The dweller is 
the same in every house, whether it is a palace or a hovel. Therefore devotion to the dweller must 
persuade you to worship every individual through acts of service intelligently executed with 
sincere enthusiasm. 


Regulation is the very essence of creation 


Do not fret against the rules and regulations which the Organisation imposes on you; they are 
laid down for your own good. Regulation is the very essence of creation. The oceans observe 
their limits. Wind and fire respect their limits and bounds. The human body has to maintain Its 
warmth at 98.4°F in order to be healthy and the heart has to beat a definite number of times a 
minute. How, then, can this Organisation escape the prescription of certain rules and regulations? 


Devotion has to be guided and controlled by discipline and duty. What exactly is duty In this 
context? By duty I do not mean the Items of work entrusted to you by your superiors or society. 
Duty means the responsibility you have not to hinder or harm any one by your movements, 
speech, behaviour, or activities. When one walks on the street waving one's stick, one has to be 
conscious of the man coming from behind; if you have the freedom to wave, he, too, has the 
same freedom, and both should behave as if they have a duty towards each other. The units of 
this Organisation, too, have to respect other units, and help them in doing their duty. Rules are 


necessary until the members realise the spiritual Unity of all. When they become Incapable of 
inflicting harm or transgressing the moral code, rules become superfluous. Protect the plant from 
goats for a few years; then when the tree spreads its branches far and wide, those very goats can 
lie down under its shade and rest. 


All Sai Units are parts of one Sai Organisation 


We have five principal units in the Organisation, and in every village or town where we have 
these, there should be exemplary unity and cooperation between them. They are like the five 
fingers of a hand. The little finger is the Bhajan Mandaii, the group devoted to singing the Glory 
of God. But they should not be proud that they are the pioneers and primary workers. The ring 
finger is the Baala Vikaas (Children's educational wing). On the precious gold plate of juvenile 
hearts, the Guru (preceptor) affixes the gems of goodness and Godliness. That is the ring which 
this finger wears. But that should neither make the Baala Vikaas proud nor make the Guru feel 
that the work done by it is the most important and so it has to be honoured most. The sense of 
unity and co-operation must prevail. 


The middle finger is the Seva Dhal (Service Corps), helping the two units on one side and the 
two on the other. But it should not hold its head high and claim to be superior to all the rest. The 
index finger is the Mahila Vibhaag (Women's division), the unit which is composed of women 
who point to the good, the great, the useful, the right, etc. They, too, should not be filled with 
overweening conceit. The thumb, naturally, is the Seva Samithi (Sai Organisation), the over-all 
executive, the guide and guardian, the promoter and provider. Thus each finger must feel that 
strength lies in working with the rest, that all are but parts of one hand which they cannot ignore. 


In a world torn by factions based on the flimsy grounds of caste, creed and colour, you have to 
prove that it is possible to have faith in Sai being the motivator for every living being, and get 
Inspiration for genuine service from that faith. Service to the Sai in the other person must be your 
daily act of worship. Of all saadhanas, this is. the most effective. Seek out the slum dwellers, the 
poor, neglected dwellers in hamlets, and take love and light to them in plenty. "God is the refuge 
of those who have no place to rest," says a proverb. Go to places where you can find such, and 
carry the message of hope and strength into their hearts. Be grateful to them when they welcome 
you and provide you chances to serve them. Your happiness depends on their happiness; your 
health depends on their health. You keep your houses clean; their houses, too, are yours, for the 
same Sai that resides In you resides In them. Until all houses and their surroundings are bright 
and clean, how can you feel clean and bright? 


The Organisation must promote this high sense of unity and responsibility. It must constantly en- 
thuse and educate members to engage themselves In the saadhana of service. 


Hyderabad, 29-3-1976 


21. Expand the heart 


WITHOUT Sathya, Dharma, Shaanthi and Prema (Truth, Righteousness, Peace and Love) the 
accumulation of scholarship is a barren achievement. Without them, all charities and services 
rendered to others are ineffective. Without them, positions of authority to which one is raised, 
become positions of persecution. Without them, no good act or meritorious achievement can 
yield fruit. There are four chief types of people. Those who see only good In everything and 
everyone; those who see the good as good and the evil as evil; those who see the good as evil and 
the evil as good; and, lastly, those who do not see the good at all, because even the good they see 
they transmute into evil. Of these one can tolerate the first three, perhaps, but the fourth type is 
definitely demonaic. 


Education is now caught up In confusion; instead of leading the country on along prosperity and 
fraternity, it struggles to take it along alien and degrading paths. It does not build on the strong, 
sustaining foundations of Indian culture, but is still based on the plans of Macaulay. Among most 
of the products of modern education we do not find even traces of moral virtue, honesty, 
integrity, eagerness to serve and readiness to renounce. 


One who lives for the sake of eating is a sinner 


The education that was practised in ancient India was far superior and far more fruitful, for it 
equipped the student with a healthy spirit of self-reliance. It endowed him with mental peace and 
equipose. It never allowed him to be enslaved by the glittering fancies and fascinations of other 
cultures. It taught him to discriminate between the flippant and the stable, the upgrading and the 
down pulling. It enthused the student to offer his life at the feet of his Motherland with a glow on 
his face and a sparkle In his eye. It armed him against all obstacles on the path of self-culture and 
self-realisatlon. It exhorted him to oppose, without rest or relief, untruth, Injustice and violence. 


But instead of cultivating these high ideals and incorporarting them in our educational system, 
we are now borrowing educational Ideals from other peoples with different heritages. We have 
no faith In the system that has been extolled by our ancestors for millennia. 


Education is to be valued not as a means of earning one's livelihood, but as the essential requisite 
for a happy, peaceful and progressive life leading man from the animal stage of existence to the 
presence of the Divine, where love and light reign undisturbed. He who lives for the sake of 
eating is indeed a great sinner; he who lives for the sake of reaching the full awareness of his 
Innate Reality is blessed. The first one is a paapi (sinner), the second a gopi (blessed one). 


Readiness to renounce is a prime virtue of character 


Intelligence being the special mark of humans, every effort must be made to amplify and sharpen 
it so that it may be a fit Instrument for understanding the inner and the outer worlds. Along with 
intelligence, character, too, has to be cultivated in equal measure, for then alone can that 
Intelligence be used to serve society. The readiness to renounce one's pleasure in order to relieve 
the burden of another is a prime virtue of character. Moksha means liberation; renunciation, too, 
involves giving up, or liberation. The secret of both is the same. 


What exactly has to be renounced? Desire is the worst enemy and it has to be canalised and 
reduced with determination until it ceases to bother you. Besides desire, anger and greed also 
have to be discarded, for they are present wherever there is desire. When you say bowman, it is 
implied that arrows, too, are there with the bow. Thus desire is ever associated with anger and 


greed. Desire is bad even if it is for fame and authority. It is the avarice for power and pelf that 
ruins many a human life. 


Life is a journey. The students here have to journey long. So, it is necessary to give them the 
skill, the enthusiasm and the security that can take them happily along. Their hearts are pure, 
steady and inclusive. Elders should so behave that they do not tarnish their hearts or make them 
narrow and vengeful. They must be encouraged to enlarge them and soften them through 
Intensive social service. 


Wealth cannot yield joyous contentment 


Our educational institutions have failed to maintain the high standards of yore. In the past, in the 
aashrams (hermitages) of the rishis (sages), one was declared fit only if one secured a hundred 
per cent marks in one's subject of study. Now, however, thirty marks out of a hundred are 
enough for the university to grant one a certificate of having passed. That means that one can 
commit seventy mistakes with impunity and be none the worse. When such is the ease with 
which degrees can be secured, and when degrees are the basis for being appointed to positions of 
authority, the person so appointed will tend to commit a hundred mistakes for every hundred 
assignments and be safe in his post. How can these people be the saviours and pillars of the India 
of tomorrow? 


Therefore I always tell the students of my colleges to attach more importance to avoidance of 
'remarks' than acquisition of 'marks.' Wealth cannot yield joyous contentment. Divinity alone can 
confer that. Yearn for God, and joy and peace will be added unto you. Embodiments of the 
Divine Aathman! When you pursue these elevating ideals, you will come up against many 
obstacles which others place in your path. So you must be ever alert and vigilant not to be taken 
in by their specious pleas. 


Awareness is life; be aware of your Inner strength and glory. Express that glory through loving 
service to society. In northern India yogis (spiritually advanced person), sages and monks are 
addressed as 'Vahaaraaj,' which means 'Emperor,' for an emperor is he who has a rich treasury 
of the gems of detachment and service, not one who has his vaults full of precious metals. The 
wealth that you hoard is not yours; the wealth that you have shared is yours. For wealth that 
belongs to you needs not to be hidden. 


Defamation and criticism also do some good 


The wealth that you have given away is really yours. That is the reason why the Vedhas (ancient 
sacred scriptures) have declared, "Not through actions, nor through progeny, nor through wealth 
can Immortality be won; it can be won only through renunciation." The youth must acquire and 
Invest in themselves all the skills and virtues which can help India prosper and shine forth as the 
benefactor and preceptor of mankind. They must develop self-confidence, the base for the 
mansion of their life; they must then erect the walls of self-satisfaction and put on them the roof 
of self-sacrifice. Then they can live In that house and achieve Self-Realisation Thus they must 
progress along these steps and become exemplars of Indian culture in Its glory. 


Some people, afflicted with envy at the reconstruction of Sanaathana Dharma (Eternal Universal 
Religion) for the revival of the glory of India, are attempting to undermine its basic beliefs and 
create confusion In the minds of the youth. The kokil's song is harsh to the ear of the crow, but 
the crow's criticism will not silence the lark. The hamsa (swan) is defamed as ugly by the duck, 
but that does not worry the swan in the least, nor can the duck decrease the glory of the celestial 


swan. Defamation, criticism and slighting are all to be set aside, unrecognised; they shall not be 
valued at all. They are all in the order of things. In fact they also do some good in their own way, 
for they help to emphasise the excellence and bring it more to light. It is a foil to make the thing 
shine brighter. Besides, when one person says 'no' and another says 'yes,' it is an individual 
problem. 


Youth should never yield to the call of fanaticism 


The attempt to darken the splendour of Sai can never succeed, except by one means: Suppose 
Sai-splendour is indicated by a line of a certain length. Efforts to shorten it by wiping or erasing 
it will not make it shorter. But if you draw by Its side a longer line, then, automatically, it will 
become shorter! So do the things that Sai is doing, on a grander and more impressive scale, then 
the fame of Sai will certainly diminish. That is the more effective way, rather than the fabrication 
of baseless stories. Of course one must have the qualification and the authority to enter on that 
attempt. How can an ant measure the depth of the ocean? Still, many venture into this field for 
they have nothing better to do. They succeed only in causing a stir In the calm atmosphere of the 
land. 


Jesus was crowned with a crown of thorns. A thorny fence around a tree is clear proof that the 
tree has edible fruits in plenty. Precious time should not be wasted in such games: it is best spent 
in realising one's Divinity and serving society. 


The acts of Sai are all selfless, sacred and beneficial. Sai has never caused harm. He is 
establishing the path of Truth, the Path of Morality, the Holy path to God-Realisation. So Sai's 
work will march triumphantly on. The person who can make Sai give up His task in fear has 
neither yet been born, nor will ever be born hereafter. For Truth is Impregnable. Truth must 
triumph. A dog barks at his own reflection Imagining it to be a rival. Other dogs, not knowing 
the reason, take cue, and the whole area is drowned with barking. Some bay at stars, but the stars 
are unmoved. You should not be perturbed by this empty noise; carry on your mission of service 
as now, with your usual enthusiasm. Youth should never, yield to the call of fanaticism or 
revolution. Try to control your emotions, even from this tender age. In one way the agitation is 
useful, because you can practise self control in these exacting conditions. 


Your master is your heart, where God resides 


I desire to tell the units of the Seva Organisation that very soon they will witness the realisation 
of all their ideals. But as and when success is achieved, as a reaction, carping and denigration 
will also increase. When the well grows deeper, the mound beside it will grow higher. That is but 
natural. Some people pay attention to the depth of the well; others watch the height of the 
mound. 


I have been telling you one truth always: your master is your heart, where God resides. You. 
yourself are three persons, not one: the one you think you are, the one others think you are and 
the one you reply are. The one you really are, is God. 


God is in you, with you, above you, around you, behind you. All of you are Divine in reality; 
differences in name and form are but temporary and external. 


Carry on your highest duty to yourselves---following the four F's- follow the master, face the 
devil, fight to the end and finish the game. Then you will win My Love in full measure. Love is 
my highest Miracle. Love can make you gather the affection of all mankind. Love will not 
tolerate any selfish aim or approach. Love is God; live in Love. Then all is right, all can be well. 


Expand your heart so that it can encompass all. Do not narrow it down into an instrument of 
restricted love. 


It is said that I try to attract people by miracles; the miracles are not 'performed' in order to 
exhibit power; they just happen, and serve as evidence of the power. As a matter of fact, 
whenever any one misuses his powers---physical, mental, economic or spiritual-Sai always 
condemns them strongly. Therefore, the Sai Power cannot be a subject for a university 
examinations; it is a subject for universal examination. Sai is limited only by His Own Will. But 
when a near and dear relationship is established, one can delve a little deeper into the Sai 
Mystery. That is the highest achievement possible. 


Embodiments of the Divine Aathman! Develop peace and equilibrium of mind and spend your 
lives in sacred pursuits like service to the distressed, the diseased and the deprived. That is My 
advice, and that will ensure you My Blessings. 


Bangalore, 1-8-1976 


22. Hospitals and health 


HEALTH is an essential requisite of man. The man afflicted with ill-health is powerless to 
execute even the least burdensome assignment. The scriptures proclaim that health is the very 
root of all endeavour in the four fields of human achievement---Dharma, Artha, Kaama and 
Moksha (righteousness, wealth, desire and liberation). Without health man cannot brave 
temptations, earn a decent living, fulfil his basic needs or succeed in spiritual saadhana. Man can 
engage himself in obligatory and optional functions only if he is healthy. 


Food and recreational habits are the two main causes for ill-health. Great care has to be bestowed 
to ensure that injurious tendencies do not affect these two. At present, though drugs have multi- 
plied and hospitals have been established in every nook and corner, ill-health is also widespread. 
This situation is attributable to the spread of deleterious food habits and pastimes. 


Physical and mental activities are closely interrelated 


It is also necessary to keep the environment of the place where one works and lives, unpolluted 
by smoke, dust or dirt. The clothes that one wears as well as the body that one is encased in, both 
have to be purged and kept clean, Health endows a person with joy and brightness. The fruits of 
the tree of human life are sweet, but they are encased In the bitter skin of egoism and ignorance 
and have hard inedible seeds of desire, anger, pride, etc. One has to exercise one's intelligence to 
peel off the outer skin of ignorance, throw off the seeds of vice and wickedness and partake of 
the sweet kernel of life. 


To remove the evil of egoism, service is the most efficient instrument. Service will also impress 
on the person doing service, the Unity of all mankind. He who dedicates his time, skill and 
strength to service, can never meet defeat, distress or disappointment, for service is its own 
reward. His word will be ever sweet and soft, his gestures ever revered and humble. He will have 
no foe, no fatigue, no fear. 


The units of the Sathya Sai Seva Organisation are engaged in enthusiastic service in the two 
areas of Health and Education. To improve and maintain the health of the people, continuous 
education on the principles and practice of hygiene and environmental cleanliness is essential. 
Education is the most effective safeguard against physical and mental ill-health. So these two 
activities are closely inter-related. The body is a temporary habitation; it is subject to all kinds of 
disease and injury. Yet the body is the boat on which alone we can cross the ocean of samsaara 
(birth and death cycle). The boat has to be kept trim and serviceable. It should not distract our 
attention more than the minimum necessary for its upkeep. It has to be used for reducing the 
burden of others, and should not itself become a burden on us. It should serve others, not demand 
service from them. That is the reason why this hospital is being established here to remedy 
disease and help people to keep their bodies in good condition. 


Most hospitals indulge in profiteering 


People of this village and villages that are in the surrounding area, will resort to this hospital for 
medical relief and advice. Unfortunately hospitals that treat patients with love and care, with 
dedication and devotion, are a rarity. There are hospitals with costly equipments and expert 
doctors, huge buildings and spick-and-span interiors, but they indulge more in profiteering than 
affording relief. Their services are for those who can pay large sums of money. Villagers are not 
welcome there, who in turn do not feel at ease to approach them. Therefore this hospital is being 


started amidst the villages so that expert advice and treatment can be rendered, to them in a 
loving atmosphere of reverence and devotion. No charge will be levied here for any service. The 
villages and others can come here, regain their health, and return hale and hearty in order to carry 
out their tasks and fulfil their responsibilities. 


The doctors and volunteers who help in this hospitals must feel it a part of their duty to advise 
the villagers about environmental hygiene and preventive measures. The members of the Sathya 
Sai Seva Dhal have a special duty for this type of service. They have to visit the villages, and 
after winning the confidence and love of the people, advise them on good food habits and other 
means of maintaining health. They must also exhort them to resort to this hospital as soon as the 
first symptoms of ill-health are evident. Early treatment will save the villagers from spending 
many days in bed away from the fields. 


Educate the villagers on the value of nutrient foods 


The villager now lives on food that is deficient in. vitamins and proteins, though he is growing 
vegetables and food that provide these ingredients in plenty and selling them to city-dwellers. He 
has to be told of the value of fruits and vegetables as a source of nutrients that will promote and 
preserve his health, for healthy parents mean healthy children, and sick parents pass on their ill- 
health to the coming generations. Members of the units of the Sathya Sai Seva Organisation can 
also join the Seva Dhal in this campaign of educating the villagers. This activity is as meritorious 
as worship itself. 


Today is the Vighneshwara festival, the day on which the entire country is worshipping the 
elephant-headed God who helps man overcome all obstacles. Worshipping Vinaayaka or 
Vighneshwara or Ganapathi, as he is also called, endows man with the courage and confidence 
needed to enter upon and carry through-any undertaking in the world. The elephant is the largest 
animal of the forest. It is very Intelligent and has a powerful memory. When it marches through 
the thick jungle, it clears a path for all other animals to pass. The elephant-headed God confers 
intelligence and memory and the power to subdue evil and vice. Thus he Is also a path- maker. 
So it Is only appropriate that every rite, ceremony or project should be started with the worship 
of this God. Today we are Inaugurating this hospital so that it will provide good and lasting 
service to the people of this region. 


Doctors sweet words are more effective than drugs 


I must also point out to the doctors serving here that perhaps even more than the drugs they 
prescribe, the sweet, soft words they speak and the love and sympathy they evince can cure 
better and quicker the illness of their patients. Look upon them as your own kith and kin, as your 
special guests and as your closest friends; and attend to them lovingly and with unflinching care. 
I call upon you to maintain this attitude in every situation. Remember that the patient has to co- 
operate with you in order that you may effect the cure, and when cured, the patient confers on 
you satisfaction, joy and a sense of elation. Be grateful to the patient for all this. 


We have in this hospital as doctor, a lady devotee who Is highly qualified and who has done 
signal service for the backward regions in Nigeria and Ethiopia in Africa. We have also others, 
equally able and enthusiastic. Experts in special branches of medicine and surgery will also be 
visiting this hospital off and on, and diagnosing, advising and helping patients who need their 
attention. It is now for you to make the best use of these facilities offered free and with fullness 
of heart. 


I am glad that the members of the Panchaayath of this place as well as of near-by villages are 
here today and have been with us ever since this project was started. If only they help the 
patients from the villages to be happy and healthy they will have no more need to beg for votes 
from door to door when the elections come round. The voters would themselves come in large 
numbers to get them elected in order to avail of their services in greater measure. India was long 
famous for the sense of compassion that animated her peoples. She is now dishonoured by some 
as a 'poor' country. No! She was for centuries the preceptor of the world, and she is assuming 
that status again today. India is the land where the Ideals of service, renunciation and spiritual 
endeavour were born and have flourished. 


It is only recently, after India fell under the impact of alien cultures which highlighted material 
comfort, physical luxury, sensual liberty and exterior display, that Indians have trodden the 
wrong path of exploitation and violence, idleness and pompousness. With the spread of allen 
cultures and alien ways of thought and life, diseases too have multiplied and mental imbalances 
have Increased. But when simplicity, humility and the idea of social service (having root In the 
worship of the God in man) are restored, the nation will again be happy and healthy, full of 
peace, prosperity and Joy. 


Sri Sathya Sai Hospital for Women and Children, 
Whitefield, 28-8-1976 


23. The Sai Religion 


WHOM the Muslims adore as Allah, the Christians as Jehovah, the Vaishnavas as 
Phullabjaaksha and the Shaivites as Shambhu, who grants, in answer to their several prayers, 


health, prosperity and happiness to all, wherever they may be, He, the One God, is the God of all 
mankind. 


India has been teaching since ages the message of the spirit and the means to gain and ensure 
equanimity and joy. She has stood forth as the preceptor of the world for centuries. The prayer 
that she has taught her people Is: Lokah samasthah sukhino bhavanthu (May all people 
everywhere be happy). This is the consummation of Vedhic thought since time Immemorial. 
Such wholesome ideals were propagated and fostered by the rulers of this land, the seers and 
yogis (God-centred persons) who guided the populace, and the chaste mothers who reared 
generations in the atmosphere of spiritual effort. 


But due to vicissitudes in the country's history, when the people were subjected to pressures and 
counter-pressures, these ideals suffered a set-back. The abstractions of faith received concrete 
form and got crystallised into specific identifiable names and forms. Each new attitude or 
aptitude, each new concretisation, became a special sect and every theory enveloped itself in its 
own shell. 


Growth of new sects and sets of belief in India 


Thus the one Vedhic religion became the parent of a number of sects and sets of belief, like 
Gaanaapaathya (centering around the concept of Ganapathi), Shaaktheya (centering around the 
concept of Cosmic Energy as the expression of the Divine), Soura (centering around the Sun as 
the source, sustenance and goal of spiritual achievement), Chaarvaka (centering around the 
concept of pleasure and material prosperity) and Veerasaiva (centering around Shiva as the inner 
motivator of all beings). Every one of these sects, and many more besides, elaborated their own 
rituals and modes of worship, their own priorities in spiritual attainment and their own body of 
doctrines about the individual, the objective world and God. 


The purpose of these codes and modes was, in all cases, to purify the mind and Insist on the 
practice of high moral virtues. But this was soon ignored and importance came to be attached to 
superficial conformity and outer purity. The craving for personal aggrandizement and power 
made every sect, faith and religion, rigid and dry. There is a great need today to discover the 
Inner spring of all faiths, the spring that fertilises the outer rites and ceremonies. A little quiet 
study will reveal that there is an undercurrent of moral enthusiasm and spiritual adventure. 


There is only one caste, the caste of Humanity 


The word generally used for religion is matha; the word to indicate the mind is mathi. Putting the 
two together it can be said that matha is primarily engaged or ought to be engaged in 
straightening and strengthening the mathi. The goal, the purpose, the key, the essence of all 
creeds, faiths and religions is just this. the sublimation of the mind of man to guarantee liberation 
for the individual concerned and happiness for the society of which he is a unit. Principles and 
practices have grouped around this prime need, and various creeds are the result. 


Religions attempt to implant holy ideals in the heart of man but man does not allow them to 
sprout and grow. His egoistic craving for power and competitive success has, in most cases, 
persuaded him to use religion as an instrument of torture and persecution. Instead of uniting 


mankind in a common endeavour, it has become a system of walled enclosures, guarded by hate 
and fanaticism. So each religion is an armed camp sunk in self-aggrandizement, trying to wean 
others into itself and preventing defections from itself. Religion, therefore, is being condemned 
as the root of chaos and conflict. In spite of great progress in many other areas of life, religious 
animosity is aflame even today in many parts of the world. 


It has to be emphasised that religion is not the root cause of this state of affairs. The factional 
fights and fanatic hatred are due to the unruly ego that is given free play. Religion strives to 
destroy just this vicious tendency. So it has to be supported, not condemned. What has to be 
condemned is the narrow, perverted attitude of hating those who do not agree with you or who 
hold different opinions of the mysterious force that animates the universe. Religious wars and 
conflicts breed in the slime of ignorance and avarice. When people are blind to the truth that the 
human family is one indivisible Unity, they grope in the dark and are afraid of strange touch. The 
cultivation of love, alone, can convince man of this truth that there is only one caste---the caste 
of Humanity, and only one religion---the religion of Love. Since no religion upholds violence or 
despises love, it is wrong to ascribe the chaos to religion. 


The diversity we experience is not a true picture 


It is also not advisable to engage in campaigns of vilification or exaggerated propagation of any 
religion with a view to draw votaries. If only each one lives up to the ideals propounded by the 
founders of one's religion, unaffected by greed or hate, the world will be a happier and more 
peaceful habitation for man. 


The religion of the Hindhus stressed the Unity of all creation and declared that the diversity we 
experience is not a true picture. But since faith in the One come into awareness only to a mind 
clarified to the utmost, the religion had soon to posit duality, and even multiplicity, with deities 
for every facet of the whole. The most widespread of these qualities is the Shaivite and 
Vaishnavite faiths, centered around the Shiva and Vishnu aspects of the One. This process of 
splitting into diverse viewpoints has taken place in all the major religions. 


Islam has the Shia and Sunni sects; Christianity has Catholics and Protestants. But however deep 
the cleavage, no sect denies God and no sect extols violence and falsehood. Names may be 
different, the facets emphasised may be different, but the Almighty Providence is denoted as 
Absolute and Eternal. The terminology may be different but the concept is not different. God 
may be referred to as Allah, prayer may be called namaaz, Priests may be known as khaajees, 
scholars may be hailed as mullahs, the Bible may be in the form of the Holy Quran. But the 
undercurrent of energising power in all cases is love, love of all beings towards all beings. The 
founders had always in view the Unity of all life and the progressive march of man from mere 
humanness to the heights of Divinity. 


Shankaraachaarya's adhwaitha philosophy 


The first among the interpreters of the Vedhas (most ancient revealed scriptures) to found a 
school of philosophy and lay down the path of spiritual discipline to benefit from that school, is 
Shankaraachaarya, born in the State of Kerala. During his very short life, he established on 
secure foundations of logic and intuition, the truth that there is only One God and that all else is 
an appearance of the One Reality. This is the 'no-two' or adhwaitha philosophy or faith, that 
explains the individual nature and God in perfect harmony. The Vedhic axioms---Ekoham 
Bahushyaam (I am One, let Me become many), /shwaras sarva bhoothaanaam (God is 


immanent in all), /shavaasyamidham sarvam (All this enveloped and penetrated by God)---are 
thus illumined by the intellect of Shankaraachaarya into patent truths. 


Merging in the Source is the ultimate destiny 


Monism, as propounded by Shankaraachaarya on the basis of Vedhic texts, seemed to the 
majority of individuals too simple a solution to satisfy their inner urges. They had in them the 
yearning to worship, to dedicate themselves to a higher power. They could not grasp the truth of 
their inner Reality being the one and only. Their emotions and activities had to be sublimated by 
disciplines of devotion. Therefore, Raamanujachaarya commented upon the Vedhic texts and 
religious scriptures from a new point of view. This made the adhwaitha take on a special 
outlook. So it was called visishta (special) adhwaitha (non-dualism). The path of devotion was 
laid down to enable man to merge with God. 


The goal is mergence, as the rivers know and strive for. The waters of the sea are raised by the 
Sun as clouds into the sky and the clouds pour them as rain back onto the earth, to flow back into 
the sea through many a ravine, as a stream or tributary-fed river. Merging in the Source from 
which one took form, is the ultimate destiny. The river has the passion of overwhelming love 
which leads it down the slopes until it reaches the loved one, where the lover, loved and love, all 
three merge in one illuminating ecstasy. Prema (highest love) is the attachment to God that does 
not allow anything to interfere or diminish its quality or depth. God is loved by the bhaktha 
(devotee) for His sake and not for any incidental benefit or blessing. It is spontaneous, sustaining 
and sublime, like a child before the mirror enjoying the reflections of its own pranks and 
gestures. Complete surrender to the extent of the annihilation of one's own individuality is also 
beyond most aspirants. Sugar cannot be tasted and enjoyed by sugar; you have to be an ant so 
that you can revel in the sweetness of the stuff. This craving of man was sought to be satisfied by 
Madhvaachaarya, who declared that the jeeva (individual soul) will remain ever separate from 
the Universal, and there can be no merging. In adhwaitha, a flash of intellectual illumination 
reveals that the Aathman (Divinity) alone exists, and that all else is deluding appearance. The 
visishtaadhwaitha posits that the river is an integral part of the sea. Dhwaitha points out that the 
joy derived from adoration and worship is enough to draw the fulfilling Grace of God. 


All paths laid down by all seers lead to the same goal 


There were other seers, too, who laid down paths towards the same goal. They announced that 
the universe belongs to God and that man should not desire to accumulate or appropriate any 
portion of the Divine Treasure. They advised that the sapling of devotion must be protected from 
the pests of sloth, doubt and fanaticism by the cultivation of valour and vigilance. 


Of the major religions I may mention one, namely Buddhism. Buddha was so agonised by the 
suffering that haunts the life of man that he investigated the behaviour of the mind and intellect 
of man and discovered remedial disciplines; he analysed the vagaries of the mind which lead 
man into the whirlpools of desires; he analysed the ways of reason, too and spotted the areas 
where prejudice takes root; above all, he preached surrender to dharma (righteousness), to 
compassion and to Buddha (the Enlightened One). Jainism, the religion that was rendered an all- 
India movement by Mahaaveera, extols jina (the heroic conqueror of the senses), the emotions 
and the stratagems of the intellect. He called upon all to carry out the duties commensurate to 
their status and professions, with steady faith and enthusiasm. He declared that all things and 
beings are holy in their own right and are but pilgrims on the road to Realisation. Any Injury 


inflicted on any of them is an intervention in that sacred journey and so has to be scrupulously 
avoided. 


The ‘Sai religion' is the essence of all faiths 


Zoraastrianism, the Paarsi religion, was founded by Zoraaster, who wanted that man should ever 
have the Fire of Wisdom blazing in his consciousness so that evil thoughts and tendencies might 
be reduced to ashes. It has to infuse all thoughts, words and deeds with the illumination of virtue 
and vigour, it must destroy all worldly desire and render man pure for entry into the heaven of 
freedom. Adoration, meditation and acts of selfless service are essential for the dawn of 
enlightenment. 


The Sai religion, if the name of religion in its literal sense of binding man to God is accepted, is 
the essence of all faiths and religions, including those like Islam, Christianity and Judaism. The 
motive behind the formation and propagation of all these different faiths is the same. The 
founders and propagators were all persons filled with love and wisdom. Their goal and purpose 
were the same. None had the design to divide, disturb, or destroy. They attempted to do good, 
see good and be good. They sought to train the passions and the emotions, to educate the 
Impulses and Instincts and direct the faculty of reason to paths beneficial to the individual and 
society. They knew that the mind, which is the breeding ground of desire and attachment, 
ambition and aspiration, has to be cleansed and properly oriented. 


Let the family become a centre of harmonious living 


Sai considers that practice of these disciplines is much more essential than blind faith in a bunch 
of philosophical theories. No one has the right to advise others unless he is already practising 
what he preaches. First establish the reign of love between the various members in your own 
home. Let the family become a centre of harmonious living, sympathetic understanding and 
mutual faith. 


The holy duty of man is to be ever aware of the Aathman (Divine spirit) that is installed in every 
living being. This will make him conscious of the kinship he has with all. This is the basis of the 
brotherhood of man and the Fatherhood of God. Cast away the vice of egoism, the evil of greed 
and the poison of envy. When you seek joy from something outside you, remember that a far 
greater joy lies in wait within your own inner consciousness. When you are afraid of someone or 
something outside you, remind yourself that the fear is born, fed and fertilised in your own mind 
and that you can overcome it by denying it. How can fear counter the path of a spiritual aspirant? 
It can hide in no shadow, it can pester no saadhaka (spiritual aspirant) who has God in his heart. 
Faith in the Almighty God is the impregnable armour that the saadhaka can wear; and peoples of 
all lands are saadhakas, whether they know it or not. Be steady, do not waver, keep straight on, 
hold fast to the ideal without despair. Pray until God relents; do not turn away sadly if God does 
not shower Grace when you expect it. 


When a religion wants to extend its influence it has to resort to vilification of other religions and 
exaggeration of its own excellence. Pomp and publicity become more important than practice 
and faith. But Sai wants that the votaries of each religion must cultivate faith in its own 
excellence and realise their validity by their own intense practice. That is the Sai religion, the 
religion that feeds and fosters all religions and emphasises their common Greatness. Take up this 
religion, boldly and joyfully. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 1-10-1976 


The Lord is devoid of attachment or hatred. He comes on a 
Mission and is bent only on that task. It is His nature to support 
the right and admonish the wrong. His task is to restore vision to 
man, to turn his footsteps along the path of morality and self- 
control, so that he may achieve Self-knowledge. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


24. Global bhajan 


SHRAVANAM (hearing the Glory of the Lord), Keerthanam (singing the name and Glow of 
God), Vishnosmaranam (allowing the mind to dwell on that Glow), Paadhasevanam (adoring the 
Feet of the Lord), Vandhanam (experiencing gratitude and joy at His Grace), Dhaasyam (feeling 
oneself as His instrument), Sakhyam (awareness of his being one's constant and closest 
companion) and Aathmanivedhanam (dedicating one's full being to Him)---these are the nine 
steps In the path of Devotion. 


"Listen, O people! Revel in this iron Kaliyuga, for there is none so propitious for liberation such 
that mere remembrance of the Name of the Lord and adoring Him thus are enough to win His 
Grace and set you free." 


"This is bad, this is good---can such judgements ever be made about anything in God's creation 
when all are manifestations of His Will." 


Samkeerthan is manifestation of inner ecstasy 


Embodiments of the Pure Aathman! Last November, on the 23rd, people from all parts of the 
world had assembled here to celebrate the Golden Jubilee and office-bearers of the centres were 
here for the Second World Conference and other functions that took place. Later they expressed 
their desire that they be allotted a date before the close of the jubilee Year, when they in their 
own places could celebrate the happy occasion. In order to overcome their disappointment it was 
decided that in all centres all over the world, bhajan and naama-sankeerthan (congregational 
singing and spirituals) be held for full twenty four hours, beginning at 6-30 p.m. on Saturday 
(yesterday) and ending at 6-30 p.m. today. Therefore in 42 countries around the globe more than 
7,000 centres have enthusiastically taken up this pleasant assignment. 


This has been named an akhanda-bhajan, that is to say, bhajan done without a break. But was it 
really an akhanda-bhajan? It is begun at 6-30 on the evening of one day, and is closed at 6-30 on 
the evening of the next day. Can we call it 'unbroken' bhajan? What is a period of 24 hours when 
we consider the vastness of the Universe and the eternity of time? it is just a wink, a minute part 
of the life of man on earth. By engaging yourselves in the recitation of the Name of God for one 
single day, you claim to have done bhajan "without a break!" Akhanda-bhajan must be as 
continuous as breathing itself if it is to deserve its name. 


You must probe into the real significance of the samkeerthan that you are engaged in. Keerthan 
is "singing aloud the Glory of God." Samkeerthan is the process of singing that originates in the 
heart, not from the lips or tongue. It is the expression of the joyous thrill that wells up from the 
heart when the Glory of God is remembered. It is the spontaneous manifestation of inner ecstasy, 
No attention is paid to the blame or praise that others may give. It does not seek the admiration 
or the appreciation of the listeners. It is sung for one's own joy, one's own satisfaction, one's own 
delight. Keerthan of this supreme type, alone, deserves the name samkeerthan. 


Naamasamkeerthan can cleanse the atmosphere 


Singing this intense yearning for God and enjoying the experience of adoring Him, helps to 
purify the atmosphere. Man is today forced to breathe the air polluted by sounds that denote 
violence, hatred, cruelty and wickedness. Therefore he is fast losing the high attainments that are 
in store for him. The vibrations of the naamasamkeerthans (heart-felt recitation and Lord's 


name) can cleanse the atmosphere and render it pure, calm and ennobling. It is with this high 
purpose in view that this programme of global samkeerthan was designed. 


No man can escape the influence of the pollution of the air he breathes. The sounds that we 
produce, with good intent or bad, spread throughout the air around us. This is our daily 
experience. The sounds produced at radio stations pass through the atmosphere and reach our 
homes when we tune in. The vibrations travel vast distances and affect the nature of those who 
inhale them. The atmosphere affects also the food man consumes. The pollution in the 
atmosphere is imbibed by the plants, the plants supply the grain, the grain is the basis of the meal 
and the meal shapes the character and behaviour of the person who consumes It. When the 
environment is clean and free from evil vibrations, the. food too, is pure, and the person develops 
a tendency to be loving and simple. It is to ensure such an atmosphere that this saadhana 
(spiritual effort) initiated the world over. 


Prayer should come shrieking through the heart 


When a man falls Into a well, of what use is it if he controls his voice and his emotions and 
whispers quietly, "I have fallen into this well, I have fallen into this well. I am in great danger. 
Please save me?" No one will be able to hear or save him. He must shout full-throated, with all 
the anguish he is experiencing and with the extreme desire to be' saved, "I HAVE FALLEN 
INTO THE WELL! SAVE ME! SAVE ME SOME ONE!" Then can he hope to get succour. 


Similarly, when you are caught in the coils of this world, when you have fallen Into this deep 
well of worldly misery, shout with all your might, with all your heart, that you may be saved by 
God. There is no use muttering faintly and half-heartedly, "Save me, save me; I am floundering 
in this samsaar (worldy life)." When the prayer comes shrieking through the heart, help is 
assured. 


Samkeerthan or bhajan is of four types. Guna-samkeerthan, leela-samkeerthan, bhava- 
samkeerthan, and naama-samkeerthan, guna means '‘attributes' (of God). So guna-samkeerthan 
is the adoration, in song, of the manifold Attributes of God---Omnipresence, Omniscience, 
Compassion, Majesty, etc. Lee/a means 'divine sport.' Therefore /eela-samkeerthan is the 
adoration, in song, of the various expressions of these attributes as evidenced by the accounts of 
sages and seers of all faiths. Bhaava means 'attitude’ (of the mind). So bhaava-samkeerthan 
means the adoration, in song, of God pictured and contacted under various relationships. 


Path of devotion is the most effective saadhana 


Some may prefer to adore Him as the Giver of equanimity (shaantham), others as a Friend, 
Guide and Guardian (sakhya), still others as the child one loves and tends (vaathsalya) and yet 
others as the lover whom one loves with sovereign love (madhura). Naama means the Name of 
God, and so naama-sankeerthan means the adoration of God, calling upon Him by various 
Names, each describing His glory, His achievements, His relationship with the individual. 


The Names are many, or even countless; it is so in all languages. We have many groups of 
‘thousand and eight Names' which can be used, for God, as the Vedhas (ancient revealed sacred 
scriptures) declare, has a 'thousand heads, a thousand eyes and a thousand feet.' Devotees can 
adore Him and derive bliss through that adoration, filling each Name with the meaning and 
significance it carries. 


By whatever means God is adored, the path of devotion is the easiest and the most effective for it 
is a saadhana of the heart, and results in love and service to all as fellow pilgrims to the same 
Divine Goal. 


Some people do question the propriety of calling God by means of such a multiplicity of names. 
But each Name is indicative only of one aspect of Divinity. It denotes a single part of the 
Supreme Personality. The eye, the nose, the mouth, the hand or the finger may be denoted by 
distinct words, but they all belong to the same individual. So, too, one must remember that every 
Name is but a facet, a part, a ray, of the Supreme. The saadhana consists in recognising and 
becoming aware of the One that supports and sustains the many. That is the precious gem of 
wisdom that one must secure and treasure. 


Let Liberation be your only desire 


There is, however, a thief that lurks in the inner consciousness of man, planning to rob him of 
this gem. He is kaama (desire). When we have gained what we desire, /obha (greed}, the 
accomplice of the thief, steps out and prods us to desire a few more objects. When what is 
desired is not gained, another accomplice, Arodha (anger), steps out and prods us to hate and 
harm those whom we suspect. stood in the way of the gain. 


Of course you cannot instantly eliminate all desire from the mind. So you should nourish the one 
desire prescribed by' the Vedhas. The Vedhas lay down four goals before man: dharma 
(righteousness), artha (wealth), kKaama (desire) and moksha (liberation). Since the first and the 
last are difficult to attain without detachment and deprivation of sensual pleasures, man has 
given them up as impracticable and is struggling in all lands and climes with the middle two--- 
wealth and desire. All the fear and misery of life can be traced to this dire mistake. What has to 
be done is to take the four as two inseparable pairs, Dharma-artha and kaama-moksha. That is to 
say, earn wealth through righteousness and use wealth for the promotion of righteousness. And 
let liberation be your only desire. 


Words have a profound effect on the mind 


Liberation means getting rid of bondage. Many people give up hearth and home, wife and 
children, property and possessions, and escaping into forest retreats pride themselves on their 
‘renunciation.’ But this act of fleeing cannot be honoured by that name, for such an act by itself 
cannot confer release, when the mind still remains bound. The fundamental bond which has to be 
got rid of Is the bond of ajnaana (primal ignorance). Death is sweeter than the bondage that 
Ignorance can impose on man. Cast away ignorance- you are free, liberated from all bonds that 
very moment. All spiritual disciplines have this liberation as their goal. Naamasamkeerthan 
(Heart-felt singing of divine names) too, helps you get rid of this basic ignorance. 


Those who rely on reason alone or on the limited laws of science, argue that the repetition of the 
Name which is, after all, sound, cannot cleanse or correct the mind of man. But the Name is not 
just 'sound.'’ You are sitting quietly there, listening, but if some one merely says, 'scorpion,' you 
get frightened. Or when some one says, the juice of a lemon, your mouth starts watering. You 
may be sitting before a plateful of delicacies, but if some one speaks of something dirty or 
disgusting, you are apt to refuse the food. The mere sound creates so much of reaction: 


A certain officer was inspecting the work of a teacher in a school. He had a hearty contempt for 
mere talk, so he asked the teacher, "How can you ever transform the nature of these children by 
the words you utter? Show them by deeds; act, don't speak." The teacher protested and argued 


that words have a profound effect on the mind. The argument continued for some time. At last 
the teacher resolved upon a plan to convince the officer of his point of view. He told an urchin of 
his class, "Here! Catch this officer by the neck and push him out of the room." Hearing those 
words, the officer flew into a great rage and started pouring abuse on the teacher. The teacher 
said, "-Sir, I only said a few words. No one pushed you or hit you or touched you. It was all mere 
sound. But see how it has enraged you. Words, sir, do help in modifying character and shaping 
nature. They have vast power," he said. 


Do not seek to discover the evil in others 


When words referring to worldly situations have such a transforming effect on the mind of man, 
words conveying spiritual and elevated meaning will certainly help in cleansing and correcting 
the mind of man. When we fill the air with harshness, we become harsh in nature. When we fill 
the atmosphere with hatred we, too, have perforce to breathe the air, and are hated in turn. When 
we saturate the air with sounds full of reverence, humility, love, courage, self-confidence and 
tolerance, we benefit from those qualities ourselves. The heart is the film and the mind is the 
lens; turn the lens towards the world and worldly pictures will fall on the heart. Turn it towards 
God, and it will transmit pictures of the Divine. 


Therefore always do good, see good, remember good and be good. Do not seek to discover or 
discuss the evil in others for the attempt will tarnish your own mind. When you are engaged in 
searching for the faults and failings of others, you are paving the way for developing those faults 
and failings in yourself. Dwell on the good in others, and in time it will prove an asset to you. 
The goodness latent in you shall then be urged to sprout and blossom. 


Every thought leaves an impression on the mind 


When you pray. "Swaami, appear in my dream tonight," there is a chance that you may be lucky 
to visualise Swaami in your dream. But if you pray, turning your attention to bad things, 
"Swaami, let not a pig or an ass appear in my dream this night," in all likelihood, the pig and the 
ass will present themselves to you in your dream. Why pay undue attention to things you do not 
need and do not benefit from? Every thought leaves an impression on the mind, so be ever alert 
that contact with evil is avoided. 


Ideas which are opposed to spiritual tendencies, that narrow the limits of love, that provoke 
anger or greed, that cause disgust---these have to be shut out. For the saadhaka this is a very 
essential discipline. He must sublimate such thoughts before they cause an impact on the mind, 
and should concentrate on the very source of the thinking process. This can be achieved by the 
practice of equanimity, unaffectedhess or balance. This attitude is the mark of the jnaani 
(liberated person) and is called jnaana-shakthi (the power of wisdom). Of course it is not easily 
acquired. The path of devotion and dedication---the bhakthi-maarga---is easiest for most. It is 
attainable by love, for love leads you quickly to the Goal. 


God responds to prayer that emanates from the heart 


Once upon a time, Naamadheva (noted for his mastery of the bhakthi-maarga through constant 
recital of the Name) and Jnaanadheva (noted for his mastery of the path of wisdom), were 
together crossing a thick jungle. They were both afflicted with severe thirst but could not find 
water anywhere in spite of a tiresome search. At last they came upon a ruined well with a little 
water far down its depths, but they had no means of going down the steep sides. So Jnaanadheva 
used his power and transformed himself into a bird. The bird flew down and drank its fill, only to 


change itself into Jnaanadheva again! Naamadheva relied upon the power of the Name. He sat on 
the edge of the well and called, 'Naaraayana,' in great anguish. God responded to his prayer. The 
water rose up to where he sat and he could gather it in his palms and quench his thirst. He had no 
need to embody himself anew and disembody himself again for the satisfaction of a physical 
thirst. 


When God is invoked by prayer that emanates from the heart, let it be but once, He responds 
immediately. But now the call emanates only from the lips, it has not the ring of sincerity and 
faith. From the lips, it must roll back on the tongue: from the tongue, it must go deep into the 
throat; from the throat, it must reach down into the heart. Continuous saadhana alone can grant 
success in this endeavour. You must become like an Infant with no inhibitions or stratagems. The 
mother may be attending to her daily chores on the first floor of the house, leaving the infant in 
the cradle on the ground floor. But when the child sends up a loud wail, either through fear or 
hunger, she rushes down to lift the child, fondle it, feed it and comfort it on her lap. She will not 
stay away because of the wall not being musical or melodious. 


Man's life has become pathetically artificial 


Similarly, the Mother of the Universe. will not weigh the quantity of yoga (divine communion) 
that you have practised, or calculate the number of Japams (repetition of sacred formulae) you 
have rolled on the rosary, or the time taken by you for saadhanas of various kinds. She can be 
moved and Her Grace can be won by a genuine appeal emanating from the heart. Man is finding 
it increasingly difficult to call upon the Supreme Source of power and grace with such 
genuineness. His life has become pathetically artificial. 


Kaamadhenu (the wish-fulfilling heavenly cowl, can be drawn and tied to a post by means of a 
rope. God, too, can be drawn towards you by the rope (the Name), and tied to the post (the 
tongue). Then His Name will be dancing upon the tongue forever, conferring the sweetness of 
His Majesty. The Name has to be sung for your own delight, to quench your own thirst, to 
appease your own hunger. No one eats to appease another's hunger, nor takes drugs to alleviate 
another's illness. So do not care for what others feel about your dhyaana (meditation) or bhajan. 
Do not seek the approval, appreciation or admiration of others, or refrain from dhyaana or 
bhajan because others dislike it or ridicule it. Be self-reliant, self-confident. See through your 
own eyes; hear through your own ears. Most people today believe their ears and deny their eyes; 
or they use the eyes, ears and even the brains of others and thus fall into error and fear. 


You are shaped by the company you keep 


Consider this : Here you do bhajans twice a day, but bhojans (meals) are taken four times a day! 
Physical exercises are resorted to in order to make the body strong and fit. Dhaanya (grain, 
cereal) is grown and stored and used to strengthen the body; dhyaana (meditation) is equally 
necessary for strengthening the mind so that in its weak state it may not yield to the viruses of 
lust, greed, anger, hatred, pride, etc. If the body is well-developed and the head is weak, it is a 
case fit for the lunatic asylum. Food should be for both body and head, and both these should be 
dedicated to the Realisation of God, the Truth behind and beyond all truths. 


Seeking good company and spending all available time in that comradeship called sathsang (holy 
company), will help the aspirant a great deal. You are shaped by the company you keep; a piece 
of iron turns into rust if it seeks the company of the soil. It glows, it softens and takes on useful 
shapes if it enjoys the company of fire. Dust can fly if it chooses the wind as its friend; it has to 


end as slime in a pit if it prefers water. It has neither wing nor foot, yet it can either fly or walk, 
rise or fall, according to the friend it selects. 


Knowing this truth, Kabir, the great mystic-poet, sang, "Here are my prostrations to the bad. 
Here are my prostrations to the good." When asked why he offered prostrations to the bad along 
with the good, he replied, "I prostrate before the bad so that they might leave me alone; I do the 
same before the good, so that they might remain near me always." 


By the power of saadhana, man becomes Divine 


Here is a burning coal; here, at some distance, is a cold piece of coal. When they contact each 
other, the heat spreads to the cold piece of coal, and the part that is in contact with the burning 
coal is rendered hot and red. If you vigorously sway a fan over the contact area, soon the entire 
coal becomes a burning ember. 'Near,' alone, is not enough for realisation; one has to make it 
‘dear’ by the fan of saadhana. This is the power of saadhana, by which the human becomes 
Divine. The Vedhas say that he who knows Brahman, becomes Brahman. The coal knew fire 
and became fire. Saadhana is the cultivation of prema (love). Be full of love, taste the 
exhilaration that love can confer. Man is love embodied: he thirsts for love and he finds real joy 
in loving and receiving selfless love. You have forgotten your real nature, which is love, and so 
you exude misery, hate and jealousy. Never be morose or melancholic. Let all see you exuberant 
with love and light and joy. Do not entertain passion or prejudice, anger or anxiety. Take the 
saadhana of the Name, the naamasankeerthan, and the path will be smooth. 


This programme of bhajan continuously done for 24 hours all round the world in all lands, has 
therefore and spread the message of love through the Names of Embodiment of Universal love. It 
has saturated the atmosphere with thoughts of God and of the peace and joy that He showers. 
The bhajan that you have done here has affected not only this particular area and its 
environment, but it will transmute the entire atmosphere. Continue this attitude of devotion and 
humility, of service and tolerance, and the atmosphere will not be polluted by hatred. Do not 
contaminate the air by voices of acrimony, scandal, insult or slander. Keep silent when you feel 
like expressing such ideas; that itself is a service to you and to others. 


Life is a song, sing it. That is what Krishna taught through His life. Arjuna heard that song on the 
battlefield, where tensions were at their highest and when the fate of millions was to be decided 
by the sword. Krishna sang the Geetha for Arjuna to listen. Geetha means 'song,' and He sang 
because He was Aanandha (Divine Bliss), wherever he might be---in Gokulam, on the banks of 
the Yamuna or at Kurukshethra between the warring armies. 


You too must pass your days in song. Let your whole life be a bhajan. Believe that God is every- 
where at all times, and derive strength, comfort and joy by singing His Glory in His Presence. 
Let melody and harmony surge up from your hearts and let all take delight in the Love that you 
express through that song. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 14-11-1976 


25. Signs and wonders 


THE conflict between persons who accept God and deny Him, those who declare that God is to 
be found in this or that place and those who affirm that He can be found nowhere, is never 
ending; it has continued throughout the ages. While considering this situation, one has to 
remember that while it is unnecessary to awaken a person already awake and easy to awaken a 
person who is asleep, we cannot awaken, however much we try, a person not wanting to awaken! 
Those who do not know, can be taught by means of simple illustrations what they do not know. 
But those afflicted with half-knowledge and proud of that acquisition are beyond any further 
education. 


The two eyes give a picture of a vast expanse of space, but they cannot see the face to which they 
belong! They are Important instruments of the body, but they cannot see the entire body. When 
you wish to see your face and back, you have to keep one mirror in front and another one behind 
you, so that in the front mirror you can see the reflection of your back also. So, too, when you 
desire to know your reality (face) and your future (back), you have to adjust the mirror of 'Self- 
confidence' (confidence that you are the Self) in front and the mirror of Divine Grace behind you 
Without these two, to affirm that you are aware of your Truth or of your destiny, is sheer fantasy. 


Divine Avathaars attract by their inexplicable acts 


The Divine is now denoted by various words that are common currency in limited human 
vocabularies. They name phenomena revealing the Divine, 'miracles’, ‘magic’, 'wonders’, etc.. 
Of course, man cannot contain in his mind more than he can hold. He cannot express in words 
the in-expressible. Only those who have dived deep and contacted the underlying principle of 
Love, can picture Divinity with some clarity. The Divinity that is Me has not been acquired or 
earned, nor has it been added or evinced after the lapse of some _ years 
in the middle of this life. 


The Divine has to reveal Itself through these manifestations, largely shaped and modified by the 
nature of the times, the region and the cultural environment. The signs and wonders that I 
manifest are given names that do not connote the purpose or effect. They can be called 
chamathkaara, that lead on to samskaara (purifica-ting acts), which in turn urge one on towards 
paropakaara (helping others) and finally result in saakshaathkaara (divine vision). 
Chamathkaara is any act which attracts on account of its inexplicability. This aspect of attraction 
is Inherent in the Avathaar (divine incarnation). The very name, Raama, means 'He who pleases 
or causes delight. Krishna means 'He who attracts, draws towards Himself (Karshathithi- 
Krishna). This attribute of attractions is a characteristic of Divinity. 


Attraction is the very nature of the Divine 


Why does the Divine attract? Is it to deceive or mislead? No. It is to transform, reconstruct, 
reform---a process called samskaara. What is the purpose of the reconstruction? To make the 
person useful and serviceable for society, to efface his ego, and to affirm in him the unity of all 
beings In God. The person who has undergone samskaara becomes a humble servant of those 
who need help. This is the stage of paropakaara. Service of this kind done with reverence and 
selflessness, prepares man to realise the One that pervades the many. The last stage is 
saakshaathkaara. The Vedhas (ancient scriptures of Divine Knowledge) proclaim that 
Immortality (the stage when one is merged in the Birthless, Deathless, Universal Entity), is 
feasible through renunciation and detachment only, and not through rituals, progeny or wealth. 


When man renounces selfish desires, his love expands unto the farthest regions of the Universe 
until he becomes aware of the cosmic love that feeds all the four processes mentioned above. It is 
important that you know this underlying urge in all as I do. 


Let us consider the chamathkaara, acts that attract and cause wonder. You see a flower. You 
long to hold it in your hand only when its colour or fragrance is attractive. You enter the market 
and see heaps of fruits. If the fruits are not attractive, you have no urge to eat them and benefit by 
them. Attraction is the very nature of the Divine. 


Reason cannot measure the Divine 


Once the person Is drawn near, the process of samskaara starts. Without this, man remains 
fallow and feeble. He has no dignity or personality. A worthless steel lump is transformed by 
skilful manipulation and reconstruction into a watch that is worth several hundred rupees; this is 
the result of samskaara, which turned it into a useful tool for indicating time. Thus man can also 
be transformed into a noble, efficient, happy and disciplined member of society by the 
implanting of good thoughts, good feelings, good deeds and good emotions. Such transformed 
persons will spontaneously engage themselves in the task of promoting human welfare. They 
will be promoters of the ideals of the brotherhood of man and the Fatherhood of God. 


Nowadays persons who have no experience or knowledge of spiritual science and no conception 
of the Divine, make pronouncements on such subjects into which they stray. The eye can but see, 
the tongue can but talk and the ear can but hear. Each has to accept its limitations and be content. 
The Divine can be grasped only through love, faith and saadhana (spiritual discipline), 
surcharged with Universal Love. Reason is too feeble an instrument to measure it. Denial of the 
Divine cannot negate it. Logic cannot reveal it. All the tirades now being made on the Divine are 
from atheists who are opportunists. So your duty is to preserve your equanimity. Be true to 
yourselves and do not waver. I am unaffected by praise or blame. My love and compassion 
envelop all; My Grace can be shared by all. I am declaring this so that you may face all this with 
fortitude. The more you dig, the deeper the derision; the higher the mound, the taller the praise. 
People with a disease in the nose cannot appreciate the fragrance of a flower. Those who cannot 
appreciate or recognise the Divine are suffering from an Illness which handicaps them to do so. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 23-11-1976 


There are two statements in the Geetha, both complementary: 
Sraddhaavaan labhathe jnaanam (the man with steady faith wins 
wisdom) and samsayaathmaa vinashyathi (he who doubts 
perishes). The doubt that overpowered Arjuna was removed by the 
teaching of Krishna and the necessary shraddha was inculcated. 


As a matter of fact, the Geetha is a conversation between the Jeeva 
and Brahman, the limited, or rather the idea of the limited, with 
the unlimited. The dehavasthra is worn by the dehi: the body is but 
a vesture of God, who is eternal and permanent. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


26. Unbroken bliss 


THIS day you have resolved to imbibe Divine Bliss by reciting the Glow of God in chorus and 
with music, continuously for twenty-four hours. You call it akhanda bhajan, even though it will 
end after that period. Still, the idea is good and the programme will yield good results. For in this 
busy age of fear and anxiety, the remembrance of God and the repetition of His name is the one 
means of liberation that is accessible to all. People toil for years for maintaining their families 
and bringing up their children, and though they do not succeed as much as they hope or wish, 
they continue their efforts unabated. But in the effort to gain the Grace of God, they do not 
evince even half the interest. They get dispirited when they do not see signs of Grace after short 
spurts of saadhana (spiritual effort). 


Bhajan (group singing of devotional songs on Lord's Names and Glory) is more important than 
bhajan (meals). Prayer is more desirable than pining for meals. Birds, beasts, insects and worms, 
all feed and keep fit. Man is the crown of creation, the monarch and master of all beings in 
creation. And if he, too, seeks only food and shelter as inferior species do, it is deplorable 
Indeed. From the moment of waking until the moment when he lays himself down again to sleep, 
man is engaged in endless errands, unceasing turmoil, never-ending tangles and boundless 
anxiety. And what does he gain therefrom? More confusion, more mental agitation. 


Bhajan is a good disciplinary process 


Is this the be-all and end-all of human existence? No. It cannot be. He has the nobler-goal of self- 
illumination, of lighting the lamp of love inside him, and sharing the light of that lamp with all 
around him. Kaama (desire) and krodha (anger) are the two enemies that will not allow him to 
keep that flame burning bright. 


Bhajan such as this, is a good disciplinary process by which these two can be kept away. Kaama 
is the lust for physical pleasure, for power, for fame, for wealth and for scholarship. Krodha is 
anger, which is the result of foiled lust. If you long for peace of mind, you must take up the 
saadhana that will confer peace on you. If, Instead, you still engage in old habits, how can peace 
be yours? You stand at the square yonder, and wishing to come to Whitefield, board a bus that 
moves in the opposite direction and takes you to Hoskote. Is that the sign of an Intelligent man? 
You choose the wrong path and then complain that you are lost. Salt and camphor look alike, but 
you have to exercise your intelligence to discriminate between them. Brass make more noise 
than gold, but you should not be deceived by that and choose brass instead of gold. 


Through genuine prayer, evil can be destroyed 


If men make more noise and mislead people into believing that they are wise, they are like brass. 
Do not mistake them for gold. Ascribe value to pure hearts and dedicated deeds, never indulging 
in talk that hurts others. When you intend to harm another, the evil recoils on you. The grief 
which you suffer is only an echo of the grief you inflict in another's heart. So when you have 
injured another, pray for pardon; repent and resolve never to do it again. Through genuine 
prayer, mountains of evil can be pulverised and destroyed. From now on decide that your words 
shall be soft and sweet, your acts beneficial to others and your thoughts always about how to 
serve others who are weaker and less prosperous. 


In this and in other villages, there are many persons who are either too old or too weak or with 
some physical defect---the lame, the deaf, the blind, the polio affected, the paralytic---who are 


finding it difficult to earn even a subsistence wage. Some of them also have families to look 
after. What they are able to scrape together is very inadequate in these days when prices are 
soaring sky-high. I am proposing to help such people in the villages around Brindhaavan with 
finance and facilities, to start some employment opportunities through tailoring, carpentry, 
painting, spinning, weaving and other such village industries. They can recite the Names of God, 
sing bhajans and practise naamasmarana (Remembering God's Name) even while engaged in 
these crafts, so that they can earn both peace for the mind and food for the body. As Vemana 
sang, they will have the "art of earning money to be happy here, and the art of earning Grace to 
be happy there." 


Bhajan has been part of our ancient culture 


The others, too, villagers who toil hard In the fields during the day, can gather after their night 
meals in this Venugopaalaswaami Temple hall and fill themselves with the joy and peace that 
bhajan can confer. Those who sing bhajans get what can be called 'double promotion,' for they 
derive Joy and distribute joy! Life today is filled with sorrow, it is beset with fear and despair. 
The only time you can forget these thoughts and strengthen yourself to meet the hard times is 
when you contact the Source of all strength, God. You cannot get that peace and joy while you 
bend under the burden of daily life. You are carrying a huge load of worry all day; keeps that 
aside for an hour every evening and spend that time with God who can make your shoulders 
strong and your burden light. You will relish the bhajan as you make it a daily function, like 
eating and sleeping. You eat twice a day for the upkeep of the body; should you not do bhajan as 
least once for the upkeep of the mind? 


Bhajan has been part of our culture, part of the Sanaathana Dharma (Eternal Universal Religion) 
tradition. But it has survived, In however attenuated a form, in the villages only. It has 
disappeared from the towns, where people have more 'exciting' ways of spending time and 
recuperating their spirits. But this programme of congregational bhajan by all must be fostered, 
developed and transplanted in the towns later. I am glad to note that the young men of this 
village and of the adjacent villages, especially those who are attending the Sri Sathya Sai 
College, are evincing keen interest in these bhajans. That is indeed a promising sign fraught with 
great potential for the future of this country and its culture. They are cleansing their own minds 
and helping to cleanse the atmosphere of these villages. The air even over these villages is 
polluted by vulgar film songs, by demeaning and disgusting conversation. The 24-hour long 
bhajan will purify it by Divine vibrations, and those who breathe the pure air will be healthier 
and more upright in behaviour. 


The student who made a speech welcoming Me, ended by requesting Me to come once again to 
this place for some function which he referred to. I am ready to come to your village as often as 
you wish, for I find the humanness of man thriving only in the villages. In the towns people have 
lost it. You know Sri Krishna was born in a village where he later tended cattle. His brother 
always had a yoke on his shoulder, was proud of it. Dharmasthaapana (the restoration of 
righteousness), has to start from the village where it is still found, however feebly or faintly. 
Therefore you have to live in the path of Dharma and treat it as the very goal of all your 
activities. Be united in that adventure and encourage one another while proceeding along the 
path. Then success is assured. 


Seegehalli, 4-12-1976 


27. Jesus 


MAN is as a Seed. The seed sprouts, becomes a sapling, grows into a tree and fulfils its destiny, 
offering flowers and fruits to the world. 'So, too, man rises from childhood through adolescence 
into youth and middle age, and when fully grown up he has to justify himself by offering to the 
world the flowers and fruits of good thoughts and deeds, himself acquiring the fullness of 
wisdom. A bird has need of two wings; a cart must have two wheels. Without these, they are 
mortally handicapped. Man, too, must have two types of knowledge---to live on and to live for. 
The one helps him to eke out his livelihood and the other rewards him for having lived at all. The 
one is called jeevanopadhi (the means of living), and the other, jeevanaparamavaadhi (the goal 
of living). The one enables to us to garner the material riches which make our lives comfortable 
and safe; the other answers the questions that haunt us and pressurise us while we live---where 
have we come, to where are we proceeding, how did the Universe originate, etc. No religion 
concerns itself with the first type of knowledge, they all are interested in stressing the second 
type only. Each of you have to pay attention to this second type even more than to the first, for it 
has beneficial impact on the first also. 


Dharma provides peace, contentment and joy 


Man has set down, in all lands and communities, certain rules and regulations in order to secure 
orderly and smooth running of his daily schedule of activities directed to the actual process of 
living. Since they have become part of the code of conduct, they are also described as 'discipline.' 
They are also subsumed under the basic principles of dharma (righteousness). Dharma promotes 
peace and happiness, contentment and joy. In every community, there have appeared, off and on, 
great personalities who shaped and burnished the codes and adapted the details to the needs of 
the times. 


What we must strive for today is not a new religion or a new society or a new code of morality; 
they are there already, in each race and country. We also have the basic plans for spiritual 
training already laid down in most religions. But we need persons who have attained purity in all 
levels of consciousness. Man can reach perfect Bliss only when his heart becomes free from 
envy, egoism, greed and other evil traits. We need persons who can recognise and relish the 
recognition of the kinship and the identity between man and man, as well as between one society 
and another. They have to move beyond the bounds of the limited 'I,' to break loose from the 
entanglements of the senses. They have to jump over the battlements of the fort called 'body,' and 
enter enthusiastically the wide world beyond. 


Turn inwards to acquire awareness of the Divine 


From the narrow vision of 'individual need' man must voyage out into the broad vision of the 
Universal.’ When a drop of water falls into the ocean, it loses its narrow individualities, its name 
and form, and assumes the form, name and taste of the ocean itself. If it seeks to live separately 
as a 'drop,' it will soon evaporate and be reduced to non-existence. Each one must become aware 
that he is part of the one Truth that encompasses everything in the Universe. It is reprehensible to 
stick for one's whole life-time to the low narrow paths of selfishness, envy, and greed. Make the 
heart big and the mind pure. Then only can peace and prosperity be established on the earth. 


This day is a holy day, the day on which Jesus was born He announced himself as the Messenger 
of God. In fact, all humans are born as Messengers of God. The sole purpose of this human 
career is to propagate the Omnipresence of God, His Might and Glory. No one has incarnated for 


merely consuming quantities of food and catering to one's senses. Human life is much more 
precious than that. That is why the capacity to appreciate beauty, truth and goodness has been 
endowed only on man. 


To acquire awareness of the Divine, one need not journey to any special region or place. It is 
enough if the eye is turned inwards. In the Bhagavathgeetha, the inner reality, the Aathman, is 
described as 'resplendent like a billion suns.' But man has not become aware of the Light and 
Power within; he still flounders in the darkness of ignorance. The scriptures proclaim that man is 
amrithasya puthrah (the child of Immortality). But man is unaware of this glorious heritage. He 
feels he is mortal, his end is imminent and his existence is temporary. 


Man reduces himself to the level of beasts 


The scriptures also say that the Aathman, the Real Core of the individual, is Aanandha Swaruupa 
(the very embodiment of bliss). But man being blind to this truth, invites sorrow and anxiety to 
hold mastery over him and discards the joy that awaits him. Every man is a messenger to fellow- 
men, entrusted with the task of spreading knowledge of the joy that is being missed. If he 
misuses this mission and fritters away his years in gratifying his senses, he only loses the chance 
and reduces himself to the level of beasts. He who announced Himself as the Messenger of God, 
developed, through the blossoming of Divinity and the expansion of compassion and service in 
Him, to a stage when he declared Himself as the Son of God. And then, finally, He rose to the 
status of 'I and my Father are One.' 


When Jesus declares that He is the Son of God, He becomes entitled to the paternal Majesty and 
Power. These He can claim only when He grows in the qualities that His Father has. As a result 
he attains saayujya (mergence), which leads Him to assert, 'I and my Father are one.’ The 
scriptures say, Brahmavith Brahmaiva Bhavathi: He who knows Brahman, becomes Brahman. 


Jesus inspired all mankind through His example 


These three stages are referred to as dhwaitha, visishtaadhwaitha and adhwaitha in Vedhic 
thought. Messenger and master, the two are basically separate, and so this stage is one of 
dhwaitha (dualism). The son and father, though two separate entities, are bound by affection and 
kindred feelings and attitudes. They are like the whole and the part, the body and the limb. This 
stage is called visishtadhwaitha (qualified nondualism). And when the Son and the Father are 
One, the stage is of adhwaitha (non-dualism). 


Even a child would be eager to pass from one class to the next higher one; he would hate being 
in the same class, vegetating for years. Then what can we say of persons with intelligence and 
discrimi- nation, satisfied with the attainment of the lower steps? Jesus passed through the entire 
process and inspired all mankind by His example and teachings, to be generous and kind, 
detached and discriminating, and to bring Light and Love to all. He attracted people by His 
miracles and transformed them into apostles and exemplary servants of man. 


You must realise that the Divine current that flows and functions in every living being is the One 
Universal Entity. When you desire to enter the Mansion of God, you are confronted by two 
closed doors---the desire to praise yourself and the desire to defame others. The doors are bolted 
by envy, and there is also the huge lock of egoism preventing entry. So if you are earnest, you 
have to resort to the key of prema (love)and open the lock; then remove the bolt and throw the 
doors wide open. The education must train you in the difficult operation. 


Give up the two evils of self-praise and scandal 


You undergo training in various subjects of study, but the crown and cries of all subjects of study 
is Aadhyaathmic vidhya (spiritual wisdom). People desirous of bathing in sacred rivers are 
advised by Thyaagaraaja, the famous mystic, poet and singer, to bathe, in the Ocean, for all 
rivers pour their waters into it. Therefore a bath in the Ocean means bathing in the waters of all 
the rivers at the same time. So, too, the Aathmavidhya if mastered, is the key to all knowledge. It 
teaches us Thath, which if known, all else is known. It reveals to us that the One is in the many 
and that the many are really One. Jshaavaashyam idham sarvam: “All this is enveloped by God," 
as the shruthi (sacred text) declares. 


Saadhana is the name for the mental discipline and intellectual effort to realise this Unity. Jesus 
sacrificed his life and poured out his blood to instil Love and Compassion in the heart of man, so 
that he may be happy when others are happy and sad when others are sad. It is not by festivity 
and. fun that you should celebrate Christmas. Celebrate it, rather, by resolving and putting into 
practice at least one of the ideals He enunciated, or endeavouring to reach at least one of the 
goals that He placed before man. 


Let Me call upon you to give up, in memory of this holy day, two evils from your mind: self- 
praise and talking scandal. Adopt one habit: the habit of loving service to the distressed. If you 
spend all your time and energy in worldly comfort and sensual delight, you are disgracing this 
human existence. Life is not to be spent In just eating; eating is only a necessity for living. You 
consider this habitation on of yours as your body; no, It is the temple of God. God resides 
therein. Keep it clean, fresh and fragrant through developing Compassion and Love. Use the 
temple of God only for holy thoughts, words and deeds. Do not demean it by using it for low, 
trivial and unholy tasks. Wherever you are, whatever you do have this resolution steady and 
strong. 


Brindhaavan, 25-12-1976 


Seeing one's own reality is the opening of the doors of liberation; 
for this, this mirror of the heart has to be prepared, by coating the 
back of the heart with sathya and dharma. Otherwise, the image 
will not appear. In every act of yours, if you observe truth and 
justice, then you can see your own reality revealed. 


You may say that the burden of past acts and their inevitable 
consequences have to be borne; but the Grace of the Lord can 
burn that burden in a flash; the revelation of reality will, in a flash, 
save you from that burden. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


28. Hanumaan 


HANUMAAN succeeded in co-ordinating his thought, word and act. Therefore he had the 
unique distinction of being great in physical strength, mental stability and virtuous character. He 
shines as an invaluable gem among the personalities of the Raamaayana. He was also a great 
scholar who had mastered, of all things, the nine schools of grammar! He knew the four Vedhas 
{sacred scriptures of the Hindhus) and the six Shaasthras (spiritual sciences). The Geetha says 
that a scholar is "one who sees the same Divine force motivating everyone"---Pandithaah 
Samadharsinaha. 


Hanumaan was a good example of this outlook. He did not pride himself that he knew so much. 
He was the very picture of humility, born out of genuine sincerity and wisdom. He realised that 
the Raama-principle, Aathmaraama, was illumining every being, and he adored it above all else. 
During their wanderings in the forest in search of clues about Seetha, Raama and Lakshmana 
arrived at the Rishyamuka Mountain, where they rested awhile in a shady glen. They were sad in 
mind and weak in physique. 


The King of Vaanaras, Sugreeva, and his confidante, Hanumaan, saw them from the top of a. 
neighbouring hill. At first Sugreeva feared that they might be the emissaries of his brother, Vaal, 
who had sworn eternal vengeance upon him. Or, he thought, they may be his spies moving about 
incognito. So Hanumaan offered to approach them and return with correct information about 
their identify and Intentions. He advised that Jumping to conclusions without sufficient 
information is fraught with danger. 


The three classes of messengers 


He spoke to the brothers in sweet, pleasing words. Raama was struck by the grammatical 
accuracy of his sentences. They readily answered all his queries and Hanumaan was satisfied 
with their bonafides. He offered to take them to his master and monarch. The darshan (sight) of 
Raama and Lakshmana had removed all his sins, their sparshan (touch) burnt away all the 
consequences of his deeds in previous lives and their sambhaashan (conversation) filled his 
mind with Joy. That is the experience of all who welcome the impact of Divinity. As a result, 
Raama and Sugreeva, who had common anxieties and problems, entered into a friendly compact, 
and both were assured that their problems would be successfully solved through mutual help. 


Hanumaan became the messenger of Raama. There are three classes of messengers- those who 
do not understand the orders of the master or do not care to understand, and who operate to the 
detriment of the work assigned them; those who do only Just as much as the order literally 
communicates; and those who grasp the purpose and significance of the orders and carry them 
out unflinchingly till the purpose is achieved. Hanumaan belonged to the last category. He never 
flinched in his efforts, whatever the obstacle, and reported back only after he was satisfied with 
the result of his assignment. He could delve into the commands of Raama and know what his 
order meant. 


Raama's words made Hanumaan very efficient 


As soon as Hanumaan received the order, he felt a thrust of power inside him and a new 
confidence that since he had been so ordered, the strength and intelligence, the courage and the 
adventurous spirit needed, would be granted by Raama himself. So he never had any qualms 
about his capacity or capability. His body and spirit were vitalised by the very fact that Raama 


asked him to do something. As electric cable has a copper wire inside its plastic coating; for 
good operation, both must be of high quality. So, too, the body and the spirit within, have both to 
be In good trim, and Raama's words made them both efficient and active. 


The dharshan (sight) of Raama conferred on Hanumaan an enormous reinforcement of power, 
even physical power. How else could he have jumped across a hundred miles of sea, a task that 
even Jaambavaan, Angadha and other vaanara heroes would, not dare venture upon, which he 
accomplished by the mere recitation of the Name of Raama. 


An important feature of Hanuman's life 


The youth of India must pay special attention to the feature of Hanumaan's life. He never 
calculated the pros and cons---can I succeed? Why am I, of all people, chosen for this mission? 
When Raama asked him to discover the whereabouts of Seetha. "Why should I weigh the 
chances of success or failure?" he said to himself. "The Raama who chose me will bear the 
responsibility." He decided to pray and do his best. While on his flight, a hill rose up from the 
sea and offered him rest and hospitality, but he refused the invitation. A demoness, rose from the 
sea and invited him to fight with her before he proceeded further, but he brushed her aside and 
flew on. He sped through the sky like one of Raama's own arrows. Self-confidence was the basis 
of his courage; over it he erected the walls of self-satisfaction; on them he constructed the roof of 
self-sacrifice, and he dwelt in that mansion enjoying the Bliss of self-Realisation. 


Here is a fine illustration of the devotion of Hanumaan to Raama. On the completion of the 
bridge and on the night before the march across to Lanka, Raama was reclining on the sands of 
the sea-shore in the cool bright moonlight with Sugreeva, Hanumaan, Vibheeshana, Jaambavaan, 
Angadha, Nala, Neela and others around him. He was lying with his head on the lap of 
Lakshmana. Suddenly he threw the question why the Moon had a mark on it and what that patch 
indicated. Each one ventured on an answer. Some said it was the shadow of the earth, some that 
it indicated a big hollow or crack on the surface of the Moon, and some said it must be a huge 
heap of soil. Raama asked Hanumaan, who had been silent for long, what he thought about it. 
Hanumaan said that it was the reflection on the Moon of the face of Raama which he adored! He 
had the unique fortune of visualising Raama in everything that he cast his eyes upon. 


The quality of rajas is to be watched carefully 


Hanumaan is pictured as a monkey, and monkeys are by nature, wayward and frolicsome. 
'Monkeyish' has become a synonym of fickleness. But Hanumaan did not have any trace of this 
fickleness. He was of Divine descent and distinguished with the Divine qualities mentioned in 
the Geetha. He derived Bliss in the contemplation of Raama. He had full mastery over physical 
and sensual cravings. He was shining in Aathmic splendour. He had established his life on the 
foundations of sathya (Truth)and dharma (righteousness) and led his companions also on the 
same path, exercising the force of his example on them. 


Of the three gunas (qualities), sathwa (the balanced), rajas (the passionate) and thamas (the 
dull), rajas is the quality to be watched carefully, for its first progeny is kaama (lust). Lust 
destroyed Raavana, who was a great scholar, warrior, emperor and a mighty hero. It can 
overwhelm and neutralise every good quality in man and reduce him to the level of a beast. 
Anger is the second among the progeny of this quality. Anger can seize the treasure chest of 
wisdom from your grasp and break it to smithereens. It is usually compared with fire (anala), 


which literally means, not enough. It always-relishes more and more fuel to feed its limitless 
hunger. 


Hanumaan considered every woman as his mother 


Hanumaan had no lust. His anger was not of the 'not enough’ variety. In order to search for her, 
Hanumaan had to enter the women's apartments in the palace of Raavana to look into the faces of 
the sleeping women to compare their features with Raama's description of Seetha. He felt very 
guilty going through this ordeal and even contemplated suicide, because he would be too 
ashamed to show his face to Raama after this experience. But consoling himself that it was after 
all the order of Raama that he was obeying, he returned to continue the search. He considered 
every woman as his own mother, and thus searched where his mother was, not where Seetha 
was. This is a good lesson for the youth of today. 


On the occasion of the Coronation of Sri Raama at Ayodhya, presents were given to the 
ministers and distinguished visitors, collaborators and companions of Raama---Vibheeshana, 
Sugreeva, Jaambavaan, Nala, Neela etc. Hanumaan was not given any. Observing this, Seetha, 
who had benefited most by his selflessness and heorism, devotion and dedication, felt pained. 


She communicated her feelings to Raama who was beside her on the throne. Raama told her that 
she could give him any present she wished. So she took off her own pearl necklace and placed it 
in the hands of Hanumaan. Immediately Hanumaan took the pearls apart, and putting them one 
by one between his teeth, he bit each pearl and spat it out in disgust! Seetha became flushed with 
anger. She whispered to Raama that Hanumaan could be nothing but a monkey. When asked, 
Hanumaan said, "I was only examining whether these pearls had Raama in them; I could not 
find any one which had, so I east them away. If a thing has no Raama in it, it is to me as 
worthless as stone." 


An example of Hanumaan's devotion to his Master 


At this, Agasthya, one of the renowned sages who was assembled in the hall, rose up and 
challenged Hanumaan with the question, "Hanumaan! You say that you will not wear or bear, eat 
or carry anything that does not sound of Raama. Well, you carry about this body, don't you? 
Does it sound of Raama to you?" Hanumaan accepted the challenge. He pulled a single hair from 
his wrist and held it to the ear of the sage. Lo! It was reciting 'Raama, Raama,' without 
interruption. So deep and sincere was Hanumaan's loyalty and devotion to all that belonged to 
his Master. That is the reason why he achieved success, whatever the assignment. 


After the Coronation celebrations, Seetha, Raama and his brothers sat together, reminiscing over 
past events, and some of them expressed a desire to have a larger share of serving Raama. 
Bharatha and Sathrughna were the most eager. So a list was drawn up of all items of service that 
could be offered to Raama and the items were allotted to those present. Hanumaan was not 
present at the time, and when he came in, the others announced, with certain amount of glee, that 
he had no more chance to serve Raama as everything was now to be done by others. Raama also 
joined in the fun. 


Hanumaan was terribly dejected and pleaded with them- "Pray, go over the list again. Give me 
any bit of service, however small, that might have been over looked." They were sure that 
nothing had been overlooked and so the list was handed over to Hanumaan himself Luckily he 
discovered one item that had not been allotted. When one yawns, there is a rite of snapping one's 


fingers in front of one's mouth. Of course the person who yawns usually does it himself, but in 
the case of Raama, Emperor of Ayodhya, it would surely be infra dig if he did it himself. 


Hanumaan pleaded that he might be given the duty of snapping his fingers whenever Raama 
yawned. The others agreed, for they thought that the chances of Raama yawning would be very 
rare indeed. For Hanumaan, however, it was a Godsend. Now he was ever watching the face of 
Raama, his fingers ready, waiting for the chance of performing the rite that was his duty! 


This, too, was the Grace of Raama, for what can happen without His knowledge and His plan? 
Who can keep the devotee away from the presence of God? Raama demonstrated by this Incident 
that no one can obstruct His wish and stand between His devotee and Himself. 


Brindhaavan, 1-2-1977 


29. Quenching the thirst 


THE responsibilities of the Seva Dhal are of a high order. It has to lead the members, and 
through them all mankind, along the path of ,saadhana (spiritual effort), which takes the 
individual from the position 'T' to the position 'We.' This has given the Seva Dhal the importance 
it deserves. One can realise it only when one delves deep into its significance. You have to 
sublimate all work as worship and try to fill every moment of your lives with that outlook. Only 
then can you justify your membership in this Organisation. 


Through activity man attains purity of consciousness. In fact man has to welcome activity with 
this end in view. And why strive for a pure consciousness? Imagine a well with polluted and 
muddy water so that the bottom of the well cannot 


be seen. Similarly within man's heart, deep down in his consciousness, we have the Aathman 
(Divine Spirit). But it can be cognised only when the consciousness is clarified. Your 
imaginings, your Inferences, your judgements and prejudices, your passions, emotions and 
egoistic desires, muddy the con- sciousness and make it opaque. How, then, can you become 
aware of the Aathman that is at the very base? Through seva (service)rendered without any 
desire to placate one's ego and with only the well being of others in view is it possible to cleanse 
the consciousness and have the Aathman revealed. 


By doing seva, you serve your own best interest 


So, for whose sake are you performing seva? You are doing seva for your own sake. You are 
engaged in seva in order that you may become aware of the Aathman in you, in order that you 
may discard the allurements of your ego, in order to know yourself and to get the answer to the 
question that torments you, namely, "Who am I." You do not serve others, you serve yourselves; 
you do not serve the world, you serve your own best interest. 


You may ask: how is it possible to transcend the ego through seva? By saturating with love, 
work can be transformed into worship. When the work is offered to God, it gets sanctified into 
puuja (sacramental worship). This makes it free from ego. It is also freed from the earthly desire 
for success and the earthly fear of failure. You feel that when you have done the work as best as 
you can, your puuja is accomplished. It is then for Him who has accepted the puuja to confer on 
you what He considers best. This attitude will make the work nish-kaama (un-attached). Regular 
practice of this discipline will render the consciousness clear and pure. It will promote 
chitthashuddhi (pure consciousness). Without this primary equipment how can man ever hope to 
scale spiritual heights? Almost all the great sages of the past spent the early years of their lives in 
saadhana that would ensure a pure consciousness. However prospective your career might be, 
however much you might accumulate the wherewithal of a comfortable life, to whatever heights 
of authority you might have climbed through the exercise of your intelligence, your gains shall 
be nil unless your every activity is suffused with the Divine purity inherent in the consciousness. 


You get blessed or punished due to your own acts 


I shall illustrate this point. Take an ordinary postal envelope. Upon it, in golden ink, write the 
address of a person in very artistic calligraphy. Insert a beautifully worded letter full of amazing 
sentiments, and then drop it into a post-box. What happens to it? It will not move even a yard 
away from that box. 


Now take a mere post card, the cheap unimpressive thing. Write the address with no special care. 
Scribble the news you like to convey. Affix a stamp and drop it into the same box. Watch what 
happens! The artistically ornamental envelope is inert, while this inartistic, cheap, document 
travels a thousand miles towards the person indicated. Therefore, whatever may be the 
uniqueness or importance, the furore or attractiveness, the seva that you do can yield no fruit if it 
is done without a pure chiththa (thought). 


Your yearning to do seva and your enthusiasm while doing seva, are rescuing you from harm. 
God is the witness. God has no desire to bless, nor anger to induce Him to punish. You get 
blessed and punished as a result of your own feelings and acts. Yath bhaavam thath bhavathi. As 
you think and behave so it becomes. 


Bad deeds never yield good, 
Good deeds never breed bad. 
Neem seeds never yield mangoes, 
Mango seeds never breed neems. 


Hence a person might be an expert in many fields of 'knowledge or a master of many material 
skills and accomplishments, but without inner cleanliness, his brain is a desert waste or a 
massive stone with no trace of love, mercy or expansive virtue. 


Rituals seldom purify man's consciousness 


Of the nine steps in spiritual saadhana, as laid down in the Bhakthi Suuthras (aphorisms on 
devotion), leading to the realisation of the self, dhaasyam, or the attitude of a servant to do seva, 
is quite near the final goal; it is the eighth step. The study of texts, the renouncing of wealth in 
charity, the repetition of the name or the chanting of psalms and hymns may be good exercises to 
sanctify the mind and to avoid falling into evil ways and ruinous pastimes, but they seldom 
purify the consciousness of man. Instead they serve mostly to bloat the ego and instil pride and 
promote a competitive craving for superiority. You may be sitting in the bhajan hall and loudly 
singing in chorus, but your mind may get involved in anxiety about the pair of chappals 
(sandals)you have left outside the hall. Always at the back of the mind there is fear of the loss of 
the chappals; this vitiates the bhajan and makes it a barren show. 


Seva done to a suffering being reaches the Lord 


The saadhana of seva Is quite distinct. In seva you devote all your energy and attention to the 
task at hand, for it is a dedicated task. You forget the body and ignore its demands. You set. 
aside your individuality and its prestige and perquisites. You pluck your ego by its roots and cast 
it away. You give up your status, conceit, your name and form and keep all chiththa 
(thought)pure. Whatever the task you are performing, renounce your personal Individuality and 
share its travails and troubles, its fruits and benefits, with God. You need not bring in God from 
somewhere outside you; He its in you, all the while. This truth must be your own discovery, your 
own treasure, your own strength. This is the grand purpose of the Seva Dhal. That is the reason 
why the Seva Dhal is assigned a high place in the Sathya Sai Organisation. 


A very pious person was once proceeding from Kaashi to Raameshwaram, at the other end of 
this vast country. He was carrying with him some holy Ganga (Ganges) water to be mixed with 
the sea at Raameshwaram. That would be the consummation of his long and arduous pilgrimage 
through many a holy place and many a sacred river. While half-way through, he saw by the side 


of the road a donkey in the last throes of life, since it was too Incapacitated to move towards 
some source of water to quench its thirst. Its dry tongue and rolling eyes indicated the agony of 
extreme thirst. The pilgrim was so moved by the tragic sight that he poured the precious Ganges 
water he had with him down the throat of the distraught animal. Moments later, the donkey 
recovered and could gain enough strength to pull itself out of the grip of death. Seeing this, the 
companion of the pilgrim asked him, "Master! The sacred water you brought from Kaashi had to 
be offered to the ocean at Raameshwaram. Why did you commit this sacrilege by pouring it into 
the mouth of this despicable animal?" The pilgrim replied, "But I have poured the holy water in 
the ocean Itself, don't you see?" Any seva (service) done to a suffering jeeva (individual being) 
reaches the Lord Himself. and can never be a sacrilege, for seva to the jeeva is seva to the dheva 
(divinity). Always be firm in that belief. 


The Play enacted by Shiva and Paarvathi 


Millions come to Kaashi as pilgrims. It is. said that those who see Kaashi will not be born again. 
One day at Kailaasha,. Paarvathi asked Shiva, "Lord, I have heard it said that all those who visit 
Kaashi, where there is a celebrated shrine for your worship, will attain Kailaasha and stay on 
there In your presence. Millions are coming to Kaashi, but is this place big enough to 
accommodate all of them?" Shiva replied, "All the millions cannot come to Kailaasha. I shall 
design a play and make clear to you who among the millions can come here. You, too, have a 
role to act. Do as I direct you to." 


Paarvathi became an old hag of 80 and Shiva a rickety old man of 90. The old woman had the 
old man on her lap, right at the main entrance of the famous Shiva shrine of Vishweshwara, and 
she implored in piteous tones the pilgrims who passed by on their way to the temple, "My 
husband is terribly thirsty. He is about to die of thirst. I cannot leave him and go to the river 
Ganga to bring him water. Will any of you pour a little water down his throat and save his life?" 


There is no prayer more fruitful than Seva 


The pilgrims were coming up from the ghats after their ceremonial bath in the holy river, their 
clothes still wet and clinging to their bodies. Some of them lamented that their peace was 
disturbed by the sight of this pathetic couple. "We have come to take dharshan (audience) of the 
Lord, and look what meets our eye." There were some who flatly ignored her cries and lifted 
their noses in the air. Some said, "Wait. Let us finish the worship inside the temple and then we 
shall bring the Ganga water for you." No. one offered to bring’ the needed help to the aged 
patient. 


Just then a robber who was hurrying into the temple to pick a few pockets, heard the plaintive 
voice of old woman and halted near them. He asked her, "Mother, what is the matter?" She 
replied, "Son, we came to this place to have dharshan of Lord Vishweshwara of Kaashi, but my 
husband has fainted out of sheer exhaustion. He might survive if some one will bring a little 
Ganga water and pour it down his throat. I cannot leave him here and go for water. Please help 
me and earn the merit." 


The robber was moved into compassion. He had a little Ganga water in the hollow gourd he had 
with him. He knelt down near the dying person on the lap of the old woman, but the woman 
stopped him saying, "The moment the Ganga water wets his throat, my husband may die; he is in 
the last stage of living. Therefore speak a word of truth and pour the water. The robber could not 
understand what she meant, so she explained, "Speak within his hearing, some good deed that 


you have done in your life, and then pour the water In his mouth." That created a problem for the 
robber. He was at his wits end. He could not quite comply. He said, "Mother I have, in truth, not 
done any good deed so far. This present act, the offering of water to this thirsty man, is the very 
first good deed I am responsible for." And saying this, he placed the gourd at the lips of the old 
man and gave him mouthful. 


Just at the moment, the couple disappeared and in their placed stood Shiva and Paarvathi, 
blessing the robber. Shiva said, "Son, life is to be dedicated for the service of others and not 
devoted to the exclusive interests of oneself. Howsoever many wicked deeds you might have 
done so far, for your selfless offering of Ganga water with truth on your tongue, We bless you 
with this Vision. Remember there is no morality higher than truth; there is no prayer more 
fruitful than seva (selfless loving service.") 


Three stages of enquiry into Brahmam 


On the royal road to spiritual realisation, there are three stages as mentioned in the scriptures: 
Karmajijnaasa, Dharmajijnaasa and Brahmaji-jnaasa. Jijnaasa means deep Inquiry. A person 
becomes fit to inquire into Brahman and succeed in that inquiry only when his consciousness has 
been trained and shaped by Inquiry Into the modes of activity and mores of conduct---the karma 
(action) and the dharma (righteousness)---which clarify and purify. He who discriminates well 
before engaging In any activity will naturally be righteous in conduct and behaviour. 


Good Karma will automatically lead to good dharma. Take the example of home-made coconut 
chutney. It is tasted only after it is ground and got ready, and when it is eaten you find out 
whether salt has been added or not. Then if you discover that the salt is not enough or that it has 
not been added, you have to add the needed quantity to make it tasty; but you will not add salt 
before eating a small amount. Hence the three stages are(i) Grinding and getting the chutney 
ready (ii) eating it, and (iii) adding the needed salt. The preparation is the karma, the eating is the 
dharma and the adding of salt to make it tasty and sustaining, is the Brahman. Act, dedicate and 
adore---that is the way to acquire a pure consciousness. 


An act dedicated as an offering to the God resident in all becomes as sacred as the highest seva. 
Devote yourselves to this seva. Avathaars (divine incarnations) of God are engaged in seva; that 
is why Avathaars happen. Hence, when you offer seva to mankind, the Avathaar will naturally 
be pleased and you can win Grace. This is a great chance you have as members of the Sathya Sai 
Seva Dhal. I hope you will make the best use of this chance. I bless you that you may. 


Brindhaavan, 6-3-1977 


30. The victory of victories 


THE spiritual path is the path of detachment, of sense control, of rigorous mind training. 
Paarvathi sought to win Shiva first by the glamour of physical charm; she had the stratagems of 
the God of Love Manmaatha to support allurements. But Shiva reduced the God of Love to 
ashes and rejected her advances. Thereafter she entered into an arduous period of ascetic 
austerities, and through them was able to win Shiva's Grace to such an extent that she became the 
left half of His sacred body. "Man must first decide, after vigorous self-examination and 
continuous discrimination, the path that he wishes to traverse. Moksha (Liberation), means the 
removal of the bonds of Ignorance that cloud the Truth and create a mirage of untruth. In fact, 
living is only another name for the process of achieving alternate misery and happiness, hunger 
and contentment, illness and health, desire and fulfilment. Man reaches out to a new desire the 
moment one is realised. He is ever struggling and ever unhappy, for he does not seek the eternal, 
the lasting, the source and the substance. He is content with the transient, the trivial and the 
temporary. 


Derive joy from making others happy 


Use the body as a chariot for reaching Liberation through truth. It is your duty to see that on the 
four wheels of Sathya, Dharma, Shaanthi and Prema (truth, righteousness, peace and love) the 
chariot moves along the road to the goal. It will move on that road only if it has less luggage, 
viz., less desires, less worries and less fears. Desires, worries and fears are multiplied when man 
thinks he is the body with all its appurtenances and not the owner of the body. Karma, Bhakthi, 
Jnaana (Work, Worship, Wisdom)---these are the three paths to God. But through Kaama 
(desire), Karma is warped; through lobha (greed), bhakthi (devotion) is vitiated; through krodha 
(anger), jnaana (spiritual wisdom) is befogged. But through prema (love) one can easily conquer 
desire, greed and anger. 


Learn a lesson from the insignificant ant. When an ant spots a lump of sugar, it does not hide the 
fact and seek to consume it all alone. Instead it moves round to collect its friends and kinsmen, 
for it loves to share with others the feast it has come upon. The crow, a bird that is despised and 
often out-cast, when it discovers a little heap of food, caws repeatedly until its kith and kin 
gather at the place. What is shared is more tasty; what is held back is bitter stuff. Life is short 
and full of misery, so do all you can to derive joy from making others happy. If others are 
miserable, how can you be really happy? 


"The greatness of man lies in the fact that by conscious effort it is possible to remove the evil In 
him. But in the case of other animals, however much they may be subjected to training and 
education, their base Instincts will only lie low, ready to spring up at the slightest provocation. 
Shivaraathri declares that by means of spending one full day in fast and one full night in vigil--- 
as symbolic of conquering the senses by sleeplessly watching their antics and preventing them 
from inflicting harm---darkness can be turned into light, shavam (corpse) can be sublimated Into 
Shivam (God)." 


There is a purpose behind all activities of the Divine 


Why should this creature, man, endowed with extra sensitiveness to share sorrow and joy with 
others, be born in this changing world of time and space? Nothing that is born can escape death; 
nothing that is built can withstand disintegration. Why, then, has man been sent onto this stage of 
fleeting experiences? There is a purpose behind all the activities of the Divine. Man has to 


manifest the Divine in him and lead and guide all living beings in that adventure. He has to 
liberate himself by his efforts and liberate all life by his example. He must become free and 
secure in his own Source. This is what is called Moksha (Liberation). He is liberated from 
littleness Into vastness, from bondage to boundless Bliss. 


The ego-alloy enters man only when he is misled by the apparent diversity, to posit multiplicity 
in creation. The Reality which is misconstrued in the dull dusk of ajnaana (primeval ignorance), 
is God. To see through the fog that projects many where there is only the One, is the purpose of 
all spiritual saadhana. If even after years of saadhana, by which ever religion it be prescribed, 
the saadhaka (spiritual aspirant) continues to see differences, distinctions and diversities, we can 
conclude that he has a long way to go before he can fulfill the aim of this human existence. 


Awareness of the One ensures unshaken tranquillity When the One is realised, there can be no 
fear. For how can the One fear itself?. There can also be no desire, for when there is no second, 
how can the desire to possess arise? Neither can there be envy, hatred, greed, pride or any of the 
evil passions that torment man and allow him no peace. The awareness of. the One ensures 
unshaken tranquility, Prashaanthi. The One (call it God, Paramaathma, Brahman or the 
Universal Absolute), is all Love, all Knowledge, all Wisdom, all Sweetness. Raso vai sah, says 
the Upanishath (He is Sweetness). How then can there be any bitterness in Him or in man's real 
nature, for man is manifested by Him, from Him and for Him? 


A goat cannot be born of a tigress. What emanates from God must be perforce Divine. Hence the 
appellation, amrithasya puthraha (child of immortality) for man in the Upanishath. Hence the 
Aathman in him, which has come from the Param-aathman, is also Immortal. Sparks emanating 
from the flames of fire have the same incendiary quality as the fire. The body is a Temple of God 
and has been organised for the sake of the God who decided to instal Himself therein. Until man 
realises the God within, and thus comes to understand that He is the 'mystery' that was evading 
him while he wandered about In the wilderness of the world, he has to attend assiduously to the 
up-keep of the body. 


Strive, yearn and struggle to merge with the Source 


He can earn that awareness only by leashing the wayward mind and directing it inwards. 
Shivaraathri is a reminder to all mankind of the goal of mind-control. The Moon is the presiding 
deity of the mind, according to the sages, and even modern science has discovered a subtle 
relationship between the vagaries of the mind and the phases of the Moon. In the dark half of the 
month the Moon is seen less and less as the days move forward, and symbolically it may be 
inferred that the mind, too, is undergoing a process of decline. This day is the 14th night and 
there is very little left of the Moon to influence the earth or the mind of man. A spurt of spiritual 
effort by way of vigil, bhajan (congregational chant)and fasting done on this raathri (night)or 
period of Ignorance, will result in the extinction of the mind and therewith the conquest of all the 
tendencies and attitudes which it has entangled man in. Thus this raathri can be sublimated into 
the heavenly splendour of Shiva. 


Strive---that is your duty. Yearn---that is your task. Struggle---that is your assignment. If only 
you do these, sincerely and steadily, God cannot keep back for long the reward of Realisation. 
The river strives, yearns and struggles to merge with the sea from which it came. It has that 
consummation ever alert in its consciousness. It attempts to make itself pure and pellucid so that 
it may be welcome by its source. It overcomes every obstacle of terrain in order to journey 
successfully towards its goal. Man too must utilise all the physical, mental, moral and material 


endowments intellectual, that God has granted him so that he may journey to the goal of 
Realisation. 


Love can never entertain the idea of revenge 


Do not be misled by the belief of the existence of two entitles: this world and the next, here and 
hereafter. Realise the hereafter here; this world is interwoven with the next. There is no truth in 
the disparity between the secular and the spiritual, the godly and the materialistic, the heavenly 
and the earthly. In all the worlds, it is His command that runs. Not even a blade of grass can 
quiver without His Will guiding the wind and agitating its position. The bulb of life is illumined 
by the current coming from the eternal, universal powerhouse, kaivalya, working according to 
His Laws and drawn through the cable of Love. 


When that prema (love) is tainted by selfishness, it cannot illumine at all. Self is lovelessness; 
Love is selflessness. Self gets and forgets; Love gives and forgives. Love can never entertain the 
idea of revenge, for it sees all others as One-self. When the tongue is hurt by the teeth, do you 
seek vengeance against the teeth? No, for they both belong to you and are integral parts of your 
body. 


So, too, when some other person insults you or inflicts pain, allow wisdom to have mastery over 
you. Discover the truth and do not rush to conclusions, always keeping love as your guide. 


Of course, it is a difficult task, but not beyond the capacity of man. A task that can be finished 
without struggle and sustained effort is not something to be proud of. It is the difficult task that 
provides the challenge and brings forth the best and highest in man. Embark upon this task with 
ardour and faith; that will be sweeter. Once victory is achieved, the rest will be added unto you. 


Shivaraathri, 16-2-1977 


The Gopees knew the secret of spiritual surrender. Their worship 
was not tainted by any bargaining spirit. For those who bargain 
and crave for profit, reverence is equated with returns; they sell 
homage at so much per unit of satisfactory response. They are like 
paid servants, clamouring for wages, overtime allowance, bonus, 
etc. They calculate how much they are able to extract for the 
service rendered. 


Be, on the other hand, a member of the family, a kinsman, a friend. 
Feel that you are the Lord's own. Then, the work will not tire; it 
will be done much better; it will yield more satisfaction; and, the 
wages? The master will maintain you in bliss. What more can any 
one aspire for? 


Sri Sathya Sai 


31. The Raama Era 


Sarva Jeeva dharma shaantham 
Sarva naama dharma Shivam 
Satchidhaanandha ruupam adhvaitham 


Sathyam Shivam Sundharam 


The support of all beings, the Supreme Peace; 
Known by all Names, the Supreme Good; 
The One without a second; the Being-Awareness-Bliss 


Truth, Prosperity, Beauty. 


RICHES melt away only when you spend them, but the span of years you can live on earth is 
shortened every moment whether you like it or not, whether you are conscious of it or not. 
Therefore, you must feel an urgency in the great tasks of life. Buddhi (intellect) is a special gift 
that has been offered to man. This has been given him so that he might know himself but 
unfortunately it is now used by him to know others. When man has been given a mirror to look at 
his own face and set right its blemishes, he is foolishly holding it before other people's faces! 


The three debts to be discharged during one's life 


There rare certain fundamental duties that man has to accomplish through his intelligence. Three 
of these are referred to in the scriptures as ma (debt). Man has to discharge three debts as a 
consequence of his human birth and earthly career. The first one is Dheva-ma, the debt to be 
repaid to the Gods. Every organ of the human body, every function in fact, is dominated and 
controlled and motivated by a Divine Power, or God. Therefore as a grateful repayment for the 
debt man owes to Him he has to use his organs, limbs, functions and skills for the benefit of 
other men and for the welfare of the community. 


The second debt is called rishi-ma, the debt owned by man to the sages, seers and ancient law- 
givers. Long before the birth of this generation, a beneficent code of morals and a precious 
collection of guidelines for the realm of the spirit had been preserved and handed down as 
heritage through the efforts of selfless seers and sages. Each generation draws inspiration and 
knowledge from the previous ones, especially from the pathfinders, the pioneers and bridge- 
builders in the regions of ethics, law, mysticism, sociology and religion. These persons promote 
concord and progress and remove social conflict; their footprints mark out the lines of individual 
and social development. So an enormous debt of gratitude has to be repaid to them. 


The sages and seers have handed down a precious quantity of knowledge about nature, about 
consciousness and also about the means and methods of testing and enlarging that knowledge. 
But today man is neglecting this heritage and even discarding it as invalid and superfluous. This 
is suicidal. Man has to preserve this knowledge and foster it, revere it and use it. That is the way 
to repay the debt to the rishis (sages). 


The best repayment one can make to the rishis 


The festivals in the religious calendar like this Yugaadhi (The Lunar New Year), are instances in 
point. The vishis have laid down these days as holy days and it is your duty to become aware of 
the meaning and significance of the festivals and as to why they have been so designated. You 
can infer, from what is generally done in every home when this festival starts, the real purpose 
intended by the rishis. On this day people take ceremonial baths, wear new clothes, tie new fresh 
green-leaf festoons across their door sills, have their houses whitewashed and painted anew, 
draw novel designs on the floors and make their homes charming to behold. All these are 
reminders of the prime purpose, namely, that of entertaining fresh ideas and giving up the old 
faded ones, installing aanandha (divine bliss) in the mind, recouping courage and confidence 
and strengthening hope and faith. 


Yugaadhis come and go; Nala gives way to Pingala. Plenty of milestones are soon crossed, but 
the Journey does not progress. You are still immersed on outdated beliefs and fancies. Observe 
the right codes laid down by the rishis with an awareness of the deeper plans they had in view. 
Follow the Shaasthras (spiritual sciences)and perform the daily and seasonal rites, rituals, fasts, 
vows and vigils recommended by them, always laying emphasis on the inner meaning and 
significance and the spiritual aspect of the celebration. That is the best repayment you can make. 


Debt to be repaid to ancestors is Universal 


The third debt is the pithru-rna (the debt repayable to the ancestors), especially to the parents. 
This debt is also Universal, that is to say, men in all lands and all climes have to acknowledge it; 
for we are all born of parents to whom gratitude is due for endowing us with a body. Adore the 
parents, make them happy, give them contentment and joy by paying loving attention and 
bestowing affectionate care. Another duty is to propagate the line through children of pure 
character, high virtue and noble endeavour. 


Dhasharatha, the emperor of Ayodhya, desirous of paying back his debt to his ancestors, had to 
perform the Puthra-kaamesthi Yaaga, the Vedhic sacrifice that can bless the aspirant with sons. 
This is the Vasantha Kaala (spring time). This season comprises two months---Madhu- 
Maadhava and Mesha-Rishabha. Mesha is the most glory-filled month in the entire year. It was 
in the Vasantha season that Dhasharatha released the sacrificial horse so that it may wander 
freely over the continent along an unhinderable course, and it was in the same month that it 
returned unopposed to Ayodhya. The Puthrakameshti Yaaga also commenced in Vasantha, and 
the four sons---Raama, Bharatha, Lakshmana and Sathrughna---were born in Vasantha. This is 
the reason why the Yugaadhi is acclaimed as the Inaugural day of the Vasantha Navaraathri (the 
first nine nights of the spring season) culminating with the Raama-Navami (the day on which 
Raama was born). 


Man is destined for some higher goal 


Yuga means in era. This day is called not Samvathsaraadhi, the New Year day, but Yugaadhi, the 
first day of a New Era. The era indicated is the Dharma-yuga or the Raama-yuga, for Raama is 
identified as the very embodiment of Dharma (righteousness). Raamo vigrahavaan Dharmah. 
The prime duty, of every one who participates in this celebration, therefore, is to adhere to 
Dharma, to support Dharma and to foster Dharma. 


It is mostly a question of the final goal that man sets before himself in life. The goal has to be 
realisation of the unity of the self with the Paramaathman (Supreme Self). Why else should the 
self take this human form? If mere 'living' or even ‘happy living’ was the goal, the self could have 


been encased in the form of birds or beasts. The very fact that man is equipped with memory, 
mind, intelligence discrimination ability to anticipate the future, desire to detach himself from 
the senses, etc., is an indication that he is destined for some higher goal. Inspite of this if man 
craves for a lesser consummation, he is a paapi (sinner). But he who persists, in spite of 
temptations and obstacles, on the path that leads to self-fulfilment and self-realisation, is a gopee, 
for the gopees (cowherd girls) of Brindhaavan were the most inspiring examples of such souls. 


The most effective discipline that man can adopt to attain this lofty goal, is the control and 
conquest of the five senses, avoid the errors and evils that the eye, the ear, the tongue, the mind 
and the hand are prone to commit. These are called the panchadoshas (five vices). 


The eye ever seeks the vile and the vulgar. Notwithstanding the danger to his own life and body, 
the motorist will stare at obscene posters advertising a movie film. The eye must be held in check 
so that it may not ruin the mind as well as the body of man. 


The ear craves for scandal and salacious stuff. It does not persuade you to attend discourses that 
can really help in your spiritual development. Even if you chance to attend any, the ear dissuades 
you by giving you a headache. But when some one pours abuse on another, the two ears attain 
maximum concentration. 


Start the day and end the day with Love 


The tongue is doubly dangerous unless held in check, for it speaks scandal and creates craving 
for taste. It is well nigh Impossible to lead the tongue towards the path of japa and dhyaana 
(spiritual recitations and meditation), however sweet be the Name of the Lord. Suurdhas pleads 
with the tongue to call out the Names--- Govindha, Dhaamodhara, Maadhava. When the eye, ear 
and tongue are under control and capable of being used for self-improvement, the mind and the 
hand can also easily be held in check. Thus when man realises himself, there is no need to 
inquire where God dwells. He dwells in the pure heart of man, clearly shining in His innate 
splendour of Wisdom, Power and Love. 


Give joy to all. Prema (Selfless Love) is the means to achieve this ideal. When Love can bring 
even God nearer to you, how can it fall where man is involved? Krishna could not be bound by 
any other means. That is the reason why Sai has declared Start the day with Love; spend the day 
with Love; fill the day with Love; end the day with Love. That is the way to God. 


Yugaadhi, Brindhaavan, 20-3-1977 


Through a desire to judge or estimate or evaluate, you cannot 
discover the mystery of God; through devotion and faith, you have 
to win His Grace, which will reveal Him to your understanding 
and experience. Steady faith alone can earn victory. You cannot be 
changing your allegiance as and when you please. Hold fast until 
the realisation is awarded. 


When a man is suffering from the effects of cobra-bite, they give 
him chillies to chew; the idea is they will not taste "hot" if the 
poison is still in his system. So too, when the poison of worldly 
sensualism is there, puuja, japam, dhyaanam all will taste drab 
and dismal. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


32. The brother among brothers 


THE ideal of brotherhood as depicted in the Raamaayana is without parallel in any other epic 
anywhere in world literature. When, during the battle with the raakshasa (demon) hordes in 
Lanka, Lakshmana fell unconscious and could not be revived, Raama lamented the calamity, 
saying, "Alas! Lakshmana is the source of my breath; there is no brother like him on the whole 
earth." Lakshmana's life and relationship with his brother Raama are shining examples for 
mankind. 


It can be said that Lakshmana is the A in the sacred syllable 4UM; Bharatha, the second brother, 
is the U; Sathrughna, the third, is the M and Raama, the eldest, is the full 4UM. Raama is the 
concretisation of the Brahman (Universal Absolute) that first emanated as the Primeval Sound, 
AUM. When Raama and Lakshmana were wading through the Jungle after the loss of Seetha, the 
sages who saw them described them as the 'Sun and Moon,' so majestic and magnificent was 
their mein. They shone with the splendour of courage and determination. When strength of body 
and steadfastness of mind reinforce each other, one's mein becomes attractive. Youth today has 
neither physical strength nor mental steadfastness, so young people appear old very early in life. 
When the body is weak, the mind, too, gets weak. You must try to develop physical wen-being 
and health, for a gem has to be treasured in a safe, strong box. The gem of Divinity that is your 
reality also has to be kept In a strong box, namely, the body. 


Lesson for today's youth from the life of Raama 


Even during their boyhood Raama and Lakshmana were careful about how they dressed. During 
the period of their early spiritual apprenticeship, they discarded princely robes, even though 
Dhasahratha tempted them to wear costly jewels and clothes. When in the forest as exiles, they 
wore deerskin and had their hair knotted on top. They argued that a dress must be worn for one's 
own satisfaction and not in order to imitate someone else. They were never slaves to fashion or 
convention. They laid down the norms for others and never Imitated others Just to earn their 
favour. 


Heroism was the hall-mark of the brothers. They met every obstacle squarely and exhibited the 
necessary enterprise and ability to meet and overcome opposition. The youth of today have to 
‘learn this lesson. They quaff before the tiniest obstacle and lose heart at the first difficulty they 
encounter. Like the heroes of the Raamaayana they should march forward bravely, whatever the 
handicap, in either the secular, the moral or the spiritual fields of activity. When the truth of One 
Reality in all, the Reality of God, is revealed, then there will be no more room for anger or 
hatred. They will seek and see only the good in every one. At present the passion In their eyes 
colours their version. 


Lakshmana could not tolerate separation from Raama 


Thulsi Dhaas, while composing his epic poem, Raamacharithaamaanas, wrote that the flowers 
in the gardens of Lanka were white. Hanumaan, who was present unseen, manifested himself, his 
face full of dissent, for he said that they were red and not white, as he had himself seem them: 
Thulsi Dhaas refused to amend the adjective, but Hanumaan insisted that the error be corrected. 
The argument almost turned into a scuffle and Raama Himself had to intervene. He told 
Hanumaan that since anger against raakshasas (demons) had reddened his eyes, the white flowers 
appeared red to him. 


Lakshmana had a pure heart from his very birth. As he grew up he was able to overcome the 
urges of his senses and establish himself as their master. His character was above reproach. He 
eagerly welcomed any order from Raama and enjoyed fulfilling it to the best of his ability. 
Lakshmana spent the first two days of his life wailing aloud in the lap of Sumithra, his mother. 
She tried all remedies, magical and ritual, to console him, but the baby would not be consoled or 
persuaded to eat or to sleep. She consulted Vashishta, the Royal Preceptor, who advised that 
Lakshmana be laid beside Raama in the palace of Kausalya. She did as directed, and in the 
company of Raama Sumithra's child slept soundly and played most happily. He could not 
tolerate separation from Raama. His greatest desire was-to be in Raama's presence. He followed 
Raama like his shadow, never residing in a place where Raama was not present. Raama was all 
that he wanted, all that he cared for. 


Steadfast loyalty of Lakshmana to Raama 


When Raama started out into exile in the forest wearing garments of bark, Lakshmana, too, did 
the same. For fourteen years he watched over his brother and his wife, guarding them day and 
night without any regard for his own comfort or even for sleep or food. Thulsi Dhaas pays great 
tribute to Lakshmana for this devoted service. According to him, when Raama returned to 
Ayodhya after his period of exile, the citizens in lakhs cheered at the distant sight of the flag on 
top of the chariot which was bringing him. But they did not know, he says, that the pole which 
carried the flag of Raama's triumph was Lakshmana, the devoted brother. How could the flag fly 
so splendidly without the dedicated service, the undaunted courage and the steadfast loyalty of 
the brother who gladly shared the travails of exile with Raama? 


In the course of Naaraayana's enactment as a nara (man) named Raama on earth, He had a 
crucial role to play. Lakshmana laid down his life for the purpose of realising the Mission of the 
Avathaar (divine incarnation). He never transgressed by as much as a step, the boundary laid 
down by Raama. When Raama ordered him to raise a fire into which Seetha was advised to step 
as part of the fire-ordeal to prove her chastity to the world, Lakshmana obeyed with a bleeding 
heart. When Raama ordered him to take Seetha out into the forest and leave her alone and 
unguarded there, Lakshmana obeyed, though his heart was wrung with pain. 


Lakshmana gave up everything to serve Raama 


There were two occasions when Lakshmana had unfortunately to go against the specific orders 
of Raama. When Maareecha, after enticing Raama a long distance away by assuming the form of 
a golden deer, was finally killed by him, he imitated Raama's voice and cried out before dying, 
"O Seetha! O Lakshmana! Help me, Help Me!" Lakshmana, knowing this to be a trick of the 
raakshasa (demon) Maareecha, and In accordance with Raama's instructions, did not leave 
Seetha's side. However on Seetha's firm Insistence to trace Raama's cry for help and on being 
accused by her of ulterior motives, he finally left her alone at the hut and went in search of 
Raama. 


The second instance occurred towards the end of the Avathaar period. The Gods sent Yama 
himself to Raama, to remind him that his life as an Avathaar could be ended and all the Divine 
participants could return to their Heavenly abode. When Yama came into the audience hall, 
Raama directed Lakshmana to be at the entrance and not allow any one to enter and Interrupt the 
conversation. He told him to be vigilant, on pain of death. While Lakshmana was keeping watch, 
the short-tempered sage, Dhuurvaasa, approached him and demanded entry. He was furious on 
being stopped and threatened to lay a terrible curse of destruction on Ayodhya, its inhabitants 


and. on the entire Raghu clan. Lakshmana weighed the pros and cons and concluded that his 
death would indeed be a lesser calamity than the destruction of the entire population of Ayodhya. 
So he admitted Dhuurvaasa and gladly received the punishment. 


Lakshmana decided every act of his on the touch-stone of either Raama's wish or the general 
good. He gave up everything---his wife Uurmila, his mother Sumithra and the princely life at 
Ayodhya---for the chance of serving Raama and furthering His mission. When he killed 
Indhrajith in battle, Raama embraced him with unbounded joy, and exclaimed, "Ah, dear brother! 
What a great victory you have achieved today. Now I feel as if I have already got Seetha back." 


Humility, heroism and noble character of Lakshmana 


Between Raama and Lakshmana there was never any trace of envy or suspicion. Lakshmana was 
supremely indifferent to what was happening around him If it did not affect Raama. His 
greatness is immeasurable. He served Seetha every day for fourteen years, but never once raised 
his eyes to her face. His conduct was the height of righteousness. 


When the bundle of jewels that Seetha had thrown along the way while being abducted by 
Raavana was retrieved by the vaanaras at Rishyamuka Hill, they handed it over to Sugreeva. 
Sugreeva brought it before Raama and Lakshmana for identification. When Raama asked 
Lakshmana whether he could identify any of the jewels as belonging to Seetha, Lakshmana said 
that he could vouchsafe for the genuineness of only one jewel---that which Seetha wore on her 
ankles. He saw it every day when he fell at the feet of Seetha and so could recognise it as 
unmistakably hers. Such was the noble character of Raama's brother. 


When Lakshmana fainted during the battle with Indhrajith, the latter wanted to lift his 
unconscious body and carry him into Lanka as a hostage. But since Lakshmana was the 
incarnation of the cosmic serpent, Sesha, he was tremendously heavy and could not be moved. 
So Indhrajith gave up the idea and went away. Meanwhile Hanumaan arrived there, and on his 
uttering the name of Raama, Lakshmana's weight was reduced to that of a feather, so responsive 
was he to Raamanaama even in his unconsciousness. This is a measure of the humility and the 
heroism of this great-brother of Raama. 


Summer Course, Brindhaavan, 26-5-1977 


Give the body the attention it deserves, but not more. Some people 
advise that you should cultivate disgust towards it; but, that is not 
beneficial. Tend it as an instrument, use it as a boat, as a raft. 
Disgust is not a desirable attitude towards anything in creation. 
Everything is God's handiwork, an example of His Glory, His 
Majesty. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


33. Yoga maarga 


CAN thirst be quenched by water droplets or hunger appeased by grains of rice? The realisation 
of the Truth of Creation and the Creator involves hard discipline and steady faith in the paths 
prescribed by the sages. These paths lead man to the goal through inquiry, devotion, dedicated 
work, meditation, worship and other such disciplines. 


There is also the process of Yoga (divine communion) which is widely advocated now-a-days as 
a means for self-realisation available to practitioners. It is being taught and propagated as a sure 
and simple means of Liberation. Novices and common folk are misled by the high promises, and 
they have to be warned in time of the limits and possibilities of Yoga as now taught and 
propounded. 


The very first axiom of Yoga as a spiritual discipline is to 'conquer the agitations of the mind.' 
However, this is more easily said than done, for the mind has to be dead, not dormant. Of course 
there are persons who have achieved this victory, but none of them will be available to you for 
guidance in mind-control or mind-conquest. They would be so sunk in aanandha (divine bliss) 
that the demands of the body, the time, the causal chain, etc. can never reach them. 


Yoga is mergence of the individual into the Universal 


What can be expected from a teacher of Yoga is only a diluted, limited, pseudo type of Yoga- 
dharshan (Yogic Vision or realisation), for only those who have stopped half-way in the path of 
Yoga will come forward as instructors and guides. When one has gone the entire length of the 
road, one has perforce to leave the world and its needs behind. 


Yoga means union or yoking, and the jeevaathma (The Individual Soul) has to be yoked with the 
Paramaathman (Supreme Soul); one has to find its fulfilment in the Whole, of which it is a part. 
As the rivers carry the waters of the sea back into the sea itself happy to lose the limitations of 
their names, their size etc In that consummation, so the individual merges Into the Universal. 
That is Yoga. It is Yoga that happens to the salt doll that is dropped into the depths of the sea to 
calculate the depth of the water. The salt too comes from the sea and becomes one with the sea. 


Man has five koshas (sheaths) covering his individuality---the annamaya (material), praanamaya 
(vital), manomaya (mental), vijnaanamaya (intellectual) and the aanandhamaya (blissful). When 
man turns from the objective world to the subjective world within him, he can unsheath his 
Individuality and reach his Bliss Nature. But most men revel in the very first sheath---the 
material sheath---and remain engrossed and entangled In material pursuits and pleasures. Man 
does not realise that he sees only what he wants to see; he cannot see beyond his need. Therefore 
unless his desires are purified and clarified, he cannot penetrate it into the inner realms of 
delight. 


The various chakras in the body 


If you ask any one where the words he utters come from, he will reply that they do so from the 
vocal chords. No. The vocal chords can produce sound, but not words. The spinal column, from 
the muulaadhaara chakra to the ajnaa chakra (the energy centre at lowest point of the column to 
the energy centre at mid-brow spot) is like the veena, the strings of which when drawn and 
played upon, produce resonance. The vital and the mental sheaths are Involved in these regions. 
When the playing fingers halt and press on frets fixed on the veena at irregular intervals, 


different notes are created and delight ensues. When the mind decides upon an idea that is to be 
communicated, the praana (life force) plays upon the strings and words emanate. 


The muulaadhaara, the lowest of the chakras (energy centres) at the lower end of the spinal 
passage, is the embodiment of the Prakrithi (Nature) principle. Therefore it is related to the 
annamaya kosha, the material facet of man. It is the prithvi thathwa (the earth-principle.) 


The swaadhistaana chakra at the point of the navel, is the guardian of the praanamaya kosha, 
the vital facet of the person. It is the agni principle, the spring and source of warmth in the body, 
that maintains the processes of digestion and protection from environmental change. The 
manlpuuraka chakra is the next highest on the spinal scale. It is the jala thathwa (water- 
principle), that helps the circulation of blood both Into the heart and out of it, from all parts of 
the body. 


The anahatha chakra is in the region of the heart. It embodies the vaayu (wind) principle which 
is in charge of the breathing process, inhalation and exhalation, so vital for life and activity. It 
also vitalises the spinal force, and passes over the frets of the inner veena. 


The visuddha chakra is in the pit of the throat, near the pituitary gland. It represents the 
aakaasha (space or ether)principle and promotes sabdha (sound). 


The aajnaa chakra on the mid-brow spot is the embodiment of vijnaana---the Splendour of 
Aware-ness---for when this chakra is reached, man glimpses the Truth, gets transformed and 
becomes translucent. It is only a step away from the final realisation, when the Sahasraara 
chakara (the thousand petalled energy centre) on the crown of the head is attained. That is the 
consummation of all saadhana (spiritual effort), of all search. 


The stage of desire operates in the first two chakras, the stage of endeavour (kriyaa shakthi) In 
the next two and the stage of awareness (Jnaana shakthi), is most evident in the last two. The 
awareness is there, latent in every one, ready to surface when the veils of ignorance are removed. 
The individual life-force or jeevathathwam, resides like a lightning flash in the womb of a blue 
cloud between the ninth and the twelfth rings of the spinal column. It will be alert and awake 
only when saadhana of any type is done after the cleansing of character and habits. 


Essential qualifications for the aspirant of Yoga 


If, however, the Yoga path is undertaken when the senses are still potent and overbearing, the 
effects on one's emotions and passions will be disastrous. One will become insane and talk and 
write absurd and ribald things about oneself and others. I have known many cases of such 
saadhakas (spiritual aspirants) who have gone astray. That is why shama (control of the outer 
senses), dhama (control of the inner passions and emotions), uparaathi (withdrawal of the mind 
from external pursuits), thithiksha (acquisition of the power to bear heat and cold, grief and joy, 
profit and loss etc., with equanimity), shradhdha (faith in the scriptures and in the experience of 
sages) and samaadhana (equal-mindedness and fortitude), have been emphasised as 
qualifications for the aspirant. 


Yoga as taught and learned at present is, at best, only a system of physical exercises, a means to 
acquire health and a sense of physical well-being. It cannot be spiritual discipline leading to self- 
realisation. The body which is composed of the five elements, can be affected by these Yoga 
practices. The mind has no illumining power of its own and, like the Moon, it can only reflect the 
light of the Sun or the Aathman (Divinity) within. The Aathman can be known only through 
Love; all claims to the contrary are spurious and missing the mark. Through the kundalini shathi 


(Serpent Power) and its ascent through the chakras, it is well-nigh impossible to realise the 
Universal Aathman. Even when realised, the experience is not communicable through lessons. 
The vision attained must be of the One without a second; only then can it be genuine. The core of 
every being must be recognised as One. 


There was once a Guru (preceptor) who initiated his pupil in the Naaraayana manthra: Om 
namo Naaraayana. When the pupil left his presence, he called him back and gave an additional 
direction saying, "Have the form of Naaraayana (Lord Vishnu) before your mental eye when 
you repeat the manthra (sacred formula)." The pupil left, but the Guru called him back again and 
told him, "But be careful that you do not think of a monkey when you are reciting the Name and 
contemplating the Form." The pupil agreed, but whenever he Sat down to meditate, the monkey 
could not be pushed aside. He kept telling himself that he should not think of the monkey but the 
monkey insisted on peeping into his consciousness. So he complained to the Guru and asked for 
his advice. 


The Guru said that Naaraayana is Omnipresent and immanent in every being and so he can 
meditate on Naaraayana as the reality of every being that appears in his vision. How can you 
separate some things as not God and others as God? They are all labs, organs and cells of His 
body. If you separate all such limbs, organs and cells, what Is left of the body? 


Therefore do not be led into the yoga marga. It is fraught with danger since there can be no 
efficient teachers. But yogaasanas can always be practised for better health under proper 
guidance. 


Summer Course, 16-6-1977 


34. The Universal Prayer 


Om bhoorbhuvaha swaaha 
Thath savithur varenyam 
Bhargo dhevasya dheemahi 
Dhiyo yonaha prachodhayath 


THE Gaayathri (Vedhic prayer to illuminate the intellect) is the Universal prayer enshrined in the 
Vedhas (Divine Knowledge), the most ancient scriptures of man. It is addressed to the Immanent 
and Transcendent Divine which has been given the name 'Savitha,' meaning 'that from which all 
this is born.' The Gaayathri may be considered as having three parts---(i) Praise (11) Meditation 
(iii)Prayer. First the Divine is praised, then It is meditated upon in reverence and finally an 
appeal is made to the Divine to awaken and strengthen the intellect, the discriminating faculty of 
man. 


The Gaayathri is considered as Vedhasaara---"the essence of the Vedhas." Vedha means 
knowledge, and this prayer fosters and sharpens the knowledge-yielding faculty. As a matter of 
fact the four Mahaavaakyas or 'core-declarations' enshrined in the four Vedhas are implied in 
this Gaayathri manthra. 


Every human being has four birthdays 


The Gaayathri is usually repeated at dawn, midnoon and dusk. But God being beyond time, it is 
a result of our limitations that we talk of dawn and dusk. When we move away from the Sun it Is 
dusk; when we move into the light of the Sun it is dawn. So you need not be bound by the three 
points of time to recite the prayer. It can be repeated always and everywhere, only one has to 
ensure that the mind is pure. I would advise you young people to recite it when you take your 
bath. Do not sing cheap and defiling film songs. Recite the Gaayathri. When you bathe, the body 
is being cleansed; let your mind and intellect also be cleansed. Make it a point to repeat it when 
you bathe as well as before every meal, when you wake from sleep and when you go to bed. And 
also repeat '‘Shaanthi' thrice at the end, for that repetition will give Shaanthi or peace to three 
entities in you---body, mind and soul. 


Every human being has four birthdays. The first is when he emerges from his mother's womb 
and, being neither holy nor unholy, craves only for food and shelter; the second Is when he 
begins his spiritual study to lead him from darkness to light; the third is when he has gained 
wisdom, having mastered the disciplines propounded by the rishis for achieving self-realisation; 
the fourth and last is when he realises his true identity and merges with Brahman. 


Never give up the Gaayathri manthra 


The yajnopaveetham (sacred thread) is a symbol of purity which is necessary if you wish to 
participate in the yajna of Living. Life is a continuous series of sacrifices of the lower for the 
sake of the higher, of the tiny in favour of the vast. Upanayana, the word which has been given 
to this ceremony of Initiation, means the conferment of another eye. Your two eyes cannot reveal 
to you the magnificence and the majesty of the realm of the spirit. They are focussed towards the 
objective world and its transient attractions. So the Gaayathri manthra has been given to you as 
a third eye to reveal to you that inner vision by which you may realise Brahman. 


Gaayathri is a treasure you must guard throughout your lives. If you have not caught the sounds 
of the manthra correctly now, learn it from your parents or from your family priest. Perhaps the 
others may not know the Gaayathri themselves or they might have forgotten it through culpable 
neglect. Then I would ask them to learn it from you. 


Never give up the Gaayathri; you may give up or ignore any other manthra but you should recite 
the Gaayathri at least a few times a day. It will protect you from harm wherever you are--- 
travelling, working or at home. Westerners have investigated the vibrations produced by this 
manthra and have found that when it is recited with the correct accent as laid down in the 
Vedhas, the atmosphere around becomes visibly illumined. So Brahmaprakaasha, the effulgence 
of divine will descend on you and illumine your intellect and light your path when this manthra 
is chanted. Gaayathri is Annapoorna, the Mother, the sustaining Force that animates all life. So 
do not neglect it. Elders and priests, manthra, have given it the custodians of this the go-by. But 
you, as Inheritors and guardians of the great culture of this country, have a great responsibility in 
preserving it and demonstrating its efficacy and worth. 


Upanayanam Day, Brindhaavan, 20-6-1977 


It is as absurd as putting the cart before the horse. The physical is 
subordinate to the spiritual. The body is the cart and the spirit, the 
horse. Of course, the cart should be kept in good condition; vice 
ruins the body and makes it unfit for the journey of life. The mind 
is the horse and that is neglected and not groomed for the journey. 
It is starved. 


In this land where Meera, Jayadeva, Valmeeki, Thyaagaraaja, 
Raamadhas and Tukaaraam, by their intense yearning and 
fortitude, showed the path of achieving lasting joy, precious years 
of life are thrown away in silly adventures. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


35. One-pointedness 


EDUCATION must impart those qualities in the individual that will ensure his peace, and 
thereby, universal peace. It should cleanse the mind of all traces of narrowness and help in 
fostering unity and love. This is the message of Bhaarath from time immemorial. The Vedhas 
(revealed scriptures of Supreme Knowledge) proclaim these as the goals of education. This is the 
Vedhabhoomi, the land that reveres the Vedhas, which the sages learnt through Divine 
Revelation. The seeds of this Message grew up as saplings and blossomed in the garden of the 
Upanishaths. These saplings then grew and into ancient Shaasthras (spiritual sciences), and the 
winds carried the fragrance of their aanandha (divine bliss) to the four corners of the world to 
vitalise and awaken the people of all the continents. 


In those days the sages lived with their pupils in hermitages, in quiet sylvan surroundings on the 
banks of rivers. Each hermitage was a university with the sage as the Kulapathi (Chancellor). 
They were proficient in ail the branches of knowledge and eager to give the knowledge over to 
whoever could receive it and make the best use of it. They succeeded in their mission as a result 
of their own efficiency, the enthusiasm of their pupils and the sublimity of the environment. It 
was all so simple and sincere, so fresh and free. 


Teacher-pupil relationship in the olden days 


The environment which surrounds educational institutions today is quite the opposite of this 
ancient picture. Then the pupils lived with their preceptor In his residence and imbibed not only 
information but also inspiration, not only manners but also morals. They rose with the dawn, 
bathed in cold water and went through the rigorous schedule of prayer, study, meditation and 
household chores. They ate the food that the preceptor gave them. There was no distinction made 
in any of these disciplines between the prince and the peasant, the son of a Pandith (scholar) or 
of an illiterate. There was no opportunity to waste time in idle pursuits or trivial gossip, or in 
satisfying vain whims and fancies. 


Every pupil was acquainted with the basic values of Indian culture, their origins and develop- 
ments and their essential validity for the progress of their country. Today the number of pupils 
has vastly increased but the quality of both teaching and learning, has suffered much. Serving the 
teacher was itself part of education in those days; it was easy to please the teacher and get the 
best out of him by the process of loving service. How can salaries and fees ever satisfy the 
teacher? They only increase the greed for more. Then the world's prosperity and peace were built 
on foundations of dharma (righteousness); now they depend on dhana (riches). 


Man is the crown of the animal kingdom 


The creation of the Universe must have happened when even time was unknown. Countless 
living beings have dwelt on this planet since, and the existing species are also innumerable. Man 
is considered to be the crown of the animal kingdom; his is the summit of living beings. Of 
janthus (living beings), it is said, he is the highest. Why? Because he is the only animal that can 
investigate his own self and realise and reveal the Divinity which is his reality. Other animals 
have no thirst for the basic inquiry and no hunger for this satisfying wisdom. This thirst has led 
many to posit that there is God and others to deny the existence of God. God is described in the 
Geetha as "more minute than the minutest and larger than the largest." Let us consider this 
paradox a little. 


We cannot see the air that surrounds us though we inhale and exhale it every moment of our 
lives. How, then, can we see the minute atom and the particles of energy that it is comprised of? 
Similarly with a clouded, and therefore limited, vision, how can we visualise Brahman, the basic 
Divine Force that manipulates even the subtle energy within the invisible atom? Of course when 
the vision is purified into its most subtle aspect, (swukshma-buddhi) and when we are equipped 
with the wisdom-eye (Jnaana chakshu) as Arjuna was, then we can identify the Divinity that lies 
behind the minutest form or particle. 


Stages of change of the created Universe 


As for being larger than the largest, consider the Sun. It is about 93 million miles away from the 
earth. Hence if we travel towards the Sun at the rate of 500 miles per hour and 24 hours a day, it 
would take over 20 years to reach it. The Sun is so big that the terrestrial globe can be dumped 
into any one of the thousands of pools or 'pits' which astronomers have discovered in its surface. 


The stars that appear to be so tiny and so multifarious are each far bigger than the Sun, and the 
distances between them are far greater than even the distance between the Sun and the earth! 
How can the petty mind of man ever conceive this vastness of the entire cosmos? But here too 
the sages by their sharpened Intellect and ecstasy-filled minds, have been able to visualise God, 
Immanent as much in this macrocosm as in the microcosm and even transcending its boundaries 
of space and time. Their experience has led them to express their adoration through names such 
as God, Allah, Jehovah and Bhagavaan. These are embodiments of the Glory and the Grace they 
tasted, the Love they felt as being at the core of the cosmos. 


The created universe is called Prakrithi (Nature); prior to the Manifestation, there was darkness; 
after the Manifestation, there was light. The darkness was the thaamasik (quality of inaction) 
state, when there was no activity. The light was the raajasik (quality of agitative) state, when 
with movement and agitation, uplift and downfall alternated. The ‘five elements' were then 
formed, and in time attained comparative quiet. That was the saathwik (quality of serenity) state, 
when Divinity shone through them. These five elements are perceptible by the five senses; in fact 
they are the responses to the needs of the senses. The saathwik state is the Divine state, when 
light is shed on the Truth. This Truth was there even before the creation and the cosmos. 


Meaning of 'one-pointedness' of mind 


Truth is more fundamental than the atom. Every atom and every star manifests the Truth to those 
who have the eye of wisdom. Each aspect of science has a special feature when it applies to 
some one group of things or beings. What is the special feature of man? If he too lives and dies 
as any animal, how can his supremacy be justified? His supremacy lies in his capacity to become 
aware of his Truth. We use the phrase 'one-pointedness' when referring to saadhana. The 
meaning that we generally give to that phrase is not correct. Each sense organ or faculty has 'a 
point’ which makes it valid. Don't we say, ‘There is no point in it,| when we condemn some thing 
in an argument? Seeing is the 'point' of the eye; hearing is the 'point' of the ear. If there is no 
point or agram, it is blind or deaf. The sense is then afflicted with some disease, It has some 
defect. Even if you catch a slight cold, the nose loses its 'point' for it cannot discover smells. 


Now what is the 'point' of the mind? When we say 'one-pointedness' it must mean that the mind 
should be pointed towards the One-the One that is denoted as being without a second, the One 
which has willed that It may become the many. Unless the mind lays aside all other pursuits and 


seeks to become aware of the One that has become the many, it can be said that the mind too is 
diseased and is suffering from some defect. 


Elevate yourselves by speaking and doing good 


The sages of ancient India had mastered this one-pointedness, and when they willed they could 
transmit this awareness to their pupils. Such persons are rare today. We have teachers in plenty 
but none of them has taken up with determination this task of discovering his own identity. With 
the disappearance of rishis (sages), the rishikuls (hermitages) of those days have become the 
schools (rishikul-shikul-shkul-school) of today. 


I have told you often that besides your parents, your teachers and your elders, you have to also 
revere your deeds. Deeds elevate us or drag us down; they chain us to both, birth and death, or 
they deliver us from that chain; they result in Joy or grief, prosperity or poverty, gain or loss, 
pleasure or pain. You must realise that your enthusiasm or despair, success or failure, are but the 
consequences of your actions. While engaged in action, you come up against certain laws of 
nature which you cannot overstep. If you loosen your hold on something you have in your hand, 
it will fall down; similarly, if you slip while ascending a ladder, you shall fall, irrespective of 
your caste, creed or status. The law does not differentiate. In every deed or act, God is present as 
the Invisible Motivator; in every minute thing that you handle or manipulate, God is present as 
the Inner Core. So always try to elevate yourselves by doing good, speaking good, seeking good, 
and having the good of others in mind. 


Education must confer humility and selflessness 


You do not lose much if a finger is so damaged that it needs to be cut off. The body can still 
function and be a fit instrument. Even if you lose a limb, you can function and benefit with the 
help of your faculties. But If you lose your character, then everything is lost! You can be worthy 
of the name 'student' only from the day on which you imprint this thought on your mind. Do not 
allow laziness, hatred or anger to contaminate your hearts. The world looks forward to your 
leadership in establishing and ensuring peace; how can this. be realised if you cultivate hatred 
and anger? Practise calmness and the habit of deliberation. Don't get agitated and yield to mass 
frenzy, that is a sign of weakness and waywardness. 


If anyone blames, abuses or hurts you, do not return him with the same. Behave nobly and with 
patience. When a dog bites a man, the man does not bite the dog in return. Education must lead 
you from darkness to light. It is only those who wander in darkness that fall into pits; can a man 
walking In the light fall Into a pit? If he does, it means that he is still in the dark, Vidh means 
light, and a vidhyaarthi (student) must seek light and gain it. What is the use of an eye that does 
not reveal to you the pitfalls? Education must endow you with that type, of eye which will reveal 
in time the pits that yawn in your path. 


Vidhya must confer humility, selflessness and the ideals of service. If a man adores his stomach 
and his material wealth as his heaven, how can he be honoured as a scholar? 


The educated man must be ready and skilled to serve his parents, his villages, his state, his 
nation, his language and his culture. The air in a balloon is limited within the parameters and to 
the shape of the balloon; unless it bursts the balloon and overcomes its barriers, how can it merge 
with the Universe? Similarly, unless the self attains awareness and conquers the barriers of the 
ego, it cannot merge with the Omnipresent, Immanent Divinity. 


You are born in society; it has helped to guard, guide and foster, you, to educate you and to fill 
you with dreams and Ideals, Repay to society the debt you owe to it. Proclaim aloud that you are 
Indians. Decide with pride and enthusiasm to serve India. The story of India and the culture of 
India---these are to be adored as your parents. 


College Day, Brindhaavan, 30-7-1977 


Man thinks he is enjoying the pleasures; but really speaking, it is 
the pleasures that are enjoying man, for, they sap his energies, dry 
up his discrimination, eat up his allotted years, and worm into his 
mind, infesting it with egoism, envy, malice, hate, greed and lust. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


36. The lin you 


THE company one keeps determines one's character; a person tries to join the group where he 
can freely express his innate nature. So Sathsang (holy company) is a very important requisite 
for moral and spiritual advancement. Man, by nature, is prone to cater to the desires that arise 
within him or the urges that are prompted from without. Very often these are deleterious. So he 
ruins himself by giving them the chance to overpower his personality. Consider the happy 
influence that good association can exert. A length of string is a worthless thing---no one will 
wear it in the hair or place it reverentially on an idol of God. But when it associates itself with a 
few fragrant flowers, then women decorate their coiffure with the length of floral garland and 
devotees place the garland on the idol they adore. 


A block of stone in a public square is a much neglected and misused thing---street dogs often 
foul it. But let the stone receive the company of a sculptor or his pupils, it is shaped into a 
charming idol of God and installed in a temple to receive the homage of thousands. Again, take 
the example of the domestic mouse. In the houses where it dwells it is hunted and trapped, 
poisoned and killed; but when Lord Ganapathy adopts it as His vehicle, it comes to be adored as 
a holy animal. 


Evil company demeans and debases man 


The serpent is hated and beaten to death whenever it makes an appearance, for it is dreaded and 
avoided by man. But in association with Lord Shiva (who has it coiling round His wrists, ankles 
and neck), the serpent receives reverence from millions. The company of the Divine gives it a 
halo of consecration. 


So, too, evil company demeans and debases man. Take the example of fire. Fire is held to be 
sacrosanct and holy and is religiously fed and fostered in every orthodox home where the Vedhas 
(revealed scriptures of spiritual wisdom) provide the guidelines of life. But when the fire enters a 
ball or a rod of iron, it has to suffer hammer blows in plenty while the rod or the ball is being 
shaped into some tool by man! Attachment to the iron brings about this calamity for the highly 
venerated fire. 


The years of life allotted to man as a result of the enormous amount of merit earned and 
accumulated through many lives in the past, have to be utilised for the purpose of rising higher 
into Divinity. For this adventure, congenial and inspiring company is essential. Riches decline 
only when spent, but life is, in Its own course, being clipped short every moment. Even when we 
sleep, unconcerned, every minute makes us older, takes us nearer the grave. 


The real end of freedom is Wisdom 


In order to direct time into useful channels, life has to be regulated and limited, habits have. to be 
sublimated, harmful tendencies have to be corrected and constructive attitudes fostered. These 
imperatives are emphasised in the Sathya Sai Hostel, though some of you may not appreciate the 
restrictions and guidelines presented for your conduct. They might be irksome to you just now, 
for you have joined this hostel quite recently having grown up in totally different kinds of 
environment. 


Perhaps you crave for what is called ‘freedom of will and action.' But when you have not fixed an 
ideal before yourselves, this freedom can easily become licence to give yourselves up to 
deleterious habits. What is the end of freedom? The real end of freedom is not pleasure, but 


wisdom. Sweccha is the Sanskrit word for Self-Will. Self here means the higher Self, the 
Overself. Its Will is ever to merge with the Supreme and be immersed in Aanandha (divine 
bliss). 


dust consider the fate of students in most of the other colleges and hostels. Note the unhappy 
state of affairs prevailing there. The atmosphere is not congenial either for academic 
achievement-or for personality development. It is full of imitative excitement and factional 
politics. Has man evolved from the animal, only to descend to degradation worse than that of the 
animal? Is man to be motivated only by the needs of hunger and fear like a cow which comes 
forward to eat a tuft of grass, but runs away at the sight of a suck? Man should be motivated 
differently. Again, can man be happy by merely attending film-shows or by roaming about in 
bazaars and spending time aimlessly? 


Accept the ideal of a disciplined life 


In many cases the parents and elders are at fault because they are bad examples for their own 
children. They drink and gamble, hate and fight. Education has to save you from pursuing these 
wrong paths. I may tell you that students who lived in this hostel for some months, in accordance 
with its rules and regulations, have won the appreciation of authorities of its sister colleges in 
Bangalore for their punctuality, earnestness and disciplined behaviour. 


A disciplined life is the best offering you can make to the country or to the Divine In you. One 
single person who is averse to regulated living may, by his example, spoil the careers of many 
others with whom he comes in contact. So each of you must accept the ideal after analysing Its 
implications and being convinced of its validity. Animal instincts and impulses have persisted in 
human nature as vestiges, and it is only when their upsurge is controlled and gradually 
eliminated, that the springs of Divinity can manifest, themselves. This hostel provides you Just 
the opportunity, and the sathsang (good company) here helps, you to accomplish this. 


Nature can be modified by nurture; even dogs can cease to relish meat when they are trained to 
relish only vegetarian food. So open yourselves gladly to the influence of the sathsang available 
here. Of course, storks ridicule the swan and crows carp at the cuckoo's song, but in spite of all 
the cynicism the swan sails upon the water as grand as ever and the cuckoo has not developed 
any flaw in its song. Those who ridicule others eventually find themselves isolated and laughed 
at for their own idiosyncrasies. 


Most intelligent schemes of men can become flops 


Very often even the most intelligent schemes of men result in the opposite turn of events due to 
some fundamental flaw in their reasoning. It was in Bobbili, years ago, that an infectious disease 
resulting in bolls on the skin, spread fast. It was discovered that the infection originated from 
domestic rats. Since the rats could not be totally destroyed by means of traps, the ruler decided to 
encourage people to keep cats as pets, and he gave each householder a liberal monthly allowance 
of rice for feeding the cats. 


Five kilograms of rice was supplied to the householders every month. After a time complaints 
reached the ruler to the effect that the cats were not being properly fed, and that the house- 
holders were themselves consuming the rice intended for the cats. So the ruler ordered them to 
present themselves in the court with the cats they were rearing. When they appeared along with 
their pets, it was discovered that the rumours of misappropriation were false. Every cat was 
astonishingly well-fed and plump. 


One cat, however, the one reared by Raamakrishna, was lean and hungry. When the ruler 
charged him with misuse of the rice supplied to him by the state, he said, "Master! None of these 
other cats has ever caught a rat. Those cats are too well-fed for that. When they have no hunger, 
how can they seek out and kill rats? My cat catches at least dozen a day." The ruler had to agree 
that his plan was a big flop. It had produced just the opposite result! 


Remember, the rules laid down for you are for your own good. Whatever I do, speak, or order, is 
for your good, for rendering your future years happy and fruitful. This Is the most valuable 
period of your lives and you must be thankful that you are spending it in this atmosphere, in the 
midst of this sathsang. All this is being done because I know that you are all Mine. Even if you 
deny that you are Mine, I shall persist in telling you that you are so until you understand. For I 
am the Divinity that is your Reality. 


The 'T' in you is disturbed and becomes distressed when you stray into unrighteousness and 
wander into waywardness. Therefore understand well the value of the schedule of work and 
worship prescribed for you here, and have your personalities moulded to the best shape so that 
you may shine forth as inspiring examples of service to man and God. 


Sri Sathya Sai Hostel Brindhaavan, 17-8-1977 


The pure heart is the best mirror for the reflection of Truth. So all 
these disciplines are for the purification of the heart. As soon as it 
is pure, all truths flash upon it in a minute. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


37. The inner yajna 


THE deeds of man elevate him or engender his fall. All deeds of his that are in consonance with 
the principles of righteousness deserve the dignity of the appellation, yajna (sacrificial rite). 
There are two types of yajna mentioned in the sacred texts; the external and the internal. The 
outer form is not so important or productive. It is mentioned only to be discarded and dismissed, 
for, of what use is a shell without the kernel? Adoring the Lord while meditating on His Name 
and Glory is also a form of inner yajna. 


The yajna in which animals were sacrificed at the altar (bali-peeth), is an external act, but it has 
an inner significance. The mind is the sacrificial post and the animal instincts still resident in the 
human character are to be slaughtered on the bali-peeth of the mind. The megalomania in man 
which urges him on to blind pursuit of power is the buffalo that has to be sacrificed. The 
foolishness that overwhelms man and renders him weak and docile is the sheep that has to be 
renounced. The slyness and stratagem-filled mind of man is the cat that has to be given up in the 
same manner. This is the inner yajna of which the outer yajna is but a reflection. When the 
external rites are being performed, their inner significance must be kept in view. It is a sin to go 
through with the outer formalities without any knowledge of their significance. 


Man is many animals in one 


Man has passed through many animal lives before he has come to earth in human form. Strains 
of animal nature such as cruelty, anger, greed and hatred still persist in him. Man is many 
animals in one. He has the jackal, the buffalo, the tiger, the elephant---all in him. He must east 
off these traits from his composition. When he Indulges in needless and useless controversy on 
matters beyond his understanding, he is announcing himself as a sheep; when he jumps from one 
idea to another, from one ideal to another, from one project to another, without fully involving 
himself in any, he is exhibiting the nature of the monkey. 


The nature of the Inner yajna can best be understood if we examine the story of Emperor Ball. 
He was the grandson of Prahalaadha, the celebrated devotee of the Lord. Prahlaadha braved a 
succession of inhuman tortures inflicted on him by his father to force him to retract his faith. Bali 
placed at the Feet of the Lord, as an offering to 


Him, all the lands he ruled over, as well as Heaven Itself, which he could claim as a reward for 
his piety. Bali decided to perform the unique yajna named Vishwajith. One feature of this yajna 
is that it can be undertaken only by an emperor, signifying victory over his enemies and 
sovereign power over their peoples. The emperor announces by this yajna that he is the 
unquestioned master of the empire that he has enlarged, and immediately after this 
announcement he rids himself of the vast treasures he has earned and accumulated by force of 
arms, in lavish charity among all sections of his people. 


Bali was a ruler who placed the welfare and prosperity of his subjects foremost in his 
consideration. He was the symbol of discriminating talent, Prajna shakthi. And the Lord who 
came to him as Vaamana, is the symbol of the Divinity latent in every one. ,When that Divinity 
manifests Its Omnipresence. It takes on the Thrivikrama (the trifold aspect), covering earth, sky 
and the heavens. 


Reason for the Lord seeking charity from Bali 


The Lord's Incarnation as Vaamana and His Manifestation as Thrivikrama, happened at the place 
later called Siddhaashrama, abode of achievement. This was the place also chosen by sage 
Vishwaamithra for his austerities. Vishwaamithra means "friend of the Universe." He was not 
merely a great sage, he was the embodiment of the Higher Will, the Icchaa Shakthi (Power of 
desire). 


Legend has it that the Lord sent Emperor Bali down to the nether regions. This only indicates the 
trampling of the ego into oblivion. The usual belief is that the performance of yajnas according 
to Vedhic regulations will confer worldly prosperity and heavenly joy. But Emperor Bali 
renounced material benefits and illusory joys. That is the reason why he could get Divine grace 
to such a large extent that the Lord Himself sought charity from him! 


Yajna is an exercise in renuciation 


Any act that is performed as a dedication to Godhead is a yajna. Manu, the ancient lawgiver, has 
declared that reverential prostration done before the mother, father and preceptor is indeed a 
yajna; when the egoistic pride or greed is absent and when the object is the good of all, certainly 
the deed is yajna. 


Throughout the empire of Bali, there was none so poor that he was forced to beg for alms. Those 
who came into his realm from outside were also well provided for. The yajna is an exercise in 
renunciation; it should not emerge off and on, and then be submerged. The spirit of renunciation 
must be evident in every single act throughout one's life. Bali was an example of this type of 
consistent renunciation. Those who manage to go through life without caring for honest living 
are akin to the crow, and those who adopt devious ways to earn a livelihood are akin to the 
jackal. 


Though Emperor Bali was born In a raakshasa clan (known for its demonic nature, but with the 
one exception of Prahlaadha), he had acquired a pure heart, free from hatred and pride. He had 
mastered the waywardness of his mind. The Lord then appeared before him as a mendicant, as a 
great tribute to his worthy nature. The Lord asked from him only three feet of ground. This was a 
symbolic request, for the three feet meant the bhuu, bhuvar and suvar lokas, representing the 
gross, subtle and causal bodies of man. The /okas (worlds) are not placed one over the other or 
one after the other. They are Immanent, each in the other. The visible Joka is the bhuuloka, the 
vital atmosphere around it is the bnuvarloka and the world of aanandha which envelopes the 
vital is the suvarloka. Man has five koshas (sheaths) which encase him. The material and the 
mental comprise the bhuuloka, the vital and the intellectual comprise the bhuvarloka and the 
aanandhamaya is the suvarloka. 


Man falls by attachment and rises by non attachment 


The royal preceptor of Emperor Bali was Sukraachaarya. He had, by his austerities and 
scholarship, attained a place of high honour among the monks, but he stood in the way of the 
renunciation which Ball had set before himself. Sukraachaarya could teach, but he did not 
himself follow what he taught others as desirable. He was a highly respected monk, but he had 
this one great flaw. It is such people, who call themselves 'theists' and 'believers,' that promote 
atheism and disbelief. They have no faith In the validity of what they profess; their actions are 
contrary to their declarations. Scholars run after possessions which they declare are 'trivial and 


temporary.’ They preach devotion to God but are devoted to mammon. They accuse others for 
causing the. decline of dharma (righteousness) but they are themselves the cause. 


When Bali came forward to offer to the Lord three feet of ground that He had asked for, 
Sukraachaarya, the all-knowing preceptor, protested and pointed out that the Lord had come only 
to ruin Bali and rob him of his possessions. But the pupil was greater than the preceptor. He 
replied, "Well, if He is the Lord Himself who is extending His Palm to receive the gift, I am 
certainly the most fortunate being on earth. The hand that creates and fosters the Universe is now 
held before me, and my hand held over It is dropping the gift into It. Do not prevent me. Be 
happy that It has become possible for me to do this. I shall renounce heaven, my empire and even 
my life for this one piece of good fortune." 


Man falls by apeksha (attachment) and rises by upeksha (non-attachment). Ball reached the acme 
of upeksha and his preceptor failed to bring him down. 


The Vishwajith-yajna was the external yajna (sacrificial rites), but the inner yajna was the great 
renunciatory surrender of Bali at the Lotus Feet of the Lord. In the consecrated fire of the heart 
he poured, as offering, his ego nature; he rose, humbler and wiser, and saluted the Divine within 
Himself, manifest as Vaamana incarnate. 


Inauguration day of Yajna, Prashaanthi Nilayam, 15-10-1977 


What is heard has to be pondered over. What is pondered over has 
to be put into practice. It is only when all three are accomplished 
that the realisation of Bliss can be attained. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


38. Krishna Avathaar 


This day is being celebrated as the birthday of Krishna. Krishna was born in prison, a fact that 
teaches us that God has to incarnate or present himself in the dark and narrow prison-house of 
our hearts, so that we may derive light and earn freedom. Maaya is the delusion that hides the 
truth of Being; it tends to identify one’s truth as the physical body with its appurtenances, and 
prompts us to cater to the cravings of the body. Man thus forgets the Divine and instead listens 
to the call of the animal in him, consequently falling from his high ideal. But when Krishna is 
born in the cellar of his mind, man is saved. Man must therefore become aware of God within 
the cavity of his heart. 


Yesterday while returning from Ooty we halted at Bandhipur Wild Life Sanctuary, and riding on 
a tame elephant, we moved into the forest to catch a glimpse of wild elephants. Imagine, sitting 
on an elephant, we were seeking elephants! When we caught a glimpse of a trunk in a bush, we 
were overcome with delight. Sitting on a tame, domesticated elephant, we were eagerly 
searching for an elephant in its natural surroundings, unaffected by artificial habits and skills. 
Man, too, is everywhere ignoring the Aathman within himself in its natural environment and 
trying to seek the shadows that attract him. 


Significance of Krishna being born as eighth child 


Sri Krishna was born as the eighth child of Dhevaki. This is significant, for Samaadhi is the 
eighth stage of spiritual effort, coming after yama, niyama, aasana, pranaayaama, prathyahara, 
dharana and dhyaana. These are known as ashtaanga-yoga, the eight-fold discipline (abstension 
from evildoing, observance, control breath, posture, withdrawal of mind from sense objects, 
concentration, meditation and absorption in the Aathma. The Lord can be visualised only after 
the seven steps are successfully negotiated and the mind purified in the process. The term, 
samaadhi (superconciousness state of bliss), is generally identified with a temporary loss of 
consciousness, or even more, a temporary heightening of the consciousness. But we have to 
judge the state by the effect it has on the person and his attitude towards himself and others. 


Samaadhi combines sama (equal) dhi (intelligence), that is to say, intelligence grasping the 
fundamental equality of every being. Not only will all feeling of difference and distinction 
disappear, but even notions such as heat and cold, grief and joy, good and Samaadhi combines 
sama (equal) dhi (intelligence), that is to say, intelligence grasping the fundamental equality of 
every being. Not only will all feeling of difference and distinction disappear, but even notions 
such as heat and cold, grief and Joy, good and bad, will become meaningless. When man reaches 
that state, the Lord is automatically born in his consciousness. 


The moment Krishna was born, the chains that bound his father fell off, the doors that had been 
bolted flew open and the prison guards were immersed in the ocean of bliss so that they could 
not recognise any event or thing in the material world. The fire of hatred that was burning in 
them was cooled and darkness gave place to the dawn of wisdom. The sky showered raindrops to 
soften the earth and lay low the dust. How can the elements operate against the Divine Will? 
Sound, touch, light, taste and smell---all became sublime to celebrate the new era of peace and 
plenty. 


Depth of Vasudheva's devotion to the Lord 


Vasudheva, as instructed by 'the voice,' placed the child in a basket and carried him on his head 
across the Yamuna river (which parted to give him the right of way), to Gokul, where at the same 
time Yasodha, consort of Nandha, had given birth to a female child. Just when he emerged from 
the prison, a donkey brayed to indicate the good women, but Vasudeva was afraid it would 
awaken the guards. So after placing the basket on the ground, he held the child's feet with both 
his hands and prayed to him that he keep the guards asleep. That was the depth of his devotion to 
the Lord. 


When he went to Nandha's house and entered the lying-In-room, she had just delivered a baby 
girl. There was no one there, except Raadha, Nandha's sister, who was nine years old. Vasudheva 
lifted her babe and placed the baby Krishna by her side. The female child symbolised maaya 
shakthi (deluding power), for she ushered the Avathaar (divine incarnation) of the Lord. Yoga 
shakthi, too, has to be ever with the Avathaar, and it came as Balaraama, born to Rohini, another 
wife of Vasudheva. Maaya shakthi played her ruse as soon as she was placed in the bed of 
Dhevaki. She cried aloud, awakening the guards, who reported the arrival of the child to Kamsa. 
He had expected that the eighth child would be a boy, but nevertheless, he took hold of the girl 
and smashed her upon a rock. Maaya shakthi flew up into the air, declaring that the person who 
was to kill Kamsa.was growing up safely in Gokul. 


Krishna being Divine, no one could harm him 


Though Kamsa slaughtered a number .of babies from Gokul, Krishna escaped his eye. Krishna 
systematically overpowered and killed various emissaries sent by Kamsa to Gokul under various 
pretexts. Puuthana, a demoness, assuming a charming human form, came to Nandha's house 
offering to breast-feed the child. She said, "Mother! You have lost .a number of new born babies. 
Perhaps my breast milk might save this one." Yashodha, believing that she was a women of true 
compassion and that her milk might have the holy effect she claimed, handed the baby Krishna 
over to Puuthana. But Krishna knew her intentions, and drawing out her breath he left her dead. 


But let us pay more attention to the boy than to his exploits. All these exploits reveal that 
Krishna being Divine, no one could harm him or suppress him. According to the folk-belief, they 
pierced the ears and nose of Krishna in order to ward off death, which had carried away many 
children from the family, and put a golden wire on the nose. The nose-ring had a small-sized 
pearl. The pearl is won by diving into the depths of the sea, so it symbolises the viveka 
(discrimination) that is won after diving into the secrets of the objective world. Also since it 
marked the tip of the nose, it sought to emphasise the need to concentrate, to meditate on the tip 
of the nose, the eyes not being fully open (for that would distract the attention), nor being fully 
closed (for then sleep would intervene and put an end to the process of meditation). They should 
be half open, their sight being directed to the tip of the nose, where Krishna wore the pearl. 


The three vows that Krishna took 


Krishna's complexion was neither fair nor dark; it was three parts dark and one-part fair, an 
amalgam of both. Since they were of the Vaishnava caste, the parents placed a line of musk on 
the centre of his brow. He wore silver kankans (bangles) on His wrists, such as cow-herd boys 
wore in those days in that part of the country. But the kankans that Krishna wore were not mere 
kankans. They had profound implications. 


One rite that every Hindu has to perform before undertaking any enterprise of a sacred nature 
like performing a yajna (sacrificial rites) or undertaking a vow or taking on a new stage of life, is 
the tying of a kankan to the wrist, which is symbolic of his determination to fulfill that vow or 
carry out the duties of that stage of life. Krishna had taken three vows and the kankans were 
symbolic of his determination to fulfill them. They were, as mentioned by Him in the Geetha: 
(i)Dharma samsthaapanaarthaaya sambhavaami yuge yuge (1 shall incarnate Myself in every 
age, to revive and resurrect dharma). (ii) Yogakshemam vahaamyham (I shall bear the burden of 
ensuring peace and prosperity for all who rely on Me). (iii)Mokshayishyaami maa sucha (I shall 
save all those who surrender whole-heartedly to Me, and I shall liberate, them from the cycle of 
birth and death). 


Thus Krishna assured man that He would save him from penury and grief and from sin and its 
terrible consequences, provided he adheres to Him and adores Him. He also assured the world 
that He would come in human form and lead mankind onto the dharmic path, and thus liberate it 
from its grief and the succession of births and deaths. 


Krishna was the embodiment of Divine Love 


He says, when promising His Grace to all who adore Him with no other thought, that there is no 
restriction of caste, creed, colour or country or origin, and no one receives special favour as a 
result of erudition or age or caste. Krishna was .the embodiment of Prema (love); His Prema had 
no bounds. How fortunate you are that you have today the same Krishna, the full Prema- 
Avathaar, moving among you! I shall show you the very kausthubha that I was wearing at that 
time. (Here Baba waved his hand, and in a trice a brilliant flash of light revealed a unique Jewel 
in his palm---the kausthubha, famed in the Bhaagavatha and the Puraanas (mythological 
stories). A large greenish-blue emerald of unexcelled brightness, rectangular in shape and 
bordered by resplendent diamonds, hung on a gold chain. Then Baba moved among the students, 
teachers and others, and graciously allowed every one of them to see the sacred jewel from 
close). 


Reason for the Divine to incarnate in human form 


Krishna moved among men as an ordinary person, and drew-them to the observance of His- 
prescriptions by means of His Divine Prema. He refrained from parading His Divine Insignia, 
comprising a Conch, a Wheel, a Mace and a Lotus. He did not wear even a crown. While a boy, 
he followed the cows into the pastures with just a towel bound round his head. (Here Baba called 
for a longish towel and wound it round his head to show how Krishna appeared at that time. He 
said that in those days, as now, there were peacocks in plenty in and around Brindhaavan and 
Gokul, so when he came across a fallen feather, he stuck it between the folds of the towel. It was 
a moment of rarest and finest delight when Baba stood revealed as the boy Gopaala, before 
hundreds of awe-stuck and adoring devotees). 


When the Paandavas celebrated the Aswamedha and the Raajasuuya yajnas, Krishna asked for 
some assignment to be given him, so that he might be of service. Though he could destroy the 
entire Kaurava race, he tried his best to instill good sense into them in order to save them. Now, 
as well as then, the Teaching and the Message are the same: "Know thyself, that is the only way 
to know Me." 


Being associated ardently with all living beings winning their love through love, and through a 
process of correcting their vision and purifying their consciousness, leading them to the 


realisatlon of the God which is their core---this is the task before you. Unless the human form is 
assumed, no one will come near; if the appearance is super-human, people will keep away. So, as 
the Shaasthras (spiritual sciences) say, Dheivam manusha rupena: "the Divine in human form" 
has to come to save mankind. 


Believe "that which Krishna speaks" is truth 


The ‘five elements’ are the products of the Lord's Will, so they obey the Will of Krishna. 
Whatever Krishna said, came true. In fact the only correct definition of Truth is, that which 
Krishna speaks, Believe in that. Be firm in that belief One day when Krishna went on a stroll 
with Arjuna, he pointed to a bird perching on the branch of a tree and asked Arjuna, "Do you see 
that peacock?" Arjuna answered, "Sure, I do." "Oh, Arjuna. It is not a peacock. It is an eagle," 
said Krishna, and Arjuna promptly agreed that it was an eagle. Then Krishna corrected himself 
and pointed to the same bird, said, "I am sorry. It is a dove." Arjuna, too, corrected himself and 
said, "Yes. I see now it is a dove, all right." Krishna laughed at Arjuna and said, "It is not a dove 
at all; it is a crow," and Arjuna agreed without demur, "Undoubtedly, It lsa crow," Krishna then 
accused Arjuna of stupidity, because he was blindly agreeing with every observation he made--- 
peacock, eagle, dove or crow. Arjuna replied, "What you say is the Truth for me. You can make 
a crow a dove, or a peacock an eagle. Why should I differ from that you declare? Your word is 
the Truth I go by." 


You, too, must develop that faith and not be turned away by your egoism or other's cynicism. 
Develop viveka (wisdom) and vairaagya (detachment) and then your hearts will bloom into 
flagrant beauty. You have here a picture of Sai standing on a lotus. Sai Krishna will instal 
Himself in the lotus of your heart. He will be ever with you, as guard and guide, and will shower 
Grace on you. He will be the Mother, Father, and Preceptor, the nearest kinsman; He will be 
your All. 


Therefore I desire that you learn well the subjects taught to you as part of the curriculum. 
Discharge your duties as students to the best of your skill and intelligence. Follow the disciplines 
imposed for your betterment. Practise japa and dhyaana and cultivate the attitude of seva. 
Become good sons and good citizens, and bring honour to the family, the society and the 
country. 


Sri Sathya Sai Hostel, Brindhaavan, 4-6-1974 Date is wrong. Correct date: 6-9-1977. 


The mind has to be brought under your grip; then, the servants will 

fawn at your feet. The manas (mind) is the monarch; the indhriyas 
(senses) are the soldiers; the soldiers are now ruling the king, 
because he lends his ears to them and not to buddhi (intellect), 
who is the Prime Minister. Let Buddhi take charge; in a moment, 
the senses will be forced back into camp and the mind can save 
itself. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


39. Controlled pride 


THE awareness of the Aathman (the Divine In man) can neither be gifted to another nor be 
accepted from another. It is there all the time, hidden behind the veil of ignorance. When the 
false image disappears, the Truth shines in all its Glory. It is like the Sun behind the passing 
cloud. Your duty is to deny this veil and let the Sun of Awareness shine forth and illumine your 
thoughts, words and deeds. 


As Andhras, it is desirable that you revere your native region and native language. But the 
reverence should not lead to Irreverence towards other regions and languages. Be proud of your 
language and culture---In that there Is no harm. But let not that pride lead you to dislike other 
languages and cultures. The languages by which thoughts are expressed may be varied, but the 
thoughts, emotions and feelings are the same. The language of the heart is the same, but when it 
comes to the tongue, it may take various forms. When it is known and appreciated that the One 
manifested itself as the many, and that the One is known by many Names, there is really no 
scope for hatred or irreverence. 


Sathsang helps to develop freedom from delusion 


Attitudes of tolerance and reverence can be cultivated only along the spiritual path. That is the 
one path for attaining peace and harmony in this world of ceaseless striving and never-ending 
despair. The sathsang, the gathering of Godward-bound seekers, is a must for the sprouting of 
spiritual desire and its fulfillment. Even the tardy will soon develop a keen enthusiasm for the 
spirit through the influence of sathsang. A piece of string may be bright and white, but no one 
will-wear it on the hair and round the neck. However, let it get entwined through some fragrant 
flowers and make of them a garland, and people will love to have it in their hair or round their 
necks. The sathsang of flowers gives it that high status. 


A boulder, lying neglected and in-treated beside the road, will receive the adoration of millions if 
through association with a sculptor it becomes an Idol for a temple. The common rat, despised as 
a pest, becomes holy when worshippers of Ganesh find It associated with Him as His vehicle. On 
the other hand, fire, which Is worshipped as Agni dhevatha, becomes the target of the hammer 
when it enters a ball of iron. That is why Shankaraachaarya has sung in Bhaja Govindham, 
"Through sathsang you develop freedom from delusion, through freedom from delusion you 
develop faith in Truth and through faith in Truth, you attain Liberation Itself." 


Egoism is the crown of all evils 


We become what we feel and act. Karma (action) shapes the future as it has shaped the present. 
Karma is the supreme maker of one's destiny. So one must seek sathsang in order to purify one's 
Karma, which otherwise might act as a shackle. It is impossible to escape from the consequences 
of one's karma. The shruthi (revealed sacred text) requires you, therefore, to prostrate before 
every karma that you do, praying that it may not bring harm to any one or to yourself. 


As child of Immortality, man is entitled to live a noble life and realise his Reality. The lotus 
takes birth in slush, rises through water, and dies when thrown out of water. It cannot survive for 
long when deprived of water. Man, too, is born in the world, lives in it, and has to exist in it. You 
must have heard the dictum, "All honour rendered to man reaches God." Hear also another 
statement, "All dis-honour inflicted on man reaches God." It is the law, as inescapable as the law 
that makes this piece of cloth that I hold in my hand fall to the ground when I release the hold. 


Only when man is able to have the Grace of God and the reinforcement of dharma 
(righteousness) will he not be led into disaster. He will then be led along the path of spiritual 
progress, for dharma protects its protector. 


So long as man lives a life devoted to objective pleasures and objective victories, he cannot 
escape sorrow, fear and anxiety. Only the Inner Vision can grant him Aanandha (divine bliss). 
For the Aathman is the fountain head of Aanandha just as egoism is the crown of all evils. Man 
must develop humility and a sense of proportion as regards his aims and ideals. 


You have fostered this educational Institution. You must lay emphasis on universal ideals in the 
field of education. You must encourage those who talk the language of the Aathman, and not 
merely the language of the Andhras. The latter provides food for the stomach; but joy for the eye 
and bliss for the heart---these are given by the former. Man is not merely body; he has a mind, a 
heart, many levels of consciousness and a thirst for the Reality. Many practise dhyaana 
(meditation), but the evidence for progress in dhyaana is to be sought in a more universal 
outlook, greater steadiness, peace, forbearance and more eagerness to serve fellow-beings. 
Dhyaana must reveal the Divine in man and thereby Induce self- confidence, self- sacrifice and 
self- satisfaction. 


So regulate your lives in such a manner that you do not dislike others nor have others dislike 
you. Love all as embodiments of the same Divine Principle. Demonstrate by your lives, these 
ideals among the Maharaashtrians. Let them speak of Andhras as broad-minded and warm- 
hearted. With the co-operation of the Maharaashtrians you have built up this Institution, and I am 
happy to bless it and give all guidance and help. You are Mine; I am yours. When it is an 
educational Institution, I take special interest in it, and I am ever ready to visit It and bless the 
students. 


Andhra Educational Society Junior College, Bombay, 30-12-1977 


