Does Sai speak these words ? 


Does Sai speak these words into avid ears and arid hearts? No!... It is our Mother who speaks, 
caressing, cajoling, crooning lullabies to relieve the pain and to bless with bliss, 
Mokshayishyaami, maa suchah! Don't weep, she cradles us! She leads us softly along the road, 
over pebbles, thorns. When the path is bitter, uphill, hard, she sings us through Yogakshemam 
vahaamyaham --- our Mother speaks. 


Does Sai speak these words into tingling ears and twinkling hearts? No! ..... It is our Father that 
speaks, refining, revealing, reminding our Name to us, long forgotten, long begotten! Abhayam 
Sarva bhoothebhyah! Don't fear, He armours us. Upward, onward, goodward, Godward--- 
guides us, guards us. When the path is tortuous, twisted, He pulls us through. Na Sukhaath--- 
labhyathe sukham---our Father speaks. 


Does Sai speak these words into mazy ears and crazy hearts! No!...It is our Master that speaks, 
advising, admonishing, h eating us crucibly, treating us crucially, leading to God within. 


Eesaavaasyam idham sarvam! There's no two; He opens the lid of Divine Box, with treasure 
encased in koshas five, Sathyam, Jnaanam, Anantham Brahma---the Master speaks. 


Does Sai speak these words into searching ears and seeking hearts? 


No! It is God that speaks, stilling the mind of waywardness, Brahmavith Brahmaiva bhavathi! 
Become and be, He aWakens. "Dear wave! emerging; merge; dear ray! run back," He calls. Dear 
spark! re-enter fire; You are I, I am you. Soham loses as so and ham; Om alone is He and We, 
Ekam-eva-asksharam Brahman---Isness---Om. 


This is how our Sai speaks, 
N. Kasturi 


1. Nut and bolt 


TODAY is an auspicious day, for the New Year is welcomed with great expectations and the old 
year is given a grand farewell, on this holy day. Every year, man has been bidding farewell to the 
old year and giving welcome to the new year; this has been going on since the history of man 
began. But, what is the net result? Only despair and distress, anxiety and insane fear! This is an 
occasion to inquire and discover why it has been so. 


Everyone seeks and strives to be at peace with himself and with society (the community in which 
he has to live) and find his fulfilment. He has tried to get this peace, by accumulating wealth, 
which gives him power over others and the ability to command the conveniences and comforts 
which will confer peace. He has sought to hoist himself to positions of authority and influence so 
that he can shape events suited to his aims and fancies. But, he has realised that both these paths 
are beset with fear, and the peace that he secures thereby is liable to quick and sometimes violent 
extinction. 


How then can man achieve peace? Only through Love! Shaanthi (peace) is the fruit of the tree of 
life; without it, the tree is a barren stump. It has no value or validity. The fruit is encased in a 
bitter skin, you must have noticed, so that the sweet juice may be preserved and guarded against 
marauders; you have to remove the skin, before tasting the sweetness within, and strengthening 
yourself. The thick rind is symbolic of the six evil passions that encase the loving heart of man: 
lust, anger, greed, attachment, pride and hate. Those who can remove the rind and contact the 
sweetness within, through hard consistent discipline attain the peace we all desire; that peace is 
everlasting, unchanging, overwhelming. 


Reason for insecurity stalking the land 


Of what avail is a car, a bank deposit, a bungalow in a posh extension in this City? If you have 
all these but no love in your heart, the heart becomes a dark deserted temple, where the bats of 
lust and anger breed in everlasting night. Such hearts are foul, diseased with terror and error. 


We have this vast gathering of the workers of the Kamaani Organisations, in the various fields of 
Kamaani enterprises. The Industrial, the Agricultural, the Mercantile, the Political and the 
Administrative---these are like the five vital airs that sustain activity in man. These five must not 
be at loggerheads; they must work in unison, prompted by love and mutual respect. Then only 
can the community have peace, security and happiness. If they do not understand each other and 
co-operate, or if any one of them strays away into a cross-road, disaster is inevitable. 


This co-operation is unfortunately not visible at the present time. Factional interests, on the other 
hand, are predominant and the competitive struggle is on, in all fields---in labour, politics, 
administration, commerce and agriculture! That is the reason why anxiety and insecurity stalk 
the land, both in rural and urban areas, and people have to go about their business, with death or 
disaster threatening them round every corner! An ominous uncertainty shadows them, at every 
turn. And, human thought turns to violence and revolution, as the obvious cure. 


Duty is God; Work is Worship 


But, that can never cure; it can only worsen the illness. Excitement blinds the reasoning faculty. 
Passion, violence, and cruelty create more problems, without solving any. These are now 
flooding the land as a deluge; persons who have no training and no sincere yearning to bear 
responsibility and discharge the obligations of office are raised to positions of authority. Ability 


as well as willingness to discharge duties and to bear burdens---these alone entitle men to hold 
authority over others. Duty is God; Work is Worship. The power that office confers has to be 
handled with that attitude of gratefulness and reverence. 


If this is remembered and practised by every worker, however placed, wherever placed, work 
will give happiness, contentment and peace, both to the person concerned and to the society of 
which he is a limb. The Kamanis erect transmission towers all over the country. It is only when 
each nut and bolt is fixed fast and firm, faithfully, that the towers can stand up to the rigorous 
test of wind and weather, isn't it? Who can say, how can we judge, whose share in the erection is 
more important and whose is less? The work of each is essential and valuable, so far as his share 
of the responsibility extends. Having the skill and the willingness to carry out that share of the 
responsibility is his title to that position, in the common enterprise. You cannot declare one item 
of work as high and another item as low. That will only engender malice and hate. And it is not 
correct, either. 


Each one must use his skill and intelligence 


A man sees while going along a road, a ripe fruit, on a tree by the side. The mind craves for the 
fruit, but that by itself cannot fulfil that craving. The feet take him near the tree. But, that does 
not bring about the consummation. The trunk stoops, the hand picks up a stone, the shoulders 
throw the stone at the fruit, and the fruit falls on the ground. But that does not end the story. The 
fruit has to be picked up by the fingers, transferred into the mouth, the teeth have to bite into it, 
and masticate it well and the tongue has to take charge in order to make it reach the stomach. The 
eating part of the task is thus over. 


But, that does not end the story of the craving for the fruit. Since so many instruments co- 
operated in the fulfilment, gratitude has to be rendered to each of them. So, the stomach sends 
strength and satisfaction to every limb that shared in the adventure of securing the fruit and 
eating it---the eye, the feet, the hands, the fingers, the shoulder, the tongue, the teeth, the gullet. 
No one of them is neglected or discriminated against. 


Each limb must act effectively at the exact juncture to meet the duty entrusted to it and accepted 
by it, so that the body may live in health and in tip-top efficiency, alert with all its skills and 
potentialities. This is true also of the enterprises which man undertakes with others of his kind. 
Each one must resolve to use his skill and intelligence for the discharge of his obligations. 


The more love is shared, the deeper it becomes 


Man has not come into this world to strut about for a while on the stage, consuming food and 
gaily gallivanting. Man comes into the world so that he may bask in the Presence of God, 
through the exercise of love and the cultivation of love. The earth is a great enterprise, a busy 
factory, where the product is love. By means of Saadhana (spiritual practice), it is possible to 
produce love and export it to millions and millions of people, in need of it. The more it is shared 
the deeper it becomes, the sweeter its taste, and the vaster the joy. By means of love, one can 
approach God and stay in his presence, for God is love, and when one lives in love, he is living 
in Go. If you deny Go angrily, you are drying up the strings of love in your heart. If you declaim 
that God is nowhere, you are installing night in your heart and making it ready for dark schemes 
and misdeeds. 


Once upon a time, a monk wearing the ochre robe chanced to enter a village full of atheists; he 
fell in with a gang of defiant youth who challenged him to show them that the God whom he was 
adoring actually existed. He said, he can; but before doing so, he asked for a cup of milk. 


When the milk was placed before him, he did not drink it; but, sat, looking at it, long and 
silently, with increasing curiosity. The youth became impatient; their clamour became insistent. 
The monk told them, "Wait a minute, I am told that there is butter in milk; but, I must say, this 
cup does not have it, for, I do not see any of it, however hard I look into it!" The fellows laughed 
at his innocence and said, "Silly man! Don't rush into such absurd conclusions. 


Milk has butter in every drop; that is what makes it so nourishing. If you must see it as a separate 
concrete entity, you have to boil the milk, cool it, add sour curd, wait for some hours for it to 
curdle, then, churn it, and roll the butter that floats into a ball." "Ah," said the monk, "that makes 
my task of showing you God much easier! God is in every thing, being, atom of the Universe; it 
is because of this that they exist, and we can recognise them and enjoy them. To see Him as a 
concrete entity, you have to follow a prescribed procedure, earnestly, strictly and sincerely. 
Then, at the end of it all, you can experience His Grace and His Glory." 


The Divine is everywhere, near and far 


The nature we have around us and with us is the vesture of God. We have evidence of His 
Beauty, Goodness, Wisdom and Power, all around us, wherever we turn our eyes. But, the art of 
recognising Him is strange to us and so, we deny Him, and live on in darkness. We have all 
around us in the atmosphere the music emanating from all the broadcasting stations of the world, 
but they do not assail your ear at any time. You are not aware of any station. But, if you have a 
receiver, and if you tune it to the correct wave-length, you can hear the matter broadcast from 
any particular station; if you fail to tune it correctly, you will get, instead of news, only nuisance! 
So too, the Divine is everywhere above, around, below, beside; near as well as far. For cognising 
it, you require not a yanthra (machine) but a manthra (mystical formula, potent with 
psychological undertone). Dhyaana (meditation) is the fixing of the exact location of the station 
in the band; love is the correct tuning in; realising the reality and the bliss it confers is the happy 
clear listening! 


Work in the spirit of love; it leads you on to Worship, that is to say, work without any regard to 
the proportion of benefit you derive from it; work, since it is your duty; work, since you love to 
work, work since that is the way you can offer God the gratitude for the skills God has endowed 
upon you. This kind of work leads to wisdom. Wisdom means the recognition of the immanence 
of the Divine in every being. 


Habits of discipline alone can ensure happiness 


The relationship between the worker and the employer should be that between the heart and the 
body. Both are bound intimately with each other; they depend on each other for their very 
existence. The employer must take upon himself the role of the father and the employees must 
accept the role of the children, attached by love and gratitude to the father. Love and affection 
have to govern the relations between the two, not hatred or envy. If the anger and irreverence of 
a few are allowed to blind the rest, all will suffer. 


In the Community Hall inaugurated by Me just now, I want weekly or monthly bhajan (group 
singing of spirituals) sessions and sathsang (spiritually oriented) gatherings. Arrange some good 


Aadhyaathmic (spiritual) talk or discussions, on these occasions. I desire also that you should run 
a Baala Vihaar for your children, where they will learn stories from the scriptures, the epics and 
the lives of saints belonging to all religions. Children must also be taught habits of cleanliness 
and mutual help and co-operation. They can also be taught to sing bhajan songs and enact little 
plays on themes selected from classics. They will also learn habits of discipline, for, these alone 
can ensure happiness, individual and social. 


Embodiments of the Divine Spirit! I am happy to meet all of you. May the New Year grant you 
mental peace and may your life's ideal of self-realisation be fulfilled. May all comforts and full 
contentment be added unto you. That is my blessing. 


Kurla, Bombay, 1-1-1971 


The place has a subtle and powerful influence on the man. 
Maarkandeya held tight the Shiva-linga and so, Yama's noose 
bound both himself and Shiva; that was the reason the boy was 
saved. 


The story teaches you to be ever in contact with God, for you do 
not know when the noose will be thrown. 


Attach yourself to the Highest, call it by any name, conceive it in 
any form. But, remember, without Dharma you cannot attain it. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


2. Prahlaadhas for the present age 


IF I ask you, who you are, you may reply, "We are teachers," or some of you may even say, "We 
are students." But, both statements are not true! You are saadhakas (spiritual aspirants); that is 
the real fact. I am glad your saadhana is moving at a satisfactory pace. You have brought Me 
among you, as a result of your sincerity and enthusiasm. I am always specially interested in the 
service done to children and I must say, you have taught them good lessons, in a spirit of love. 
Some of you, I find, are a bit over-enthusiastic! You have taught the children stories that are too 
long, and made them cram the whole stuff. Do not tax their memory overmuch. Short stories, 20 
to 25 lines long will be the best. Don't make them learn by rote, for, what they learn under 
pressure, because I am coming and a programme of story telling has to be arranged, will soon be 
forgotten. It will not transform the mind by soaking into it. The incidents and the morals they 
illustrate have to be imprinted on the heart;. They must learn not 'by heart,’ but for and through 
the heart. 


I find you are instructing them in bhajan, story telling and writing stories and essays. The stories 
they recite or write are culled from the epics and Upanishaths (scriptures of Supreme Reality). 
Good. But, instruct them in meditation too, for a short while, each day. Let that habit be 
inculcated even at this age. Five minutes of prayers and another five minutes of dhyaan 
(meditation) will be a good exercise, whose taste itself will persuade the children to make it a 
habit. The tender mind has to be fed, with tenderness. 


Story of Shabari's entry to the hermitage 


Shabari had a very tender compassionate heart. How she came to Sage Maathanga and stayed at 
his hermitage is a very interesting story. Her marriage was arranged by her parents, and as was 
the custom among the Aadhivaasis (tribal folk), a goat was to be offered to the tribal Goddess, on 
the night previous to the ceremony, in order to win the Grace for the couple. When Shabari came 
to know about this slaughter, she wept, and fell at the feet of her parents, praying them to save 
the goat. She asked, "How can our married life be happy, when the dying bleat of this goat is the 
prologue?" But, the father pushed her aside and proceeded with the cruel rite. That night, Shabari 
stole out of that den of torture, and hid herself in the depths of the jungle that was not far off. 


When day dawned, her parents as well as the groom's party were plunged in grief and anxiety; 
they combed the area, even where she was lying low amidst the thick bushes, and they went 
back, saying among themselves, "She could not have gone to the hermitage, for no woman 
would be given asylum there." She heard these words and so, she concluded that the hermitage 
was the safest place for her. She felt that some monk will take pity on her, and not send her back. 
Mathanga espied her and gave her permission to be in his habitation. He told her that God in the 
form of Sri Raama was coming to the hermitage some day, since he has been exiled into the 
forest for 14 years and He is eager to save the monks and seekers doing thapas (penance) in the 
forest from the ravages of the demonic enemies of peace! Raama, he said, was proceeding from 
one region to another, with His consort, Seetha and His brother, Lakshmana. 


Shabari's heart became Raama's heart 


From that day Shabari had no other thought than of Raama, no other desire than the desire to 
have the dharshan of Raama, the chance to touch His feet and the opportunity to speak with 
Him. Her heart was saturated with the Raamarasa (the sweet juice of the Raama principle). She 


had no other japam or dhyaana (repetition of God's name or meditation) or spiritual exercise. 
She spent her time preparing for the visit of Raama to the hermitage; just as she cleaned the 
paths, she cleaned her heart, too. Pebbles and thorns disappeared from both, through her efforts. 
She walked through the undergrowth and removed overhanging creepers and briars, for she 
imagined Raama would not have combed His hair and it might get caught. She broke the lumps 
of earth, for she feared the tender soles of Seetha will be hurt when she walks over them. She 
gathered fruits and tubers from the jungle trees and plants and kept them by every day, for no 
one knew when Raama will arrive! And, she took no risks. She tasted every fruit, whether it was 
bitter, sour or sweet, so that Raama could eat the best. She smoothed the surface of all stones that 
lay by the side of the tracks in the jungle for, she expected Raama, Lakshmana or Seetha to sit 
upon any one of them when they got tired of walking. She hoped that one of them would rest 
awhile on one of the rocks she had polished with great care. Thus her heart became Raama 
hrudhaya (Raama's heart)! 


The children of the Sathya Sai Baala Vihaar must know the Sathya Sai that is residing in their 
hearts. Teachers also must take it as a puuja (ritual worship) of Sai Raama. How to reveal the Sai 
Raam residing in their hearts to the children?---that is the problem that must be directing your 
work. Sai Raam has to move about in the jungles of your heart; so, render the tracks wide, 
smooth, free from thorn and pebble. 


Shabari's high level of saadhana 


Shabari was so immersed in Raama that the ascetics lost all awareness of her sex; they allowed 
her to remain in the hermitage, after Mathanga related to them her high level of saadhana 
(spiritual practice). Mathanga also left his body and gave up his hermitage to Shabari, saying, 
you alone deserve to be here when Raama arrives. 


The saadhana that Shabari did to earn the bliss of serving Raama, you do, when you serve Sai 
Raama in these children. By this service, you realise the Self. 


People say that they are doing paropakaara (good to others) and lokopakaara (good to the 
world). Really speaking, this is an empty boast. Let us take it that you invite ten people for 
dinner; when the ten sit at table, you too sit as the eleventh, don't you? So, you too consume a 
share of the dinner. How then can you call it a dinner for others, an act of hospitality for others? 
When you do good to the world, you share in that good, and so you cannot say that you are 
serving others. It is self first and help next. When you carry out the duty you have undertaken to 
do, God will shower Grace! 


You are both-teachers and students, remember; for, you teach these children and you learn from 
Me. You must not have the consciousness that; they are children belonging to others. Treat them 
as your own. 


Make children take up some positive task 


When you relate stories to the children, select such stories as have some reference to the 
background of the children's home life. Tell them stories which will implant in the mind genuine 
disgust for evil sights, evil entertainments, evil deeds and evil habits. Tell them how they must 
forget the wrong done to them by others and the good that they do to others. Make them take up 
some positive task and the negative attitudes will fall off. Good habits will drive out bad ones. 


A wicked man once went to a Guru (preceptor) for initiation into spiritual life. The Guru asked 
him to give up at least one of his bad habits; he gave up uttering falsehood. That night, when he 
went to the Royal palace to commit theft, he found on the terrace another person, who said, he 
too was a thief. He too announced that he was a thief and both broke into the treasury and 
divided among themselves the diamonds found there. The other person was none other than the 
king; he pretended to be a thief and he knew where the keys of the treasury were! While the 
diamonds were shared, the honest thief felt pity for the King of the realm who was losing his 
entire stock; he asked his companion to leave one diamond behind, in the safe. And, it was done. 


Next morning, when it was discovered that the treasury was looted, the Minister was sent by the 
King (who had acted as thief the previous night) to assess the loss. The Minister found the 
diamond, that had missed the eyes of the thieves. He quietly transferred it to his own pocket and 
reported at court that all the diamonds were gone! 


One step in the right direction leads to another 


The King had got from the honest thief his address, the previous night, while they parted 
company, with their separate bags. So he sent for him and when stood in court before the King, 
he confessed that all but one of the diamonds were stolen by him and his unknown associate. The 
diamond was discovered in the pocket of the Minister and the King dismissed him for the lie. 
The honest thief was appointed Minister, instead, and he gave up his other evil habits too and 
pleased his Guru, by his fame as a virtuous administrator. 


One evil habit, if acquired, will lead to a whole gang of them taking possession of the mind. 
There is a story for this too. You can tell the children this. A King once announced that he will 
honour with a big girl; any Brahmana who will agree to do any one of three evil things: (1) He 
must aver that the Vedhas are false, or (2) He must drink liquor, or (3) He must elope with 
another's wife. For a long time, no one within the seven seas came forward to do any one of these 
atrocious things. At last a poor Brahmana on the verge of starvation came into court and offered 
to drink liquor, an evil which he considered the least reprehensible of the three. But, as soon as 
he got drunk, he began to swear and in the excitement of intoxication, he shouted in the streets 
that the Vedhas are a tissue of lies; he entered the house of his neighbour and assaulted the lady 
of the house, like the worst criminal of the land. One thing led to another, just as in the other 
story, one step in the right direction led to another. 


Make yourselves holy by consecrated service 


I know that you are telling the children fine moral stories that will impress on them, silently and 
spontaneously, the value of restraint and of love in dealing with nature and life. I know that your 
other responsibilities do not give you the chance to serve them as much as you desire. Train as 
many as you can, within the limits that now exist; the Samithi (Sai Organisation) cannot ask 
more from you. 


This is no imposition from above; it is an inspiration from within. You are engaged in so many 
activities that do not lead to any good; you have to move in groups that you may not like; these 
are inevitable under present conditions. So, make yourselves holy by this consecrated service. 
This will bring you the saving Grace. By shaping these children in Divine Form you are helping 
their parents too to set their minds right; you are brightening and cleansing the homes of the 
pupils. 


When that little boy recited the story of the Geetha, so feelingly, everyone was moved; when 
towards the end, he turned to Me and said, "Now, we have this Sai Krishna..." he was so 
overcome with Aanandha (bliss) that he sobbed and shed tears of joy. Perhaps he had a vision of 
Krishna! So intense was his faith and his sincerity. His heart was echoing every sentiment that 
his tongue was expressing. Children such as he are needed for our country at this juncture. You 
have read of Prahlaadha, Dhruva and other children filled with devotion to God; they lived in 
ages that have gone by. You have seen now that such children are here, in this age too; I am sure 
they will reform and transmute many Hiranyakashipus (unbelieving fathers) by their unflinching 
devotion and transparent dedication. 


Do what God likes, not what you like 


Arjuna announced at the commencement of the battle of Kurukshethra, 'I will not fight against 
these people.' Then, Krishna asked him, 'Won't you do what I like?' and he had to reply, 'Yes. Of 
course.' Then, the Lord told him, "Look here: I have come as man in order to reestablish Dharma 
(righteousness); yours is the Kshathriya Dharma; it casts on you the duty to fight against 
unrighteousness. You will be doing what I like if, according to the demands of Kshathriva 
Dharma, you fight, as first planned." Do what He likes, not what you like---that is the way to 
win the Grace of God. He likes you to revere all beings, not to injure or insult any being; he likes 
you when you do not bear in your heart the tiniest grudge against any being. 


The Baalavihaars run in schools, in the hours now given to them out of the school time table, are 
not as successful as those run by you in your home centres, I know; the School Vihaars try to 
make the children successfully ride two horses at the same time---the regular curriculum and the 
Sathya Sai Ideals. You are doing your best, I know, and that is enough. Develop cordiality 
among yourselves, exchange experiences and share your ideas for improvements. This is an 
excellent opportunity for you to feel the bonds of the Sai family, where each teacher is a sister of 
the other. 


Dharmakshethra, 3-1-1971 


3. Link by link 


I AM glad that the Office-bearers of the various units of the Organisation in Bombay have 
gathered here and are asking Me to tell them some words about saadhana (spiritual discipline). 
A life of saadhana involves the dedication of all acts to God, the offering of whatever one does 
or thinks or speaks at the Feet of God. You can do this only when you are aware always of the 
Presence of God, in and around you. Your awareness must not deviate for a moment from God. 
The mind must revolve round one centre, God. Your concentration must be strong and steady. 


You are now able to attain concentration when you walk, talk, write or cycle along. But, you say 
you are helpless when it is a question of concentrating on God. Why have you to struggle to 
acquire it? The reason is: you have no yearning, no fond attachment, no Love towards God. But, 
carry on with the endeavour. By means of continuous culture, it is possible to acquire it. The 
Geetha says, Shreyohi jnaanam abhyaasaath. Abhyaasa (practice) is the crux of the problem. 
Through that, victory can be won. Concentration can be mastered in dhyaana (meditation) and 
this will lead to disinterestedness in the results of one's actions, for the actions are not one's own, 
but God's. The results too are not one's; they are God's. When you become detached from the 
fruits of your actions, though intent on action (offering to the Lord your skill and energy), then, 
you attain peace of mind, Prashaanthi. If, however, you cultivate attachment to things of the 
world, and houses, bank balance and insignia of power, then, dhyaana fails. 


Follow the dictates of Divine Father in action 


Sincere effort and actual activity entitle you to the Grace of God. When Jesus Christ entered the 
precincts of the Temple of Jerusalem, and found people sacrificing doves and other living beings 
to God, he released the birds and condemned the acts of blood. The priests and scholars resented 
his act and argued that the God in whom they had faith accepted the sacrifice and was propitiated 
thereby. They asked him for evidence of authority to interfere with the dictates of religion. Christ 
went on to tell them a parable. Once there was a farmer who had two sons. He asked his first son 
to go out to the field so that he may watch the crops ready for harvest. The son refused to obey 
him. Thereupon he asked the second son, and he readily agreed. But, what really happened was, 
the second son later calculated the bother and the sleeplessness which the watching will bring to 
him; he did not go. The first son later repented for this refusal to do as bidden; he went and 
watched the crop. 


Now, Christ asked, who among these two pleases the father more---the son who declared his 
assent by word of mouth and disobeyed in action or he who disobeyed by word of mouth but 
obeyed in action? You obey in words but disobey in action. My action reveals that I do acts 
which God has commanded. You are your own witness, whether you follow the dictates of the 
Divine Father. I have greater authority than you, for your action shows that you disobey whereas 
my action proves that I follow His commands. 


Saadhana is a uniquely precious activity 


You are Office-bearers and so, you have the responsibility to carry out in ‘actual practice, in your 
own lives, the rules and restrictions and recommendations laid down by Me. I warn you against 
falling prey to exhibitionism and display; there are many who desire that' others must admire and 
applaud, and so, they do japam or sit in dhyaana, where many will be-seeing them. Theirs is not 
the attitude of indifference, which says, "I don't care what they say, or who sees me or who does 
not." Their innermost craving is for people to notice them and publicise their spiritual 


attainments. They are eager for audiences and spectators! But, saadhana is a uniquely precious 
activity, which will be vulgarised by public gaze. Fish is sold in open shops, or in open daylight, 
by the side of public, thoroughfares. Diamonds are however sold in shops that admit only 
genuine purchasers and they are kept in strong underground vaults. Saadhana is moro valuable 
than diamonds. It will wither in the open. 


This is the reason for saadhakas (spiritual aspirants) retiring into lonely mountain caves, or into 
solitary temples in inaccessible regions of the Himalaayas, or in the depths of jungles. But, you 
need not imitate them; you can create enough privacy in your own home, screening off a portion 
of some room. There you can sink into yourself and discover the Inner Reality as the Reality of 
the Universe Itself?. You need not be told that perfect amity between husband and wife is 
essential for domestic peace. When they are at loggerheads, it is not a home, but hell. 


In the body of man, the Aathma (inner real Self) is the husband and the inclinations are the 
wives. Every act and word and thought must subserve the needs of the emancipation of the 
individual, by the recognition of the sovereignty of Aathma. The Primal, Formless, Absolute 
wedded Desire and Mind was born. The mind wedded two wives, inner contemplation and outer 
activity. The first gave birth to five sons, sathya, dharma, shaanthi, prema and ahimsa (truth, 
virtue, peace, love and non-violence), the five Paandava brothers. Mind was infatuated more 
with the second wife, and so, she gave birth to a 100, each one with a name indicative of badness 
and wickedness, the Kauravas. God was on the side of the Paandavs, and they won. 


Cleanse your heart of the canker of ego 


In the Geetha, you don't find the slightest fear in the make-up of the character of Arjuna, Krishna 
appreciated him and served him as the charioteer, because he was so solicitous of Dharma. 
Arjuna's most serious argument against the battle of Kurukshethra was that the slaughter of 
millions of warriors will lead to the widowing of women and depreciation of public morals as a 
result of their enforced celibacy. God has established, as the Vedhas say, Brahmanas (repre- 
senting the Divine face) to learn and teach the path to emancipation. Kshathriyas (warriors) are 
His shoulders for they establish and maintain peace so necessary for the good life. The Vaishyas 
(traders) are, it is said, the stomach of God; for, they provide the sustenance and the strength. 
The Suudhras (service people) are the feet, for they move about and carry the Divine Message 
from door to door, through precept and example. All the four castes are dedicated for the upkeep 
of Dharma. So, when Arjuna pleaded the cause of Dharma, the Lord was pleased, and He 
decided to remove the delusion of the dispirited hero. 


Share wholeheartedly in all festivals 


By dhyaana you develop jnaana (spiritual wisdom) and by japam (recitation of God's Name) 
you develop bhakthi (devotion) and by both, you cleanse your heart of the canker of ego. You 
can link yourselves with God, by a chain of love, through the recitation of the name, in silence 
and with full awareness of the meaning and its nuances. Each Sai Raam, Hare Krishna, Hare 
Raam, or Vitthal is a link; the more the links the longer the chain, the firmer the bond. But, each 
link has to be well forged out of well tempered steel. One false link, that is to say, the Name once 
uttered in sloth or slight, indifference or anger, resentment or rancour, will constitute a weak link 
and the bond will not bind! 


Be careful that you do not cavil at another's faith. There is a road from each heart to the Source 
of all joy, namely, God. Each one will come in his own good time, at his own pace, through his 
own inner urge, along the path God will reveal to him as his own. You can have in your home, a 
shrine, where-you can worship the Name and Form you desire to invest yourselves in! But, so 
far as your activities as a member of this Organisation are concerned, you must wholeheartedly 
share in all-festivals and functions that promote faith, devotion and dedication. 


Have love towards all Do not allow the weeds of pride and envy to hamper the harvest of peace. 
Do not monopolise the time in bhajan, by singing one song for six or ten minutes, repeating the 
same line often. Repeat each line twice and no more. Have only two speeds: one slow and the 
other fast. In this way, you can have in the hour of bhajan, more songs on more Forms, more 
tunes and more variety, giving more people the chance. Let Me tell you that, even if Naaradha or 
Thumburu, the Divine Musical pair, sing if they croon the same monotonous tune, listeners will 
have to take refuge in Saridon tablets! Or, it may be Subbulakshmi or any other artist of this 
region, but headache is bound to result. 


When a naamaavali extols Shiva, the next one will have to be on Krishna, the next on Raama 
and so on. A person whose favourite form is Raama or Shiva will feel neglected if out of 
inadvertance, you stick to only one form. Let the atmosphere of bhajan be free from competitive 
conceit and fanaticism, That is My advice. 


Dharmakshethra, 5-1-1971 


The spirit of sacrifice is the basic equipment of the sevak. Without 
the inspiration of the sense of sacrifice, your seva will be 
hypocrisy, a hollow ritual. Inscribe it deep and clear on your 
heart. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


4. Saline turned sweet 


WHAT a tragedy! Truth is treated as a foe; falsehood is the friend of man. Liquor is sold in a 
tavern, to which people trek miles; but milk is taken to their doorsteps, by vendors who cry 
hoarse, to draw the attention of the residents, but yet, they turn away with their ware unsold. 
What a reversal of values has man accomplished! 


On this sacred day called Vaikuntha Ekaadhashi, one is reminded of this, because, festivals like 
this have been ordained in order to take stock of one's spiritual progress and to make man resolve 
to march forward, until the goal is reached. 


This is a thrice-blessed day, as the Thriveni is the confluence of three holy streams: Thursday, 
which is especially significant for Sai devotees, being Guru Vaar (the day of the Guru); the 
Akhanda bhajan (non-stop singing).which you concluded after twelve hours a few minutes ago; 
and the festival of Vaikuntha, for which you have gathered here. 


Vaikuntha means, without any trace of grief or pain; the place where perfect peace reigns, and 
there is no flutter of fear. Ekaadhashi means the eleventh day of the lunar fortnight. The phases 
of the moon are numbered, and the day after the tenth, Dhashami, is refered to as the Ekaa- 
dhashi! But the real meaning of Ekaadhashi, the eleventh, is this. When the ten senses---the five 
senses of action and the five through which knowledge of the objective world is gained---are all 
coordinated and turned in the direction of God, the eleventh, then it becomes genuine 
Ekaadhashi! 


Man has to pay attention to 26 categories 


This is also the meaning of the Namaskaar, where you fold both palms together and hold them 
on your chest, near the heart region. The ten senses surrender to the person adored, with real 
sincerity in the heart! The caricatures of this reverential rites are today current in almost all 
circles. People are reluctant to follow tradition and so, they hold the palms as if they are trying to 
shield the rays of the Sun from their eyes (!) or vigorously shaking them defiantly at the face of 
the person who is sought to be honoured(!). 


This is a day on which one has to transcend the lower impulses originating from the thaamasik 
(inertia) and the raajasik (passionate activity) natures and, help the upsurge of Saathwik (pure) 
tendencies. Men engage in good Works, good thoughts, good speech---but, they do not pause to 
inquire the purpose, the goal. Man has to pay attention to 26 categories. The 5 senses of action 
(Karma-indhriyas),; the 5 senses of knowledge (Jnaana-indhriyas); the 5 vital airs (Praana); the 
5 attributes of the elemental principle, smell (of prithvi or earth); taste (of water); light (of fire); 
touch (of air); sound (of sky); and the remaining four manas (mind), buddhi (intellect), chittha 
(differentiating memories) and ahamkaara (the selfish ego). The jeevi (individual soul) the wave 
is the 25th; it has the 26th, the Param-aathma (the Supreme Self or Reality) on one side and the 
24 principles on the other. It has to illumine all the 24, and draw them all to the Reality, namely, 
the 26th category, the Paramaathma. When they are illumined, they disappear, for they cannot 
survive light; they are but creatures that are the progeny of maaya (delusion and illusion). 


Know thyself, you know the world 


When the 24 categories are analysed and known, nothing is gained. For, they belong to the realm 
of the relatively real, not the absolutely real. They are jagath (world), the moving, changing, the 
transitory, the untrue! The Vedhas, Shaasthras and Puraanas have not mentioned anything about 


the origins and dissolutions of these, with any degree of certainty, because they are concerned 
more with the rescue operations of the I that is entangled in them and with validation that they 
are of no importance. Know thyself; you know the world, which is but a projection of thy mind; 
that is the lesson conveyed. 


Measure the microcosm, you have measured the macrocosm. Know all about clay; you have 
known all about pots, pans, plates and cups. Know about the base, you have known about the 
superstructure. Know about water, you know about rain, cloud, steam, stream, river---all its 
modifications and manifestations. The same quantity of silver might be shaped into a plate today, 
a set of spoons tomorrow, a number of cups the day after. The forms get new names; the uses of 
each are different. When put to use or when silver remains as a silver 'lump' only, in the hands of 
every one that holds, it or handles it, in the beginning or in the end, it and they are always silver. 
The core, the truth is ever One. In the murky, dusk of ignorance, it appears diverse, that is all for, 
then, your are led to distinguish and differentiate on the bases of name and form. 


There are two sets of rules which regulate human conduct: the one a-moral and the other moral. 
The a-moral is illustrated by the rule that you have to be at the airport at a particular hour, in 
order to board a plane. The moral rule is illustrated when the father's property is divided between 
the sons,, half for one and half for the other, equal share for both. From the point of view of 
dharma (righteousness), equality is seen as the basic principle. From the Aathmic standpoint, all 
beings are equal. 


The primary seed of knowledge 


When one proceeds to attain the Aathmic vision, one has to negate everything as Not this, until at 
the end of the journey, the Aathma alone is cognised. It admits of no definition, no description, 
no designation, It is the end of enquiry, the swmmum bonum of all endeavour, the silence that 
swallows all speech. The primary seed of knowledge is "I am not the body." It contains three 
entities: I Body and Not. I is the aathma, the Only truth. The idea I applies only to the eternal I, 
over which, the transient Is are superimposed by ignorance, born out of false identification. 
Then, we have the entity called, dheha (body). 


Dheha means that which will undergo destruction (dah: to burn). It means the five feet bundle of 
bone and muscle, nerve and brain, the senses, the vital airs, the mind that imagines (constructs 
images), the intellect that argues pros and cons, the chittha that revolves around the past 
impressions and choices and the ahamkaara (ego) that urges outwards, the internal and external 
equipments of man, Dheha means not only these, It is composed of the five we elemental 
categories also: earth, water, fire, air and sky. It disintegrates finally into these five for, it is built 
up of those five. It is kith and kin, with these five; so, by dheha is meant all the regions of the 
five elements, desha (country), in fact! 


Realisation cannot be won by book knowledge 


The multifarious effloresence of maayaa, the primal desire which proliferated into the Universe-- 
all that is the permutation and combination of the five elements, to cognise which man has 
equipped himself with the nose (smell, earth attribute), tongue (taste, water attribute), eye 
(perceptible form, attribute of fire), skin (touch, attribute of air) and ear (sound, attribute of sky). 
So, the statement says, I am not the body, that is, it declares that Nature, the Universe, all created 
thin and beings, are not I, or Aathma (the true Self), but, only appearances of I. 


Man can realise the goal either by picturing something that is different and distant, and praying 
to it, adoring it, worshipping it---such ways are useful only up to a limit, to purge the mind of 
low desires, sensual urges etc.,---or by delving into oneself, to reach the truth. 


The realisation of the one cannot be won by means of advice, listening to talks and discourses, 
study of books or austerities. It worried even Naaradha, who approached the sage, 
Sanathkumaara, for the vision of the Infinite. With this decomposing body and the deteriorating 
intellect, man cannot experience and contain the boundless surge of bliss that accompanies the 
realisation that he is the absolute. The wisdom that comes of actual experience is as the rain 
drop., when compared with sea water which is saline and undrinkable book-knowledge or 
derived knowledge. Through the inter-action of the rays of the Sun, the salinity was removed and 
the water that floated into the sky became sweet and sustaining. Saadhana that turns the physical 
into the meta-physical is the solar action that confers potability. 


Samaadhi is a much misunderstood word 


Deep sleep is often compared to samaadhi, for, the senses, the mind, the reason, are all absent 
therein; only the ego is immersed in itself. It is in bliss, but, it is not aware of that bliss, for, 
waking alone gives that knowledge. So, what can grant Realisation is the awareness of the 
waking stage and the bliss of the sleeping stage. Concentrate on the point, where one is having 
these two: that is the moment of victory. 


Samaadhi is a much misunderstood word. It is freely misapplied. All kinds of emotional 
upsurges, attacks of hysteria, nervous breakdowns, neurotic fits are now extolled and exalted as 
"Samaadhi"! Mark the word! It says sama dhee, that is to say, balanced, unruffled intellect; that 
is, a discriminating reaction of equanimity, in the face of heat and cold, grief and joy, pain and 
pleasure, rejection or rejoicing. One who has attained that stage, or realised that he is the One 
without a second, will be indifferent to fear or favour, to hate or love, to exalt or execrate. Where 
there is One, how can even thought arise. That is the Samaa-dhee---the being, the awareness and 
the bliss. 


Dharmakshethra, 7-1-19 71 


5. Thirst and quest 


NA shreyo niyamam vinaa---"No progress without constraint!" Control heightens power; 
regulation puts it into the best use. As volunteers trained and eager to serve, where the chance 
opens up, you are like the young men who were growing up in the Rishikuls (hermitages of old), 
under the loving care of sages. (Now, these Rishikuls have lost the 'r' and are merely shikuls 
(transformed phonetically, into schools). Discipline comes to the rescue, during crisis, when the 
world flows towards you, as a dark flood of hate or derision, or when those in whom you put 
your trust shun contact and shy away. Without discipline, the mind of man is turned into a wild 
elephant in rut. You have to catch it young and train it so that its strength and skill can be useful 
to man and harmless to life around. 


At this period of life, when you are in the flush of youth with your physical, intellectual and 
mental equipment in perfect trim, you must resolve to keep it running on right; lines, and not 
injuring itself, or the operators. Discipline must be welcomed; it should not be enforced by an 
outside agency, like the samithi (organisation) or your parents or friends. It must be 
spontaneously sought after, and sincerely practised. 


Prepare yourselves for serving others 


This birth has been undertaken by you, for this very mission: the mission of crucifying the ego 
on the cross of compassion. An opportunity to be of some service to fellowmen comes to you as 
a gift from God. Serve with that sense of gratitude, for it is God who accepts it from you. Prepare 
yourselves for serving others, not only by learning the skills of first aid, the rules of the road, the 
technique of blood donation, the art of handling mikes and loudspeakers, wiring and fitting 
electric lines, etc., but, at the time when you are not actively engaged in some such activity, be 
busy with japam, dhyaanam or naama smarananm, fill yourselves with God, lest you go dry and 
cruel. 


Keep the mind busy with these, for once it strays into the by Lanes of the world, it will get 
infected with evil. Guard the tiny flame of sympathy with suffering, from the gusts of cynicism 
and miserly greed. Service to others is the duty you owe to society, which has given you the 
culture you fed on the breath you live on the warmth you crave for, and the security you seek. 
Man is born helpless, and is laid on the lap of society. Society gives him a name and a form, a 
personality, an individuality, an armour of beliefs, a playground of doubts and diversions. Man is 
the only animal that knows it has to die, and that yearns to survive death or by pass the fangs of 
death.. Man alone has the strange thirst after the nectar, that confers immortality. That is his 
special task, his special quest, the quest for the Truth that emancipates. 


Understand the deep significance of service; it will lead to your becoming ideal leaders, who are 
in great need today, all over the world. You fulfil yourselves, by sharing; you empty yourselves 
by grabbing. Do not behave in such a way that people are wary of you be open, without harmful 
eyes, lascivious ears, false tongue, foul minds and pernicious hands. Your eyes give you away 
easily; look upon all without the guilt of lust or scandal; speak to all, of all with love blooming 
out of adoration; let your hands give never take what is not yours. Treat the distressed, the 
diseased, the old, the helpless, the child with great respect, and intelligent consideration. 


"Do what will win the approval of Baba" 


Lead simple lives; do not develop an attraction for high life, gaudy outlandish dress and 
manners; invite the reverential attention of those who need service. They will be kept away if 
you walk about swell, talk raucously, and begin pushing people around, with swagger and 
swearing. Test every gesture, every mannerism, every whim of yours, on this touchstone Will 
this win the approval of Baba? 


Here is a young man, whom I will call a good boy! Do you know why? Yesterday, when I 
moved among the thousands gathered in the pandhal, he was standing---a volunteer---on the 
outer fringe. I shook my little finger at him. This morning, when I went round the same place, he 
was at the same post of duty but, with his side burns removed! He knew what Baba disapproved, 
and he corrected himself immediately. I appreciate that. Side burns is a side issue; there are more 
serious misdemeanours, which you know I do not encourage. Be free from every one of them. 
When you recognise Me as the dweller in your heart, these will fall off, and you will walk on the 
path of self-knowledge, self-confidence, self-satisfaction and self-realisation. 


Dharmakshethra, 7-1-1971 


The Truth that is in all beings is also in you. Search for that; 
discover that unity; that source of courage, of love, of wisdom. 


You do not realise that it is He who digests the food that you 
consume, for, as He says, in the Geetha, I am the Vaishwaanara--- 
fire that is in the bodies of all beings and digests the four types of 
food they eat." That fire digests food, but, it is careful not to 
destroy the stomach itself! 


He is the basis of all activity, though Himself unconcerned. 
Sri Sathya Sai 


6. Green across the door 


SAGES who have designed the Hindhu Calendar have arranged the holy festivals for fostering 
mental stamina and emotional purity. The Makara Sankraanthi (the Summer Equinox), when the 
Sun enters Capricorn, is laid down as the day when man dedicates his activities for the higher 
purpose of attaining Divinity, by following the Uttharaayana (the Northward Path), the Nobler 
Path which the Sun Himself is seen to take from this day. The month of Dhanus is over, and that 
of Makara begins today. Dhanus means not only the bow but also the sugar cane, which is the 
bow of the God of love. 


The harvest has come in now and every family has cooked this day the gift of God that has been 
stored in the granary. The children have chewed the sweet cane and are running about in glee. 
The cattle which toiled in the fields as companion, helpmate and slave of man are ruminating in 
the shade, enjoying their holiday from the yoke. The earth too is wearing a sari of yellow 
flowers, bedecked with spots of red, wherever ripe chilies cluster under green leaves. Nature is 
happy that man and all living beings can now turn Godward in thankfulness, and intensive 
contemplation of His handiwork. For six months now, it is dheva-yaana--the season of 
pilgrimage. It is Utthama-yaana (the superior path). 


The message of the holy day of Sankraanthi 


The Geetha proclaims that he who dies in this half of the year dies in peace and plenty and so, 
rises to purer levels of spiritual attainments. Bheeshma, who was stricken by mortal arrows on 
the field of Kurukshethra, waited for this day which ushers in the holier half of the year, so that 
he may give his breath up, and merge in the Supersoul! 


This is a day of dedication! Not a day of diversion and dissipation. It is wrong to waste it in 
gambling, and feasting and catering to the lower instincts, it is not a holiday; it is in the strictest 
sense of the word, a holy day! Become whole, by wholesome deeds and thoughts; that is the 
message of the holy day. Mere spinning like a top, until you can spin no longer, and then falling 
helpless and inert, is dreary devastating existence. The top has no faith in itself; it has to be 
handled and twirled by another. Be self-confident, that is to say, have confidence in your self; 
for, that self is Divine; it has in it all the strength, all the sweetness of the Aathman (True Self), 
which is but a wave of the ocean of Param-aathman (Supreme Reality). 


In order to ensure happiness and peace, administrators contrive five-year plans, and build 
bridges, dams, factories and schools. But, without the cleansing of the spirit, the strengthening of 
detachment, the promotion of compassion and kinship, economic progress promotes only hatred, 
faction and envy. Self-confidence, self-control and self-knowledge---these alone can lead man to 
peace and joy. Na shreyo niyamam vinaa---"No prosperity without control!" No progress without 
discipline, that is what the sages teach. On these holy days, he has to look back and forward, and 
orientate his route along the correct markings. 


Mind is a bundle of desires and doubts 


Belief in the Creator, the Designer, the Supporter and the Disintegrator is a necessary equipment 
for the pilgrim on earth. Fear of sin, love of God---these two endow man with peace and joy, 
save him from sorrow and grant him aanandha (bliss). During deep sleep, one is not aware of 
time, space or causation. Only the I persists; the I that is sath-chith-aanandha. But, during deep 
sleep the I is not aware of its aanandha, not aware of itself. It is only after one awakens that one 


declares, I had a very pleasant sleep! During the dream stage, the mind is active, though the 
intelligence, the senses, are all dormant. The dream builds a bungalow in a few seconds, and you 
occupy it and live happily in it, until, in the dream, an earthquake brings it down on your heads, 
and you flee for sheer life! The entire story of construction, occupation and destruction was the 
reflection of mental aberration, its sankalpa (resolve). It is the seat of the ego and the ego plays 
all sorts of pranks with the mental stuff, during sleep, when the senses and reason are temporarily 
out of action. The mind is a bundle of resolutions and hesitations, of desires and doubts. 


When the basis of the ego is removed by spiritual effort heroically, directed towards this end, 
then all the drama of name and form drifts away into nothingness. 


The Sun draws the water up as steam, and endows it with the name and form of 'cloud,' 'rain' and 
then as 'stream,' 'river,' 'flood' until it merges in the sea back again, losing all the manifoldness of 
name form caused by time, space and causation. Each one of you is the basis of truth, which a 
cloud of unreality fogs. This is to be discovered, each for himself, by himself. 


Maaya is like your shadow in the well 


The seed struck in the soil sprouts and grows. It puts forth branches and leaves, and adorns itself 
with blossoms which attract' bees; it develops fruits which are really offerings of sweetness and 
strength, to those who serve the tree, carrying the seeds ensconced within them, to far distances 
and scatter them again on the soil, so that they may get stuck and sprout, in another cycle of life 
and death! The seed is not inert; it is conscious, alive, active. The whole Universe is suffused 
with Divinity, Divinity that is Existence-Consciousness-Bliss (sath-chith-aanandha)! Existence 
as "seed-plant-tree," Consciousness which strives for expression and manifestation and 
unfoldment; and, Bliss, in that fulfilment. You are also sath-chith-aanandha. Do not condemn 
your majesty bewailing, "I am unfortunate, I am despicable, I am downhearted." No. You are 
elated, you are enthroned, you are exalted. You are all this; but you are not aware of this, on 
account of maayaa (illusion). Maayaa is like your shadow in the well; if you do not peep into the 
well, it is not there! It is there, only whenever you peep into it ! 


The primal ignorance and the primal wisdom, are inherent, one in the other; the light of day 
darkens the stars, so that we cannot see them, though they are up above our heads! The darkness 
of night reveals the specks of light, which are the stars! Vibration, motion, light, darkness---all 
are inferring. 


God knows what is good for individual souls 


To adore Name and Form is against the basic teaching of Vedhaantha; for, one has to educate 
oneself into ignoring the evanescent, the temporary, the superficial. Unless one has discovered 
his identity with all, the identity of all with him, one cannot have the waveless calm, the steady 
flame. Thyaagainaike amrithathwam aanashuh; give up, give up the fancy for the fantastic 
objective world, give up, until you reach the stage, when there is no "giver-gift-giving," when 
there is no "beginning-continuing-ending." Naaradha learnt from the sage Sanathkumaara that he 
can acquire Shaanthi only when he knows that he is Shaanthi and nothing else! A-shaanthi 
(restlessness) is something that has possessed him, like a phobia which has no footing. Shake it 
off; exorcise it. He is free. It is the role that is tragic; not the actor. He has only to remind himself 
that it is a play and that he is playing the role of a tragic hero! This Naaradha learnt and his 
equanimity was never again disturbed. 


This day, every home is swept clean, the floors are polished, the walls whitewashed and painted, 
and before every house, women draw auspicious designs in flour. They place in the middle of 
that design a lump of cow dung, and stick on that lump a big yellow flower of golden hue, of the 
sweet cucumber. Why the cow dung lump? It symbolises the cow, the Go which Gopaala feeds 
and fends. Go (cow) also means, beings, souls, individuals. So that, Gopaala is He who tends the 
souls, keeps them away from harm, encourages them to graze in peace, and drives them back 
into the sheds when evening falls on earth. Individual beings too are under the loving care of 
God, who knows what is good for them and saves from ruin. Thus, each trivial detail of the 
festival rites has a meaning, which can vibrate the participant, in its proper time. 


Sathsang will keep you young and fresh, full and free 


Again, this day, you are requested to eat sweet rice cooked in milk. That is the food called 
Saathwik (pure), which promotes elevated thoughts, mildness and humility. But, food does not 
end with what you take in through the mouth. What you take in through the eye, the ear, the 
nose, the skin, through your greed your hunger for excitement, your thirst for variegated 
experience of the objective world---all is food. And, every particle of it has to be Saathwik, so 
that your progress towards self-realisation may be quick and fruitful. 


You are really fortunate that you are able to drink through the ear the discourses on the glory of 
the Divine; Vedhaantha is the best and highest food which man can consume; it keeps your 
propensities pure, your body in perfect trim, your passions well controlled, your emotions clear 
and lucid, your thoughts simple and sincere. Sathsang (noble company), is more nutritious than 
fruits and nuts, milk or honey. It will keep you young and fresh, full and free, beyond the 
disintegrating influence of time and space. 


These holy days are reminders of the discipline, which you have strayed away from. It is a grim 
world, from out of which you have to squeeze yourself out, into freedom and fulfilment. A train 
whistling past in full speed over the rails drawn by a giant locomotive cannot be stopped by a 
million hands; but by merely pressing a button, the driver can bring it to a halt! Installing that 
button, that mechanism in your mind that rolls along behind the senses is the purpose of 
saadhana; installing and operating it. 


The knowledge that you are the architect of your fortune and that you can, by steady effort, 
rebuild it or foster it, that you are ever laying on or pulling down the structure of your career, 
will be a great inspiration, provided you welcome it. 


Nothing ever happens without proper reason 


It was the first night of Raama, Lakshmana and Seetha in the thick jungle into which they were 
exiled. Guha (the chieftain of the fisherman), who had rowed them across the Ganges was 
engaged in subdued conversation with Lakshmana, while Raama and Seetha were sleeping, on 
the river bed! Guha, was sunk in sorrow, that the inheritor of the empire should be cast on the 
sands under the sky; he cursed the Queen Kaikeyi (step mother of Raama) and her wicked. 
accomplices for contriving this heart breaking tragedy. But Lakshmana prayed that he halt his 
tirade. I too emitted fiery fury at the perpetrators of this tragedy. For, I did not then know the 
inner purpose of this chapter of Raama's history. He has come in this human form to destroy the 
evil brood of demons, and so, He has himself contrived this exile, to be free from imperial 
responsibilities until that aim is accomplished. What do we know, dear Guha, of the mysteries of 
God or even of man, who is but God in human attire? Or of any living being or non-living 


matter, for they are all the inscrutable Divine, appearing to our limited senses in the way they do, 
What their real nature is, how can we ever know, with these inefficient instruments of 
knowledge? 


Nothing ever happens without proper reason, however accidental or mysterious, it might appear. 
The roots go deep and are out of sight. I was telling Hislop, in Bombay at Dharmakshethra, the 
same thing. The bridge towards Lanka was being built over the straits, so that Raama and His 
army could, march across to the realm of the demon King Raavana, where. Seetha was interned. 
The valiant monkeys were plucking mountains and leaping vast distances in space with those 
peaks hoisted on their shoulders, so that they could be thrown into the sea to create a passage for 
Raama! The monkeys had formed a queue all the way from the Himaalayas down to the 
southernmost point, where the bridge was fast coming up. When the causeway was completed, 
word went fast along the queue that no more hills are needed and each monkey placed on the 
ground, wherever it stood, the hill it had on its shoulder at the time. 


Inanimate things too have emotions 


One hill, however, did not sit quietly. It started bewailing its fate.! "Why was I removed from 
where I was and why am I now refused? Alas! I was elated that I was destined to serve a Divine 
purpose; I was overjoyed that the armies of Raama and Raama Himself will walk over me. Now, 
I am neither there, nor where I was!" It shed profuse tears. News reached Raama, and His 
compassion was great. He sent word that in His next; Avathaar, when He will come again upon 
His mission in human form, He will certainly bless the sorrowing hill. This was the Govardhana 
Peak which Raama (as the boy Krishna) lifted on His finger and held aloft for full seven days, in 
order to save the cowherds of Gokul from the deluge of rain that Indhra dared inflict on them! 


I related this story to Hislop, when he asked Me whether inanimate things too had emotions and 
feelings of disappointment and despair. The occasion at Dharmakshethra was : I asked that about 
a hunted saris be brought, so that I could select some, for distribution to the women workers at 
Ananthapur who are helping build the Sathya Sai College there! I selected 96 and asked them to 
return 4 to the shop. I kept the 4 aside and the 96 were placed in my room. Later, when I passed 
the table on which the four discarded saris were kept (Hislop was standing by the side of that 
table), it was noticed that the card board box which contained the four was dripping tears! The 
saris were weeping (!) that they could not get appreciation from Me and were declared unfit. 
Yes! They had shed tears. You may ask whether this is ever possible. I answer, there is nothing 
in this world which has no heart, which is incapable of feeling joy or grief! Only, you must have 
the eye to see, the ear to listen, the heart to respond! 


Accept bravely whatever happens, fame or shame 


This morning, when the Sun rose in the East, the Moon was just setting in the West, so that both 
the orbs could be seen at the time. The moon represents the mind and the sun, the intellect. Both 
must be balanced in a disciplined way; it should not be one or the other, emotion or intelligence, 
but, emotion held back by intelligence. Then, you will not be carried off your feet by gusts of 
fear or fury, fancy or frivolity. You will accept bravely whatever happens---fame or shame! 
Welcome every happening with a Yes. I always say Yes, Yes, Yes (S S S), whether it is praise or 
blame, ill or well. 


You are in the see-saw, in two moods, anger, exultation, pride, self-condemnation, alternating 
joy and grief. Bheeshma, whom one should remember on this Uttharaayana day, felt the bed of 
arrows on which he lay to be as cosy as a bed of roses! He had accepted it of his own choice and 
so, he felt no pain. I accepted the inflamed appendix of a devotee, as a consequence of the Love I 
bore him; and, so, though every one, including the doctors said, I must have excruciating pain, I 
did 'not feel it! Bheeshma said, Yes, to all that happened. It was the Will of the Go within, the 
God without, the God without whom nothing can ever happen. 


Adore God offering Him your deeds, words, thoughts 


The Sun takes the Northern Path from today; the higher path. So, the children too have to follow 
the footsteps of the Parent. In the North, the Himaalayas welcome you into 'Un-affectedness' (a- 
chala), Purity (Hima, Snow) and Immaculate-ness (pure white, untarnished clarity), and coolness 
(perfect joy). Whenever the mind yearns for and pursues these four gains, it is on the Northern 
path leading to the Himaalayas, the Abode of the Gods; it is following the Sun, the Splendour of 
the intelligence. 


Resolve to take the first step towards the Indwelling Cod, now, this day. That is the reason why 
people have hung mango leaves across their doors today, to welcome Cod into the home! But, 
your home is your heart, not the brick and mortar pile, where your body dwells. Hang the 
streamer of green across the door-sill of your heart. Enthrone the Divine there, and adore Him 
with all sincerity, offering Him your deeds, your words, your thoughts. 


You celebrate the Sankraanthi with a feast, where you prepare a dish, out of green gram, rice and 
jaggery. The gram-is Lord Vishnu, the rice is His consort (Sri or plenty and prosperity), and, the 
jaggery is the principle of Divine love. So, it is not that dish that marks the festival, it is the 
contemplation of the Divine that has to be established in the wayward mind. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 14-1-1971 


Be like the lotus, unattached to the slush where it is born and the 
water in which it is bred; the merits and demerits earned in past 
births is the slush, where the jeevi (individual soul) is born. 


Maaya or the enticing illusion called world is the water which 
sustains; but do not allow that enticement to affect you. Be above 
and beyond the earthly attachments like the lotus. 


Know that though you may be in it, you should not allow the world 
to get into you and affect your sense of values. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


7. Love and serve 


THERE are many organisations in this country, established with the express purpose of 
promoting the welfare of the country, in the political, economic, educational, moral, and material 
fields. Many have social and religious affiliations, but, unless there is a spring of spiritual 
enthusiasm beneath the activity, a fervour fed by faith in God, they will be groping in the dark, 
holding in their hands lamps without flame. Light and Love, so essential for being really helpful 
to man, have to come from the recognition of spiritual kinship. 


I find that the Rotary Club has as its aim the service of others, mainly, the amelioration of 
poverty, the alleviation of disease and the promotion of education. I have visited a large number 
of Rotary Clubs and Lions Clubs in India and across the sea, in East Africa. I have noted that 
they have as members, enterprising individuals, experts, rich men, highly educated persons of 
various professions, like law, medicine, engineering, architecture, trade, etc. 


I find that you pay great attention to the cementing of friendship among yourselves, rather than 
expanding love outwards, to those who are hungry for it. You arrange dinner parties and picnics, 
where members are treated to costly feasts, more as a part of social convention, than to appease 
hunger. This is sheer exhibitionism and display. Instead, I would ask you to feed some hungry 
people, with the delicious dishes, people who have never had in their lives the joy of having 
eaten a full meal, not to speak of a rich meal. 


Love grows with every gift of Love 


The point of view is most often warped; the direction in which thought flows is, how much can I 
get out; of all this, what benefit can I derive from membership, how beneficial it will be for my 
status, profession, contacts. This has to be changed full circle. The problem should be framed as: 
"How much can I give my fellowmen through this membership? What can I contribute to the 
fulfilment of its ideals?" 


All are eager to take, none is earnest about giving. The reason is absence of Love, love that 
transcends caste, creed, colour, and the fences erected: by man between man. Fill the heart with 
Love, and distribute that Love to all. Love grows with every gilt; of Love; the heart that pours 
out love is ever full. God is there as Love and you are only drawing on Him, when you are 
sharing love with others. 


Expansion is love, is life. Contraction is death, is hate. Pray for the good of all, crave for the 
prosperity of all, not of one person or party, or nation. The craving for power if it afflicts any one 
person degenerates into a mania, and it brings in its wake, great confusion and calamity. Be 
servants, not masters. How can one be happy, putting another into the humiliation of attending to 
one's personal comforts--this is what I cannot understand. Try as much as possible to avoid this 
painful contingency. 


How long can a nation subsist on alms? 


The people of this country are suffering from poverty, disease, and want of proper education. 
Clubs such as this can render intelligent help, supplying food and medicine. I find that you are 
also providing wells in villages where there is at present no adequate supply of drinking water. 
Instead of duplicating services already being carried on by Governmental agencies, I shall be 
happy if you select areas where such agencies do not operate; as also, select activities that are 
specially yours, where your contribution will be thankfully appreciated. 


Bhaarath is now standing before the doorsteps of other nations with the begging bowl, for even 
the most essential day-to-day need of food! This is because, farmers concentrate on cash crops, 
rather than food crops. How long can a nation subsist; on alms? This nation has another series of 
food crops too, which have been neglected, in the rush for growing cash crops. They are the 
Upanishaths, the Geetha, the Bhaagavatha. They have been neglected; man is not cultivating 
them and reaping the harvest of peace and joy that can fill his inner granary. 


Vedha and Shaasthra are the two eyes of Bhaaratha Maatha (Mother India). Through neglect, 
her eyes are now as bad as gone. She is now struggling to see through American eyes or Russian 
eyes or Chinese eyes! See through the Self, the eyes that the Self activates; for, the Self knows 
best your utmost need. 


In Clubs and similar Associations, the President or Chairman is the heart and the members 
constitute the body. The heart must pump enthusiasm and the body must transform it into useful 
activity. There must be wholehearted co-operation and faith. Doctor members must visit the slum 
areas once a week; they must be at the consulting centre, at the same time, every week. Be 
punctual and regular, sweet and courteous. If you talk with a smile, the tablet will act more 
efficiently. 


Learn the ways of acquiring peace of mind 


Lawyers can help the poor, by drafting documents according to rules; now, most of litigation is 
due to faulty drafting. They can also point out to the villagers and the poor how the various 
Governmental agencies are prepared to help them; they can instruct them about the methods of 
securing that help. Ignorance of the assistance offered is leading many grants to lapse, and many 
a good intention to evaporate into nothing. 


This length of cloth has such strength, because a large number of thin threads have joined 
systematically, with disciplined determination, into one new entity, called cloth. A single thread 
cannot stand the pull of an ant; but, many stranded together can hold back an elephant in rut! 
Indiscipline, factionalism and recrimination are the bane of all associations in this country. Every 
one is plotting for the promotion of his own interests, whether he deserves or not. 


Instead of inviting important persons to spin platitudes and their own pet prejudices, I suggest 
that you can well listen to spiritual discourses from learned and experienced people. They can 
give you the secret of equipoise, the ways of acquiring balance and peace of mind and the means 
of enjoying unadulterated bliss. I also desire that you should encourage the use by members of 
saathwik (pure) food and the avoidance of intoxicating drinks. It is demeaning the high role of 
man; it is pitiable to see a man under the influence of drink. Do not put tender minds on the path 
which leads to moral and physical tragedy. Drink milk or yogurt; eat fruits and nuts. They 
generate constructive, virtuous spiritual thoughts. 


I suggest that you start Baala Vihaars (cultural centres for toddlers), and the very young. Provide 
them inspiration to understand and live by the culture of this ancient land. Schools are not at 
present eager or willing to do this. So children grow up, dehydrated, and torn from the roots. 
They sing of Jack and Jill, not of Raama and Seetha. They know the robin and the raven, not the 
crow and the peacock. Children are moving about, like cars with no brakes. Boys and girls are 
growing up, resentful of constraint and treating eiders with contempt. Demonstrate to the young 
the joy one can derive through service, let them learn the technique of timely service and be 
eager and ready to speed with service, wherever it is needed---in times of flood, fire, famine, and 


festivals where the sick and the old require special care. Money spent for training youth for this 
kind of loving service is well spent. 


Do not feel that I am a stranger, doling out advice. All are mine, those who serve and those who 
render service. I belong to all. Like flowers of many species and colours and fragrances, you 
have come together to make up a garland, for the adoration of God. Fulfil that great mission. 
That is my blessing to you today. 


Ananthapur, 18-1-1971 


8. Forms of food 


THE mind of man is not an organ that can be identified physiologically; it cannot be touched or 
operated on by doctors or surgeons. It is an intangible bundle of resolutions and hesitations; of 
wishes and wants; to pros and cons. It has as warp and woof of the wishes that man entertains 
with reference to outward objects and sensations. It easily rushes out after external pleasures and 
assumes the shapes of the things it seeks. It can also be turned back into searching for inner 
contentment and inner joy. That is why the mind is said to be the instrument for both bondage 
and liberation. Allow the senses to lead it outward; it binds. Allow the intelligence to prevail 
upon it to look inward for bliss; it liberates. 


The mind is the puppet of the food that is consumed by man. It is prompted one way or the other 
by the subtle pull of the food it is fed on. The quality of the food determines the direction of the 
desire that diverts the mental flow. That is why in the Geetha as well as in all scriptural texts, 
saathwik (pure) food is recommended for the upward seeking individual. Mind means desire, 
sankalpa (resolve), something sought for. When the Formless desired Form, the Universe arose; 
so, mind is the creative principle, the maaya (illusion), that desired the very first desire, to be 
many. When it is now fed on rajas---passion and emotion, activity and adventure---it gallops 
into the world with the plunge of desire! It brings man deeper into the morass. When it is fed on 
thaamasik (impure) food, which dulls, inebriates, blunts reason, and induces sloth, the mind is 
callous, inert and useless for uplifting man. 


The three types of 'food' eaten by man 


Saathwik food, according to some, consists in milk and fruits. But, it is much more; it; may not 
even be these. For, the calories that one takes in through the mouth are but a small part of the 
intake of man. The intake by the senses are part of the food that builds the individual. The sounds 
heard, the sights seen, the tactile impressions sought or suffered, the air breathed, the 
environment that presses for attention, appreciation and adoption---all these are 'food.' They have 
considerable impact on the character and career of the individual. 


The quality of the food is determined by the vibrations that it is charged with, through the 
thought processes of the persons who handle it, prepare it and serve it. The 17th chapter of the 
Geetha clearly defines the nature and tastes of the three types of 'food' eaten by man: the food 
that promotes love, virtue, strength, happiness, and cordiality is Saathwik; that which inflames, 
arouses, intoxicates and heightens hunger and thirst is Raajasik; the food that depresses, disrupts, 
and causes disease is Thamaasik. 


The company in which food is consumed, the place, the vessels in which it is cooked, the 
emotions that agitate the mind of the person who cooks it and serves it---all these have subtle 
influences on the nature and emotions of the persons who takes the final product in! It is 
because the sages of India realised this that they laid down many do's and don'ts for the process 
of eating, as-for the different stages of spiritual progress. 


Our thoughts trail off in directions determined by the sounds that fall upon the ear. When the 
sounds convey rebuke or praise, flattery or challenge, the thoughts too react correspondingly. 
When the sounds instil ideas of truth, beauty or goodness, the mind too seeks the silence of truth, 
the sweetness of beauty and harmony, the strength of goodness. 


Nagarasankeerthan is the greatest disinfectant 


I have directed that you should start this day with Nagarasankeerthan (street singing of spiritual 
hymns), for, it is the greatest disinfectant of the atmosphere of the individual, as well as the 
community. The puuja (ritualistic worship) in the domestic shrine, the recitation of hymns, the 
bhajan (group singing of devotional songs) that you do, all send forth vibrations that purify and 
cleanse the atmosphere, and so, disinfect the 'food' that you consume. 


Pareekshith listened to stories of Divine Glory and so, he was hastened on the path of liberation, 
during the seven fateful days. So too the sight of temples, churches, mosques and houses 
surcharged with Divinity, of idols and sculptures depicting the mystery and majesty of God in 
His various Forms, of scenes that instil in your mind the littleness of man before the vastness of 
God's handiwork---these have a salutary effect on the formation of character, and the direction of 
habits and attitudes. 


The senses have to be controlled, primarily because they pursue deleterious influences that 
harass man and lead him into ruin. Inner peace is lost when the senses feed man on inflaming 
wants and infructuous desires. For the saadhaka (spiritual aspirant)---and, who can escape being 
a saadhaka?---the intake must always be pure and blameless, saathwik. The sounds, the sights, 
the impressions, the ideas, the lessons, the contacts, the impacts---all must promote reverence, 
humility, balance, equanimity and simplicity. If the impressions are raajasik, the mind will get 
agitated, vengeful, fanatic and fearsome. If they are thamaasik, the mind will not even be 
aroused into the awareness of its own innate handicaps. It is only the saathwik 'food' that will 
keep the mind on an even keel, fully concentrated on the Aathma on which one must contemplate 
in order to attain peace. 


Hyderabad, 28-1-19 71 


When you are eager to place offerings before the Lord, let your 
offering be love, instead of transitory materials. Love is the very 
light of love; it is the only comprehensive Code of Conduct. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


9. Step by step 


I AM glad your resolution to walk the 400 miles from your village, on the other side of the 
Western Ghats, to this place, in time for Shivaraathri, has been fulfilled, a day earlier than 
expected. This was due to the bond of faith and prema (love) that made all the 25 of you into a 
well-knit group of pilgrim. It is also due to the rigorous discipline you imposed on yourselves, 
about food and sleep and rest. It was good that you decided to cook your own food all along; for 
the spiritual yearning and strength will be endangered by consuming all kinds of raajasik food 
(food which inflames emotions), or food prepared by raajasik (passionate) persons, or eaten in 
raajasik company (which arouses attachments)! You offered the food you prepared, to God 
before you ate and so, what you ate during the journey was consecrated 


I was with you throughout, from the very first step to the last. Some of you argued at 
Holenarasipur that the push cart in which you were bringing the provisions, vessels and personal 
luggage broke down only by coincidence, right in front of a workshop! But, that gave you a day 
of rest, which you badly needed. Fourteen days have been spent by you on the road, one was 
spent in rest while the cart was undergoing repairs. To cover 400 miles in 13 days, is indeed 
good going! 


The Name of God is a great tonic 


Your schedule of activity every day must have charged you with stamina. Perhaps you thought 
that you were only adhering to the Prashaanthi Nilayam time-table, when you had bhajan twice a 
day Omkaaram recitation at 4-30 A.M., and Nagarasankeerthan, as you walked through the 
streets (singing the glories of the Lord) of the village where you spent the night! But, the Name 
of God is a great tonic. Vitamin G gives strength to the legs to cover thirty miles a day! And, 
imagine how the villages through which you passed were not only thrilled, but also instructed by 
your bhajans and discourses to the groups that gathered round your camp! I was with you when 
some one turned you on to a new but longer route. I knew that some villages, lying away from 
the highway, could get to know of Me through the bhajans and talks. 


Your manner of journey is nothing new. This was the style which your great grandfathers 
adopted, albeit helplessly, when they went to Kaashi, Badhri, Thirupathi or Pandharpur. They 
moved along, as a Sathsang (good company), as a family, a brotherhood, showering along the 
pilgrim route inspiration, instruction, compassion, and charity. They went through the different 
linguistic regions of the land and they were welcomed and feted wherever they went. There were 
no provincial and linguistic barriers then. From Raameshwaram to Kedhaarnaath, it was a land of 
One God with different Names. They ascended the peaks on which the temples were situated, 
shouting for their own encouragement, Hari bol, or Govindha. 


Over the seven hills of Thirupathi, it was Govindha, Govindha for every step, but, now, 
motorable roads have been laid to reach most of the shrines, and people ride up to the very 
doorstep, with scarcely any Govindha emerging from their lips; while getting down from the cars 
right in front of the shrine, they throw away the stump of the cigarette that they were smoking till 
then! Iam glad, you came walking, with the name of God on your lips, even in these days, when 
you could have come in cars or omnibuses, right up to the Prashaanthi Nilayam. 


Activity is the very sine qua non of life 


Shankaraachaarya, in the fifth century A.D., went on foot from Kaanthi to Kaashi, Badhri, 
Kaashmir, Kedhaarnaath, Kailaash or Puri, Shringeri and Kaaladi! And, he lived only until the 
age of thirty-two! Imagine the tremendous amount of work that he did, writing, expounding, 
propagating, establishing, organising, inspiring, teaching--all in about fourteen or fifteen years of 
active life! When you trudge towards a holy shrine, when your legs ache, you pray to the God 
who is leading you forward; your thoughts do not deviate from that high endeavour! You came, I 
know, reciting or reminding yourself of the Name, Sai Raam. I know that you spent 75 per cent 
of the time in Divine thoughts; 25 per cent you spent---didn't you?---on your personal worries--- 
your homes, people there and their problems,, discussion on the distance yet to cover and. the 
distance already covered! Also, some suggestions about smoother and quicker movement! 


Be active, welcome activity, that is the message that God gives man, at birth. The breath teaches 
you Soham all the time, ‘so’ when it goes in and ‘ham,' when it is exhaled. Activity is the very 
sine qua non of life. You will have to select that activity which is conducive to your spiritual 
progress, judging the stage in which you are at present. There is no high and low, in the activity. 
The eye sees stars that are billions of miles away, but, they do not see the ears, which are a few 
finger-breadths afar! The eye must see, the ear must hear, the hand must hold. That is their 
Dharma (duty). Each must manage its own, his own Dharma. 


Use your limbs as God willed them to be used 


A plantain tree has a number of uses; the leaf is used to eat one's meal from; the flower is used to 
prepare a few dishes; the outer covers of the trunk can be used for binding and packing things as 
a good string-yielding substance; but, the main use of the tree is in the bunch of bananas! You 
take all the trouble of planting and growing the tree for the sake of the bananas, not the leaves, 
the strings, the inner soft core, or the flower. So too, the main use of this human body is the 
realisation of the reality! The rest is all incidental. 


Prahlaadha prayed, "Lord! I desire to adore you and offer flowers with both my hands!" You 
may say, O, the hands have so much else to do! But, though they may be used for a variety of 
operations, the chief purpose for which man has been endowed with them is to pray, to do puuja 
(ritualistic worship), to hold the Feet of the Lord. The ears are designed to hear the glory of God, 
the eyes to stand witness to its manifestations! The tongue may be used to talk scandal, or to 
flatter those in authority, but that is really misuse! Use it as God willed it to be used, for singing 
hymns of Divine Glory. 


Like Seetha under the Ashoka tree, surrounded by ghastly demonesses who terrified her and held 
out threats of torture, but all the while immersed in the bliss derived from contemplation of 
Raama, the tongue moves about, with sharp teeth around, waiting for a chance to hurt and 
wound! The tongue has to speak out testimony for the majesty and mystery that is God; all other 
tasks are subordinate. The legs must take you to the temple of God; of what benefit is it if they 
take you to houses of vulgar entertainment or places where money is earned and lost, as in the 
race course? 


Obstacles alone can toughen your character 


You have put your legs to their legitimate use! Do you feel any pain now? Any tension in the 
muscles? No; you are filled with Aanandha (bliss). All that bother was to get this Aanandha. Is it 
for My sake that you underwent this Paadhayaathra (pilgrimage on foot)? No. It is for your own 


sake, for this chance of sitting around Me and listening to My words! Outside this room now, 
there are thousands waiting for a few words from Me; but, you have earned the chance, by the 
proper use of your limbs! 


You told Me yesterday, "Swaami! We have been coming to you since ten years; you have spoken 
to us often;. but, why is it we have not progressed a bit in our saadhana (spiritual practice) to 
earn peace and joy? Well. It is not enough if nice dishes are cooked and arranged in the kitchen. 
They have to be served on your plates, you have to eat them and more than all, digest them. So 
too, it is not enough if I speak and you hear! You have to recollect what I have said and treasure 
them in the cavity of your heart and ruminate over them and put them into daily practice! Some 
of you feel neglected by Me, when some disappointment or trouble comes upon you. You must 
welcome such obstacles, for, they alone can toughen your character and make your faith firmer. 


When you hang a picture on the nail driven into the wall, you shake the nail and find out whether 
it is firm enough, to bear the weight of the picture, don't you? So too, in order to prevent the 
picture of God from falling and getting broken into bits, the nail (Name of God) driven into the 
wall of the heart has to be shaken by means of a disaster or two! Suppose I ask one of you now to 
jump from the first floor, you should not hesitate and weigh the pros and cons, and slide away, 
for fear of injuring your feet! It is a method of shaking the nail to ascertain whether it is firm and 
steady. You must take it as a Leela (Divine sport) of Mine and jump; if you do so, no injury will 
happen! Or else, I would not ask you to do it! 


Married life will not bar your way to Realisation- 


When you travel towards God, whoever objects has to be bypassed; Prahlaadha went against his 
father, Vibheeshana went against his brother, Jamadhagni had to harm his own mother, Meera 
could not obey her husband; because, they stuck to the path of God and broke through all those 
who opposed them. Young men like you have the problem, I know, of being forced to marry 
against your will by parents who seek to hasten you into marital security. You have to win them 
over and get their approval as Shankara did when he wanted to enter the monastic order! 


But, let Me tell you that married life and being a grihastha (householder) will not bar your way 
to Realisation. Look upon the wife and the children as a sacred trust, and serve them in that 
spirit. Prepare yourselves for a celibate and spiritual discipline from the age of fifty; the five 
senses have to be mastered, by the time five decades of your life are over. The conclusion of six 
decades means that you. have conquered the six foes of man: lust, anger, greed, attachment, pride 
and hate. When you are seventy, you must have become ready to merge with the seven sages, the 
seven seas and the seven colours of the solar ray; that is to say, you must be far, far above 
mundane desires and ideals, and as near the point of mergence as possible, through saadhana. 


God is the Power behind the wheel of life 


Eighty must see you in line with the deities that preside over the eight cardinal points, more or 
less Divine, in attributes and characteristics. Ninety takes you, or rather should take you to the 
realm of the Nine Planets, into the realm of the Super. When man reaches the hundred mark, 
living out the ten decades, he must have mastered the ten senses, the five senses of action and the 
five senses of knowledge and become Wisdom incarnate, with no trace of action or the 
consequence thereof or the desire for it. He and the Absolute are One and Indivisible! 


But, all this is about the paahayaathra of the pilgrimage of life. Let Me tell you now about your 
400 mile yaathra (journey)! Arjuna had the privilege of having Krishna as his charioteer during 


the battle of Kurukshethra. But, he did not realise that Krishna was his charioteer every moment 
of his life! You also must have thought that I was with you all through the 400 mile route! As if I 
have not been with you, before and since! Krishna commissioned the great bowman Arjuna to 
escort the women of the Yaadhava clan to a safe place of refuge, when He decided to end His 
earthly career; on the way, some wild tribals attacked the convoy, and Arjuna rose to destroy 
them, with the Gaandiva (his famous bow and the divine arrow) he had won by severe austerity. 
But, the charioteer had gone; the strength had ebbed away! He had forgotten even the formulae 
for invoking the deities who directed the arrows! He could not even string the Gaandiva bow, he 
had wielded in a hundred encounters with the mightiest heroes of the age] Then, he realised that 
Krishna was the power behind the wheel of His life, that without Him, he was a spent force. The 
tribals overpowered the group and kidnapped the women whose wailings pierced the heart of 
Arjuna! 

So, be convinced that whatever achievement you make, is caused by the Grace of the Lord. Pray 


to the Lord for strength, wisdom, humility, detachment, light and love. With each step in the 
pilgrimage of life approach Divinity steadily and surely. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 21-2-1971 


The plan and purpose of the ancient religions of India are to plant 
the seeds of Love in the human heart so that they may sprout into 
saplings of endurance, and blossom into tolerance, yielding 
ultimately the fruits of peace. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


10. Sappers and miners 


The very first gathering in the Prashaanthi Nilayam heralding every Festival, is a meeting of 
members of the Sathya Sai Seva Dhal, from all parts of the country. When thousands come to 
this place, which to most of them is new and strange, full of unfamiliar experiences, it becomes 
the duty of young persons like you to serve them, in a spirit of dedication, so that they may feel 
they are lovingly looked after and treated as if they are brothers and sisters, come to their family 
home. 


It is a sign of spiritual weakness to differentiate among them and select the poor or rich, the 
educated or the illiterate, the native or the foreigner. They are all aspirants and seekers, and so, 
they have to be welcomed and helped to participate and share in the joy which they have planned 
to experience here. Each of them is a repository of Aanandha (Bliss), and that is the reason why 
they have the urge to taste it in a larger measure. Each one has Sai installed in his heart and so, is 
a brother, a kinsman. So do not pollute your acts of service with the poison of pride. Be humble 
that you have the sacred chance to use these days of your life in this noble task. 


There are nine stages of devotion, through which the seeker has to ascend, before he culminates 
in total surrender and mergence with his Divine ideal. Of these, the seventh stage is 'Service of 
the Feet of the Lord!' And you have the good fortune of being considered fit for that stage, now 
itself. The Lord's Feet are million; the feet that are rushing into this campus are those of the 
Lord. Serve them, so that you can move on into the two further stages and realise your goal. 


Be looking all around for any chance of service 


You are getting the great chance of partaking in a huge sathsang (holy company), from today! 
Thousands are coming to this place, prompted by keen desire to see, hear and contact Divinity, 
and for those who have kindred desires, the chance to move about in this Sea of Spirit is indeed a 
sign of Grace. This is the benefit of fairs and festivals held in holy places; the wave of 
exhilaration, enthusiasm and exultation lifts men aloft into the rarefied air of Holy Beatitude. 


Two attainments mark out the Sevak, especially the Sathya Sai Sevak---absence of conceit and 
presence of love. Service to those needing help makes you the comrade of all, irrespective of 
other considerations. Be looking all around you, all the time, even beyond the horizon of your 
allotted tasks, for any extra chance to serve. An old man may be stranded in the hot sun, a 
paralytic may be casting his eyes for a chair, a child may be wailing for its parent, a mother may 
be clamouring for water to slake her thirst, another may be heart-broken for she has not got a 
vantage point from where she could see what is happening on the dais---watch for these, and run 
towards them, with a smile and a word of cheer! 


It may be that some one has swooned or fainted. Get the doctor or take the patient to the 
dispensary, with loving care, and with gentle alacrity, instilling courage and confidence. Let 
them go back to their places and say that not even their nearest kinsmen could have dealt with 
that situation as lovingly and as intelligently as you did. Have compassion, love, readiness to 
sacrifice personal comforts, and patience---then, you can be a successful Seva dhal member. 


Examples are the best instructors 


This means that you must be engaged in constant Naamasmarana (remembering God's Name) 
yourself, so that you remain a true servant of God while claiming to serve man, or rather, so that 
you may see in Man the God that is his real nature. If you have not acquired that vision, you will 


not find unity among these diverse representations of the Divine. You will get confused by the 
multiplicity. 


Hold on to the Command; that is the genuine path of the bhaktha (devotee). Never doubt or 
hesitate. Even if you are posted to the canteen or the hospital, do not get downhearted, that you 
cannot get dharshan, all time. I have no such handicaps; you can have My dharshan, wherever 
you are. When you are engaged in dhyaan (meditation), if you hear some groan by your side, rise 
and investigate; do not curse and neglect. You get much more spiritual benefit by this means, 
than by sticking on selfishly to your patch of carpet or deerskin! 


Have a tender and a sweet voice. Do not shout yourselves, while reprimanding others for 
speaking aloud. Be examples for others, not simply castigators! Examples are the best 
instructors. Be deaf to the harsh words that others may in their ignorance use against you. They 
too will soften, if you explain to them the why and wherefore of the restrictions and regulations 
that are prescribed here, by Me. When you speak soft and sweet to a person who is angry with 
you, you will feel a surge of joy within you. And the repentance you evoke in him is the reward 
you get. 


Be saturated with equal love to all 


One more point. You should wear simple dress, and not swagger about in new fangled outlandish 
bush-shirts and drain-pipe pants. How can a simple villager ask for help from some one who 
does not appear to belong to his world? Your face, appearance, stance and apparel must infuse 
confidence exuding sympathy and humility, so that the distressed and disconsolate, the old and 
the decrepit might come to you gladly for assistance to solve their problems. This applies also to 
lady members of the Seva Dhal (Volunteer Service). They too can keep people away, by means 
of frightful hair-do's and repelling apparel. 


Above all, remember that you are members of the Sathya Sai Seva Dhal, 'sappers and miners' of 
the Sathya Sai Era. You have to be saturated with equal and universal love to all. You must be 
steady in adversity and in fortune. You must be skilled in the knowledge necessary for serving 
others, in an emergency. My name is Baba, B.A., B.A. I am a 'double graduate,’ as you can see! 
What do those letters mean? B means Sath (Being); A means Chith (Awareness); the second B 
means Aanandha (Bliss); and the second A means Aathman. The entire word means that I am 
Sath-Chith-Aanandha Aathman! And, you too are Sath, Chith and Aanandha Aathman. Only, 
you are not aware of it, you have not discovered it and revealed it. Service in the spirit I have 
indicated is one of the ways through which you can make that discovery. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 21-2-1971 


A volcano throws up its lava on the screen of the picture house; a 
dam bursts and the flood waters it had impounded roar along 
towards the sea, submerging vast states; but the screen is not 
burnt, nor does it get wet in the least. 


The screen is the truth; the film is an illusion, however realistic it 
was, however genuine the feelings it aroused. 


Know this and so direct your life that this knowledge is the 
background of all your action,. Thus, you will have great peace 
and great joy. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


11. This and that 


THE Vedhas prescribe forms of worship through rites and formulae for different Names and 
Forms of the single Godhead, so that people of different stages of growth and different standard 
of intellectual attainment can draw inspiration therefrom. The Unity of all the names and forms 
was, however, emphasised throughout. Each name and form when it was adored was described 
as All-powerful, All-knowing. All-pervasive, etc, so that worshippers may be led through every 
door to the self-same entity that subsumes all. But, the shortsightedness of man won over this 
largehearted view; the Names and Forms were taken as essentially distinct and each became the 
centre of a sect, creed, with all its divisive consequences. Thus, we have a multitude of warring 
factions, each swearing by its own favourite Form and Name, to the exclusion of all the rest--- 
like Gaanaapathyas, Souras, Shaivas, Vaishnavas, Veerashaivas and Veeravaishnavas. The real 
harvest of Aanandha for which the spiritual operations of rites and manthras (sacred formulae) 
were gone through has been neglected, while the weeds of calumny, cynicism and conflict have 
grown wild over the fields. 


Prescription of the Geetha to lasting happiness 


The evil influence of kaama (lust) is at the bottom of this tragedy. The Geetha laid down that 
even the Vedhas have to be transcended, whenever they seek to foster desires and cater to 
transient urges. It speaks in the same sh/oka that man must seek to become Aathmavaan (the 
possessor of soul) and the Aathmic (spiritual) strength. Note the word! Aathmavaan! The Geetha 
asks you to be, not Balavaan (possessor of physical prowess), not Dhanavaan (possessor of a 
comfortable bank balance) but, Aathmavaan (having the prowess arising out of the awareness 
that you are the Aathman, which can remain unaffected by fame or shame, grief or joy and all the 
buffetings of the dualities of the world). 


Another word in the same shloka is Nir-yogak-shema. Dwell for a while upon its meaning, too. It 
points the way to lasting happiness---never being concerned with the earning of happiness and 
the maintenance of happiness, but, just being oneself! Being established in the Aathman, never 
worried about how to be happy (for the Aathman is ever Blissful), this is the prescription of the 
Geetha. Nir-dhwandho (without paying attention to the dual throng of grief-joy, pain-pleasure, 
etc.), nithya-sathwastho (ever fixed in the quality of equity), nir-vogakshema (unaffected by 
considerations of security and welfare), Aathmavaan (established in Aathmic consciousness) that 
is how the Geetha lays down the path of liberation. 


In chapter 5, shloka 28, the Geetha says that the Muni (ascetic) who is eager to attain liberation 
must be the master of his senses, mind and intellect and he has also to give up raaga (likes and 
dislikes and preferences), bhaya (fear, at something unpleasant or undesirable happening) and 
krodha (resentment, anger, at those who cause disappointment or grief or loss). Vigatha (free 
from) raaga, bhaya, krodha, is the expression used. The shloka goes on to say that such a person 
is already liberated; he has nothing else to do! 


Regulation of the senses purify the intellect 


The prescription to scrutinise always the purity of the means, and not worry about the acquisition 
of the fruit of the activity; and the description of yoga as the stoppage of all modifications of 
consciousness---both emphasise the same advice of the Lord. The regulation and restriction of 
the senses purify the intellect, which then can boldly and quickly investigate into the real nature 


of the subject-object relationship, the I-other relationship, and discovering that all is I (the One), 
attains peace, prashaanthi (unruffled peace). 


A single seed of kaama (desire) if it gets stuck in the soil of the heart, is very difficult to 
dislodge. The thinnest shower of rain, a slight change in circumstance which promises to be 
favourable, will suddenly make it sprout and spread its tentacles. Kaama can be suppressed and 
mastered only by Raama (attachment to God) and prema (love for all beings, prompting sacrifice 
of joys and comfort for others). Without a hold on Raama and prema, kaama will upset your 
faith in standards of morality and righteousness. It will place before you all sorts of specious 
arguments to overcome the pangs of conscience and enslave reason and sense of duty. 


I am arranging every year during Dhashara a yajna (sacrifice), so that you may learn thereby the 
importance of Vedhic studies as well as the need to renounce what we falsely evaluate as 
precious, and be for some days in the atmosphere of the ancient discipline, so that your emotions 
may be calmed and impulses domesticated. I am untouched by elation or sadness, or any of the 
consequences of activity. The ball of butter, floating on buttermilk, though it is in it, is not of it. 
My nature is unaffected by My movements and activities. I talk and walk among you, I arrange 
and direct, I advise and admonish, but I am away from any attachment. The Divine is so distinct 
and distinguished from the mortal and the bound. Train your minds to follow not the devious, 
but, the Divine path, of which I am revealing to you the trail. 


The evil mind infects those who contact it 


A clean uncontaminated mind is like a fully blossomed fragrant rose! It refreshes and pleases, 
whether it is on the wall or on the table, in the left hand or the right. It can rise and reach the 
Footstool of God in Heaven. But the evil mind stinks, and is avoided by kith and kin; it infects 
those who contact it. Waves move out from the mind in ever-widening circles and affect all those 
who draw near. Let your mind have no waves; let it be silent, level, calm, so that the Hamsa (the 
bird of purity with perfectly white plumes, the bird that can distinguish between right and wrong, 
accepting right and rejecting wrong, the bird that is the symbol of Soham. Sa (He)aham (I), 
Soham: the principle of the One, embracing He and I, I and the others, I and He becoming We, 
or even I) can sport thereon! Every gesture, word and activity of mine, however casual it may 
appear, is motivated to move you towards .the fulfilment of your lives, and endow you with the 
Aanandha (bliss) that your Aathman (Self Reality) is. 


Dive into the depth of silence to hear the Cosmic Om 


You read the Raamaayana or listen to expositions of the text by learned Pandiths; but, you spend 
no time trying to circulate through your activities the lessons the Raamaayana teaches. 
‘Baagavuthaam' is how the illiterate pronounce the word, Bhaagavatham! Baagavuthaam means, 
"Let us become good." Yes! that must be the spirit in which you must take up the Bhaagavatham 
for study. Enter into the spirit of the narration and imbibe the courage that restores the 
equilibrium of the mind. Then you can easily pace the path of Maadhava (God) instead of the 
path of maanava (human). Maadhava means, the Master over maayaa (delusion due to 
ignorance)---Maa (maayaa, delusion); dhaya, master. Follow God and nothing can delude you, 
putting on the apparel of the real. 


Sound is of three kinds: Saamaanya, Varna and Mooka; Saamaanya (the common): the sound 
produced by things falling, or breaking apart or fusing, all the sounds of the objective world, of 
rain and thunder, of rivers gurgling, of valcanoes and earthquakes and the like, even the dropping 


of dew on a tender petal of rose, the sailing of a feather from a bird's wing through the air! The 
second kind is the sound of Varna (the spoken word): this carries a specific meaning and is 
armed with intention, to inform, or instruct or inspire. This is the flow of the heart-beat of one 
into the heart of another. The third kind is mooka (the sound of silence): when one dives into the 
depth of that silence, one hears oneself, the primeval Cosmic Om, the Pranava that emanates 
from the praana (the vital vibration) that fills the Universe. To hear that sound, one has to 
approach, as near as possible, the core of one's being. That is why the Upanishath calls itself so; 
it urges you to go near, delve deep, dive to the very floor of the lake. Upa means Near; Nishath 
means Sitting. 


Go and sit near, so that you can hear the whisper of the Super Soul to-the soul. Om summarises 
the Vedhas and their teachings. Om thath sath, says the Geetha. Thath (that) which Sath (is) is 
Om, the One. All this is Brahman, the One without a second. Thath is used to indicate that the 
objective world is taken by senses to be separate and afar; it means 'that', and 'that' is always far, 
and separate. Sath means 'is,' 'the is,' 'this!' When you recognise the Thath as 'is' or Sath, it 
becomes 'this, it is no longer object, it is subject, and the merging of object with subject 
manifests as the Om. 


God is one for all, like Sun and Moon 


Seeing difference is the bane of the undeveloped intellect. The One Sun is seen, adored, and 
acknowledged all over the world; you do not boast of an American Sun, an Ananthapur Sun or 
the Sun of Puttaparthi. He is for all. So too children all over the world play in the moonlight and 
welcome the Moon, the Moon which follows each of them wherever they roam! Since the Sun 
and Moon are so far away in outer space, they receive the homage of all. God is so high, so far 
away that He is One for all. When you argue and quarrel over your God and mine and say He is 
many, you are only bringing Him down and insulting His Majesty. 


When you pay undue attention to differences, spasms of hatred, anger, malice and envy 
overwhelm you. Anger rushes blood to the brain; the temperature rises; the composition of the 
blood changes; toxins enter into it in such quantities that it injures the nerves, and make you old 
before your time. There was a mother who was feeding at her breast her tender baby. Suddenly 
she plunged into a violent quarrel with her neighbours, and forgot to keep her baby down, in the 
heat of vulgar oratory. The poor child drank the toxin-mixed milk of the mother and when the 
flames of anger subsided, the mother found that she had a corpse on her breast! Desire to which 
you are too fondly attached breeds anger and its nefarious brood. Discard it and you can have 
perpetual youth! The Aanandha that the Aathman can manifest will keep age and aging away! 


Raama learnt from Vasishta (it is part of the game of the Avathaar to bestow on the preceptor 
Vasishtha the merit of having taught the way of liberation) the method of conquering desire and 
he demonstrated by his equanimity that he could go into long exile, with as much exaltation as he 
could go towards the throne for his Coronation. 'Raama' means the Joy that comes of Love. He 
loved bird and beast, demon and sage, to prove to the world that God saves those who love His 
children. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 22-2-1971 


12. Love, the sine qua non 


The rays of the morning Sun induce buds to blossom into fragrance and beauty; they prompt the 
Divine in you, today, to blossom into fragrance, purity and holy endeavour. Earth and sky take 
on a golden hue, reminding us of the Hiranya Garbha (Golden Womb) from which all creation 
emanated in the timeless past. This is a sacred day, according to the traditions of this land; it has 
been revered and celebrated since numberless centuries. But, at the present time, people are 
content to listen to the praise of the Day and repeating what they have heard, to others, in parrot 
chatter. What really matters, however, is the experience of the bliss that it is designed to confer. 
The intuitively ready have surely visualised that the vow of fasting and vigil prescribed for this 
festival will guarantee certain results. But, the genuine practitioners are few, and even they do 
not communicate their ecstasy to others; so, faith in the cultural calendar has declined, and the 
validity of vows is being questioned. 


People who go about this land will notice the large concourses that attend temples, that partake 
in bhajans and Naamasankeerthan where the glory of God is sung with demonstrative 
enthusiasm that; mill around venerable personalities who preach and teach the ways of God, and 
they infer that this is a sacred land full of pious individuals, who tread the pilgrim path to 
Divinity. But, these are hollow rituals, empty exercises, exhibitionistic picnics or hikes; the 
pilgrims are more interested in shopping, both in the temple and the bazaars, than in stopping the 
ungodly habits to which they are attached! They are unaware of the basic truth of God, nor are 
they anxious to earn that awareness, by the hard path of discipline. 


Unwavering Love alone can win God's Grace 


Without an intellectual grasp of the fundamentals of the Divine Principle, all vows, fasts and 
vigils are imitative, routine, mechanical activities that involve waste of time and energy. It is best 
that you impress upon yourself the need for this basic step on this Mahaashivaraathri, for, this 
raathri (night) is the night that has to usher in the dawn of realisation. 


On this Mahaashivaraathri, you have to impress on your consciousness that Nature is alive, 
since God is life; that Nature appears ever-lasting, since God is eternal; Nature is but a reflection 
of God. He lends the colour of order, purpose, and activity to inert Nature. Without the 
motivator, Nature is helpless and powerless. Appearance is but a reflection of reality; Zshwara is 
but a reflection of Brahman, the intelligence behind the Awareness of all. Shivaraathri inspires 
us to learn this basic Truth and shape our lives in the light of that illumination. 


The Grace of God cannot be won through the gymnastics of reason, the contortions of Yoga or 
the denials of asceticism. Love alone can win it, Love that needs no requital, Love that knows no 
bargaining, Love that is paid gladly, as tribute to the All-loving, Love that is unwavering. Love 
alone can overcome obstacles, however many and mighty. There is no strength more effective 
than purity, no bliss more satisfying than love, no joy more restoring 'than bhakthi (devotion), no 
triumph more praiseworthy than surrender. 


Right living is the prescription of Vedhaantha 


The achievement of aanandha through prema (of the highest bliss through the highest love)--- 
this is the teaching of Vedhaantha; Vedhaantha for which all seekers compliment the sages of 
this land. Vedhaantha is an often misunderstood school of philosophy. It does not mean the study 
of profound tomes, or the calculated breathing, through trained nostrils of measured quantities of 


air, or even eating as a dog does and sleeping as a jackal does, (wandering without any assured 
abode or source of sustenance) as the saying goes! Right living, balanced living, true living is the 
prescription of Vedhaantha. The fair face of Vedhaantha has been disfigured by fanatics and 
false interpreters. They sought manifold meanings behind the axioms of Vedhaantha and landed 
themselves amidst a medley of wrong meanings! They created confusion where clarity existed 
and so people lost faith in spiritual discipline itself. Vedhaantha is Love, the philosophical basis 
for that love. 


Love should not be rationed, on the basis of caste, creed or economic status or intellectual 
attainment of the recipient. It should flow full and free, regardless of consequence, for, it is one's 
nature to love, to seek out the dry dreary wastes which love can water and make fertile. 
Wherever there is a vacuum, in any heart, Love flows into it and is glad that it can fill the 
emptiness. It is never held back; it is offered in abundance, without guile or deceit; it does not 
wear the cloak of falsehood, flattery or fear. 


The tendrils of love aspire to cling only to the garments of God; it senses that God resides, in His 
Infinite Splendour, in every heart; so, it probes silently into the innermost recesses of all 
personalities around it to discover the seat of God, so that it may bloom therein. That is real 
bhakthi (devotion). When the tendril clings to worldly objects, it is bhukthi (gourmandism), not 
bhakthi (godwardness). It is the direction that is crucial. 


Love ennobles the least and the lowest 


When love is directed towards things that cater to the senses or bodily happiness, it will dry up 
when they fail or disappoint. When profit is loved, loss will undermine it. Discontent will sap its 
springs, when you love with the motive of worldly contentment. Even when ten million 
disappointments combine to distress you, never give up love; fix it on the source of love, the 
spring of love, the Supreme Goal of love, namely, God. Whatever the handicap, howsoever you 
are tempted to loosen the grip, hold on to God; there is always a calm, after the storm. A bout of 
hot weather invariably brings welcome showers. Love saturates all activities with joy and peace. 
Love ennobles the least and the lowest. Love your self for the God that it embodies; love others, 
for the God that is enshrined in them, that speaks and acts through them. 


This is the bedrock on which you can build the mansion of happiness, this recognition of the 
Divine, that motivates you from within. Thousands are here before Me now; you claim to be 
devotees, with hems full of love and devotion; you roll rosaries over your fingers, and roll the 
Name over your tongues; you indulge in breathing exercises or contortional feats, but, unless you 
revere all and worship all in the abandon of selfless love, you only insult the unique tradition of 
this land. Passion, agitation, anxiety---these degrade human nature. They are born out of hatred, 
greed, malice or envy, which love alone can counteract. 


You become what you yourself feel 


When you have here the very embodiment of love as your dearest treasure, why welcome into 
your hearts the waves of hatred, faction, fear and doubt? Why turn them into volcanoes of cruelty 
and wickedness, when they can smile as green valleys of fragrant flowers? When you Have fear 
in you, the reaction of' fear greets you. When you have hatred in you, it resounds from all whom 
you come across. All around you echo the sentiments that you carry in your own heart! Yadh 
Bhaavam thadh bhavathi---"You become what you yourself feel." Making or marring is the 
activity of your own mind. When you pronounce another person as vicious or bad, you are 


making a pronouncement on your own wickedness or vice. Your own impurity casts upon him 
that suspicion. No one can judge another, for, when another is judged, you are yourself 
condemned! 


You may ask Me, how is it possible for a man to be wicked or vicious, when his body is the 
temple of God. His words may be harsh, his actions may be reprehensible, his behaviour may be 
revolting, but, he is nevertheless Divine! For, look upon him not as a body with a name and 
form, or a mind with emotions and feelings, or reason with resolutions and conclusions, but, as 
the Aathman, the "Universal I" reflected as the "particular I", that I is as pure, peaceful, 
illumined and expansive as the I of which it is but a wave! Cultivate this attitude of observing 
everyone. Then, you can rid your mind of prejudices. The I in him and the I in you are identical, 
for, both derive existence, knowledge and bliss from the same "absolute I", the Paramaathmam. 


Wisdom is compassion at its highest 


If your devotion does not stand by you when you seek to revere the reflections of God in the 
body-mirrors that move around you, when you peer into and prostrate before these images of 
God that parade before you, wherever you cast your eyes, how can you claim to be devoted to 
God, the Original of which these are but faint and faltering echoes? This is the saadhana 
(spiritual discipline) I prescribe for you. 


Without steady faith in this saadhana and sincere practice of this saadhana, if you simply group 
together, preparing and sharing Prasaadhams (eatables placed as offerings to God) on every 
conceivable occasion, or even singing and extolling God, I must say that your efforts are all in 
vain! Expand your hearts; enlarge your vision; enlarge the circle of kinship; take more and more 
of your fellow beings into the tabernacle of your hearts. And, adore them in loving worship. 
Wisdom is only compassion at its highest; for, through sympathy you enter the heart of another 
and understand him through and through, you go behind the veil of pretence and punditry, 
convention and custom; you go behind good manners and fashion that people put on to hide their 
agony and ignorance from the rest of the world. Finding the unity in this diversity of roles is true 
wisdom. 


Have no other thought than God 


You consider Shivaraathri to be a great event, a sacred festival, because of the emergence of the 
Linga from this body. The Linga emerged this day from the embodied Shiva, and the Shaasthra 
(ancient scriptures) say, Brahma and Vishnu who sought to measure its Glory could not succeed 
in their venture! Some superficial scholars say that Shiva was born this day, as if the Sath-Chith- 
Aanandha swaruupa has either beginning or end! Some say that He started thapas (penance) 
today, and some others that today marks the conclusion of His thapas! Even this is due to 
attempt to drag Divinity down to human level, so that man can peer into the face of God and 
move as His servant or slave! The affinity should elevate both, not degrade the outer and the 
inner Divine. No low desire or vulgar ambition should be ascribed to Godhead by the meanness 
of man. 


God is all-powerful; Cod is everywhere; God is all-knowing. To adore such a Formidable 
Limitless Principle, man spends a few minutes out of the 24 hours, and uses a minute before an 
idol or image or picture! It is indeed ridiculous, it is practically futile. 


Adore Him so long as you have breath, so long as you are conscious. Have no other thought than 
God, no other aim than knowing His command, no other activity than translating that command 
into action. That is what is meant by surrender. Render your self unto Him. 


When you intend going on a journey, you hand over the keys of your car to the chauffeur and sit 
in comfort and security in the back-seat, forgetting the possible troubles on the way. You have 
surrendered your life into the hands of that man, his intelligence, alertness and skill. Some men 
do not fully surrender; they are too egoistic for that! They interrupt him every minute with tips, 
hints, and suggestions about driving; with questions and doubts regarding the condition of the car 
or the road! And, so, they confuse him and confound his confidence so much that they inflict 
accidents upon themselves! Be steady, have Faith, and reach the goal safe. Life is the car, your 
heart is the key. God is the saarathi (chauffeur). Surrender to Him and be rid of further bother. 
Travel safe and arrive happy. 


You are atheist, if you have no Love in you 


There are many who declare that they have surrendered to Me. They use the word, arpana. They 
have dedicated their thanu, mana, dhana (body, mind, wealth), their all, they proclaim! But, they 
still continue with their 'I did it,' 'I feel so,’ 'I think so,' 'T like it,' 'I do not like it,' etc. The I raises 
its hood so that it may receive homage or praise! Now, it is a big lie to say that you have 
surrendered! It is sheer falsehood. The word arpana is a word that is just thrown about, without 
any value or purpose, to deceive people who do not dive into its authenticity. How can you 
surrender something over which you have no control? 


You are the slave of your mind, of your passions, of your prejudices; but, yet, you dare claim that 
you have surrendered your mind, your thoughts, your plans to God! While you are struggling to 
escape from the coils of the mind and the stranglehold of the passions, how can you dedicate 
them to Me? No. You need not boast of such bravery, such sacrifice, such devotion. I do not 
need or ask for such declaration. It is not enough if you believe that God is everywhere and at all 
times, and that you are yourself no different from Him. When you are God yourself, to whom are 
you to surrender what? Think over this deeply and attain to that realisation. 


Thousands of you have gathered here from all the corners of this world. You have put up with 
many discomforts, hardships, and inconveniences, in your struggle to earn Grace. It has been for 
each of you a lesson in love, tolerance, fortitude and patience. Your innate quality of love has 
enabled you to share in joy and peace. Love makes you all theists. You have to be labelled an 
atheist, if you have no love in you, however demonstrative your religiosity may be! If you 
believe that you can win the Grace of God by means of vows, fasts,, feasts and recitation of 
hymns of praise, offering of flowers, etc., you are woefully mistaken. Love alone is the sine qua 
non. 


The Geetha says, you must be adhweshthaa sarva bhoothaanaam---"without hatred to all 
beings"; but, that is not enough. A wall has no hatred towards any being. But, is that the ideal? 
No. You must positively love all beings, actively love, actively engage yourself in acts of love. 
That alone wins the Grace you crave for. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 23-2-1971 


13. Shivaraathri : its significance 


THE scriptures composed by the sages of Bhaarath are testaments of genuine experience; they 
are to be interpreted and observed in practice, after reverential study by persons who have 
clarified their intellects by rigorous disciplines. They can confer eternal Aanandha (bliss) when 
they are thus utilised; but, scholastic or philological or grammatical inquirers which seek to 
comment and confuse can only lead to the neglect and loss of the precious content. They are 
ready to teach the Truth and lead the student towards the goal of Aanandha; they are eager to 
grant immortality and save man from the dreary round of birth and death. 


Really speaking, children of Bhaarath are fortunate to have this invaluable heritage. The Vedhas 
and Shaasthras speak of this fortune; the sages extol this land on this score; the Upanishaths 
acclaim the people who have such gurus and guides; the achievements of generations of aspirants 
and seekers stand witness to this treasure and its worth. But, some blind cynics discard the 
treasure, and condemn it as something that draws men away into futility! One can only pity them 
from their lack of vision. Bhaarath is the name of a way of life, not an extent of land between the 
seas and the Himaalayas. It is another name for tolerance and mutual love, which have made it a 
garden of multicoloured religions and philosophies, creeds and faiths. 


Dharma means a lot of things, do's and don'ts 


It is the land where the identity between man and God has been declared by persons who have 
attained that realisation. The individual is encased, while God is unbound; the individual believes 
himself bound, as having name and form, as the body and its appurtenances. The fire that is 
latent in the fuel can manifest only when it is lit by external fire. So too, the divinity of the 
intellect, the mind and the inner instruments of cognition can manifest only when the Aathma is 
prompting and urging them. Otherwise, if they are prompted and urged by the senses, they will 
lead only to perdition and delusion. 


Every directive given in the scriptures on discipline is intended to help the saadhaka (spiritual 
aspirant) to realise this identity and to derive the Aanandha which recognition of this Unity 
confers. For example, take the exhortation in the Geetha shloka, which says, Sarva dharmaan 
parithyajya maam ekam sharanam vraja. What is the dharma that has to be given up? Are all 
duties and responsibilities to be discarded? Or, does Dharma here refer only to some of these? 
Dharma is an omnibus expression, which means a lot of things, attitudes, behaviour patterns and 
mores. It includes often mere rules, which are known as vidhi (fate) and nishedha (do's and 
don'ts). If you are anxious to catch a bus, board a plane or entrain for some place, you have to be 
at the stop or port or station before a particular time. That is a vidhi. When two brothers divide 
among themselves the possessions left by their father, they share half and half; this is Dharma, 
that is to say, right and proper, moral, approveable. Now, Dharma of this nature is laid down and 
observed, so that we get peace and content, so that sukha (happiness) may be promoted. It 
belongs to the relative world, the absolute has no concern with these relative advantages or 
benefits. It is in the realm of ajnaana that sukha is desired and dhukkha (sorrow) is avoided. 


Know that you are the ever full, ever blissfull 


Kaama (desire) is the urge for karma (action). It is regulated and modified by dharma 
(righteousness) so that happiness may be gained and sadness avoided. And, kaama is the product 
or expression of ajnaana. So, when the Geetha directs that all dharma be given up what is meant 


is that ajnaana (ignorance which induces kaama, the progenitor of karma which has to subserve 
Dharma) is to be conquered, and overcome. Acquire jnaana (spiritual wisdom); know the truth of 
thyself. Then, you will be free from lust and hate, because you will know that you are the ever 
full, the ever blissful. 


Imagine a person searching for things in a room. His eye falls on all the articles he wants to 
secure, but, he does not notice the person who searches! The seeker does not see himself! When 
you give. up the search for objects, for things other than yourself, you see yourself and know 
yourself. When the dhraishta (seer) is seen, the dhrishya (seen) is negated; when the dhrishya is 
seen, the dhraishta is ignored! 


Tideman said just now that in the very first meeting he had with Me, I told him that I am God. In 
fact, every one is God, limiting himself into this particular name and form in which he is 
encased! If you believe yourself to be the label that is now affixed on you, and call your self by 
the name that others have given you, you can never know your reality and have unshakeable joy. 
This is the lesson that Vedhaantha teaches. Each one is "Sathyam jnaanam anantham Brahma 
(Truth, Total Knowledge and Infinity is Brahman)." But, sunk in the morass of ajnaana which 
multiplies endlessly the desires that haunt the mind, man forgets the core of his being. Every one 
must get convinced that he is the Aathman, not the body which is its material residence. To 
instruct you about this is the special purpose of the festival of Mahaashivaraathri. 


Linga is the symbol of the beginningless and endless 


People ask, "Why does Swaami produce the Lingam (Formless Form of God) from within 
himself on this day?" But, let Me tell you, it is impossible for you to understand the attributes of 
the Divine and to measure its potentialities, or, to gauge the significance of the manifestation of 
Divinity. It is agamya (unreachable) and agochara (un-understandable, mysterious). Therefore, 
in order to bear witness to the fact that the Divinity is amidst you, it becomes necessary to 
express this attribute. Or else, the atmosphere of hatred, greed, cruelty, violence and irreverence 
will overwhelm the good, the humble and the pious. 


The Linga is just a symbol, a sign, an illustration, of the beginningless, the endless, the limitless- 
--for it has no limbs, no face, no feet, no front or back, no beginning or end. Its shape is like the 
picture one imagines the Niraakaara (Formless) to be. As a matter of fact, linga means--- 
leeyathe (that in which all forms and names merge) and gamyathe (that towards which all names 
and forms are proceeding, to attain fulfilment). It is the fittest symbol of the All-pervasive, the 
All-knowing, the All-powerful. Everything is subsumed in it; everything starts from it; from the 
Lingam arises Jangam (Universe), from the Jangam arises sangam (association, attachment, 
activity) and as a result of the sangam, one realises the lingam (attributeless Aathma). Thus, the 
circle is completed--from the beginningless to the Beginningless. This is the lesson that 
Lingobdhavam (emergence of the Linga) teaches. The lingashareera (the physical body) that is 
inhabited by the Aathma is but a vesture worn for this particular sojourn! Many a vesture has this 
soul worn, though its reality is eternal! 


The lesson that Raamaayana teaches 


People have not imprinted on their hearts the lessons that the ancient Hindhu scriptures and epics 
seek to teach. I have been, for example, asked often, why some persons who have associated 
themselves with Prashaanthi Nilayam for years leave off and do not appear again! The reply is 
evident for those who have studied the Raamaayana well. After ten or twelve years of 'devotion' 


suddenly these people take a turn for the worse and stray away; as the Shaasthras say, "When the 
accumulated merit gets spent, they slip into the depth of mortality." Seetha is the daughter of 
earth, of Prakrithi (Nature), seeking the eternal comradeship of Purusha. She weds the Purusha, 
the Lord come as Raama. When Raama agrees to go into exile and proceeds to the forest for a 
stay of fourteen long years, Seetha too gives up all the luxuries she was accustomed to; she 
braves the perils of jungle life, for the sake of being in the presence of Raama. She renounced 
desire from her heart for the sole goal of Raama. 


Thirteen years she spent with the Lord, in perfect bliss, as a consequence of the sacrifice she 
dared to make. Then, quite suddenly, desire sprouted in her mind, and carried her away, far away 
from the Lord! She saw a golden deer, and she coveted it! She who had renounced huge treasures 
of gold and diamond was attracted by a fantasy and this led to the agonising separation. 


So too, for those long attached to Me, there arises some desire---for lands, jobs, family life, fame, 
position, possessions---and they move away! But Seetha repented for her mistake, and her mind 
suffered extreme anguish at the separation. She called on her Lord to redeem her, calling out in 
contrition, Raama, Raama, Raama, Raama, with every breath. And, finally, Raama Himself 
moved towards her and restored Himself to the devotee! So too, if you are agonisingly repentant 
and aware of the loss and anxious to rejoin, craving for the presence, this Sairaam too will move 
towards you and grant you Grace. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 23-2-1971 


14. Life-long bhajan 


THROUGHOUT last night, you have sung bhajans and kept vigil, as part of the Shivaraathri 
celebrations. This aarathi (waving lights before an image) marks the end of that bhajan sessions; 
but, only of the outer, congregational, vocal part, not of the inner solitary silent bhajan that must 
be the very breath of your existence. The Vedhaantha persuades you to investigate the function 
of the senses and of the mind which is activated by its capacity to reflect the Aathman within. All 
the inner instruments of knowledge and the inner witness in man are promoters of the highest 
wisdom, though they are misused, in ignorance, to confound and ruin man's progress. Those who 
are aware of their being only the indestructible Aathman, encased in temporary sheaths, in a 
ramshackle dwelling house bearing a name and presenting a form, they are unaffected by 
anything that happens to the sheath or house. Prahlaadha was one such. However inhuman the 
torture they inflicted on him, he was calm and unruffled; for, he was established in the 
Naaraayana, that was his genuine Truth. 


It took Arjuna a long time to realise this. In fact, it was only after the Ascension of Lord Krishna 
that it was brought home to him, in a dramatic form. Krishna, while rolling up the curtain of the 
Avathaar Drama, had asked him to take the women, children and some old men of the Yaadhava 
clan orphaned by his departure, to the safety of Hasthinaapura, away from Dhwaaraka which had 
been swallowed by the sea. 


The mind hides the Prompter and the Power within 


Arjuna led the disconsolate community through lands infested by wild tribes, confident that the 
bow Which had won him the Kurukshethra battle against the array of gigantic heroes will ensure 
safely and success. But, when some barbarian hordes fell upon the Yaadhava remnants, Arjuna 
sought to string his bow and fix an arrow upon it---in vain! He could not recall the formula 
which could send the arrow on its mortal mission. He had to witness the debacle, the kidnapping 
of the women whom he had vowed to guard! When Krishna had finished His Mission, he too had 
ended his mission; there was no more breath in him too. Krishna was his life, his might, his 
archery, his mastery, his heroism, his all. That truth was made patent to Arjuna by the shame of 
defeat, not by the paean of victory! 


The mind plays many tricks with you, the chief of which is to foster the ego and hide the 
prompter and the power within. You must have heard of an accountant in the Court of the King 
of Death, Chithraguptha, by name. He maintains a Register of the good and the bad, done by 
each living being, and on death, he brings the books to the Court and strikes the balance between 
debit and credit. Yama, the King then metes out the punishment that can expiate and educate. 
This Chithraguptha has his office in the mind of man, all the time, awake, alert. The word means 
'the secret picture; what he does is to 'picture' all the secret promptings that blossom into activity; 
he notes the warning signals as well as the occasions when those signals were ignored or 
wantonly disregarded. You must see that the warning of the Divine against the merely human, or 
even the bestial inclinations are heeded. 


Bhajan encourages man to dive into himself 


Bhajan is one of the processes by which you can train the mind to expand into eternal values. 
Teach the mind to revel in the glory and majesty of God; wean it away from petty horizons of 
pleasure. That is all that bhajan or puuja or vratha can do. Bhajan induces in you a desire for 


experiencing the truth, to glimpse the beauty that is God, to taste the bliss that is the Self. It 
encourages man to dive into himself and be genuinely his real Self. Once that search is desired, 
the path is easy. One has only to be reminded that-he is divine, for, the malady is, its being thrust 
out of recognition. 


Chaithanya once had very high fever, the temperature rising to 105° to 106° He refused to 
administer upon himself any drug other than what the Shaasthras has prescribed; he asked for 
the dust of the feet of a Brahmana, water consecrated by washing his feet! They could only get 
hold of a Brahmana who was not following correctly the disciplines laid down for that high 
caste, which entrusted with heavy responsibilities like leading the community along the spiritual 
path to self-realisation. But, Chaithanya asked that they need not be very strict in scrutinising his 
credentials, for, a Brahmana is holy, however fallen he may 'be. He belongs to a line which has 
soaked itself through many lives in Vedhic lore and saadhana. 


However rickety a cow has become, milk can be got only from her; she has to be fed, fostered, 
fondled and revered. Thus, Chaithanya reminded the Brahmana of his great; role in society and 
encouraged them to live up to the high expectations that history has fastened about them. Man 
too has come for a great destiny, on a sacred mission, endowed with special skills and tendencies 
to help him on; but, he fritters these precious gifts and crawls on earth from birth to death, worse 
than any animal. Exercises like bhajan elevate the mind and exhort the individual to seek and 
find the source of eternal joy that lies within him. 


Grace is not something that is given or taken 


When I directed that groups of people belonging to our Samithi should go along the streets in the 
early hours of the morning singing the glory of God as summarised in the Names with which 
they are identified, some ask me, "Is this also included in bhakthi? Should we sing aloud in 
company while on the streets?" The question arises from false conceit. Bhajan which is part of 
Nagarasankeerthan gladdens the singer and showers joy to those who listen; it cleanses and 
purifies the atmosphere by its vital vibrations. It inspires and instructs; it calls and comforts. 


Hold fast to the God you believe in, despite trials and tests, the ups and downs of life. This day is 
the New Moon Day, when the moon starts growing into fullness, but, as soon as he has come full 
circle, he starts waning, until he almost disappears and the earth is plunged-in darkness; yet, all is 
not lost; the thin curve grows steadily into the full moon again. Fortune too is like the moon. 
Nothing can be fixed or fragile for ever, in this fickle world, born out of the fancy of the Lord. 
The Lord is eternal, absolute, unchanging. My Name is Truth, I am the Truth, and since I am in 
every one of you, you too are everlasting Truth. Do not doubt this and descend into distress. 
Strive to be endowed with the unwavering eye, the unhesitating mind. 


Call out the Lord who is within your heart 


Now, you will all be given Prasaadham (eatables offered to God) and so, sit silently in rows. Of 
course, I mean by Prasaadham the cooked offerings that are given this day at the conclusion of 
the bhajan. Prasaadham, also means Grace, which flows from God when He is propitiated. My 
Grace is ever with you; it is not something that is given or taken; it is given always and accepted 
by the Consciousness that is aware of its significance. Win the Grace of your own sub-conscious, 
so that it may accept the Grace of God which is ever available. 


God does not deny any one; it is only you, who deny God. When the gift is proffered, you have 
to do only one little act, so that you may earn it---you have to extend your hand to receive it. 
That is the Grace or the subconscious; Win it, by teaching it the value of the Grace of God. My 
Grace is showered wherever you are through My infinite Love, without even calculating or 
measuring the readiness of your subconscious to receive it and benefit by it. The Grace itself will 
confer on you the faith and the strength, the wisdom and the joy. I am in your heart all the time, 
whether you know it or not. Dhroupadhi called out for the Lord of Dhwaaraka, Shri Krishna, 
when she was cruelly insulted by the wicked cousins of her husbands, and so, the Lord 
responded after a little delay. He had to go to Dhwaaraka and come from there to Hasthinaapura 
where she was! He told her that she could have got Him in the fraction of a second, had she 
called out, 'O dweller in my heart,' for He dwells there too, as everywhere else! 


The Mahaa Shivaraathri festival is over; but, the message of the day is yet to fructify in your 
behaviour, conduct, thinking and activity. Do not rest content with a night-long bhajan. Make it 
a life-long bhajan, of adoration, of pilgrimage to the Lord within. 


Mahaa Shivaraathri, Prashaanthi Nilayam, 24-2-1971 


The poor are rich in devotion to God; Kunthi prayed that her 
difficulties may continue, for they keep the Lord ever in her mind. 
Riches are a great handicap in the path of spiritual progress. So, 
though you may be rich, do not cultivate attachment to the bank 
account or to the mansions, cars and comforts you command. Have 
them as if they are given to you on trust by the Lord. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


15. He and He alone 


THE Vedhaanthic teaching that jeeva and Brahman are one, is the true wisdom. Without 
proceeding towards it, man is cutting himself off from the unfailing spring of Aanandha (bliss), 
light and peace. Without it, he sees the many, he is afraid of the many, he is confused with the 
many; he loves and hates, he craves and is spurned; he posits one theory and condemns another. 
In fact, he is caught in the coils of moha (delusion). When moha is conquered, man is aware of 
the truth and he is free. 


Kurukshethra is the field of food, for kuru means food. Food indicates all that is taken in, 
through the gullet or the nostrils or the senses. This aahaara or anna (food) is what determines 
the nature of the impulses, emotions and passions. These have to be directed along proper 
channels, and sublimated to serve the goal of liberation from fear and grief. 


The kshethra (field or body) must thus be transmuted into the Dharma-kshethra, the purified 
area of virtue and vairaagya (detachment from worldly desires). Then, the charioteer will take 
charge, and man gets liberated, the body becomes Brahma-kshethra (field of Universal Soul). 
That is the life-story of a self-realised person. 


Saadhana is essential to overcome faulty vision 


The self-realised person is merged in Aathmic Bliss; he is not bothered by external happenings; 
he has the world of inner peace all to himself. If you follow such a person and pray for guidance, 
he will not be interested in you. Then, we have the Mahaapurusha (the high-souled or noble 
person). He has not reached the goal yet; he is well on the way; he knows the road only as far as 
he has trekked; so, he is unable to give full guidance to the aspirant. The Avathaara-purusha, 
however, has come solely to save mankind, and so, He is aware of the pilgrim, the path and the 
goal. He is the Master of creation and He is fully conscious of his power. He knows the past, the 
present and future of all. He leads and liberates. 


The mind is the source of delusion; it deludes and binds. If the mind is subjected to the intellect 
then it disintegrates and disappears, leaving the field dear for the illumination that reveals, that 
"we and they are but He or It." As long as the world is seen as manifold, saadhana, to overcome 
the faulty vision is essential. 


In the deep sleep stage, the senses do not work; one is immersed in the I consciousness only; that 
is to say, one is in Samaadhi, (the state of bliss). Only, one is not aware of it, at the time. There is 
just a trace of ignorance. During the waking stage, there is knowledge, but no Aanandha (bliss). 
In deep sleep, there is Aanandha, but, no knowledge. That is why it is said, liberation is attained 
the moment one is able to fix himself at the point where there is the experience of both jaagrath 
and sushupthi (waking and deep sleep). 


"When you love Me, you love all" 


Love is the word which indicates the striving to realise the falsehood of the many and the reality 
of the One. Love identifies; hate separates. Love transposes the Self on to another and the two 
think, speak and act as one. When love takes in more and more within its fold, more and more 
entities are rendered as One. When you love Me, you love all; for, you begin to feel and know 
and experience that I am in all. By means of dhyaana (meditation), you can realise that I am the 
resident in all hearts, the urge, the motive, the guide, the goal. Yearn for that vision, that 


awareness and make it your priceless possession. Then, you have what you often ask Me for--- 
saakshaathkaara (Direct Vision of Reality). Your love has to be as pure and as free from the 
taint of ego as nine so that it can merge in Me. 


Of course, it is hard saadhana. The mind is too much with you, now. One has to negate and 
deny, deprive oneself of many expectancies, dive deep into oneself, swim upstream against the 
current of generations of attachment to worldly things, including the body which one bears. The 
gopees (Cowherd girls) were so filled with the highest type of love that they saw and 
experienced the Krishna Principle in every speck of dust and blade of green that they saw. Love 
of Krishna makes the whole world Krishna. The denial of everything else is the method of 
visualising Krishna in all. There is only One, the integer I. When it is repeated once again, we 
have two. The manifold creation is only He, and He and He, repeated so often. Dust and blade, 
drop and spot---each is He, He and He alone. And, you are no exception, you are also He. The 
realisation of this truth, this identity, this mergence, this is Saakshaathkaara. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 24-2-1971 


The Shaasthras say: 
have faith in the doctor, so that you may get cured of illness; 


have faith in the manthra (holy formula) with which the preceptor 
initiates you, for then alone can your saadhana be fruitful; 


have faith in the sacredness of the temple, for then alone is your 
pilgrimage profitable; 

have faith in the astrologer's predictions, for, without it, why 
bother yourselves with him and his abracadabra? 


Have faith in the Guru, for then alone will your steps be steady and 
firm, on the path to self-realisation. 


Faith in the Guru should bring faith in the Aathma (true Self), or 
else, the Guru is a handicap. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


16. Mind'irs, not mandhirs 


EACH one of you is designated a District President; you have to guide and help the Bhajana 
Mandalis (Spiritual Singing Groups), Mahila Vibhaags, Baala Vihaars (Women and Children 
Sections), Study Circles, Seva Samithis, Seva Dhaals (Service Groups and Centres), that are 
established with your approval and watch whether they are working smoothly, with the ideals 
laid down in Swaami's Messages always in view, and within the limitations, rules and 
regulations laid down by the conferences under Swaami's guidance and with Swaami's blessings. 
Of course, you have to watch over yourselves and see whether you yourself are having those 
ideals in view and whether you yourself are following the rules and regulations and disciplinary 
limitations laid down from year to year, in the conferences. 


There are many who come forward when there is a call for social service; but, most of them 
crave for publicity, seeking cameramen whenever they help others and very disappointed when 
they are not mentioned in newspapers! Such men push themselves forward, and climb into 
positions of authority, just to parade their importance before the public. They forget that service 
is worship, that each act of service is a flower placed at the feet of the Lord, and that, if the act is 
tainted with ego, it is as if the flower is infested with slimy insect pests! Who will contaminate 
the feet with such foul offering? Have no egotism while you serve the people of your district. Be 
guides in their spiritual struggle. Nourish faith in God in the area; upon that faith, you can build 
any type of spiritual organisation. Trees that grow by the side of canals will flourish, thick with 
foliage and fruits. So too, Bhajana Mandalis and other units of this Organisation will flourish, 
when faith in the Divine feeds the roots. 


Do not indulge in exhibitionistic display 


Emphasise simplicity and sincerity, more than pomp and show. Make the mind, the shrine. Have 
mind ‘irs, not mandhirs! Discourage the building of mandhirs and halls; try to utilise the temples 
and halls that already exist. Let the temples that are fast being depleted of pilgrims become once 
again centres of spiritual vibration. Decorations and detonations tend to draw the mind away 
from the essential; people indulge in these things more to show themselves off and impress their 
importance on the public. During the festivals and celebrations, or even in daily life, people 
should not indulge in exhibitionistic display. If money comes into the picture, it becomes ugly 
and low. 


You must insist on the observance of the rules of the Organisation, for, they are laid down out of 
love, not to tyrannise. They are bunds erected on the river banks in order to direct the flood 
waters safe to the sea. Guide the devotees, taking it as a divine duty. Stir well the sugar of God 
in the tasteless water of worldly affairs, and it becomes drinkable. Have faith that it is adoration 
of Swaami that you are doing, through the work allotted to you; then, it becomes saadhana 
(spiritual practice) through which you can win Grace. 


There is a Thelugu proverb which characterises elders thus: 'Peddhalu kaadhu; gaddhalu'--- 
"They have no culture; they are vultures." They soar highly, only to espy carrion. If only elders 
are genuinely anxious to serve people, (instead of merely talking about service) the world would 
have entered the Golden Age long ago. 


The daily activity of dedicated service 


One practical way in which the spirit of service can be inculcated is this! Tell this to the 
Mandalis in your districts. Every day, when the lady of the house measures the rice for preparing 
lunch or dinner, let her place a handful in a separate pot, kept for the purpose, with the words, 
"For God;' at the end of the week, let her cook that rice separately and give it to as many poor 
people as the quantity justifies. That will be a daily act of dedicatory service. 


Pay special attention to Baalavihaar children and the classes being held for them. It is very 
valuable work, since it supplements the school and gives them what they don't get from the 
curriculum. It is the Baalavihaar that shapes them into the children of Bhaaratha Maatha. The 
heritage of India has to be handed over to the children by the mothers of the land. Discipline and 
the exercise of authority must be there, but, modified by love. Without a certain amount of 
restraint and some use of authority (to press good things on unwilling minds), no progress can be 
made. The child has to be persuaded much against its will to eat rice and curry, when it has to be 
familiarised with them. The sick man has to be reprimanded, if he refuses the drug that can cure 
him. Why, you, too, have to impose on your own selves a rather rigorous routine of discipline, so 
far as saadhana is concerned. 


You must have noticed that, in Prashaanthi Nilayam, you find during festivals and special oc- 
casions, the same faces appearing again and again. First they came with a bag of prayers for 
worldly advancement. When they listened to My discourses and conversation year after year, 
they have come out of the coils of material desires and have now only one desire: to win mental 
peace, through a course of strict saadhana! So, they come again and again, to draw inspiration 
and win instruction for spiritual success. 


Let Me tell you what the first steps in saadhana are: Practise silence. Then, you can more easily 
recognise the galloping of the mind behind worldly happiness. Restrain its movements; turn it 
inside, into the calm lake of bliss that lies deep in the heart! Get over fear, by establishing your 
mind in the One, for, fear can arise only when there is another. An inquirer from the United 
States asked Me recently, 'How can faith become firm?' I answered, 'When the Truth is known, 
faith is rendered firm.' When the truth is known that it is a rope, faith in its harmlessness is made 
firm, and fear that it is a snake disappears. 


Let people know the Truth’; they will then grow in faith and the faith will endow them with great 
energy and enthusiasm. The rest will follow, and Dharma (righteousness) can flourish in this 
land' as well as in the world. 


Brindhaavan, 8-3-1971 


17. Liberation from bondage 


MANY a saadhaka (spiritual aspirant) has gone through long and arduous disciplines in order to 
win his dearest ambition of entering the kingdom where there is no bondage; he has recited the 
Name or meditated on the Form or denied the senses. There are others who have ventured with 
Reason as their sole guide, into the realms of the inner consciousness and discovered that 
liberation consists in realising the reality that is behind all the transient and manifold phenomena. 
But, the experiences of these heroic men and women are discarded as the vapourings of crazy 
individuals, by those who live on the flimsy surface of the first of the five sheaths of human 
personality, the Annamaya kosha (physical sheath). They identify the body as themselves and do 
not delve behind the falsehood into the realm of Truth. 


Such cynics who condemn the Vedhaanthic approach to the problems of living are not rare even 
in the land that gave birth to Vedhaantha! The reason behind their attitude is---they do not grasp 
the fact that Vedhaantha reveals only the genuine history of each one of them. It but seeks to 
hold before every one the true picture of himself, devoid of deficiencies or exaggerations. 
Moksha (liberation) is no special and exclusive heaven into which one has to earn admission; it is 
not a special status or acquisition or possession. It is just the removal of the false notion that we 
are bound and limited by the body, the senses, the intellect, the mind, the ego and other fancies. 


What exactly is the bond which one has to free himself from? The bonds have been forged by 
fear and anxiety, produced by desire which holds one in its grip. Fundamentally, fear arises 
because you feel there is before you, another, a second! If there is no second, whom can one 
fear? The first person is the seer, the I; the second is "all other beings and things," which are 
seen, observed, Nature. 


Renunciation confers immortality 


The objective world is the illusion caused by ignorance, which makes one ignore the One that is 
only apparent as Many. Ignorance causes the identification with the Mine. So, when some one 
attached to us dies, we feel broken-hearted, whereas, when some one who is not in the circle of 
kith or kin dies, we are not affected at all. It is the sense of I and Mine that causes grief and fear. 
That is why the Upanishaths proclaim that renunciation alone confers immortality, freedom, 
fulfilment. 


The highest wisdom is the awareness of the unity, the One, which is all this. In fact, there is no 
two, there is only One Brahman. You realise this when you are in deep sleep, when all thought, 
feeling, emotion, passion, attachment, knowledge cease---only the I remaining, and the happiness 
of being only the I. But, the Aanandha is not known at the time of sleep! It is only after waking 
that you declare I enjoyed fine sleep. If only you were aware of the Aanandha, sleep will be 
samaadhi, for, it is Aanandha unalloyed. So also, in the waking stage, you have knowledge, but, 
no Aanandha. 


If you can experience the knowledge of the waking stage and the Aanandha of the sleeping 
stage, both at the same time and to the full, that is Moksha. That is true liberation. Then you have 
consciousness, knowledge and bliss, unalloyed; you are Sath-Chith-Aanandha itself, pure and 
simple. 


The fruit of the tree of love is jnaana 


You must watch for the moment when the wakeful stage passes into the sleeping stage and 
concentrate on that moment purifying it of all the agitations and thought which mar the wisdom 
and the Aanandha. Of course it is difficult in the beginning! When you are at the wheel of your 
car, driving along, far into the night, there comes a fateful moment when you slip into sleep, 
from the awareness of awakening! There is nothing that you cannot gain by practice. You have 
learnt the highly complicated and strange skills of walking erect, of writing scripts and reading 
them and interpreting them, all by practice, haven't you? This is the way of acquiring and 
experiencing, the jnaana (spiritual wisdom) which alone can grant liberation from fear and grief. 


From the seed of love, springs the sprout of devotion to the Lord. The devotee sees everything as 
the manifestation of the Glory of God, every act as His handiwork, every word as His voice; he 
offers every thought, word and deed inspired and prompted by Him to Him. Thus for Him, the 
world is but He, He is the world. There is no second. So, the fruit of the tree of love is jnaana. 
The sweetness in that fruit is Aanandha and the fruit contains once again the seed of love from 
which the sapling put forth its leaves. In the vishwa-viraat-swaruupa (Cosmic Form of God) 
which Krishna allowed Arjuna to witness, Arjuna found himself, as well as his brothers and 
cousins. 


24-3-1971 


What exactly is your duty? Let Me summarise it for you. 
First, tend your parents with love and reverence and gratitude. 


Second, Sathyam vadha, Dharmam chara. Speak the truth and act 
virtuously. 


Third, whenever you have a few moments to spare, repeat the 
Name of the Lord, with the Form in your mind. 


Fourth, never indulge in talking ill of others or try to discover 
faults in others. 


And, finally, do not cause pain to others, in any form. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


18. The new year dress 


New Year must usher in a new step in spiritual discipline. The old must be rung out; the new 
must be rung in! How do we celebrate the New Year Day? We sweep, we clean, we remove the 
cobwebs, we whitewash the walls, we hang up festoons and greens, floral garlands and croton 
leaves; we wear new dresses, we feast on new types of dishes. For one day, we feel fresh and 
renovated. At this time of the year, Nature too puts on a new garb of green; every tree is gay with 
flowers. The green carpet on the earth is speckled with multicoloured floral dots! In this festival 
of renewal, man alone continues with his old prejudices and tendencies, outworn habits and 
moth-eaten principles. Should not he too brush the cobwebs from his mind? Should he not get rid 
of opinions and motives which tarnish and demean? 


The word Yugaadhi means the Day of the Inauguration of the Yuga (Age). The spiritual 
discipline for each Age has been prescribed by the scriptures; for the Kritha (First Age), it is 
dhyaana (meditation); for the Thretha, the second, it is dharma (righteousness); for the 
Dwaapara, the third, it is archana (ritual worship) and for the present age, the Kali, it is 
Naamasmarana, the remembrance of the Name of God. So, on the Yugaadhi Day, you must 
resolve to accept it and practise it to the utmost. This involves giving up all habits that interfere 
with the constant remembrance of God. 


Without grief, there is no relish in joy 


As a matter of fact, life is a series of acceptances and rejections, of attachments and detachments, 
of joys and griefs, benefits and losses. This year itself has got a rather forbidding, foreboding 
Name: Virodhikrithi, meaning, the year of making enemies! Do not have any apprehensions; the 
only foes you will be meeting will be the evil habits and meaningless pursuits th at you are 
giving up! 


Take-everything that happens to you as the Gift of Grace. Of course, on your path, you must act 
with all the skill and devotion you are capable of. Do this with as much sincerity as you worship 
God. Then, leave the result to the All-powerful, All-knowing, .All-merciful God. Let whatever 
ensues ensue! Why do you hold yourself responsible? He prompted it, He got it done, through 
you; He will give whatever result He feels He must! 


Without grief, there is no relish in joy! The orange has a bitter rind, the bitterness guards the 
sweet juice from marauders; you cannot have a sweet sugary rind, for the sweet fruit, for, then, it 
will be consumed entirely by all and sundry, then and there! The urge of the fruit is to travel far, 
so that the seeds may grow into trees in open spaces in the distance and not under the shade of 
the parent tree. The tree desires its progeny to spread far and wide. So, if the rind is bitter, the 
eater will take it with him and travel some distance, while removing it and start scattering the 
seeds only many paces away! You cannot keep gold safe in a gold box! You must have a steel 
almirah, for it! The gift of joy comes packed in the rind of grief. Do not pray God to give you 
only joy; that will be foolish. Pray for the fortitude to realise that grief and joy are but the 
obverse and reverse of the same coin. 


Effort needed to win the Grace of God 


Today in every home, the priest reads the New Year's calendar, called the Panchaangam 
(almanac), of the five limbs. Which are these five limbs. Not as is usually understood, the 
position of the Sun, Moon, stars, etc. But, the five senses of man---which yield him the 


knowledge he gathers through sound, touch, sight, taste and smell! They have to be pure, so that 
the knowledge can be truly genuine. 


The hour and the moment have to be auspicious, so that auspiciousness may result. Hence, the 
careful study of the calendar is prescribed. The planets cannot prevail over the Grace of God, 
which is the most potent influence to guard and guide man. Thyaagaraaja sang that Raama's 
Grace can counteract the evil effect of the worst conjunction of stars! People resort to vows and 
rites, hoping to ward off the evil that stars may bring about! But, no effort is made to win the 
Grace of God. The pomp and the paraphernalia of puuja are merely superficial; they do not- 
confer lasting benefits; at best, they prevent you from using that much of time and money in 
harmful ways! It is the 'why' of these rites that matters, not so much the ‘how.' The why has to be 
the realisation of the reality of the individual, which is also the reality of the Universal! 


Be devoted to the Universal; be eager to become That. When you pray to God for a job, or a son, 
or a prize, you are devoted, not to God, but to the job, to the son and to the prize. Pray to God for 
God; love, because it is your nature to love, because you know nothing else, because you cannot 
act otherwise than love. Expand your Self, take in all! Grow in Love. That is the new dress you 
have to wear and shine in, this day. 


Yugaadhi, 27-3-1971 


Grief is caused, as joy is caused, by the attachment of the senses to 
objects; once you know that you are not the senses or the mind, but 
He who operates the senses and wields the mind, you cross the 
bounds of pleasure and pain. 


Separate yourself from the grief; you are the President of your 
Realm. The senses and the mind, with all the attendant impulses, 
desires, attitudes, etc., are your servants, instruments that have to 
carry out your orders. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


19. The Raamaayana family 


THE Raamayaana is the very life-blood of the Bhaaratheeyas. Down to a few years ago, it was 
difficult to find throughout the length and breadth of India a village without a temple for the 
worship of Raama, a home where a picture of Raama was not adored, or a tongue whereon the 
name Raama did not dance. The entire country was saturated with the fragrance of Raama. Such 
a fortunate land has degenerated in recent times into a region fouled from top to bottom with the 
contagion of kaama (lust). Seek to be filled with Raama; you will be saved. Seek, on the other 
hand, to be fouled by kaama; you will be damned. 


In the Thretha Age of human history, the Formless, Attributeless Principle of Existence- 
Knowledge-Bliss was so overcome with compassion that It assumed the human form, as the very 
embodiment of Dharma (Raamo vigrahavaan Dharmah), manifested various examples for man 
of correct righteous conduct, re-established the supremacy of Dharma and its inherent might, and 
merged again in the Absolute, from which It had appeared. 


The Vedhas describe the Divine entity as Maadhava: Maa meaning maaya and dhaya meaning 
Lord. That is to say, He is the Master of all that is born and therefore dies, changes and therefore, 
false! Life and death are a part of maaya (delusion), of which He is sovereign. So, all who are 
bound by this dual chain have to be loyal to God, and pay homage to Him and obey His order. 
That is the path to happiness. But, the agent of maaya that is in the human, namely, the mind, 
does not usually help him in this endeavour. It runs after the shadow, the reflection, the 
unsubstantial glitter, and discards the gold. It runs through the senses into the outer world and 
neglects the call of reason for discriminating analysis and renunciation. Man is thus everywhere 
living a life of shame, far below the level that he can well attain and enjoy. 


Tread the path of truth laid down by Raama 


To meet a person living on the tenth floor, you have to go up nine floors. To experience the joy 
of being with Maadhava (God), you have to rise to that purity, that love, that truth, that peace. 
Become full of compassion; love all; serve all; do your duty sincerely and with joy; be good, do 
good, and thus deserve God. Raama will be pleased when you tread the path of truth, for, that is 
the path laid down by Him. A cursory reading of the Raamaayana will give you only the husk; 
the kernel can reveal itself only when you reflect over each word and incident. Indian culture has 
always encouraged this reflection on the meanings of symbols, parables, and names. It is stated, 
"Dhasharatha had four sons: Raama, Lakshmana, Bharatha and Sathrughna." Well. Who is the 
Dhasharatha? Which kingdom was he ruling over? If in some City called Ayodhya, there was 
once a ruler named Dhasharatha and he had a son called Raama, how are we related to that 
episode? Why should we celebrate that event, at this distance of time and space? 


No one can escape living with the three gunas 


Go a little deep into the story and you will realise that Dhasharatha is not the ruler of a far off 
land, that his capital city is not on the map of Northern India, and that the four brothers are not 
people who lived and passed away! Ayodhya means a city that is unconquerable, into which the 
enemy cannot penetrate, an impregnable fortress. It represents the Aathma, the heart where the 
Lord resides, which is proof against temptations, the subtle foes of passion and emotion, impulse 
and instinct. And Dhasharatha? The person who has as his ratha (chariot) the ten entities namely, 


the body with the five senses of action and the five senses of knowledge! He married three 
brides, this individual, who is the symbol of all individuals. 


Now, though each married man may have a wife with a physical existence of her own, he has 
also wedded to him, inseparable from him, till death 'do separate,’ three attributes: Sathwa, Rajas 
and Thamas, the three natures---balanced, passionate and dull. The three queens represent these 
Gunas---Koushalya, the Saathwik (balanced) Guna, Sumithra, the Rajas (the passionate, active) 
and Kaikeyi, the Thaamasik (ignorant, undiscriminating) No one can escape living with these 
three gunas, and experiencing the varied reactions which that contact involves. In due course, the 
yeaming arose in the mind that it must have a Master whom it can obey and revere. The agony 
became so acute that the transcendent divine actualised itself in Grace that took the form of 
paayasam (rice pudding), brought by a messenger of God from the sacrificial fire. That gift of 
Grace was shared by the three gunas (qualities) and four sons were born, representing dharma, 
artha, kaama and moksha (virtue, wealth, desire fulfilment and liberation), the four prime ends of 
man. Raama the eldest is dharma and the other three stand for the rest. 


You will have to sacrifice a great deal, if dharma must be born in your heart. That is why 
Dhasharatha had to do the Puthrakaameshtiyaaga (a great sacrifice for obtaining sons). The 
Divine is the very embodiment of dharma and it is only by means of dharma that He can be 
worshipped. And Dharma is a garland of the flowers of holy deeds, holy words, holy thoughts. 
Earn the reputation; of being good, serviceable and efficient in doing good. Children who do not 
render their parents happy, by such good conduct are remembered by their mothers only through 
the pain they gave them at birth. 


Make every act reflect the Divine splendour 


At the present time, every one is moaning that they have lost peace, security and happiness. 
There is a loud clamour from all the quarters. But, no one seeks to discover why this tragedy has 
taken place. The reason is this: what has to be done is not being done; what has to be observed is 
not being observed. There is no co-ordination between what is said and what is done. Hypocrisy 
is rampant in the homes, the villages, in the offices, the council-halls of the nation. It is raised to 
high positions even in the spiritual field. Those who turn beads with God's name on their lips are 
engaged in ungodly pursuits. With the Bhagavath Geetha in their hands, they talk scandal and 
hatch evil plots. With rosaries on their fingers, they fume at servants, losing temper on the 
slightest pretext. This is no vow, no discipline of the spirit! 


The Bhaktha who poses to be sincere has to exercise constant vigilance and practise the 
discipline of being ever in the Divine Presence. God who is now dormant in your consciousness 
has to be recognised and made resurgent so that every act of yours will reflect the Divine 
Splendour. Vyaktha means patent; the individual man is called vyakthi in Samskrith; for, he has 
to make patent the latent Divine. 


Consider the ideal examples Raamaayana provides 


When you have achieved the consciousness that God is in you, with you, for you, that awareness 
must re-shape every thought, word, and deed, and make you wish good, speak good, and do 
good. Men who have ostensibly dedicated themselves to the religious discipline are only play- 
actors strutting on the stage of the world. Others wear their devotion very thin; the smallest 
trouble or disappointment turns them against faith in God. But, real devotion has to withstand 
whatever misfortune may bring. 


Just consider the series of ideal examples that the Raamaayana provides: the family of Raama is 
itself an invaluable gallery of Supreme Dharma. When a son is as loyal as Raama, accepting 
even exile as his father's will and gladly walking into the forest as gladly as he moved towards 
the throne for his coronation, he will be the ideal son indeed. Consider how that great lady, 
Seetha, revered her husband as her Lord and God, and herself persuaded him to take her with 
Him into exile in the forest, braving all the deprivations in her desire to be by his rode. If all 
wives were so steadfast and loyal and loving as Seetha, India will certainly be full of happy 
homes resounding with hearty joy of contentment. Every door will be green with festoons. 


As for brothers, who can equal Lakshmana or Bharatha? His mother had secured the throne of 
the vast empire for him, but Bharatha spurned it, since it belonged, as of right, to the eldest of the 
brothers. Everyone is struggling to secure positions of authority, by hook or crook. But, here is a 
man who gave up what was very correctly won for him by his own mother from his own father, 
gave it up so that the person to whom it morally belonged, might return from exile to receive it 
and enjoy the status and power! And, Lakshmana, how he forsook food and sleep, in order to 
stand guard over his brother and sister-in-law, in the thickest jungle; how he surrendered his will 
fully and gladly at the feet of his brother! 


Grand examples of renunciation 


The women? When Lakshmana went to his mother, Sumithra, to take her blessings before 
accompanying Raama into exile, she did not argue, "Why should you go? Your father has not 
asked you to leave. Stay on and be happy in the palace and make me and your newly wedded 
bride happy." She said, "Son! Do not imagine that you are leaving for the forest and that we are 
remaining in the city of Ayodhya. Without Raama, this city is the jungle; with Him the jungle is 
Ayodhya." What did Uurmila, the young wife, tell her Lord Lakshmana? She did not plead for 
permission to accompany her husband as Seetha did and for very good reason. She said, If i 
come, you will not be able to pay undivided attention to the service of Raama and Seetha. I shall 
remain here awaiting your arrival after 14 years!" What a grand example of renunciation, this! If, 
in each family, we have such sons, mothers, brothers and wives, the land will have no anxiety or 
sorrow. It will be resplendent with joy and peace. 


Brindhaavan, 4-4-1971 


The worst action is to do the opposite of what you preach: to deny 
by the hand what you dole out of your mouth. 


If you cannot act up to your declarations, keep quiet; do not go 
about advising and advertise that you are hypocrite ?. 


Do not preach dharma (virtue) while decrying it in deed. Dharma 
is steady, unchanging, it can never decline. 


What happens is: those who have to practise dharma decline in 
faith and steadfastness. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


20. Beside, behind, before 


THE saadhaka (spiritual aspirant) must have as his objective the state of mental preparation, for 
the realisation of Godhead at any moment. That is to say, his heart must be cleansed of despair, 
free from hesitation and doubt, and open to the waves of bliss that surge in from all sides, in 
God's Universe. Love brings the waves in, ever expansive as they are! Follow the directives, 
with faith and sincerity. That will help you to realise the purpose of life. Since every act has its 
appropriate reaction, beware of evil intentions, wicked words, acts that harm others and therefore 
harm you, and so live that you revere all as moving temples of the Divine. 


Narasamma, who passed away recently is a good example for you. She was a pure devotee. She 
came to Parthi, 30 years ago; and once having come, she never turned back to Madras, with any 
longing for her home, her belongings or her kith and kin! She was friendly with all and put up 
gladly with all sorts of people. I used to reprimand her often, "Narasamma, Why do you 
welcome all these people into your room and allow them to disturb the saadhana and silence you 
need?" But, her heart was large and it was difficult to restrain her. She spent all these years, 
happily here; and, now she has settled here, as her eternal home. 


I wrote a letter to her from Goa, I did not write to any one else from there. I wrote only to her. I 
wrote, "Narasamma, I am with you, beside, before, behind; and I am guarding you as the lids 
guard the eye. Do not be worried in the least, that I am not there. Since your body is getting 
weaker and weaker, be ready for any eventuality. Avoid thoughts of the body, be ever full of 
thoughts of God. Carry on in that manner." When the body gets over-ripe, it rots; when it rots, it 
is thrown away. Her body became ripe, over-ripe and it even suffered due to over-ripeness. So, it 
had to be disposed away. But, her seva and saadhana---these do survive. 


Tread the path of goodness & achieve good results 


Perhaps you wondered why I did not come to give her dharshan (audience), even though she was 
praying for it so long! Her fortune was not this kind of dharshan, standing before you, as I do 
now. But, I certainly stuck to my promise to her, that I shall give dharshan to her, during her last 
moments. I came, I stood before her, I gave her the blessing prasaadha (consecrated gift), I 
asked her to put into her mouth the vibhuuthi (sacred ash) I created and gave her; and, some 
persons round her bed at the time came to know about it. For they asked Narasamma, "What is it 
you are putting into your mouth?" and Narasamma told them, "Swaami came just now and gave 
me Vibhuuthi prasaadham." Until the last breath she was fully conscious. 


Narasamma died at seven minutes past eleven in the morning here at Prashaanthi Nilayam, and 
there at Whitefield, I mentioned to Peddhabottu (who has come there and is staying there), at 
seven minutes past eleven, "Your Narasamma has gone!" 


Her nature, her heart that corresponded with her nature, her achievement which was 
characteristic of her heart and its purity---all bore fruit. It is difficult to understand the beauty of 
such a life and to find analogies by which one can explain it. 


The path depends on the principle, they say. Follow good principles, you are led along to the 
good fruits. So, tread the path of goodness and achieve good results. That is my advice. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 18-4-1971 


Falsehood looks easy and profitable; but, it binds you and pushes 
you into perdition. Purify your feelings and impulses; do not worry 
that others are not doing similarly. 


Each man carries his destiny in his own hands. You will not be 
bound, because others are not freed. You should strive for your 
salvation, at your own pace, from where you started when you 
were born into this chance. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


21. Good and bad 


THE body is the temple where God dwells within, and is installed in the heart. But, it is not 
enough if you go on repeating this very pleasing axiom and pretend that you have joined the 
ranks of the good. To make that statement is a great responsibility. For, you must behave every 
moment, as if you are aware of the God within. The priest in the temple first cleans the altar, then 
he scrubs and polishes the vessels used for worship, and then, he pours water sanctified b; ! 
Manthras in order to cleanse the idol, and finally, he offers adoration through flowers and 
fragrance, reciting the meaningful Names of God. 


You have also to cleanse the senses, the instruments of action and knowledge and remove all the 
blemishes of bad habits, bad tendencies, feelings and thoughts. Render yourselves pure, steady 
and unselfish. Then only can you deserve the chance of worshipping the God within. Until then, 
the temple will be a ruins, infested with bats that revel in the darkness. Vyakthi is used to refer to 
the individual man, not without a certain degree of appropriateness. The Samskrith word means, 
"he who has made manifest the Divinity in him"---that is the answer. That which was 
unmanifested due to the heavy overlay of saadhana, and the a-vyaktha has become vyaktha. He 
who has achieved this is the vyakthi, not each and every single human. Keep the mirror of the 
heart untainted by kaama (desire), and its chief attendant krodha (anger); then, the God within 
clearly shines therein. 


Throw your inclination on the side of the good 


As soon as you rise from bed in the morning, examine for a few moments your thoughts, plans, 
habits and attitudes to others, which are about to pounce on you and decide the shape of things to 
come, throughout the day. Identify in the motley crowd the vicious, the wicked, the evil, the 
harmful, the one that are born in anger, that breed on greed and assert that you are not willing to 
be led by them. Throw your inclination on the side of the good, the constructive, to renounce, 
and rise up a purer, stronger and happier man than when you went to bed. That is the real 
saadhana, not simply spending a few minutes, watching your breath, or wandering homeless and 
living on alms. 


There is a belief that is strongly held and justified by many that good deeds and bad will cancel 
out and it is only the balance that one has to suffer the consequences off That is to say, the 
consequences of sin can be diminished by the consequences of acts of merit, done by the same 
person; ten sins and eleven meritorious acts mean that the balance is favourable to the doer! But, 
this system of accounting does not hold good in the spiritual field. The consequences are there, 
but, they do not cancel out. It is like this: a man scatters seeds of thorn plants as well as of fruit 
trees. Both grow together, and both have to be endured. They sprout distinctly and as ruled by 
their own innate dharma. You may have in an orchard of 1000 fruit trees one thorn bush, but, 
that will not turn into a fruit tree, by association with the rest. What has to be done is to pull out 
and destroy the bush. Identify it as thorny and harmful; and, then, by discrimination, pull it out 
by the roots. By the roots---for, when the rains come, the tree will sprout again, if the slightest 
trace of life is in it. 


Be vigilant about your steps 


Only very few are now able to spot out the thorny bushes and uproot them; so, they have to 
suffer the thorns, even while they are enjoying the fruits. Reap the mixed harvest, you must, if 


you do not take note in time. As I said at the beginning of this discourse, the tragedy is: Man 
seeks to avoid the progeny of sin, with pleasure; he seeks to earn the fruits of meritorious deeds, 
but, is not inclined to follow the meritorious path! Be vigilant about your steps. Do they lead you 
along the road that will take you to the goal you have in view? Or do they turn away from it? 
How can you reach the east, when your steps lead west? 


Many persons ask me, "Swaami! when can I realise the Truth? Please grant me, self-realisation." 
My reply is, you will be liberated the moment the 'l' goes; do not ask for 'my' liberation. 'My' 
liberation. The I should go. The I and mine should go. That is itself liberation. This I has been 
created, protected and grown by your own ignorance. A baby has no I or mine. It easily gives up 
anything from its grasp; the I hardens with the increase of intelligence, and it does not part with a 
doll or toy. Do not allow the role of the separate I to damage the springs of love and sacrifice, in 
your heart. 


In order to escape the nefarious influence of this ego, cleanse the heart with constant 
contemplation of God, .His Glory, His Lee/as, His Beauty, His amazing attributes. Contemplate 
the vast, so that your heart too might overstep its limits and become vast. Bhoomaa (the Vast), 
that alone confers Joy. Another directive I give is: Be more concerned with your own progress, 
your own correction than with the good and evil of others. There is time enough to worry about 
the good of others, after you have become good, yourself. But, try as far as you can, to give 
Aanandha (happiness) to others; desist from causing pain to others. 


The way to realise the unity of all 


You must feel the pain of others as your own; you must be happy when others are happy. That is 
the way to realise the unity of all. Above all, be vigilant; for, the fruits of Saadhana may be 
destroyed by negligence. When the rains come, the earth is again green, for the seeds of grass are 
underground, though you thought the land was dry and fallow. Sathsang, Sathkarma (good 
company, good deeds)---these have to be kept up, all through life. 


Deepaavali (Festival of Lights) celebrates the destruction by Krishna of Narakaasura, King of 
Prakjyothishapura. Narakaasura means the demon who has with every act of his, taking a step 
towards hell. It symbolises ignorant and evilminded men. And, which is their pura (habitation)? 
It is called, Prak-jyothisha! Prak means the First, the Initial. Jyothi means Light; and sha means 
forgetting, ignoring. The city which has forgotten or is ignoring the Primal Light, the body where 
man lives which has neglected the Aathma which is the Primordial Source of Light, Jnaana 
(Intelligence), that is the Prak-jyothi-sha-Pura, over which the Naraka (Hell)-ward marching 
Demon ruled. And, Krishna saved him, by destroying his demonic tendencies and showing him 
the Light. 


18-4-197] 


You are proud that you have written the name of Sai ten million 
times; you talk about it whenever you get the chance, so that others 
may admire your faith and fortitude. 


But, it is not the millions that count; it is the purity of mind that 
results from genuine concentration on the name. 


Your Saadhana must avoid becoming like drawing water from a 
well in a cane basket! You get no water however often you may dip 
and pull the basket up. Each vice is a hole in the bucket. Keep the 


heart pure, keep it whole. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


22. Be and Be Blessed 


ACTIVITY is the keynote of the Universe; by activity, all beings are born, by activity, they 
maintain themselves, and through that activity they: perish. Constant breathing, inhaling and 
exhaling, keeps the body temperature even and comfortable. The One that is beyond all activity 
assumed the forms of the five basic elemental materials---sky, earth, air, fire and water---in order 
to act and activate. To be active, yet, to be always aware that it is all mere acting, is the secret of 
happiness. That is the Dharma (virtue) which must regulate and sanctify the karma. 


The achievements of technology which have taken man to the moon are also events in the 
Cosmic Drama, where the principle performers are only working out His Plan; identification 
with the adventure and its success or failure will make the performers proud or depressed---states 
which would not help inner peace and joy. The secret of good karma is, do karma as an act of 
Worship, a dedicatory rite offered to the source of all energy and intelligence. And, never take 
the consequence to heart. By this means, one can approximate to the Divine Principle, which is 
beyond activity. 


That Divine Principle is the very core of man. Becoming aware of this Truth is the goal of life; it 
is source of strength which is unfailing and irresistible. Close your eyes, you feel there is no one 
else here, though there are thousands. If you suffer from cataract or worse still, if you are blind, 
you cannot know the truth. So, too, the Divine is here, before you, behind you, inside you, 
outside you; the intelligence through which you can recognise It is also with you; but, you are 
either blind, or diseased with defective vision or worse still, wilfully inclined to close your eyes! 


Search for the unreal is the root of all fear 


You have a bird in your very hand; but, you are wasting your time and energy conspiring to 
catch the bird hiding in the bush; the notes that make you believe there is a bird in the bush are, 
you do not know, only the echoes of the notes from the throat of the bird in your own hand! The 
Guru reveals the Truth and makes you free from the travail and the trial, the search for the bird in 
the bush. In a flash, you know, and the Knowledge is Bliss. Why crave for the non-existent? 
Why ignore the 'existent'? That is to say, the Sath? It is the search for the unreal that is the root 
of all the fear, the sorrow, the sickness of humanity. Learn, while you can, the key which will 
open the door of escape. 


Have all around you the curtain of 'Vaamajapam' (the vibrant, vigilant repetition of the Name of 
God, and recapitulation of His Glory); then, unhealthy yearnings for self-aggrandizement will 
not pester and poison you. Naamajapam will not allow you to ignore the essential hollowness of 
worldly affairs and the essential absurdity of getting too involved in it; you behave as if you ate 
the designer of your destiny; you are only a wave, formed on the breast of the ocean by storm 
and surge. 


When his dearly loved son, a stripling of sixteen summers, Abhimanyu, was surrounded and cut 
to pieces by the Kaurava cousins who trapped him in a labyrinth, Arjuna gave vent to his anguish 
before his eldest brother, Dharmaraaja, the consistent follower of righteousness. He placed on 
him the entire blame for the death of his son; indeed, he said that they could have avoided exile, 
poverty, infamy, dishonour, disgrace and all the elaborate preparations for the war of vengence 
had he been cleverer and more adaptable. Dharmaraaja sat quiet and silent during the shower of 
invection. He knew that Arjuna himself, in his cooler moments, will recall the Geetha teaching, 


that every single happening is His handiwork, that no one is killed or no one kills, if only you 
know the Truth, that everyone is a puppet in His hands. 


Seva fulfils the aims of all paths to God 


The quickest and easiest way by which one can realise the basic absurdity of attachment is the 
path of Seva. Pour out Love, whether it is returned or not, whether it results in success or not. Let 
Love be ever translated into Seva, into beneficial acts, sweet words of consolation, comfort and 
courage, and thoughts of sympathy and compassion. I do not declare that other paths like Bhakthi 
or Jnaana are of no use. 


Worship of God in temples and shrines has its place in sanctifying time and sublimating the 
instincts and impulses. Inquiry into reality has its use in clearing the fog of doubt. But, activity in 
the shape of Seva (selfless service) charged with Love fulfils the aims of all paths to Godhead. 


Sarvathaah paani paadham, sarvathokshi shiro mukham, says the Geetha. "All hands are His, all 
feet, all eyes and all faces and mouths are His" He works through all hands, He walks through all 
feet, He sees through each eye. He eats and speaks through every mouth. Everything is He. 
Every step is His, every look, every speech, every act is His. That is the lesson that Seva instils. 


Pray in agony, "Lord! Have you no ears?" and His Ear will be listening. Pray, "Lord! Let me fall 
at Thy Lotus Feet!" and the Feet will present themselves before you. They are at; all places, at all 
times. Your call compels the manifestation, that is all. 


Attach more value to the kernel, not the husk 


When you get a parcel by post, what do you do? You remove the packing and take out the article 
sent, don't you? Take away the packing and secure the thing of value. You say, "For me peace is 
required." Remove the packing on both sides of the thing you really want---'For me' on one side 
(indicative of egoism) and is required on the other (indicative of desire, want, sense of 
incompleteness). Don't have egoism and desire; you have Peace! It is the packaging that hinders 
the securing of the Reality. You attach more value to the husk, not the kernel. 


A certain village had a few philanthropic people who provided it with a drinking water well, an 
overhead tank and a distributory system of pipes and taps. They were so pleased with it and so 
proud of their possession that they decided to invite the Governor of the State to inaugurate the 
system, by opening one of the taps, on an auspicious day and moment, selected by astrologers. 
The Governor graciously agreed. The philanthropists were elated; they fitted a length of gold 
pipe, and had a golden tap made for the occasion. Festoons and flags were hung on the pavilion 
put up around the tap. Bands of musicians with their complicated and costly instruments were 
hired from the metropolis. Pandiths (scholars) were gathered from various Paathasaalas 
(traditional schools) to recite Vedhic Hymns as the water would start to flow. 


Connect the act of service with love in the heart 


There was no dearth of V.I.Ps, that morning; hundreds of cars streamed into the tiny hamlet. The 
great moment came; the Governor solemnly approached the golden tap. He gave it the right kind 
of twist; but, no water flowed! The Vedhic recitation rose to the skies; There was no trickle, not 
even a drop or the sign of one! Everyone wondered why. The well was full, the pump worked 
well; the tank was not leaky. The golden pipe was there, with the golden tap. What was really the 


fault, they asked each other. At last someone discovered that the golden pipe had not been 
connected with the regular supply system; it had not been screwed in. 


Have you connected your act of service with the reservoir of Love in the heart? Are you doing it 
with God-consciousness? Or is it merely a superficial ceremonial routine act, done for publicity 
or personal pride? Really, the power that man holds in himself is unsurpassed; no other created 
being has it. For he is the living image of God, the precious casket enshrining the Divine Itself. If 
you are weak, grief-stricken and ignorant, the fault is yours; do not blame others: you have not 
tapped the spring of God within you. This is the sin-,-the turning of the blind eye to this patent 
fact. Diagnose the faults in the eye, and have the blind spots or the cataract cured. You can do it, 
by prayer or by resorting to a Guru. 


There are three stages in this process of awareness: Jijnaasa, Mumukshu and Aaroodha--- 
Inquiry, Yearning and Attainment. (1) The period of study, (2) the period of being employed in a 
job, when what is studied as applied in practice, and (3) the period of life when one lives without 
care on a well-deserved pension---these can be compared to the three stages mentioned above. 


Worldly loss or profit are playthings of a day 


You may have a picture or two of the Form of Go you like; "O Lord," you may cry before the 
picture and prostrate before it, in humility and contrition. It helps to ensure peace of mind. But, 
do not pray for paltry gains, or petty-vengeances against others! Such prayers will take you away 
from Grace; you faith will suffer set-backs. Wordly loss and profit are playthings of a day; they 
are like baubles with which you sport in dreams; when you awake, they are gone! When you are 
awake into knowledge and awareness of the God in you, they melt away from your 
consciousness. Why bother with gaining them or losing them? 


All are of one essence; let this truth be established in your heart. Then there can be no faction, no 
fear, no fanatic attachment to someone. For want of this vision, we have at present cliques in 
every family at cross purposes over every matter! The Raamaayana and the Mahaabhaaratha 
hold forth examples of avoiding such situations and establishing Dharma in the home, the village 
and the nation. Wives like Seetha, husbands like Raama, brothers like Lakshmana and Bharatha, 
Arjuna and Bheema are delineated therein. 


Do not try to avoid contact with others or with external nature. Develop a wider, a universal, 
outlook. Look upon external nature as the vestment of God; it is the expression of the Will of 
God, it is the manifestation of His glory, His power, His might, His majesty. See these in every 
blade of grass, in every floral petal, every slice of fruit. Learn lessons from the river, the 
mountains, the star and the sky. 


The message of the seers of India 


Through this worshipful attitude to man and beast, plant and stone, you must remove the veils of 
Thamas (ignorance), Rajas (passion) and even Sathwa (goodness) and achieve equanimity---the 
stage where judgement itself is given up. Then, you become aware of your own Self, behind and 
beyond the three veils. Yanna bhaarathi, thanna bhaarath, says the scripture. "Where there is no 
Vidhya, there is no Bhaarath." Intelligence is the sign of the true son of India; he yearns to 
discriminate between the Real and the Unreal through purified and clarified intelligence. 


Discriminate and decide; dive and declare the depth; eat and judge the taste. That has been the 
message of the seers of India. Mere axioms without the chance to prove their value to oneself 


were not thrown at the pupils by the ancient preceptors. The pupil was told then that Divinity 
was dancing in every cell of his; that he can therefore be fearless. Meet hatred with your innate 
Prema (Love); meet grief with innate Joy; meet anger with the shield of Shaanthi (Inner Peace). 
You are bound to win. Loka is Lokesha: "the Universe is the Universal Principle" manifested in 
multifarious particulars. Man is Maadhava (God) in miniature. The human body has been 
acquired as a gift in return for the meritorious lives spent by you in the past. The nature of man is 
genuinely Divine, in the past, present and future, for ever. There was never a time when it was 
not. 


To plead that one has no time for spiritual Saadhana of this type is sheer sloth, sheer cowardice; 
for, it is an endeavour that can co-exist with other activities and even fertilise those activities into 
fruition. There is nothing to be gained, except awareness of what already is. Simply BE; that is 
the state of Bliss, of Peace and Truth and Love. 


11-5-1971 


Do not grieve, nor be the cause of grief: The very embodiment of 
Aanandha (God) is in you, as in others, as in all else. In spite of a 
multiplicity of containers, the contained is the same. That is the 
principle of Sath, Chith and Aanandha (Being, Awareness, Bliss). 
The minutest atom, the mightiest star--both are basically one. All 
are, in truth, Brahman, Divine. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


23. The two poles 


THIS was to be a gathering exclusively for Office Bearers of the Units of the Sathya Sai Seva 
Organisation in Maharaashtra; but, what have we to confer only among ourselves? The 
Organisation is designed to promote the welfare and progress of all and so, I am glad devotees 
and volunteers are also participating. 


You must be clear about the objectives of the Organisation of which your unit is a limb; for, 
without having the goal clear in the mind, how can the journey end in success? Whatever you do- 
--reading, writing, meditating, doing Bhajan (group singing), going on pilgrimage---can be valid 
and worthwhile, only if you have the objective clearly in view. You must know why certain 
things have to be done, and why certain other things have to be avoided. 


Imagine you are on a journey to, say Prashaanthi Nilayam. En route, you have to change trains at 
Guntakal, from the broad gauge line to the metre gauge line, isn't it? You wish to take a little rest 
and you go to a Travellers Bungalow. The man in charge asks you. Whence do you come? 
Where do you wish to go?" Now, if you have forgotten the answers to these universal queries, 
how awkward will it be! You can neither go forward, nor, return! 


You are now an individual, contained in this body or that; you are moving every moment 
towards your home, the place where you came from, the Aathma, the Param-aathma (The 
Supersoul of which your own soul is but a spark). The Upanishaths ask the questions, Whence, 
Whither, Who, Why; and, when you pine for the answers, they teach you the solutions and 
advise you to practise the disciplines for experiencing the answers and their truth yourselves. 


God acknowledges His devotee as His friend 


Know whence and whither, both. The letter must have the address of the person from whom it 
has come, so that it could be returned to the sender, in case of need; it must, of course, have the 
address of the person to whom it is to be delivered for, else, why write at all? Now, since the 
letter, that is, 'your life,' is not aware of whence and whither, it rots in the post box only, or 
perhaps, it might reach the Dead Letter Office! Why waste lives like that? Learn from the Guru, 
and move forward, from the box to bliss. Everyone has the basic urge to imbibe the immortality 
from which he has fallen off! Some, like flies flit from fair to foul, are swooped for their pains! 
They are avoided as disease carriers; they do not give ease to those that contact them; they only 
tease and torment. Others are like bees, seeking only honey from fragrant flowers, and 
fructifying, them in return for the sweetness they derive. Every being has a latent, basic urge to 
know the Supreme Self, the Paramaathma. 


Some persons boast that they are devotees of God, that God has blessed them in such and such 
ways that God's Grace has helped them thus and thus; do not give ear to these ego centred 
pretenders. You become a devotee when God has acknowledged your devotion. The ego is the 
greatest obstacle in the way of such acceptance. God has said, You madh bhakthah sa me priyah: 
"He who is my devotee is my friend!" Why has God mentioned both 'devotee' and 'friend'?. The 
devotee reveres God, he fears God, and so, cannot be quite close to Him. A friend is most close 
to Him. But, if one is only a friend and not a devotee, there is the danger that he might take 
liberties with Him, which might not be pardoned. Freedom must not turn into licence! 


Everyone has to guard land, faith and wife 


Bheeshma was a mighty warrior; he was famous for the grandeur and glory that he won, through 
both detachment and Divine Grace. In the vicinity of his kingdom, Bheeshma once had to 
encounter a person called Gadhaa-dhara. This man had undergone severe austerity and received 
from God as a reward for pleasing Him, an invincible discus Chakra (wheel) so people hailed 
him as Chakradhara (the wielder of the Divine Wheel-weapon)! The fellow had become so 
insolent and wicked that he wrote a most insulting missive to Bheeshma, on the death of 
Shanthanu, Bheeshma's Father. Chakradhara wrote, "Either send the widowed queen to my 
palace zenana or, meet me in battle!" Who could tolerate such insults and keep quiet? It is said 
that everyone has to guard Dharani (land), Dharma (faith) and Dharmapathni (wife). 


Bheeshma said to himself, "What is my life worth, if I cannot avenge this insult, if I cannot save 
my mother's honour?" But, the Brahmanas of the court advised him that he should engage 
himself in combat with Chakradhara only after ten days; for, during the ten-day-period after the 
death of his father, he had ceremonial pollution and during that period, he should not handle the 
divine missiles he had with him. He could not utter then, the holy manthras which can activise 
them. "Finish the religious rites to appease the departed soul of your father and then, destroy the 
foe in battle," they advised. Bheeshma realised the propriety of their counsel and sent a message 
to Chakradhara, inviting him for the fray ten days later! 


Skill reinforced by Divine Grace can work wonders 


But, Chakradhara could not delay that long; he was itching for victory; he directed his newly 
won weapon at Bheeshma! But, a wonderful thing happened! That Chakra which had come from 
the hand of God would not harm a son who was doing his scriptural duty, performing the Vedhic 
rites for the manes! It rotated in the sky for ten days, waiting for the funeral-pollution period to 
end! When one is devoted to his duty, one is surrounded by such powerful protecting influences 
that no injurious force dare approach. That is the way Grace operates. Personal skill when 
reinforced by Divine Grace, can work wonders, as happened when the horde of monkeys 
successfully built a bridge across the sea to Lanka. 


One has to go through the act of expiation 


A study of the lives of the great men of past ages in Bhaarath will reveal that they were candid 
enough and brave enough to confess their sins before everyone. They were also willing and 
ready to accept punishment for the sin committed. They sought to know what the Praayachittha 
(expiation of sin) was---the means of purifying and cleansing the erring mind. They went 
through the process with a sense of contrition and contentment. 


The Horse that was let loose and allowed to wander through whatever realm it willed, a 
preliminary to the Ashwamedha yaaga "(Horse-sacrifice) resolved upon by the Paandava 
brothers, was being guarded by Arjuna, who followed it at a certain distance. When the horse 
passed through Manipur (ruled by Babhruvaahana, his own son born, of Chithraangada), the 
King held it captive in his stables! 


Arjuna marched towards the City; when Babhruvaahana heard of his arrival and knew that he 
was his father, he went forward with all his courtiers, kinsmen and priests to give him the 
welcome due to the father. But, Arjuna invited him for combat; he said, "Having stopped the 
horse, you must fight and not cringe before its guardian. Earn it on the field of battle; do not be a 


blot on the fair name of Kshathriya!" His mother too urged him not to shirk his duty, whoever 
be the guardian of the horse or whatever his kinship with him. When the call of war is heard, no 
Kshathriya should creep back, she asserted. 


So Babhruvaahana went back and fought so valiantly with his own father that Arjuna was 
overwhelmed by the rain of sharp arrows. He fell dead on the ground, between the two armies! 
Babhruvaahana was plunged in agony. At that moment, a divine nymph, Uluupi by name, came 
upon the scene, and consoled the son "Do not grieve! This is but the play of Fate. It is written 
that Arjuna should suffer death at the hands of his son, as an act of expiation for his mis-deeds. 
Now, touch him and he will rise up alive!" This was done and Arjuna regained consciousness. 
The two entered the City happily and were welcomed by Chithraangadha. 


Arjuna himself had asked for this calamity, in order to cleanse his mind. During the battle of 
Kurukshethra, he had killed his own guru and grandfather, Bheeshma, and repented pathetically 
for that: sin. He had invoked, a punishment on himself for the wrong---"To redeem me from this 
sin, may I die at the hands of my own son!" Constant cleansing of the heart is essential, so that 
the spiritual journey might be smooth and without accidents. 


Serve your family as a duty 


You are all nuts, bolts and screws. If even the tiniest screw thinks, "I am just a small screw; what 
does it matter if I am not cent per cent efficient?" a fatal accident can easily happen! Do not 
neglect your duty wherever it lies. Have self-control, so that: the senses may not run amuck. 
Serve your family as a duty, not with more attachment than is due. 


Frogs croak all round the tank, sitting in hundreds along the shore, when the tank is full; when it 
goes dry, not a single one is seen! Kinsmen crowd in when you are in affluence; when your 
riches are drained by misfortune, you are left severely alone! 


There is the story of a rich man, who was being led away on death to the world beyond. He 
pleaded with his angelic escort that he may be allowed to halt a while, and turn back once. They 
allowed him to do so; he turned and had a good look, then, he said, "Well, now I am ready; lead 
me on!" The messengers were surprised at his strange willingness to accompany them; they 
asked him what had happened to make him so resigned and determined. He said, "I amassed vast 
wealth through sin and crime; I fed and fostered a large brood of friends and kinsmen. I looked 
back to see whether at least one among them is now following me, eager to help in my sorrowful 
plight! Not a single one is worried about me. I shall now walk forward to wherever you take 
me." 


God is the truest friend. A sage has described the spiritual family, which will never hurt you with 
such ingratitude. Truth is the father; Love is the mother. Knowledge is the son; Peace is the 
daughter. Devotees are brothers; Yogees are the friends. Cultivate this type of family; you can be 
happy in their midst. 


Bliss obliterates all worries and anxieties 


Sathya Sai Seva Samithis have been formed, to enable you to achieve peace and joy. They are 
not to be used for advertisement of myself or yourself. Some people ask. "Why rules and 
regulations in a spiritual organisation?" How can progress be achieved without disciplining the 
mind? Regulation, strict regulation, is essential up to a certain stage of individual development. 


The aeroplane runs on wheels for some length on the ground, before it takes off into the air. You 
may ask, "Why wheels for air-plane?" So too, when you reach a certain height in spiritual 
saadhana, rules and regulations can be folded up, as the pilot folds up the wheels when up in the 
air. While serving others through the Samithi, do not forget to do some Saadhana for your own 
advancement. Paraseva (service of others) is the negative pole; Aathma-seva (service to one- 
self) is the positive pole; and when they meet, the Flash of Aanandha (Bliss) emanates. Bliss 
obliterates all worries, all fears, and all anxiety. March on to that consummation, through 
Saadhana and Seva. That is my Blessing to each of you. 


Bombay, 13-5-1971 


God does not reside in the head; He is Hridhayavaasi, the dweller 
in the heart. Keep the heart cool, pure and soft---as the moonlight 
is on the Guru Poornima Day. For this, your mind has to be 
cleansed by the mind only. 


Just as you shape an iron sickle or axe with an iron hammer, the 
mind is the shaper and shaped, both. 


The power behind the mind which helps it to shape it well, is Faith 
in God. That is why it is declared that one must have faith in God, 
holy places, the scriptures, the manthra, the soothsayer, the drug 
and the teacher. 


Cultivate that Faith and everything else will be added unto you. 
Sri Sathya Sai 


24. You are all I 


YOU must live in conformity with the basic ideals of our Organisation. The Seva to which this 
Organisation invites you is the very first step in the growth of the Spirit. Seva is the 
manifestation of your willingness to work, irrespective of reward; for, work is dedicated as 
worship. That attitude robs egoism of its sting and instils in the mind the Divinity inherent in all 
creation. Faith in God is the very taproot of all spiritual activity, either through this Organisation 
or otherwise. 


There shall be a system and an order in the Organisation---every unit has to follow the All India 
pattern. No State can arrange things in its own way. Mysore, Kerala, Gujarat, all States have to 
keep before them the same pattern, and not venture on separate individual types of units. Every 
unit must respect and follow the rules and regulations laid down at the All India Conference, 
from year to year. 


This Conference is just a chance for you to move a day or two in good company, and charge your 
batteries, for further stages of the journey to God. When one is added to one, it becomes two; 
when one is placed by the side of another one, it reads as eleven! That is the measure of Sath- 
sang, the companion-ship of the wise and the good. All these petty ones must end up in that 
ONE. That is the ultimate goal, the journey's end. The Vedhas direct man through karma 
(activity) into upaasana (worship) and finally into jnaana (the wisdom that breaks the shackles). 


When you surrender, give yourself fully 


The leaders in each unit, that is to say, the President, Vice-President, the Secretaries and others, 
must themselves walk aright and be right. They must all join the Nagarasankeerthan, the choral 
singing along the roads of the village or the town in the early dawn. If the rich and the influential 
sit at home and ask the rest to go and take part in the sankeerthan, we do not need them as 
Presidents or Office-bearers. No unit must depend on such people, however rich they happen to 
be. Money comes and goes; but mortality, once come, grows! Try to break the coconut, with the 
fibre on! It is an impossible task. You have to take out the shelled nut from inside the packing 
fibre; then, if you hit at the shell, the kernel becomes available for use. Remove the fibrous 
cover, sensual desires, so that you can get at the kernel of spiritual joy. 


Many of you declare even before Me that you have surrendered everything to My Will; this is 
mere verbiage. Your mind is not your own! You are its plaything, tossed about, as it fancies and 
frolics! How then can you claim to have given it over to Me? You have to give yourself, fully 
over, when you surrender. Nothing should be held back. And, what is it that you can call your 
own, which you can give Me? Your offering of homage is but pouring back into the Kaaveri 
river the waters of the Kaaveri! There is nothing creditable in that. 


The weighing machine on which you stand and exult that you have put on ten pounds since the 
last weighing in, laughs at your exultation{ It chuckles within itself, "Yes! When death overtakes 
you, you will be ten pounds heavier for the undertakers!' You have come into the World, which 
is a Dharmakshethra, abode of righteousness; so be righteous. 


Practise what you direct others to do 


Your destiny is not achieving the peak pleasure, but climbing the peak of Bliss. Dhaya 
(compassion) and dharma (morality) will take you higher and higher, until the summit. So, 
practise these qualities even in your smallest acts, to the best of your capacity. You cannot 


always oblige; but can you not talk, obligingly? You can; but, you don't! The tongue has the 
extra power to harm and hurt; so, you must exercise extra control over it. Do not pain anyone 
through your words; spread Love; be full of Love, If you cannot love man, how can you hope to 
love God? 


Develop indifference towards accumulation of wealth or power. Dhritharaashtra held on to his 
kingdom and his hundred sons; finally, he had to lose his throne and live on in misery as the lone 
survivor of the dynastic holocaust! Once there was a big quarrel between Lakshmi, the Consort 
of God Naaraayana, and the Goddess of Wealth and Jnaana (knowledge)-which was the Intellect 
of Naaraayana; they began to argue that each was superior to the other. Wealth was more useful, 
said Lakshmi; without knowledge, wealth is a danger, said the Intellect. But Naaraayana 
intervened and said both are either good or bad, according to the use man puts them to! 


Use the office you hold in the Units to the best advantage, namely, to overcome your ego, to 
inspire others in the Godward path and to relieve distress. Don't go through the routine of 
bhajan, dhyaana and Nagarasankeerthan, because you have to; or, because someone else will 
usurp your Office, if you do not stick on. Share it with others, act from the depths of your hearts. 
Do not indulge in mere talking. Practise what you direct others to do, asserting that it is 
beneficial. 


When motives are purer knowledge will be pure 


Merge in God, submerge your mind in Divine activity; ‘eeyathe gamyathe ithi lingah': “that in 
which all merge, that to which all proceed is Linga.” God is called 'chittha chora' (the thief who 
steals hearts); when you know that he does so because he likes hearts, it is your duty to keep the 
hearts dean, so that He will be more pleased at His booty. That 'thief’ is your only well wisher. 
The rest are interested in what you leave behind when you die; they search for your 'will' and 
‘insurance papers!'. 


Youth, wealth, reputation, status, authority---all are subject to quick ups and downs. There was 
one young man who wasted much of his father's income and lived through College a number of 
years, as an M.S.M. student! That is to say, failing in the March Examinations, appearing again 
for the September Examinations, again appearing in March---M.S.M. for short! At last, out of 
sheer disgust at his consistent feeble-mindedness, the University gave him a degree and got rid of 
him! When proposals for his marriage were mooted, he insisted that the bride must be a degree 
holder, a graduate! And a graduate she was! He reclined on an easy chair and sang, "My life is 
entirely happy now." He asked his wife "Get me a cup of hot coffee!"; but, she replied, "I am as 
much a graduate as you are; why should I alone prepare the cup of coffee? Come into the kitchen 
and make your coffee for yourself." Then, he sang another tune, "My life is entire darkness, Oh." 
When everything goes well, it is heaven when things go awry, it is hell! The same event is 
heaven today, hell tomorrow. Until your hunger is appeased, food is desirable; when it is 
appeased, food is a nuisance! When motives are pure, knowledge will be pure; when knowledge 
is pure, liberation is ensured. 


Expansion is Love, contraction is Death 


For example, consider the feeding of the poor, which many units are now doing. You arrange the 
feeding, once a year, on the Annual Day of your Unit; but; is that enough? Does it solve the 
problem? Do they eat but one meal a year? They have to eat, as you do, many times a day. So, let 
Me ask you: Instead of feeding hundreds one day in the year, let the housewife keep aside every 


day, when she takes out rice for cooking the food for the family, a handful, saying, "This is for 
the offering that Swaami accepts," and at the end of the week, feed at home three or four hungry 
people with that 'offered' rice. This is the real Anna-Samidh arpana---"offering food as fuel in 
the holy fire of hunger." Old clothes can be collected and given to the poor, when new clothes 
are not available or not within your means. Children outgrow their clothes soon, keep them by 
and give them to the children in the poorer areas. Expansion is Love; contraction is Death! 


The Sathya Sai Organisation and its units must not collect money or material from those outside 
the membership. Fund collection is as much opposed to this movement as fire is to water. If you 
yield on this point, spiritual advance will perish. Let only members contribute; do not ask all and 
sundry, or anyone who is not a member of the Samithi (unit). 


In Mysore State there are some who distribute amrith, vibhuuthi (holy ash) and other articles 
announcing that they are showering from my pictures at their places; they do this free for some 
weeks, and later, they start begging for money, like any common mendicant! This is sin, to ask 
so and also to give so. Devotees should keep far away from such places and persons. 


Avoid pomp, exhibition and boasting 


Visualise God in your hearts; why, go to such place or outside yourselves to see Him? In some 
other places, they announce that I make Myself present and communicate through writings on 
rangoli powder etc.! I do not do such things, if I come at all to any place. I come directly, so that 
you see Me. I do not speak or answer through another person or another medium! Carry on 
Naamasmaran, japa, bhajan (remembrance, repetition and singing of God's name) in your own 
home; there is no special call for you to come to this place or that. Wherever you are, whatever 
name you like, whatever Forum pleases you, I bless you, if your heart is pure. Avoid pomp, 
exhibition, boasting; be simple, sincere and sweet. 


Cleanse your home of falsehood, hypocrisy and cruelty and then proceed to start Baalavikaas 
(Children's Club). Or else, the children will catch "infection!" Do not import into the Sathya Sai 
Organisation political faction-mongering, group- formation, scandal-spreading, and vote 
catching, in order to win positions of authority or oust others from them. Do not create splits and 
parties among the devotees in order to establish yourselves over others! Even when you are 
slandered, you should not lose balance. Put up with slander and scandalising talks. Anger is the 
chief enemy of Saadhana, as Vishwaamithra discovered. One attack of anger exhausts three 
months of health and efficiency. Before encountering Jaraasandha in open battle, Krishna 
enraged him nine times; time after time, getting nearly caught and escaping from his hold; these 
bouts of rage so weakened him that, when the final bout took place, he could be easily 
overpowered! 


Be vigilant everywhere, at all times 


Contentment is heaven; grief is hell; anger is the foe; calmness is the armour; compassion is the 
comrade. You repeat Shaanthi three times, don't you? It is to encourage peace in the human, 
godly and natural milieu in which you have to live; also to develop peace, in the body, mind and 
intellect! 


There is no visible Master for those who are part of Organisations run in the name of Raama or 
Krishna; but, in this Organisation the Master is here, available for help, advice and direction. 
You cannot behave in accordance with your whims and wishes here. You have to be vigilant 


everywhere and at all times. Discard the ego and serve. Don't go about with extended hand, and 
humiliate yourselves. Ask Me, when you need any help. 


Extend your hand only for Grace from God. Ask Grace as of right, not in a grovelling style. Ask, 
as the child asks the father; feel that God is nearest and dearest. You are the reflections, the 
images; I am the bimba (object), the Object so reflected. Can there be any question of difference 
between the object and its images? You are all I. I am all you. I know I am the Aathma; you 
believe you are the body! You are sugar dolls; I am the sugar. Revere any Name; the reverence 
reaches Me, for, I answer to all Names. Denigrate any individual; it affects Me; for all 
individuals are expressions of My Will. 


Dharwar, 14-5-1971 


Detachment, Faith and Love---these are the pillars on which 
Shaanthi rests. Of these, faith is crucial. For without it, Saadhana 
is an empty rite. Detachment alone can make saadhana effective, 
and Love leads quickly to God. 


Faith feeds the agony of separation from God; detachment 
canalises it along the path of God; Love lights the way. 


God will grant you what you need and deserve; there is no need to 
ask, no reason to grumble. Be content. Nothing can happen against 
His Will. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


25. Who am I? 


BEING a human is itself a great piece of good fortune; and, getting born in India, with its 
precious heritage of spiritual discipline is a blessing for which you must feel grateful indeed! 
Four items of enquiry have been emphasised for ages by the sages of India, who built up the 
heritage of which you are proud today. They are: Dheham, Naaham, Koham and Soham. First, 
the Body where you dwell, in which you are encased. It is called, meaningfully, dheham, that is 
to say, that which is combustible, liable to be burnt. How can anyone feel attachment to such a 
transient tinsel? It is subject to growth and decay; it is the harbour of worms and viruses, of 
foulness and illness. It is subject to impulses and the impact of passion and emotion. It is the seat 
of disease and unrest; of fancy and fantasy and fear. It calls on you enticingly to invest 
yourselves wholly in its care and cure. It entangles you so much in its coils that you forget you 
are its master, as you are the master of the car in which you ride to office or the home to which 
you return from office. 


When you delve deep into the transience of the dheham you get well rooted in the next idea: 
Naaham, I am not the Body, which I had mistakenly taken to be me! Naaham means, Not-I. The 
dheham is naaham, the Body is Not-I. I am the owner, the temporary user, occupier of this 
instrument or bundle of instruments; that is all. 


Man is a spark of the Divine 


People keep on asking others, "Who are you? What is your Name? Where are you from? Whither 
are you bound?"---but, they seldom ask these questions of themselves or try to discover answers 
to these mysteries! When you get that thirst, you are in the Koham stage. Koham means, "Who 
am I?" "I am a highly evolved ape," say some. "I am a conglomerate of chemicals," say others. "I 
am a contraption with a limited life, I begin at birth and end at death," say some. "I am. an 
eternal entity, and this is but one sojourn of mine here on earth," say others. ‘7’ is a false 
limitation imposed by ignorance; "I am a wave of the ocean and so I am the Ocean itself," 
declare others! These last announce that the I is Soham, 'I am He.' He, meaning the eternal, 
Universal Absolute, the Brahman, the Boundless, Beginningless, Endless entity. When that 
axiom is meditated upon and made one's own deepest experience, man has the highest Bliss, the 
Bliss of merging into the Aathman from which he felt long he had been displaced. 


Man is a spark of the Divine; he must manifest in every activity of him, the Divine. Activity is 
his lot; he cannot exist without the physical activity of breathing, or the mental activity of 
thought. With every breath, he must inhale the experience of Soham, with every thought, he must 
express and experience his Divine affiliation. God is Love; Love is the Divinest quality that man 
can cultivate and confer on himself. Be born in Love, die in Love; live in Love. That is to say, 
emerge from God and merge in God; be the wave on the Ocean of Love. You should not die; you 
should merge and fulfil yourself. That is the destiny, that is the destination. 


You are not limited by any name; a baby has no name stuck on to it when it is born. The name is 
a label fixed later, for the sake of social convenience. But, you start identifying yourself with the 
label! You answer giving your name, when you are asked, Who? The name separates; it 
distinguishes; it announces the divisive characteristics of language, religion, caste, race, etc. Go 
beyond the name to the individual, beyond the individual to the God who is installed in the heart. 
Then, kinship is cognised and Love streams forth! Spend the years of life, the wherewithal you 


earn or possess, in the service of others who are in distress. Love grows on such service. Service 
is the sincerest form of adoration of God. 


Get beyond the horizon of body, mind & intellect 


When man moves away from his moorings, hate spreads far and wide. In the past ages (the 
Kritha, Thretha and Dwaapara Ages), the fumes of hatred poisoned human relations off and on; 
but, at no time were they so insidious and so infiltrating as now. Now, the evil has contaminated 
relations in the family, the village, the community, the school, the State, the nation and the 
international organisations. In no field of human activity is it absent! When the members of the 
same family are engaged in faction, how can the nation be free from it and how can national 
affairs be conducted in the spirit of tolerance and mutual cooperation? It is wrong to spend the 
days in the prison of dualities, the see-saw of grief and joy, pain and pleasure, success and 
defeat. Get beyond the horizon of body, mind and intellect, and be One with the Vastness. 
Brahman means the Vast, the expanse without horizons. 


God is the inner Truth of all, content of every body 


Peace is what everyone seeks; but, it can never be secured from the outside world. Alexander had 
no peace; Mohammed of Ghazni had no peace. The millionaires are harassed by fear and 
anxiety. Accumulation of riches or power cannot endow peace. Peace can come only from the 
fountain of peace, within. An old woman dropped her needle, while mending a tear in her saree. 
She had poor eyesight; so, she could not locate the needle in the pail where she sat. So, she went 
under the street light on the road and looked searchingly on the patch of light; some boys 
returning from school saw her plight and offered to help. They asked her what she had dropped 
and what she was searching for. She replied, "I dropped my needle in the pail of my hut; but, it is 
dark there! I am half blind. There is some little light here; I can see better. Therefore, I am 
searching for it here!" The boys laughed and told her, "Grannie! How can you get your needle 
back from here? Search for it where you have lost it!" 


You have lost peace, vision and wisdom in the region of the self; how can you get them back, if 
you seek for them, in the world, which can be contacted only by the senses? Search where you 
have lost them; in your heart! There you will recover them; for, they are only attributes of the 
Divine, which is installed there. God is the inner Truth of all; He is latent, in this vast assembly. 
He is patent in this Universe, which is His vesture. 


You talk fluently about this; but, your actions are not moulded by that inspiration. The food on 
the plate must reach the stomach; its calories must reach every limb and organ in the body. So 
too, the sense of the Divine must be infused into every word, deed and thought. You may have a 
chalice of ambrosia by your side; you may know its composition, fragrance, colour, density, etc.; 
but, unless you place a spoonful or a drop on your tongue, you have not fulfilled the purpose of 
winning it. Go is the content of every body that you see around you; but you do not make any 
effort to know Him! 


Each country is but a room in the mansion of God 


Serve others with reverence---that is the easiest and best method to cognise the Divine content in 
each. Since all are His forms, His sparks, His children, feel that kinship with every community; 
pray for the welfare and prosperity of all mankind, whatever the political boundaries which 
might shut them from one another. Until recently, there was no Pakistan. It is a creature of 


political strategy, of human weakness, or foible. Do not think of them as anything but artificial 
arrangements; let not your love be curtailed. Pray that tolerance and understanding shall prevail 
and that love and cooperation hold sway, more and more among mankind, whatever appellation 
may be---Russian, Chinese, Pakistani, Indian or American. Each country is but a room in the 
mansion of God. Small minds select narrow roads; expand your mental vision and take to the 
broad road of helpfulness, compassion and service. 


Pain and grief toughen your moral fibre 


Saadhakas (aspirants) of Self-realisation are like mansions; they have to lay brick, and raise the 
wall higher and higher. That is the upward vision. Others are akin to well-diggers; they get lower 
and lower; that is the downward vision. Be like the spire, piercing the sky. Shower Aanandha on 
others; lead them along the godly way; be an example in sincerity and earnestness. Partake in 
Bhajan and Naamasankeerthan (singing of God's Names); share in the singing loudly and with 
enthusiasm. Some ask Me, "Why should we sing aloud? Isn't it enough if we feel it in the silence 
of the mind?" I know all this is mere dry Vedhaantha! They are prepared to advise others in the 
Samithi, but, are unwilling to practise the advice themselves! 


Two friends were remarkable for their sloth; one of them had to catch a train at 3 A.M. So, he 
asked his friend to wake him up at 2.30 A.M. itself, for he had no faith in himself. The friend 
was even more of a sloth! He wanted that he should be awakened by his friend at 2.15 A.M. so 
that he could wake the same fellow at 2.30! How can anything be accomplished by such men? 


Develop a calm unruffled serenity of mind. Welcome pain and grief, for they toughen the moral 
fibre, they reveal hidden sources of courage and hardihood. They appear to affect your career; 
but, the real 'you' is unaffected. The real 'you' is the 'I' that wakes, dreams and sleeps. While 
asleep, you are unaware whether you are a man, a bird, a beast or a tree! 


Curious assortment of family members of Shiva 


Here, at Dhaarwar and Hubli, we have a large number of Shivabhakthas, devoted to the Shiva 
aspect of Divinity. Shiva is the supreme exemplar of serenity! Shiva, according to the Puraanas 
has a curious assortment of family members. Yet, each one is so calm and without agitation, that 
the Divine Family exists in peace and concord. Shiva has snakes on His arms, round His neck, on 
His head, around His waist! One of his sons, Kumaara rides on a peacock, which attacks snakes; 
another rides on a mouse, which the snakes feed on! One son has the head of the elephant, which 
whets the appetite of the Lion, which is the vehicle used by Dhurga, the Consort of Shiva, who is 
so inseparable that she is the left half of the body of Shiva Himself. Nor is the Lion friendly by 
nature to the Bull, which the Lord Shiva Himself has as His vehicle! Shiva has Fire on the 
Central Point of His Brow, and Water, the river (Ganga) on His head, incompatibles both! 
Imagine how loving, how co-operative the various components have to be, to render life in 
Kailaash smooth and happy! 


It all depends on the mind and its proper discipline. The weapon of Love will disarm every 
opponent. Love begets Love; it will be reflected back, it will have only Love as reaction, Shout 
"Love'; the echo from the other person's heart will also be 'Love'. 


Walk on the path of righteousness, dharma. That is what all appreciate. Dharma means morality, 
the control of passions and emotions and directing them along beneficial channels. If you have 
no greed or hatred, you will get good sleep, also. There is no need to swallow sleeping tablets! 


Now, life has become artificial, there is no art or heart in life! It has become mere 'fishlal' type of 
life---for, consider how fish stinks, though all its life is spent in water! 


Better to be mad for God, than be mad for money 


Wake up every day, to the singing of the Glory of God for if God does not exist, what is it that 
exists? Live every day, in that joy, with that inspiration as your companion. Some Samithis have 
reported that they are beginning Nagara-sankeerthan one day in the week, or two days in the 
month! This is no sincere Saadhana. What do you lose, how much of ancestral property you 
have to sell(!), if you have Nagarasankeerthan every morning? Have it every day, immerse 
yourself in that discipline and imbibe the bliss. Do not fear people who call you mad! When you 
know and when your heart tells you that it is a joyful experience, carry on, in spite of calumny 
and criticism. It is far better to be mad for god than be mad for money, or wife and children. If 
only more people suffer from this madness, the world will be a much happier place! 


Thyaagenaike Amrruthathwam Aanashuh: "It is by renunciation alone that immortality can be 
experienced!" Renounce the petty pleasures and tread the path towards the Supreme Aanandha 
which is God. You say, "enjoy"; but, it is when you "end joy", that you can really enjoy. These 
petty joys must end; the pursuit of tawdry tinsel should stop; then, the mind will fix itself on the 
highest joy. I find here a vast ocean of piety and spiritual aspiration. When there are such large 
numbers of seekers in Dhaarwar, why is the city overclouded with anxiety and dread? Carry to 
every door the name of God and let the clouds be illumined by Love and Reverence. 


Let every street in the towns, every village in the State, ring with the adoration of the Almighty, 
every sunrise sing of Raama, Ishwara, Shankara or Krishna---any Name is effective, provided it 
is suffused with the Divine Essence Love. Branches, twigs, leaves, flowers and fruits may appear 
to be different in colour, feel, taste, smell, etc., but, all are products of the earth, drawing 
sustenance from the soil and the Sun. Live together in love; live in peace; live in service. I bless 
that you succeed in this noble endeavour. 


Dhaarwar, 15-5-1971 


You come to Prashaanthi Nilayam, as cars come to a workshop. 
You must go out with a new paint, with all the damaged and loose 
bolts and nuts replaced, with the engine cleaned and 
reconditioned, every part spick and span, beautiful, trouble free, in 
perfect trim, ready to speed on the journey that lies ahead. 


Every bad habit has to be replaced by a good one, no trace of vice 
must be allowed to persist, the heart must be drained of all egoism. 


This is the fruit of this pilgrimage that you must acquire. Let this 
be your resolution. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


26. Raajas as Raajarishis 


YOU call your association, the Rayalaseema Rajula Sangham. What is a Sangham? Sangham 
must not instill an idea of separateness from others; on the other hand, it must emphasise the 
necessity of inter-dependence, inter-dependence of something like the limbs of an organism, 
each doing its share in the common task. The Vedhas declare that the four castes have four 
complementary functions, like the head, the hands, the thighs and the feet; the safety and 
security, the strength and efficiency of one depends on those of the other three! Each caste is in 
charge of some beneficial task and ideal. It is dedicated to some useful way of life, which is 
essential for society as a whole; each has rights as well as obligations. The rights are based on 
and are proportionate to the discharge of the obligations. If the ideal is neglected, the caste 
lowers itself-, if it is discharged, it raises itself to the level of the higher ideal. Every caste has the 
obligation to promote the spiritual progress of its components, through the fullest use of all 
facilities available. 


In past ages, the Raajas were not merely rulers, but, they raised themselves to the stage of 
Raajarishis (royal sages), by incessant yearning, systematic austerity and steady faith. They were 
Kshathriyas (fighters for righteousness), devoted to the protection of the country and its culture, 
the prevention of any possible invasion by which the culture will be dangered. They had such 
sensitive hearts they sought relief in renunciation, as Gauthama Buddha did; or, in enquiry as 
Janaka did; or, in the sweet simple ways of bhakthi, as Ambarisha did. Today, neither the love of 
culture nor the love of God has maintained its ancient level of strength; the inroads of alien ways 
and culture have damaged the ideals of every caste. 


Pray to God to help you realise Him 


People argue that religions and the system of communities and castes have to go; but, so long as 
man has variegated aptitudes and skills, and capacity to learn and grow, they are inevitable. You 
cannot abolish faith in God, or in the mystery and might of the Unseen. You cannot also abolish 
distinctions and differences, castes and communities. What can be destroyed, what needs to be 
destroyed, is the hatred between these natural groups. You can have an association of the Raaja 
(warrior) caste or community, but, don't run it in a spirit of hostility. Use the association to pool 
resources for advancement of the boys and girls of the community. That is a good reason for the 
formation of your Sangham. 


The Divine has in its vision all mankind; it cannot be bound by the limits of one caste or one 
creed. This Avathaar (Divine Incarnation) might have taken birth in a particular community, but 
it has come for the weak, the diseased, the distressed, the downtrodden, the devoted, the divinely 
oriented, among all mankind. You describe yourself wrongly as A-naatha (without-a-guardian)! 
For, to guard you and foster you, there is God, He is ever ready to respond to prayer, to virtue, to 
goodness. God is the only A-naatha, for He has no naatha (guardian). He is the guardian of the 
Universe! No one can control Him or command Him or claim to guide Him] 


Every being who is handicapped by hunger has the right to ask God for food! He has inflicted 
hunger; so, it is His duty, His pleasure to provide the food, which can assuage it! So, you have 
also the right to pray that He helps you realise Him. That is the vidhya (education), which you 
must encourage among yourselves. The schools today aim at making children fit for factory, 
farm or office; they get the skill for clinging to jobs. But, they are not taught to till their hearts, to 
face the fact of misery and grief, to take up the office of the servant of God or of a pilgrim on the 


Godward path. In the hostels for students that you are proposing to establish, encourage activities 
through which love, compassion and the spirit of service are cultivated. That alone can justify the 
labour and sacrifice of the workers on behalf of this association. 


Ananthapur, 21-6-1971 


Have this so inscribed on your heart--the axiom that "serving 
others is meritorious, that harming others or remaining unaffected 
and idle while others suffer, is sin." 


Sri Sathya Sai 


27. The seeds of a University 


BHAARATH is the land that won renown in continents across the seas for her heroic 
achievements in the material as well as spiritual fields, that swept away the mighty cohorts of her 
imperial conquerors, that is the nursery of famous scholars and investigators into the mysterious 
realms of the mind, that is upholding high traditions of music, dance, painting, sculpture and 
architecture that have their roots in the ancient days of adventure and achievement; this is the 
heritage that the sons and daughters of this country have to feed and foster. This is no weakling's 
task. It requires a generation of mothers, like Kaushalya who brought up Raama, Seetha who 
fostered the charming twins, Lava and Kusha, Thaaraabai who filled the heart of Shivaji with the 
earnestness and enthusiasm of epic heroes, and a Putthalibai who shaped a Gandhiji out of her 
hesitant and honest son. 


These mothers took the children on their laps and through song and lullabies, through gesture 
and good stories, while feeding and rocking them to sleep, they poured into the precious vessels 
of their hearts the nectar of the Vedhas, the Upanishaths and the various Yogas of Bhaarath. 
They charged them with power and charted the road to eternal joy and peace. Maa (mother) was 
the first word the children uttered and the last that man gasps. She teaches the first steps for the 
child's unsure feet, and she sets it on the long journey towards Liberation. 


The process of education has become a trade 


This Day we are inaugurating the new buildings for the College dedicated to this purpose of 
having such maas (mothers) for the revival of the Dharma, which Bharath and the world so 
urgently need today. Today, all departments of life are reverberating with the raucous noise of 
anxiety and fear, uncertainty and insecurity. The main purpose of life is the acquisition of 
Aanandha, and the sharing of that Aanandha with others. This has gone under; and a vast new 
number of desires, quite unrelated to the chief aim of the Vyakthi (individual) who has to make 
his Divinity patent, is emerging, like lava from the subterranean fire! The Guru warns and 
waylays; but, his words are not heeded. Man loathes the law and loves the lie; he gives ear to evil 
and invites iniquities on himself! 


Education does not seem to improve his plight in any manner, or to any extent. The schools and 
colleges, once revered by the entire population as Temples of Saraswathi, the Goddess of 
Learning, as a means of attaining the supreme state of self-realisation, have degenerated into 
temples for the Goddess of Wealth! For securing admission into the schools and colleges, money 
is demanded; contributions are sought. For the payment of a sum, the required attendance at 
classes will be certified as having been secured. A "pass" in the examination can also often be 
manipulated with the help of the purse. As a result of this decline in morality, discipline is 
reduced to shambles, character is devalued and the process of education has become a trade. As 
Shrimathi Saraswathi Girl said, degrees and diplomas have become worth while because they 
entitle you for jobs. They are begging bowls, with which you can clamour outside the doors of 
offices and factories. 


Make the home that children love to cherish 


Shrimathi Giri said that the misery of some unemployed women is more pitiable than that of 
their brothers. This situation has arisen because the real significance of education has been 
missed by the educated, educators and educatees! Education must strengthen the springs of 


Aanandha, Prema and Shaanthi (Bliss, Love and Peace) that are inherent in the heart; these 
should not be dried in the dusty years of study. Man is in essence a fountain of eternal joy, peace, 
love and devotion. Cultivate these, by precept, example and exercise, during the formative years 
Then, the educated will have security and sweetness as long as they live. 


Of course livelihood has to be earned; but, when, as happens now, both husband and wife attend 
office away from home, children grow on the laps of aayahs (nurse maids) and the shoulders of 
servants, learning their language and manners. The father and mother become casual strangers. 
When the food they eat is not prepared by loving hands and served with affectionate smiles, the 
savour disappears and the vibrations are often vile. The mother, as a teacher, attends school 
leaving off her natural role as a teacher of her own children! This is indeed a tragedy! The house 
where such parents live can never become the home that children love to cherish in memory. 


The securing of jobs cannot be allowed to overshadow the real purpose of edcuation. Women 
have to cultivate the qualities of sacrifice and detachment, of virtue and wide vision, so that they 
can lovingly transform their mates and children into seekers and saadhaks, on the way to 
success. At present, Colleges are infected by anxiety and perplexity, discontent and _ ill- 
discipline, irreverence and futility; they have lost the status of temples of learning, where youth 
is shaped into self-reliant, contented and enterprising heroes; when I identified these defects, 
deficiencies and dangers, which are rampant in the country, I resolved upon this College in 
Raayalaseema, at Ananthapur. 


Gurukula atmosphere should be fostered 


I am never satisfied with the declaration of intentions. I must taste the Aanandha (bliss) of 
putting them into action! I express my Love through every act, every intention of mine. More 
than floods of eloquence in praise of that intention and millions of words written in elaboration 
of the theme, I insist, by my own example, on immediate and complete fulfilment. This will be a 
Gurukul---a place where teachers and taught will grow together in love and wisdom, as close to 
the ideas of the hermitages of the past as possible under present conditions. Today is Guru-vaar, 
Thursday; it is also Guru-pournima, the Day set apart for adoration of the Guru (the Preceptor). 
It was mentioned just now that this must prove to be the nucleus of a Women's University---but, 
I am not enamoured of that prospect; I will be happy only when the Gurukula atmosphere is 
fostered and maintained, uncontaminated. 


Women must emerge from this College armed with deep-rooted virtue and firm faith in the 
ideals of woman-hood, laid down in our sacred texts. Then only can they, as mothers, mould 
their children as bright, beautiful, virtuous, strong citizens of the world. This is the only way out 
of the horror in which the world is simmering. 


India should regain the status as preceptor of mankind 


Now, the education that is being given in schools for girls and in women's colleges helps only to 
make them 'desirable wives', not 'desirable mothers.' The role of the mother which is the natural, 
native and inescapable role is neglected; the subsidiary short-lived scintillation is given 
prominence. I am glad that the Hostel Building was inaugurated today by Shrimathi Saraswathi 
Giri, who provides the ideal I desire to hold forth before the girl-students who will be residing 
and studying in the Hostel, now and later in the coming years. The words she spoke about the 
dangers of imitating alien cultures, and the validity of the ancient mores of this land have to be 


remembered by them, as an inspiration. If those words are treasured and acted upon, India can 
regain the status she long held as the preceptor of mankind. 


India shone for centuries as the Karmabhoomi (land of sanctified activity) where each activity of 
man was ennobled by high purpose and the sense of dedication. She was therefore acclaimed as 
Yoga-bhoomi, the land where the people yearned for communion with God; she was revered as 
the Thyaaga-bhoomi, where the ideal of the mendicant monk, the naked fakir, the simple 
monarch counselled by the sage, was placed before the people through precept and example. 


At the present time, it is being forged into a Bhoga-bhoomi, the land of skyscrapers, air- 
conditioning and tinned foods, an imitative, insurgent, indisciplined mass of humanity, pulled 
from its roots and transplanted in other soils. This is an insult to out past, a defiance of history. It 
is a sacrilege on the sanctity of time, the holiness of the human body and on the consecration 
which each activity can well become. 


Peace is file most priceless possession of man 


The seed has been planted today; it has to sprout and spread as a tree, heavy with fruits. It has to 
confer security and sustenance to all. Shrimathi Saraswathi Giri said that, while she is happy that 
this great institution has come up in the town which is the place of her birth, she can get 
undiminished happiness only when all those who are poor are enabled to get food, clothing and 
housing. Of course, these are basic requirements for man; but let me ask, do people who have 
these---even a surfeit of them---enjoy mental peace? Are they free from anxiety, fear, malice and 
hate? Peace is the most priceless possession of man. It is the sign of a virtuous character, a 
willingness for service, a readiness to renounce, a calm spirit of resignation, an awareness of the 
evanescence of material wealth, of the cool agitationless lake of joy in the heart. You are all 
broiling in the Sun and I do not desire to cause further suffering; we shall gather again in the 
evening when I can speak to you at greater length on Guru Pournami and its meaning. 


Ananthapur, 8-7-1971 


There are people who go about declaring that there is no God, 
because they are not able to see Him. They say that they have 
searched in space, on the way to the moon, and even on the moon 
but there was no sign of the Almighty. Can you, do you assert, that 
there are no roots for trees, that nothing feeds them or upholds 
them, from below? God feeds, sustains, holds firm--unseen. 


He can be seen by those who make the effort, along the lines laid 
down for the purpose, by those who have succeeded in 
experiencing Him. God is, as butter in milk, visible when 
concretised by saadhana (spiritual striving). 


God is the great Unseen, the vast Unknowable. Though you do not 
see the roots or know how far or how wide or deep they are 
clutching the earth, you pour water round that trunk, so that it may 
reach them, is it not? You expect that when the roots contact the 
water, the tree will yield fruit. 


Recognise, similarly, that there is God, as the very basis of 
Creation; pray to Him, and He will shower fruit. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


28. Radiate rays of Love 


DIVYAATHMASWARUUPULAARA! (embodiments of Divine Self!) This morning, you all 
shared in the exultation of the inauguration of the College Buildings, with endless Aanandha, 
boundless enthusiasm and hearts overflowing with gratitude and hope. Generally speaking, such 
functions everywhere are filled with three undesirable things: praise of oneself, condemnation of 
others and purposeless dry talk. But, what has to be said and sought in order to achieve better 
living and firmer joy is to be found in the sphere of the spirit. That alone can silently and steadily 
reform, from within, the evils that encompass the individual and society. 


When we speak of society or community, we calculate numbers only; we picture groups of 
people, brought together by some thin filaments of affinity. 


But, pay attention to the word used in Samskrith for society. We call it Samaaja; the syllable 
sama means same, equal, undifferentiated---that is the key to its meaning. People imbued with a 
sense of sameness, a sense of oneness, a feeling that each is but an image, a reflection of the 
same Divine Principle, they alone are entitled to be called a Samaaja, not others. It is the 
realisation of the One, which thought It blossoms into the many, does not lose its Uniqueness, 
because the many are but appearances, unreal impositions of name and form on the Real---this is 
the Adhwaitha experience. Samaaja prompts in the mind these subtle influences that lead to the 
adhwaitha goal. I-ness comes of the delusion of separateness; I-ness melts away, when the light 
of Reality dawns. 


Enter boldly into the realm of fearless enquiry 


In the word Guru, Gu indicates the darkness of the 1-ness, (the separateness, the illusion of 
Many on the basis of the One, of the snake over the rope or garland on the ground in the dusk). 
Ru, the second syllable means the removal of the illusion, the illumination that reveals the 
Brahman (rope) which put on the snake-cloak and caused fear and anxiety. When the real Guru 
reveals, the many merge in the one; when there is but One, how can fear enter? What is there to 
desire and acquire? On this Guru-pournami, reflect on these truths and decide to enter boldly 
into the realm of fearless inquiry. 


What can the possession of canvas and paint do, if an artist with vision is not moved to paint? 
What can the chisel and a lump of marble do with no image formed in the heart of a devoted 
sculptor? That vision and that image are the sparks of the Divine. You are all 'the Divine' packed 
in human skin and bone, the Aathma encased in the evanescent flesh. Know this and you become 
fearless, happy without limit. Get rid of the ego- enclosure in which you now feel you are shut 
in; then, you are liberated from the non-existent prison(!) which now enfolds you as hard as 
existent one! This is the higher wisdom, the knowledge of the spirit; the lower one is that which 
adheres to the mind, which cleanses the mind and calms its agitations, which is earned by japa, 
dhyaana, naamasankeerthan (repetition of holy Names or sacred formula, meditation and 
singing of God's Names) and such other meritorious activities. 


I must tell you, however, that Seva (voluntary service) is a process through which the lower 
wisdom, and after that, even higher wisdom can be gained. 


Investigate and discover your limitless core 


Seva can instil more intensely than any other activity, the sense of the basic ONE. In fact, 'the 
service rendered by the Seva dhal (voluntary service group) members not only from Andhra but 
from all over the country is something that I do not want to describe before you for, I will not be 
content with a mere description. There can be no higher thapas (austerity) than this, nothing 
more rewarding. Seva opens the eyes of man to the comprehensive unity of creation. When you 
open the lids, you see the world, the stars, the galaxies that are far out in the depths of space. 
When you close them, the scene disappears; there is only gloom, emptiness. The eye reveals Him 
as the Universe, as Vastness, as Magnificence, as Order, as Beauty, as Power, as Vishwa-Viraat- 
swaruupa (Cosmic Divine Form)! It is as one picture that it appears; it is as one picture that it 
disappears! Dhrishti is srishthi. As you envision, so it becomes the nethra (eye) is the Shaasthra 
(the Scripture that illumines). When you are aware only of your joys and sorrows, you are blind 
to the joys and sorrows of others; your eyes are closed! You are apart; the others are afar. There 
is no ONE. Disparate entities drift in the fog, frightened by every stump and shadow. 
Samaajaseva means serving the sama (the ONE that makes the many same). 


Education is essential, if man must be inspired by this high ideal of Seva as Saadhana (spiritual 
striving). Not the acquisition of information or skills, but the sublimation of impulses, emotions, 
and passions, the mastery of the wayward mind, the grounding of the individual in the eternal 
aathma (divine reality). You must be encouraged to investigate into your own reality and 
discover your limitless core. Do not entangle yourselves in the relatively real; anchor your life on 
the Absolute. That is the education needed. It will make you one with the Lord of the Universe. 
You draw all the Love, Power and Wisdom therefrom. Unless you attain motherhood, you 
cannot plumb the depths of maternal affection; unless you become Divine, you cannot know the 
supreme ecstasy of God. 


Be conscious that the body is your temporary abode 


There is a standard with which everything has to be judged, some fixed, established, quantum 
which it must seek to achieve, if it must justify itself. Pramaana, it is called; pra means already 
laid down; maana means measure. What is the measure of man, already laid down? How has he 
to live, so that he does not demean his status? He has to be conscious all the time that his body 
and its equipment is his temporary abode; he is the eternal Divine, the aathma, apparently 
encaged in the physical cage, as the moon is apparently sunk in the pot of water! 


Glimpses of this Truth will be vouchsafed to the pupils of this college---glimpses which will 
urge them on to further saadhana which will reveal its fullness. This College will contribute to 
the happiness and welfare of the nation, because mothers akin to the mothers famous in the epics 
and puraanas will transform the hearts of their children into heavens of peace and joy. The ideals 
we have set before ourselves will be translated into action, sincerely and swiftly. 


The Vedhas declare that the mother and the father have to be revered as Divine; they must 
consider the children too as Divine, and foster the blooming of that Divine Principle. Whether 
one is doing it sincerely or not can be left to each one's conscience. You are the best judge of 
your sincerity. The mother's is the first face that the child sees; ma is the first syllable that its lips 
utter; it is also the last. The agony of the mother at the loss of a child is something that is 
inconsolable. 


Be concerned with acquisition of equanimity 


When Abhimanyu, the sixteen-year old son of Arjuna and Subhadhra was entrapped in a maze 
and slaughtered by the vengeful warriors of the Kaurava camp, Arjuna broke into tears and 
bewailed the loss. "Why should I battle for an empire, when the son who is to inherit the glory is 
gone?" he asked himself. He cursed, the war which killed the very beneficiaries of victory. 
Subhadhra, the mother, called to mind that in the Thretha Yuga, when Raama ruled, no single 
mother was afflicted with this agony over a son who died when his parents were alive! She 
lamented the calamity of the Yuga and said, the shadow of the Kali Yuga had already darkened 
the Dwaapara Yuga, which was drawing to a close! But, it is wrong to ascribe to what is called 
the Time-spirit, the Yuga- dharma, the evils emanating from human weakness and wickedness. 


The duty that each one owes to himself is to clear the heart of fear and grief, to fill it with Love 
and Dedication. You have no concern with the chronological divisions of Yugas; you have to be 
concerned with the psychological levels that you attain. You are most concerned with the 
acquisition of equanimity and Prashaanthi, that is all that matters. So, look upon all and 
everything as images of the One, namely, God. Every one, everything is His image. In Thamas, it 
is reflected as matter. In Rajas, it is reflected as Life. In Sathwa it is reflected as Divine. Feel 
thus; think thus; act thus. Then there is no greed, no lust, no hate, no malice. Doff this cloak of 
human-ness and shine in the splendour of the Divine which is your reality. See every one as 
Divine, not as the human roles they are playing. 


Make service as worship of the Divine around you 


In the eleventh year of their exile, when the four younger brothers had gone to collect alms, 
Dhroupadhi was silting at the feet of the eldest, Dharmaraaja and with tears flowing in cascades 
down her cheeks, she massaged his tired limbs. When asked the reason why, she replied, "You 
are now lamenting that the brothers who have gone for alms have not returned, for, you are 
hungry! I remembered the days when we as monarchs of this kingdom, fed sumptuously every 
day thousands of Brahmins, sages, monks, scholars, students and mendicants! And, now we pine 
for a mouthful for ourselves!" Just then Bheema entered and was moved into violent anger at her 
anguish, for which he blamed Dharmaraaja, whose adherence to Right had reduced them to this 
plight. But Dharmaraaja said, "Brother! Since we stuck to Dharma, we have the Lord as our 
guardian and guide. The Kauravas follow Adharma (injustice), and their doom is written in 
blood; the Devil may hold hopes before their eyes, but, none can save them from perdition." 


Without the strength that righteous behaviour gives, physical might or even the might of 
weaponry is nought. Bheema had physical might; he could pulverise mountains. Arjuna had the 
most dreadful bow of the age and an array of Divine arrows. But, both had to be directed and 
controlled by the dictates of Dharma, so that the Lord might bless them with victory. The easiest 
and the most fruitful expression of Dharma today consists in Seva, service as worship of the 
Divine around you. Dedicate all your skill, talents, wealth and scholarship to the living 
embodiments of Divinity that are around you. That is the Dharmashakthi (Power of 
righteousness) which can draw Grace upon you. 


Aims of the women's college 


I have come upon a mission, and the first and foremost task in the fulfilment of that mission is 
the revival of the Vedha and Vedhic rituals, along with an appreciation of their inner 


significance. The next step is the lighting of such Lamps, to spread illumination into all the 
nooks where darkness has taken refuge. 


This College is not founded, as some of you are guessing, to promote financial considerations; 
nor is it intended as an instrument for publicity. It will be an example, an inspiration, a beacon, a 
pioneer, a lesson for educationists, for all those who have the future of humanity in their hems. 
The usual answer to the question, 'Why College’ education?' is, "To help secure jobs." The 
answer to the question, "Why this college?" is, "To sweeten the hearts of the future mothers of 
this land with humility, faith, discrimination and fear of evil. To light the path they tread towards 
truth and virtue." 


An educated woman must herself run the home 


The learning of Sanskrith is crucial for this generation. That is the key to the treasure of 
Bharatheeya Culture which is the heritage of the children of this land. The world is in great 
hunger for this nectar of immortality, and you must not neglect this rich patrimony. Again, I will 
insist that the educated woman must herself run the home, and shoulder all the burden of nursing 
and nourishing the members of the family. The Aanandha that can be derived by unselfish 
scattering of Love is a rare elevating experience. It is a very valuable Saadhana. A third need is 
that the ideal of Seva must be inculcated in the hearts of the students and they must acquire not 
only the enthusiasm to serve but they must earn proficiency in the ways of helpfulness. 


During the last seven or ten days, the volunteers from Hyderabad (they had come on some earlier 
occasions too) and those from West and East Godhaavari Districts, from Krishna and Guntur 
Districts, from Orissa, Gujarat, Punjab and Bengal, as well as from Mysore, Kerala, Assam and 
other parts of India, as well as from across the seas, from East Africa and America, gave of 
themselves fully and sincerely, and exhausted themselves in hard continuous work both night 
and day, so that this vast area which was rubble all over, and very uneven at that, became, at 
dawn today, the smooth, level, soft maidhaan (meeting grounds), where hundreds of thousands 
could sit in comfort. The Love that they translated into service is indeed beyond the power of 
words to describe. This noon, since it was already late and you were all boiling in the Sun, I 
could not dwell on this Love and give expression to My joy. But, now I can mention it with joy. 


Every being is surcharged with God's Bliss 


The Universe is seen; it can be learnt about; it can be experienced and enjoyed. But, God is 
unseen. He has to be inferred through His handiwork. So, too, society to which social service is 
rendered, cannot be seen as such. We can contact only individuals. But, through the individual 
you infer the immanence of the Divine. All are actors on the world stage, in His Play. Every 
atom is surcharged with His Power, His Might, His Glory. Every being is surcharged with His 
Bliss, His Beauty, His Goodness. Do not claim that you are using some skill or force which is 
specially yours; it has come out of His Grace, His Compassion. 


People retire into solitude and attempt to contact God; but, solitude is best used for discovering 
and curing defects of character and conduct. To contact God, one has to open his eyes and serve 
brother man. He is the God Incarnate one can worship and adore to his heart's content. The 
greatest joy springs from the utmost sacrifice. That is the utmost bhoga (enjoyment), though it is 
called thyaaga (sacrifice). It is the utmost fulfilment. 


Giving is gaining. It leads to the utmost yoga (identification with the Divine). This manner of 
gaining bhoga, is the best; all the rest becomes not gaining, but grieving (roga). And, Seva is to 
be offered, not here only, or on special occasions like this; but, where ever you are, whenever 
you realise the need, to the extent of your capacity and ability. Feel that God has given the 
chance, the inclination, the ability---that is the crux of the Saadhana. 


Have no ego, discard desire, you are liberated 


This day is Guru Pournami, when many offer special puuja to the Guru (worship of the 
preceptor) who has initiated them into spiritual life, with the grant of some manthra (sacred 
syllable) or some vow. To adore the preceptor who has shown the path of liberation, you need 
not wait for the arrival of this particular day. You need not watch the calendar at all; be ever 
grateful. The guru has directed the vision inside, the goal is in you, the path leads you to 
yourself, the I that shines unknown in you, as well as in all. Knowing it is liberation from the 
bondage of the body and the chain of birth and death which the body drags along with it. 


People come to Me and pray, "Swaami! Naaku rooksham kaavaali" (For me - moksha 
(liberation) is wanted). Consider for a moment that statement of thirst. A parcel you get through 
post is covered top and bottom, with the gift inside the two; you remove the packaging material 
from top and bottom to get at the thing you really value most; moksha (the gift you value) is 
packed between two ideas---'for me,' and 'is wanted'---the idea of EGO and the idea of DESIRE. 
So, all I have to tell you is, "Remove the packing, and take the gift, MOKSHA. Have no ego, 
discard desire, you are liberated!" The Guru asks you to repeat a manthra; but the manthra 
cannot grant you the final beatitude, It will discipline the mind, control its vagaries, and 
strengthen faith. But, unless you see God in all, unless your mind is made a mirror reflecting the 
image of God that every one and every thing is, you are not entitled to the release you claim. 


Wrestle with your Own errors in solitude 


When the pot has a leak, tiny as a needle prick, the water drains out whole. When the heart is full 
of faith and strength, of light and love, a prick-leak caused by anger, or malice, envy, or pride is 
so damaging that the precious wealth is spent away quick and fast! Resolve this day in the 
Presence that you have so ardently wished for, not to be swayed by these low desires and 
insidious foes; never be moved by fame or blame, by praise or persecution. 


When the crows see the kokil (nightingale), they pursue it and try to wound it with their envious 
beaks. Good men are the targets for the malignity of the small. Have your own errors and evils 
hidden so that you can tackle with them in solitude; do not inflict them on others. Wrestle with 
them, and overwhelm them in the silence of Saadhana. Deal with others only beneficially and in 
joyful co-operation. Look at Lord Shiva. The poison which will ruin the world ruthlessly, He has 
hidden in His throat! The Moon that can shower cool calm comfort, He wears on His Head, for 
all the worlds to benefit from! That is a lesson for you. Why render others miserable, because 
you are too weak to suppress the bandits your heart has welcomed? 


We have in this country, as well as in others, many institutions and organisations devoted to 
spiritual uplift of man; but, they are all caught up in the politics of competition for prestige and 
power, and in the game of personal aggrandizement. Wherever you turn, you meet Sanyaasins, 
Yogis, Gurus and Babas---varieties of the same theme, clamouring for clientele, wheedling for 
funds, parading for protocol! No one seems to have delved into the relativity of things. No one 
seems to have dived for the pearls at the bottom and secured them. All are on the surface of 


things, afraid to lose their identities, once they have the light revealed. We require spiritual 
guides who are free from conceit and pride, hate and greed; guides who have travelled the whole 
length of the journey. 


In religious field, hypocrisy is high treason 


I know there are many of you who argue and discuss how and in what manner these structures 
came to be built so grandly. If you have known Me through and through, there will be no such 
argument at all. You will know that this is but an insignificant product of My power. I have done 
this, only as an example, for, unless those who lead are themselves active and earnest, to bend 
and bear the burden, those who are encouraged to follow will lose heart and miss the way. 
Religious leaders have a greater responsibility in this respect; for, it is a field where hypocrisy is 
high treason. People fly high, only to cast their eyes on a wider circle, searching for sustenance, 
as vultures do! The eye belies what the wings proclaim. 


Others, I know, have questioned, why I had requested the President of India, Shrimathi Saraswati 
Giri, the Governor of Mysore, the Chief Minister of Andhra Pradesh, the Education Minister of 
Andhra Pradesh, and the Vice-Chancellor of the Venkateshwara University to share the 
Aanandha (joy) of this occasion. They hold positions which are sources of influence over many 
and it is necessary to draw their attention to this resurgence of spiritual education. They 
themselves have to be put into touch with the activities that are crucial to the revival of the 
culture of this land. That is the reason why I am inviting these dignitaries to attend and share in 
the joy of the proceedings. My aim is to plant transformation in the hearts of all, whether they 
hold high positions or not. All are dear to Me and all are important in My eyes. By having 
recourse to all means, the mission of establishing Prashaanthi has to be achieved. That is My 
task. 


The happy confluence of three Gurus 


Having an open heart, do not relish the narrow path of restricted love; love all, do not develop 
prejudices against men in power or position. They too are our kith and kin; we all sail together. 
Be convinced of one truth about Me: Swaami will never lay his hand on a task without proper 
reason, and without some profound effect that will flow therefrom. 


Today, we have the happy confluence of three gu’s: it is Guru-vaar (the day of the week is 
known as the Day of the Preceptor or Guru). The second refers to Aadhi-Guru (Primary 
Preceptor)---the Full Moon of this month, which occurs today is revered as specially sacred to 
the memory of Vedhavyaasa, the collator of the Vedhas, the author of Brahmasuuthras 
(aphorisms on Supreme Reality), the great poet who composed the epic known as the Fifth 
Vedha, the Mahaabhaaratha, and the author of the renowned scripture of Bhakthi (devotion), 
called the Srimad Bhaagavatha. The third Gu refers to this Guru-kula-aashram, this college with 
the new (but ancient) outlook, of reviving the master-disciple, sanctified by centuries of spiritual 
effort and experience. These three gu's are reminders of the three-pronged bilva (wood-apple 
tree) leaf, which is placed in reverence while adoring Shiva, symbolising the three Gunas 
(qualities), the three prongs of time (past, present, future) held as a spear by Shiva, and the three 
attributes which man has to overcome, the Thamas, Rajas and Sathwa (inertia, passion and 
equanimity). 


Learn to speak what you feel, act what you speak 


The greatest contribution of Vyaasa in the realm of Bhakthi, which adores Go with an identifying 
label of a name, as man can appreciate and apprehend only Name and Form. Fire has no form; it 
takes on the form of the article it burns or fills, a ball of iron, a crooked rope, etc. Water has no 
form; it takes the form of the vessel which contains it. Air has no form; it fills a ball and assumes 
that form. So too, the aathmic (divine) principle. 


The body is the ball filled with the air of Divinity; it is kicked in play, by six players on one side 
(the six foes: Lust, Anger, Greed, Attachment, Pride, and Hate) and six on the other (the six 
friends, Truth, Right, Peace, Love, Compassion and Fortitude). The goal-posts are on each side, 
and the ball is hit so that it passes through them, the Dharma vidhya (Moral attainment) and 
Brahma vidhya (Spiritual attainment). Those who hit it so, can claim victory. Or else, their kick 
results in an 'out'! Learn to speak what you feel, act what you speak; do not allow them to be at 
cross purposes. 


Man with feelings of a demon, fuming with hate, engaged in fighting, holds Peace Conferences! 
And, prides himself on his plans for peace! Transform the heart into a tabernacle of Peace; then, 
conferences to deceive oneself and others become unnecessary. What can mere talk achieve? 


Right will be restored and evil put down 


Have constructive thoughts, consoling words, compassionate acts. Be on the look out for eyes 
filled with tears, hearts heaving in sigh. I am sure My words will give you the strength of 
elephants when you need it to carry through tasks of service. I know they have; each one of you 
is the witness of the truth of this fact; I am the witness of all that you did and achieved. I don't 
need any one to report; to Me; you don't need any one to measure the Aanandha you had. When 
the Non-gazetted officers of the Andhra Pradesh struck work for more than a month and a half, 
the hospitals did not have attenders and helpers in the wards; the Seva dhal members of 
Vijayawaada, Hyderabad, Vishaakhapatnam and other places were moved by the distress of the 
in-patients left: helpless in the hospital beds; they served them with great love and even 
adoration. 


No service was too low or mean; every emergency was immediately noticed and attended to. 
They need not be sorry that during those days, they had no time to sit for dhyaana or do japa or 
even to go out on Nagarasankeerthan (meditation or recitation or group singing of God's 
names)! Why? You can have the Name on the lips, when you sweep the streets, or lift a corpse 
on to the morgue, or when you walk towards or away from the area of distress. People may dub 
you mad! But, be elated that you are not affected by the insanity they suffer from. 


Not only Bhaarath, but the whole world is today in the throes of anxiety and fear. But, I assure 
you that very soon the dark clouds shall be scattered and you will witness a happy era all over 
the world. Right will be restored and evil put down. Your duty is to yearn for the attainment of 
the consciousness of the One, behind all this apparent multiplicity. Be centres of love, 
compassion, service, mutual tolerance, and be happy, very very happy. That is the blessing I 
shower on you, this Guru Poornima (the full-moon day dedicated to the Preceptor). 


Ananthapur, 8-7-1971 


Shiva is described as having three eyes, eyes that see the Past, the 
Present and the Future. 


The elephant skin which forms His cloak is a symbol of the bestial 
primitive traits which His Grace destroys. In fact, He tears them to 
pieces, skin them, and they become totally ineffective. 


His Four Faces symbolise Shantham (Equanimity), Roudhram 
(Terror), Mangalam (Grace) and Uthsaaham (elevating energy). 
While adoring the Lingam on this Lingodhbhava Day, Mahaa 
Shiva- raathri, you must contemplate on these truths of Shiva that 
the Linga represents. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


29. Constant Divine Communion 


THERE is no illness worse than desire; no foe fiercer than attachment; no fire so ravenous as 
anger; no ally so reliable as wisdom. In the ancient aashrams (monasteries) of India, the Master 
took the pupil by the hand and, by precept and example, he removed the wild weeds and planted 
the seeds of virtue and equanimity, which grew into love and wisdom. There man became aware 
of his fundamental Divinity and drew unfailing Aanandha (bliss) from that awareness. But now, 
taking delight in dubious designs and tortuous trials, man is fast shaping himself into a demon! 
The mind is the conspirator, who has brought about this calamity. If man yields to the mind and 
its vagaries, and the mind is enslaved to the senses and their fancies man cannot escape, 
calamity. 


The mind prompts man to seek sukha (happiness), and avoid dhukha (misery); it creates the 
distinction and deludes the activity; it pushes forward and pulls back, tossing man back and 
forth, throughout his life. The idea of happiness, which is often only another form of comfort, 
arises in the mind and gets concretised as objects shaped by the hands and brains of man, like the 
aeroplane, the radio, and even the bomb that devastates and delights the mind saturated with 
hate. 


Ideas, desires, cravings, yearnings---these get concretised and so, the world is only the product of 
the mind. In fact, the Universe is itself the manifestation of the Divine Mind, which willed, 
Ekoham bahusyaam: "lam one, let me become many!" The Universe arose in the Mind of God, 
it sprouted and spread there, and since then, the mind has become potent and permeating. For 
each of you, it is the mind that colours the world. If it is pure, the jagath (world) is congenial; if 
it is unclean, the world is replete with jeopardy. The sages of Bhaarath laid down a series of 
exercises and disciplines, in order to de-contaminate the mind, so that it may turn away from the 
senses towards the buddhi (intellect). These are included in the comprehensive path, dhyaana 
(meditation). 


Meditation should be a continuous process, not a fad 


Dhyaana is, according to many exponents, the performance for a few minutes when man tries to 
assume a certain posture, and controlling the ingress and egress of breath, endeavours to fix 
attention on an image or ideal, to the exclusion of everything else. During meditation, people feel 
elated, have exaltation of a kind, experience joy and peace; but when the period is over they 
lapse into the normal routine of scandal, envy, faction and fear. So, dhyaana has become a fad, a 
routine, a pastime or habit, a drug or tonic, instead of the very sustenance of the spirit. 


It should not be taken up and left off, at stated hours of the day; it must be continuous process, 
filling the personality with sweetness Divine. The mind must be rid of bitterness, and be charged 
with the nectar of Universal love. That love must reveal to you that the jeeva (individual) is only 
Dheva (God), clothed in that garment. You too are not this temporary vesture that you have 
worn, but, the ancient bodiless Divine! The limits of time and space which make you declare that 
you were born in one particular year and that your native place is some dot on the map of the 
world are also artificial and temporary and incidental; they are not fundamental. 


The wants that the mind spins out endlessly can never be over; they are like the digits, which can 
be added ad infinitum, and with each addition, the total load increases! When you are in the coils 
of kaama (desire), you cannot come to Raama (God). The study of sacred books, the counsel of 
sages, the company of the wise---these are barren when you do not transmute then into 


awareness and Aanandha! Pour the mind into the mould of God, His Glory, His Majesty, His 
Beauty. The mind-stuff is rendered an instrument of liberation, from being a shackle that binds. 


Desires are often momentary urges 


When you come to Me weighted with wants, prayers for boons and materialistic wishes, you 
stand the risk of losing faith and losing your moorings; for, that faith is frail. Develop the love 
that asks for no return; build faith on that basis. Thereby, you can rescue yourselves' from the 
duality of exaltation and despair. The path of love knows no ups and downs; it is smooth and 
level, straight and safe; it leads you to the throne of the King of Kings, installed in your heart! 
Nothing can delay your journey, or devise obstacles to stop you. 


Desires? What is their nature? When a cat kills your pet parrot, you are enraged; when it kills a 
mouse, you are pleased. Though the behaviour of the cat is same, you desired one and disliked 
the other, as a result of your attachment! Desires are decided by personal prejudices and fancies. 
They also pall when fulfilled and are often momentary urges, clamouring for immediate 
satisfaction. After a full meal, food becomes uninteresting, if not positively repellent! Once 
satiated, the thing desired becomes disgusting! 


Gateway to God's glory lies open everywhere 


There are two attitudes of mind: the separative attitude and the unity attitude! In the grip of the 
separate "community" idea, you cling to some as friends and keep away from others. This 
attitude cannot win the Grace of the One. He who sees unity wins the Grace of the One. And, one 
spark of that Grace destroys in the conflagration it causes the fame and blame, the joy and grief, 
that the world heaps on the head. Do not worry about temporary trifles, and tribulations. Do not 
exaggerate the inconveniences they cause. Bear them with courage, and a smile. 


Aim at the highest goal; hunt the royal tiger, not the foul fox! Even if you fail to bag the tiger, 
there is a grandeur in being foiled. In the case of the fox, what glory is there when you finally 
bring its corpse home? Why become too considerate about the body, too concerned about the 
state of health, too worried about material possessions? Be concerned to acquire as support the 
embodiment of truth! Be anxious to win the status of immortality! Struggle for Eternal Verity, 
though the victory may be distant and difficult. 


To realise that Verity, you have the opportunity and the invitation, everywhere. The gateway to 
that Glory lies open everywhere. Open your eyes, and witness His Compassion, His Majesty, His 
Beauty, spread before you; sitting in meditation for three hours, you are not able to concentrate 
on these attributes of God for even three seconds! You get pain in the back, your legs ache, you 
have to change posture a dozen times an hour! But, before you, above your head in the sky, 
under your feet the handiwork of the Almighty calls on you to adore His artistry. 


Invest yourself fully in meditation 


Why spend all that time trying to achieve control of the mind? Practise another saadhana---the 
saadhana of seeing the Divine all around you! Believe that the Aathma in you is the same 
Aathma that activates everyone else, and makes him live and love, wail and hail. Dhyaana is not 
a limited liability concern! There are no bounds for your share in it. It is a full time endeavour; 
invest yourself fully in it. Then you get a plentiful harvest of returns. You become aware that you 
are a Hari-mandhir (a temple of God), that your limbs are the holy vessels that are consecrated 
for service therein, that' your deeds are the fruits, your thoughts the flowers, your words the 


music, with which the worship is consummated every moment. Offer yourself as the heart of 
faith. Then, whomsoever you contact, will shine before you as God Himself. 


The words---social, cultural, spiritual, moral---all indicate only facets of this vision. Social 
service or consciousness is but the expression of this ever-present Divine in all members of the 
human community. What is culture, except the culture of the mind to reap this harvest? The 
spirit, when it blossoms, finds kindred spirits everywhere. And, as for morality, its highest 
expression is truth, and the truth is unity! 


All activity originates from a common source, God 


When you speak with the tongue or see with the eye, or plan with the brain, who is it that speaks, 
sees, judges and decides? It is the One intelligence, the One that, like a current, works in and 
through all men and materials, God. When you are immersed in bhajan, note how the One is 
activating you! Your tongue pronounces the words in the tune designed for them; your palms 
beat the time, slow or fast; your head sways in unison with the sentiments that the words express; 
your mind is gushing Aanandha, at the magnificence of the pictures that the song evokes! So too, 
a dancer is articulating harmony and melody through every gesture and movement of muscle and 
limb. But, all the activity originates from a common source, God, who is resident as President in 
the heart. When He is ignored, neglected, or denied, there is no joy for you or through you for 
others. You are either Thaamasik---dull, inert---or Raajasik (passionate, fanatic)---but, not 
Saathwik (pure) balanced, serene! 


God is all. He is all forms, His is all names. There is no place where He is not; no moment when 
He is not! (Even the devil has the syllable dev to indicate his affinity). Thunder is God's 
message; the rain is his grace. Let no second pass without awareness of Cod; let no event lapse 
without reminding you that He is the artificer! You have an image or picture, in the room you 
have set apart for worshipping God. You light a lamp before it! You say, "I have lit the lamp;" 
but, is it you really? Who endowed the oil, the wick and the lamp, the property of producing a 
flame together? Who moved you to revere the picture in this form? Who was it that placed the 
lamp, lit it and bowed before the picture? It is all God, Cod, God. There is none else nothing else, 
for the man who knows and feels. 


Live in the consciousness of Raama & His message of Truth 


This morning, someone asked Me, when I called him in and gave him the chance to speak to Me, 
"Baba! The world is fast forgetting the potency of the Name of God. People do not have it on 
their tongues; they do not sustain themselves by its sweetness and sanctity. Bless me and bless a 
plan that I have, to make them ever conscious of the precious treasure that they are missing. I 
propose to print posters, blazing in colour, with the Name 'Raama' and paste them on all 
available walls, pillars and vantage points, so that the eye may warn and waken the mind of 
man." I told him that his posters will be smothered by the loud lascivious announcements and ads 
of film makers and exhibitors, and they will soon give place to the scrawls and scribbles of hate. 
Nor is your plan worthwhile, I told him. 


Paste the poster on your heart, I advised him. "Reform yourselves, live in the consciousness of 
Raama and the message of dharma which He lived out in His earthly career. That is enough 
publicity, enough prompting. That is the best that you can do to promote loyalty to the name," I 
said. For, people will know how it has changed you into a more joyous, peaceful individual and 
wonder how it was possible. Realising the how, they will start revering the name, like you. 


Do not get tied up with symbols in stone or metal; raise yourselves to the higher stages of 
realisation. Do not get entangled in rituals and ceremonials. 


Fill your heart with God, not with 'you' 


Ego plays all kinds of tricks, in order to get unholy pleasure. During the construction of the 
bridge to Lanka to take the army across, Hanumaan heaved a boulder on the raging waves of the 
sea, as part of the bridge! It floated! Raama heaved another; it sank! Hanumaan's ego was 
tickled, naturally. He laughed in derision; at that very moment, his boulder sank! And, the 
boulder that Raama had thrown, rose from the bottom of the sea and floated! Hanumaan's ego 
was pricked into nothingness. That was the purpose for which Raama had willed that his boulder 
should sink! 


Yearn to fill your heart with Him, not with 'you.' Your yearning must be warm, so warm that it 
can be called thapas (heat). Become hot earnest! Now it is only lukewarm longing, a surface 
activity. Examine yourselves how far you have filled your heart with Him. Measure the heights 
you have reached with the yardstick of virtue, serenity, fortitude and equanimity. You now 
become easy victims of lust, anger, malice, envy and the rest of that evil brood, for, the 
atmosphere of the heart is polluted by ego fumes. The knowledge derived through the mind 
utilising the senses is always "incomplete, incoherent;" but, the knowledge that is earned through 
the buddhi (intellect) illumined by the Aathma (divine Self), is full free-ing, and revealing the 
Truth. The first is termed Mano jnaana and the second, Aathma jnaana. 


Mano jnaana informs that you are distinct from others, that God is at Kailaash, Thirupathi or 
Kaashi or Prashaanthi Nilayam, that the God at Kailaash or Kaashi or Prashaanthi Nilayam is 
different one from the other! But, names, forms and temples are only for the kindergarten stage. 
You print the picture of a head or a net or a wave, and have underneath the words, thala (head, in 
Thelugu) or vala (net, in Thelugu) or ala (wave, in Thelugu), so that the child may learn the 
letters quicker, while pronouncing the name of the picture which the word represents. Once the 
letters are learnt, the picture can be dispensed with. The kshara (temporary picture) can be given 
up when the Akshara (permanent letter) is learnt. The picture is only a crutch. The transient is 
only an illustration of the truth that it reflects. 


Accommodate all forms of God in your heart 


The kshara can be rubbed off the blackboard, when the Akshara is fixed in the mind. The brick 
and mortar structure where God is taken to be can be, rubbed off the mind board, once the 
presence of God is experienced. When you change your puuja (worship) room in your house, it 
does not mean that God too shifted from one room to another, that he is no longer where He was 
and that He has been brought over to a new place! He is not a piece of furniture that you can 
transfer hither and thither! He is here, there, everywhere, inside and out, above, below, around. 
Accommodate all forms of God in your heart; do not exclude some and welcome others: Bear 
with those who adore Him in another form through another name and acclaim Him in another 
language. 

There was once a heavy downpour of rain in a small village. A lonely monk was caught 
unawares and he ran helter-skelter seeking some shelter from the hard-hitting drops and the 
chilly wind. He found a short length of dry floor, on the raised verandah of a house, the inmates 
of which were fast asleep behind closed doors. Being a yogi with no weight on his mind, he fell 
asleep soon, and was lost within himself. Very soon, another forlorn man, who also had no 


shelter, espied the verandah and came on to it. The yogi woke up and finding another claimant 
for the space sat up and said, there is sitting room for two; come, we shall sit the night through!" 
Within a few minutes, another desperate man arrived and he had to be accommodated. The two 
who were sitting agreed that there was standing room for three! They decided to stand until 
dawn; that is the spirit of tolerance that has to be cultivate, by the children of God, towards 
brothers in distress. God is love; so, you must become love, in order to merge in Him. He is 
beauty; so, be beauty, with no ugliness in you. Then, you can be one with Him, He is 
compassion, be compassionate. Water mixes easily with water, not with oil. Oil mixes with oil 
only. 


Devotees should cultivate the spirit of tolerance 


God is sweetness; His words are sweet, His sight is sweet; He sounds sweet; He is sweeter than 
sweetness itself. But, when your tongue is afflicted with illness,. He will be bitter. Cure the 
illness, by cultivating love to all. There is no need to take refuge in a forest or in solitude. You 
cannot give up activity. You have to move along the line to which you are attuned; you cannot 
lead a life of renunciation, on the spur of the moment; it requires long years of preparation. 


Once Arjuna was seen by a monk, walking listlessly in the forest looking for something. The 
monk asked why and Arjuna replied, "I am searching for roots and tubers that are edible, for, my 
brother is certain to be invited to a game of dice as soon as this exile is over and since he is 
certain to wager us once again and lose, we are destined for another long spell in the forest; so, it 
is better to accustom oneself to sparse and saintly saathwik (wholesome) food now itself." Then 
the monk said, "No, you are a kshathriya, born and bred for war on wickedness and evil; how 
can you throw off all that tendency for dedication. Besides, why sanyaas (mendicancy) to 
discover that your real core is Maadhava (God)? It is God that agitates you, admonishes you, 
administers you! A minute's introspection must convince you of this truth." Know that you are 
but an instrument; what can you prepare for? It is all His Will, His plan. 


Know that you are but an instrument of God's Will 


Sathatham yoginah---always a yogi! Be calm, unruffled serene; unaffected by good fortune or 
bad, for you are a puppet making motions and contortions according to the pulls He gives to the 
strings! Be pleasant in speech and manner; do not inflict injury or insult on others nor be affected 
any adverse act or remark by others. Be happy that everyone and everything is so ordained by 
God. It is His play, His sport! 


Also be eager to confer consolation and courage; be anxious to be of help. Watch for the chance, 
snatch each opportunity to expand yourself by sympathy, to enlarge the horizon of love, by 
understanding and prayer. Don't keep another at arm's length, saying, "My God is different from 
yours" or "My Clod is opposed to yours." It can never be so. Paramaathma, the name for God 
does not mean, a stranger God, but, the Supreme God! Who can vouchsafe for the correctness of 
the picture which you now worship as the picture of Raama or Krishna? The poet described and 
the painter delineated; but, both relied on their imagination, rather than actual authentic vision. 


Who can set limits to the freedom of God? 


A shepherd boy heard a Brahmana discourse on God and describe Him as a dark blue being of 
human form, riding a white eagle. He prayed for many days continuously giving up food and 
drink, that God must come down where he was tending the fold and partake of his gruel. At last 


on the tenth day, when he threatened to put himself to death (for he had become desperate) God 
came in the form of an old man. And, demanded the gruel. The old man declared that he was 
God, but, the shepherd would not accept the credential! He did not see the dark blue complexion 
or the white eagle! He refused to share the gruel with Him, unless the Brahmana certified that the 
visitor was genuinely God. The Brahmana was brought post haste, but, what could he say? He 
had only expounded from books, written by equally blind persons and from pictures drawn by 
equally audacious painters! Who can set limits to the freedom of God, to assume any Form He 
likes or, any Form that the devotee likes? For the shepherd, God was valid, vital and very near; 
for the Brahmana who expounded the texts, He was a mystery; a distant possibility, an image 
lined by fancy. 


Be convinced that God can and will appear in any form and so all forms are His. Don't refuse to 
recognise Divinity in the form you dislike or did not expect! He can appear as a fox, as a dog, as 
a beggar, any form. When you call on God, whatever form appears, treat it as God. Thotapuri 
taught Raamakrishna that Mother Kaali was Vishwaswaruupini, the all-comprehensive form of 
the formless energy that pervades the Universe, and not the eight-armed occupant of the shrine at 
Dhakshineshwar, the form that was appearing between his brows, whenever he tried to delve into 
himself and discover the unity behind all the multiple manifestations! She was One without a 
second. With no name or form or body or sex or age, beyond time, space, causation. She was all 
forms and so, of no form; she was all attributes and so, beyond the attributeful. She was saguna 
as well as nirguna, the nirguna being the base on which the saguna was conceived. 


Emerge from meditation more charged with love 


We divide the one into two, and play the game of duality; positing one half as giver and the other 
as receiver, one as the seer and the other as the seen, one as subject and the other as object. We 
say Sarvam Brahma Mayam---"All is Brahma!" As if there is an All, which is to be identified 
with another thing called Brahma. Sarvam and Brahma are One, not two! That is why we say, 
Adhwaitha (Not-two), in spite of the appearance as two. In deep sleep, you are one with yourself, 
though at the time you have no Chith and no Aanandha. The realisation that you are not two but 
One will endow you with the awareness and the bliss. 


To earn that consciousness of not-two, love alone is the path. Prema, means seva, which means 
saadhana, which means expansion, self-enlargement, reaching out to the very horizon of being 
and becoming!---until all is I. 


Prema (love) must grow with every moment of saadhana. It must sweeten every word, deed and 
thought of yours. Emerge from dhyaana as a person more charged with love! Emerge from 
bhajan with a greater measure of love! Return from Nagarasankeerthan with a firmer conviction 
that everything is surcharged with the same Divinity that is behind all your activity. I find now 
that these have become mere routine procedures, a matter of schedules, time-tables and 
attendance registers and reports! The thrill, the exhilaration, the enthusiasm are absent; the 
singing starts like a wail, without strength and joy. 


Bhajan must spread goodwill and love 


The "O Bhagavaan song" is a very weak, meek song to begin bhajan with. You do not put any 
spirit into it and so it falls flat on the ear. Do not have it from this day; begin with a vigorous 
song on Ganesha, instead. Also, have the song for aarathi (waving the lights), both morning and 
evening and during all occasions of aarathi, Jai Jagadeesha Hare---and give up the Paavana 


Purusha, which is a much mutilated Kannada song, which has lost its meaning and appeal as a 
result of a number of emendations and interpolations from other linguistic regions! When you 
sing without the thrill of ecstasy I do not derive any joy, nor does the I (that resides in everyone 
of you) get it. 


Bhajan must spread good-will, love, ecstasy; it must cleanse the polluted atmosphere; it must 
invite all to share in the joy and peace. The Nagarasankeerthan must be inspiring, radiating 
devotion and love. The Aanandha, I derive from bhajan, I do not get from anything else. That is 
the reason why I am emphasising these points. Be sincere, feel in your hearts what you are 
singing by your voice. The motion will express itself through the raaga and thaala it chooses. 
You need not worry about the raaga being appropriate or the thaala being accurate. When 
Raama is prompting you to sing, the raaga and the thaala can never be wrong. Raama is the pen, 
Raama is the thought, Raama is the word, Raama is the style, Raama is the composition. How 
then can error creep in? 


Shravan is the first stage of spiritual progress 


Fill every moment with energy, enthusiasm and effort. The epics teach you how to succeed in 
this. The Mahaabhaaratha describes how, when every other of the hundred Kauravas died, the 
eldest Dhuryodhana was challenged by Bheema to meet him in a duel; when at last, he fell on the 
ground, Bheema struck his head with his foot in order to add insult to injury. Dhuryodhana's 
pride was hurt; a Kshathriya such as he could not pass that insult by. He retorted, even when he 
was dying, "Do not exult that you have done some big heroic act by trampling on my head! In a 
few seconds, dogs and vultures will be doing that act. It does not require a hero to plant his foot 
on a dying man! You dared not do this when I was capable of hitting back, you coward!" That 
kind of awareness of one's potentialities and quick response to all happenings must be present in 
you, too. Heroism gushed out his lips even when he was passing away! 


Today is the first day of Shraavan month. Shraavan is the month when the Vedhic studies are 
considered most fruitful, for, Vedhas are Shruthi (the heard), coming to man through Shravan 
(hearing from the Guru). Shravan is the very first stage of spiritual progress. So, it is a good day 
for inaugurating spiritual study and practice. Shravan leads ultimately to Aath-manivedhana, 
surrender of the individual to the Universal. I bless you that you may achieve that goal. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 23-7-1971 


30. Live in Love 


WITHIN thirty days of the inauguration of the Women's College building in this town, I am glad 
I am laying the foundation today for this Kalyaana Mantap (Festival Hall). Joy and grief come 
upon mankind, often without advance notice! Ananthapur has had the college as well as this 
festival hall, as surprises. That is indeed worthy good fortune. The mind decides and shapes 
things according to the decision. It manipulates external objects until the desired achievement is 
concretised. When the decisions are good, good is the resultant; when they are bad, bad happens. 
When love is the lever that operates the mind, only good can result. That is why I always 
emphasise the role of love. 


Live in love; love is life. Without loving or being loved, no being can exist on the earth. Love 
sustains, love strengthens, love is the urge behind all adventure, all sacrifice, all success. 


I have come to restore love among mankind, to cleanse of narrowness, and restrictive attitudes. 
That is the main task, in the revival of Dharma (morality). It is not enough, to talk about the 
prime importance of love in the task of human rehabilitation. One must set the example, in actual 
practice. This Hall is a symbol of that love resulting in joy for this town. When words, deeds and 
thoughts emanate from hems filled with love---pure, untarnished, such as, love for God and for 
man as the image of God---all who contact you, will feel elated. If you love your aathma and not 
your body, you will realise that the same Aathma is the core of every being and you will start; 
loving every being as much as you do yourselves. This is real self-realisation. This is the truth; 
that is to say, a fact that can never be denied or deviated from, during the passage of time. 


Someone mentioned now that the results of the final examinations held by the University are 
commendable, since more than seventy per cent of the students who appeared from the college at 
Ananthapur have passed with credit! Good, but, what I will be glad over, is quite another thing! I 
look forward to cent per cent success in the examination which assesses character, virtue, 
sweetness of speech and behaviour, reverence towards elders and the culture of this land. I wish 
that the pupils of this college live so fully in love that the homes where they were born and bred, 
and the homes which they enter on marriage, and the homes they themselves establish--all will 
be happy, on account of them. No one of them should feel dishonoured, through their behaviour. 
All must shine as splendid examples of joy and contentment, devotion and dedication. 


Ananthapur, 1-8-1971 


31. Raso vai sah 


IT is a great pity that, in this land, which discovered the Divinity of Man and the means by which 
he can regain that Divinity, which is having a continuous stream of saints and sages who remind 
man of his grand role as a pilgrim towards God, men have allowed the teaching to decline and 
the practice to fade! Hearts saturated with this honeyed wisdom have become chalices of poison! 
Hate has hardened them, greed has sharpened them, pride has polluted them. Once again, man 
has to be made aware of the spring of joy within him, so that he may be happy and unagitated by 
anxiety. Human ideals have degenerated so much that man has become incapable of appreciating 
the beauty, wisdom and power of Avathaars (divine advents)! They do not yearn for the intuitive 
experience of the glory and majesty of which they are themselves parts. They do not lose 
themselves in the stream of joy that flows from the contemplation of the limitless, beginningless 
power that is God. This day which you are celebrating as the Birthday of Krishna can best be 
used for re-dedicating your lives to the attainment of that joy. 


Universe, God's creation, cannot but be sweet 


Krishna has three separate meanings---the word, that is: (1) Karsh is one root from which the 
name is derived. It means, "that which attracts"; Krishna attracts hearts to Himself, by His 
Sportive pastimes, miraculous victories over the forces of evil, his charming conversation, His 
wisdom, His personal beauty. (2) The word is also related to the root, Krish, to cultivate, as a 
field, for growing crops. The word means, he who removes the weeds from the heart of man, and 
sows seeds of faith, courage and joy. (3) It is related to the root, Krish, meaning something above 
and beyond the three attributes and the three eras, and na, means, Sath-chith-aanandha. The 
leelas (divine plays) and mahimas (miracle powers) of Krishna through which He attracts the 
Love of Mankind, cultivates the harvest of joy in the hearts of His devotees and makes them 
aware of His being Existence-Knowledge-Bliss are described in the Bhaagavatha. 


Dr. Baalasubrahmanyam said now that if you follow my directions, it is as good as putting the 
Geetha into practice. Arun Kumar Dutt said, that you are all lucky since you have seen many 
manifestations of My power. But, they are manifested because they have to be, not for exhibiting 
attainments, nor for drawing clientele. They manifest when needed by the exercise of Will, as 
naturally, as spontaneously as any other physical act. I am the truth of truth, I guide towards 
truth, I manifest truth and when men realise truth, they realise Me. 


Raso vai sah---"He is sweetness". So, the jagath (the Universe), which is His creation cannot but 
be sweet for those who recognise it as His handiwork. The jagath has to be used to instruct you 
on the glory and the power of God, so that you may seek Him and reach Him. There are four 
stages in the journey towards this goal; each one is called a /oka, a region which you reach. The 
first is A-vidhya loka (the region of ignorance and delusion) from which you start, prompted by 
the chain of grief and pain it inflicts on you. The second is the Vidhyaloka, where you penetrate 
into the Vijnaanamayakosha (the intellectual plane) and are able to distinguish between the true 
and false, the kernel and the husk. The third is the Aanandhaloka, where you are immersed in 
bliss, at the glimpse of the eternal source of power and peace. And, lastly, you have the Go-loka, 
where the Go-paala reigns, and all the go's (jeevas, sparks from the Divine), waves of the 
Premasaagara (the ocean of love) are one in ecstasy and enlightenment! 


Soak your emotions in compassion to attain God 


Unless you have love, you cannot claim kinship with the votaries of God; mere ritualistic 
exactitude or pompous adoration, or loud acciamation will not entitle you to enter the portals of 
Go-loka! They are as tin and trash before the treasure-chest of love. Love is the bridge which 
helps passage from birth to death to deathlessness, from death to birthlessness. When you rise 
from the jeeva-sense to the Dheva-sense (human-ness to God-ness), then, there is no more birth 
or death. Liberation happens when you love every being so intensely that you are aware of only 
ONE. Soak your heart in love, soak your acts in righteousness, soak your emotions in 
compassion; then you attain God soonest. 


Krishna was the servant of even cows and calves! 


Now, most people are nearest the temple; but, farthest from God. For, there is no genuniness in 
the manipulations of the limbs or emotions or impulses or activities during worship. You say, 
Krishnaarpan (dedication to Krishna); but, really, the dedication which the mind performs is to 
thrishna (desire)! Or it may be dedication to wife or children! It is seldom done to Krishna! God 
is everywhere at all times; he accomplishes everything. He accomplishes the minor feat of 
assuming the human form and growing up among men as one of themselves right in their midst, 
in order to win them over to the path of truth. He gives man the chance to savour His sweetness 
and glimpse His glory. He acts despite the absence of any compulsion, so that man may be led to 
do likewise. 


The Sage Vyaasa happened to pass by when Krishna was washing the horses of Arjuna's chariot 
in the water of the Yamuna; he shed a tear, contemplating the duty that the Lord had imposed on 
Himself in order to guide man aright. Krishna played the role of servant to Arjuna, so that: man 
may know how to serve and thereby rise to sovereignty! Krishna was the servant of even cows 
and calves! When just a boy, His mother proposed to have shoes for His tiny feet, lest the hard 
thorny ground of the pasture might injure His lotus feet. Krishna would have none of it; He 
replied, "I go daily behind the cows and calves to the distant pasture, in order to tend them; I am 
their servant. How can the servant; go shod before his masters, when they are not shod, himself 
wearing shoes?" 


Krishna's breath was Love, His behaviour compassion 


The cattle were so loyal and loving towards Krishna, because of this intimate bond. When 
Krishna was invited by Kamsa to Mathura and Akruura, the messenger from Mathura took him 
in his chariot to that City, the cows and the frisking calves too shed tears at the separation! The 
beasts had such sincere Krishna-thrishna! Only man has strayed away into the wilderness of 
ego-infested evils! Every other animal is still treading its allotted path! God takes human form, in 
order to fill man with gratitude and joy; man sees the power, the wisdom and the beauty of God-- 
-the Sathyam, Shivam and Sundharam---and the vision gives him a tormenting thirst for truth, 
goodness and beauty. 


Krishna dealt with the world as with a sitar, pulling its heart-strings to arouse the melody of 
comradeship, heroism, love, affection, compassion and conviction. But of these, the two 
emotions of love and compassion were characteristically His and his own. His breath was love! 
His behaviour, compassion! Adore Him, placing a garland of tears around His neck; washing His 
feet with tears, springing from joy at the contemplation of His love! That very worship will 
endow you with the Wisdom that sages seek, the Bliss that the books extol! 


Grow in love, meditating on the embodiment of love, called Krishna. When the heart has not 
melted and softened to the cry of distress, the spasm of pain, the groan of the hungry, when the 
fountain of love therein is blocked with the tinsels of pride, Krishna will not play the flute in 
your ear. You may be a master in the service of Krishna; but, without the key of love you cannot 
gain entrance to the Go-/oka where He resides! You may be in Prashaanthi Nilayam since years, 
claiming to be with Swaami and near Him; but, without cultivating love expressed in service you 
cannot know Me. 


World is the splendour of God, His reflection 


There was a pupil once, who prided himself on his ancestors and his master; they were great 
Pandiths (scholars), renowned over the entire realm. His preceptor asked him one day, whether 
he could answer any question he might ask. The pupil was stung to the quick! He said, "Why this 
hesitation? Ask, and it will be answered! I come from a Somayaaji family; my father is a 
celebrated savant. I have been learning at your feet for years! Don't I know the answers to all 
questions." "What is the meaning of the word, Lavana?" the Guru asked. The pupil laughed and 
said, "O, you surprise me, with this absurdly simple question! Don't I know? Lavana means--- 
cowdung." Well; /avana is a word that is in daily currency in every household and everyone 
knows, it means 'common salt'! Even this, the conceited disciple had not learnt. This is very 
much like what some long-standing 'devotees' know about Me! 


Unless you brighten your vision with Love, you cannot see the Truth. Love helps you to see God 
in everyone, everyone as Divine. The Jagath is not false, it is not a trap; it is the splendour of 
God, His reflection. He reflected and the Jagath happened! it is His own substance, manifesting 
as multiplicity, as latent or potent energy or matter. When activity is in accordance with 
awareness and awareness is befogged or belittled, dried up or deluded, then, Dharma is 
descendent, and the Avathaar (divine incarnation) appears among men! 


People tell Me that mankind is on the brink of destruction, that the forces of hypocrisy and hate 
are prevailing fast in all the continents, and that anxiety and fear are stalking the streets of every 
city and village of the world; there is no need to tell Me this, for, I have come precisely for this 
very reason. When the world is on the verge of chaos, the Avathaar comes to still the storm 
raging in the hearts of men. Prashaanthi (the higher peace, the calming of perturbations) will be 
stabilised soon; the demonic deviations from the straight Divine Path will be corrected. Dharma 
will be revived and re-vitalised, in every human community. 


Infect yourselves with madness for Krishna 


You celebrate the Birthday of Krishna, of Raama and of Sai; but, they have no birth, they do not 
age; they appear and disappear, like the Sun rising and setting, because you roll and rotate; they 
are steady and ever-present! They appear so, so that you might realise the Unlimited and forget 
in that ecstasy the limited to which you are shackled! Do not derive contentment simply adoring 
pictures and images,, and reading or reciting hymns or songs of praise. Move on to the higher 
stage of Seva activity, and then, to the highest stage of Aanandha, which is Go-loka! 


Know your Reality and the reality of all beings as revealed to you; that very instant you become 
Raadha and since Raadha is Krishna and Krishna is Raadha, you enter and merge in the Krishna- 
thathwa (the Krishna Principle), the Divine Truth. Whoever adores Krishna unintermittently, 
without any other thought or feeling to perturb him, is Raadha. See with the eyes of Love; hear 
with the ears of Love; work with the hands of Love; think thoughts of Love; feel Love in every 


nerve. The God of Love, Krishna, will come to you on the wave of Love and fill your hearts with 
Himself! 


Do not cage Him in a picture-frame; do not confine Him in an idol. He is all forms. His is all 
names. He is the Reality of all beings. Infect yourselves with madness for Him, instead of for the 
World. Some one has written a song about Me, saying that I cure madness and confer madness, 
that I wipe tears and cause tears to flow! Yes; madness for visualising God is any way preferable 
to the madness after riches and reputation. 


Power of love can bind the world 


Shed tears of Aanandha (divine happiness), not tears of grief. Yearn for the Love that will bring 
you the Love of God, Prema. I have no power mightier than that. I might change earth into sky 
or sky into earth, but, that power is nothing before the power of Love that can bind the world and 
rule the world. Love; do not hate or harm. Even mosquitoes can pride themselves on the capacity 
to injure and harm, and cause disease! Bugs can do likewise; so, if you feel proud of the skill to 
harm, you are only demeaning yourselves. Love and serve; that is the Saadhana (spiritual 
striving) that will reward you best. 


Celebrating festivals like this has been prescribed by the sages, since they encourage you to 
ponder over he fundamentals of spiritual progress. A young tree grows better and faster, when 
the soil around the roots is raked up now and then, so that air and solar rays can penetrate the 
source of its strength and vitalise it. I bless that you will have the constant contemplation of the 
Lord and that your minds Will taste the sweetness of the Divine without intermission. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 13-8-1971 


You sit in meditation for ten minutes, after the evening Bhajan 
(devotional chanting) sessions; so far, so good. 


But, let Me ask, when you rise after the ten minutes and move 
about, do you see every one in a clearer light, as endowed with 
Divinity? If not Dhyaana is a waste of time. 


Do you love more, do you talk less, do you serve others more 
earnestly? These are the signs of success in Dhyaana. 


Your progress must be authenticated by your character and 
behaviour. Dhyaana must transmute your attitude towards beings 
and things; else it is a hoax. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


32. Stoop to Serve 


VINAAY AKA Chathurthi is the name of the festival celebrated today, all over the country, from 
the Himaalayas to the Cape, and also wherever people of this country owning allegiance to its 
culture live. Vinaayaka or Ganesha or Ganapathi or Vighneshwara---all indicate the elephant- 
God, who is popular among young and old, and who is worshipped as the very first deity, before 
regularly beginning any ceremony or samskaar, any yaaga or yajna, any vow or fast or 
pilgrimage. He is the Lord of the Ganas or Divine Forces, inside and outside the human body; 
He is the Lord, who masters and overwhelms vighna (obstacle), however imminent or eminent. 
This is the natural effect of the fact that Ganapathi is the God of Intelligence, Vidhya or Buddhi 
(learning or intellect). 


Ganapathi is a God revered in Tanthric (ritualistic) lore, and also, by various Vedhic manthras. 
The elephant is proverbially the most intelligent among the mammals and it is vegetarian, 
indicating its saathwik (balanced or pure) nature. Ganapathi has the head of the elephant, for, it 
indicates the Intelligence through which obstacles in the path of achievement, secular as well as 
spiritual, can be overcome. 


There is a popular verse, used on most occasions when Ganapathi is invoked. It mentions various 
attributes of this God : Suklambaradharam (wearing white vesture) is the first, this is the symbol 
of purity, for, ambara means also the sky, the aakaasha of the heart. Ganapathi is pure, having 
universal love and compassion. Vishnum is the second attribute, ascribed to Him. Vishnu means 
that He is present everywhere, at all times. Shashivarnam is the third adjective, used. Of the 
complexion of ash or Vibhuuthi; that .is to say, glowing with spiritual splendour, with the 
majesty of spiritual attainments, achievements and potentialities. These are also called 
Vibhuuthis, for, in the Geetha, we find Krishna saying, wherever you see Power, Glory, Majesty 
(vibhuuthi), know that it is Mine! 


Ganesha is OM personified 


Ganesha is bathed in His Divine Glory; that is the significance of the attribute, shashivarnam. 
Chathur-bhuja (Four-handed) is the next denotation. This means that apart from two visible 
hands, He has two invisible hands, that are available for the' two divine uses of (1) Blessing the 
devotee, and (2) Guarding him from danger. The last: of the descriptive word is: 
Prasannavadhanam (of graceful countenance). The countenance depicts the inner calm, 
happiness and balance, inner grace and mercy, the consciousness of strength and sovereignty. 


Without intelligent discrimination, no skill or strength can be profitably used. One must know 
how fire, for example, or the electric current, has to be used and how far one can deal with it as 
an instrument for our needs. The senses of man are also like fire; they have to be kept under 
constant vigil and control. 


No worship ca succeed unless the heart is pure and the senses are mastered. Ganesha is the God 
who helps overcome obstacles; but, He will create obstacles when good endeavour is obstructed 
by bad influences; He will clear the path for the sincere Saadhaka (spiritual aspirant). He is 
Prasannavadhanam (of beneficial looks) when you pray to Him for good ends; but, He will not 
be that, when you seek His help for nefarious stratagems! He is Pranava-swaruupa, the Om 
personified; so, He is auspiciousness itself. 


When God is adored and man is injured, there can be no auspiciousness in such deeds. Man is 
God encased in human form; he is the Divine in that form and with that name. If the anu (paro is 
neglected, how. can the ghana (whole)' be gained? If the paisa is discarded, how can the rupee be 
gained? It all begins with a single paisa; another added to it makes two, and ninety-eight again 
make the lump, a rupee! Man is the one; start, revering him; then, you can gain the Grace of the 
invisible God; neglect the visible paisa, you lose the invisible rupee! 


The basic defect of man is greed, uncontrolled desire 


Man loses his status of human-ness, through acts that shame even the beasts. He does not strive 
towards revealing and manifesting his latent divinity! There is not as big a failing as this sliding 
back into the animal from which he rose! If he keeps on with his human attributes and capacities, 
that will deserve congratulation enough. A formidable list can be made of the inadequacies and 
defects of man, but, the basic defect is 'greed', 'uncontrolled desire'---always clamouring for 
more, as a result of the ceaseless prompting of the senses! 


Raavana destroyed himself afflicted by greed. The very Gods were his chamberlains; such was 
the dread his austerity' invoked, such was the reward for his Saadhana! But, he was not content. 
The flames of lust rose as fast: as they were fed. Dhritharaashthra, the father of the Kauravas, 
was enamoured of the greedy plans of his sons, and so he lost all of them, without a survivor, in 
the field of battle, though their number was a hundred! 


Let your heart pant for God 


While moving through the dense jungle called ‘life on earth’, in the thick darkness of Ajnaana 
(Ignorance) of the place you have come from and the place to which you should go, and even of 
your own real identity, six dacoits---lust, anger, greed, attachment, egoism, hate---pounce on 
you, and you can overwhelm them and save yourself, only by means of the light shed by Jnaana 
(spiritual wisdom) and weilding the weapon of Bhakthi or Dedicated Living. 


The Light of Wisdom can shine bright and far, only when Love, pure Love, Love that does not 
demand any requital, is firm in the heart. He who loves, for the sake of some requital, or for 
being loved in return, is a coolie, with his eye glued to the wages. 


You are really loving only yourself; for, there is only You in everyone. Soham, He is I. Whoever 
you injure, it is you that suffers; whoever you cheat, it is you who are cheated. If you do not do 
your duty, to the best of your ability and intelligence, and to the full satisfaction of your own 
conscience, you are cheating yourself. I have known that lecturers in the Colleges have to take 
lecture only for eight classes of one hour each, per week! And, they do not put the rest of the 
hours to any beneficial use, either! 


Service, the utilisation of time and skill to the uplift of society--that is the highest form of 
adoration which God will reward with Grace. You get the actual experience of Sath-Chith- 
Aanandha through service, for, through service, you conquer egoism and convince yourselves of 
the unity that underlies creation. Everyone, be he an office bearer or not, must gird up his loins 
and stoop for work. The body must be sanctified through Karma (good action) and the mind 
through Dhyaana (meditation); in all parts of the country, these units must uphold the ideals and 
practise them, so that they become inspiring examples for the people. 


Bhajan must be a felt experience. Do not sing with one eye on the song that makes the effect on 
the listeners, and the other, on the effect it makes on God. Let your heart pant for God; then, the 


raaga (musical tune) and thaala (musical beat) will automatically be pleasant and correct. 
Sincerity will blot out all errors in raaga and thaala! Do not allow even one vice like the vice of 
conceit to enter and ensconce itself in your heart. All the water in a well becomes undrinkable 
even if one frog is dead and its corpse floats on it. A hundred live frogs will not render it 
unpotable; but, a single dead one will! Life has to be lived, through the channel marked out by 
embankments that slow the. raging flood and direct it into useful fields. Na shreyo niyamam 
vina--"No progress without rules and restrictions." Blessed are they who obey the 
commandments for, they will be rewarded. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 24-8-1971 


33. Society, the Reality 


WHEREVER men gather with a purpose into a society, there you perceive the Divine---the Sath, 
Chith and Aanandha (Being, Awareness and Bliss)! A personality has arisen; a clearer flash of 
reason is evident; a deeper joy fills the hearts. Immerse yourselves in them. 


This is real spiritual endeavour; not pining in solitude or revelling in the breaking of bonds with 
others of your kind, priding on your independence! Be with others; in others; for others. Be with 
all, for all, in all. 


But, nevertheless, be unattached, be the unfailing source of Love. Therein lies success in spiritual 
endeavour, the triumph of spiritual discipline. Thus is the Sai in you manifested; thus is the 
world fostered; Sai within; thus is the heart purified enough to install. There are questions 
raised: Of what relation is society and social ties with spirit and its glory? Of what relation is the 
spirit and its glory with society and its tangles and trickeries? Such questions arise from erring 
minds. 


Spiritual endeavour must aim at individual illumination, social betterment and the divinisation of 
the human community. This is extremely urgent and essential. While in society, the divinity 
inherent in man can blossom more quickly, more widely, more fragrantly. You recognise the 
world, but, not God who is immanent in it! So too, you see the individual but, not the corpus that 
is immanent in society. 


All beings form the Universal Body of One God 


Of course, Society is not another concrete composite collective body! It is the expansion and 
expression of the Divine in each of its components, denotable and enjoyable as One. Society is 
the awareness of this cognisible Divinity. So, the one should not flee from the many; the 
individual is not harmed by society. The one should rather see the many in a new light--the light 
which reveals that society is but God, who activates and prompts the composite whole. The one 
is rendered fuller by association with the many: he gains by losing himself in the many! All men 
are kith and kin, one family, one aspiration, one attempt at one acquisition. They are all equally 
Divine, all form the Universal Body of the One God. All are heirs to the Aanandha that this 
awareness can give. Of course, Society does not happen when people gather by chance, or get 
together with no common goal of good. The many-faceted skills and intelligences that are 
contributed by the many must flow pure and clear, untarnished by egoistic desires along the 
channel of the spirit; then, they will feed the roots of truth and goodness; they will ensure peace, 
for, all ideas, of high and low will disappear. This is the criterion for a stable strong sweet 
society; not, mere numbers. Be conscious of the God in each and in all; then, inner equality will 
impress each so indelibly that the awareness will stay undisturbed. Shaanthi (Peace) will reign in 
each and all. 


Understand the Aathma or God which is your core; that will establish Shaanthi in you and you 
can share that Shaanthi with others What can you give others, if your hearts are empty? 
Feel that you are a true limb of society 


Do you intend to be in society? Do you crave to serve it and be served by it? Then, seek the God 
in all; see the same in all. Yearn to worship that Clod by self-less service. That alone makes you 
a true limb of society. If you feel separate, distinct, outside and beyond society, you will run after 


name and fame, you will be enslaved by hate and partiality, and ruined in the end. So, east out 
those evil attitudes; feel that you are giving society what is its due, offering God His own gift of 
skill and intelligence. Vow to serve, to dedicate. Cultivate Love; society is the reflection of the 
God you adore, the God whose nature is Aanandha. Transform yourself into Love, and become 
Aanandha. 


Adore society as the Divine Body; that is the Truth, the eternal Vision. 
A message by Sri Sathya Sai Baba, October, 1971 


Life is a market. In life, giving and taking, bargaining and 
speculating, is a part of the game. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


34. Where and why 


The glory of Bhaarath which has illumined for centuries the hearts of humanity is awaiting the 
surgence of the Sai Movement, through proper presentation and practical application by you, to 
have an even more brilliant future in the coming years. As the spark that causes the fire, as the 
driver in. the engine drawing a long line of coaches along, as the designer and operator of a 
system of automatic lights, this Sai is here creating and fostering the world, and all its various 
communities, living and non-living. 


You have gathered here as office-bearers of the units of the Sathya Sai Organisation, activating 
the villages and towns of this land. I am happy to be with you. You all know that this gathering 
has a special significance: last week, you and all those connected with the Organisation were 
afraid that this Conference might not meet at all, for, this country was invaded by enemies and 
we were in the midst of a conflict. But, today, fear and anxiety have gone and there is this 
atmosphere of Aanandha around you. 


This Conference was decided upon by Sai, it is a Sai-nirnaya. Nothing can interrupt the 
realisation of that resolution. Last November, on the 23rd, the day when this Body took birth, I 
announced, as you know, that Bhaarath will not suffer from any calamity or distress. Therefore, 
when the conflict with Pakistan came about, you began doubting whether that announcement was 
contradicted by events. There were some who drew conclusions and started arguing according to 
their own notions. But, you should not count what happened until a few days ago as "war." It 
was only the last chapter of a conflict in existence since years, and which grew in dimensions 
during the last eight months. It has little to do with India; it was a struggle of one part of Pakistan 
with another. 


People of Bhaarath will never inflict injury on others 


This civil war in Pakistan forced millions of terror-stricken people to seek refuge in India; they 
prayed in their agony that we should help them. And, true to our traditions and our Dharma 
(moral code), we sacrificed a great deal and gave them food and shelter, and sent them back to 
their homes, after ensuring that they could be safe there and live in peace. The people of 
Bhaarath have never entertained any desire to expand their territory, or to inflict injury on other 
nationalities. They will never develop such desire hereafter also. 


This is the land of the Hindhus. Him means himsa (violence, injury). Dhu means dhuur (far away 
from). Hindhu means, therefore, free from any desire to be violent, to cause injury or harm. This 
country is incapable of aggressive intentions on others. The people of Bangladesh who 
underwent countless tortures and travails were welcomed, treated with sympathy and care, and 
taken back to their homes and settled on the land which they had run away from. That is the 
sacred service that India did; it was no offensive against Pakistan. And, it all stopped well before 
this Conference. 


There are still a few who are bothered with anxiety since Bhutto has become the leader of that 
country, and his intentions are not friendly. You need not entertain any fears on that score. It is 
inevitable that Pakistan might harbour some resentment at their defeat; but, that resentment 
cannot grow into anger sufficient to induce them to fall upon India again. 


Purity of thought, word and deed is needed 


Embodiments of the Divine! The welfare of the world depends on the welfare of Society; the 
welfare of Society depends on the welfare of the individuals who comprise it. The individual by 
his thoughts, words and deeds develops or undermines the welfare of Society, and thus affects 
the World. When the world has space and prosperity, the individual can have freedom from fear, 
and positive joy. Without that Aanandha, one cannot grasp the Brahman-Principle (unitive 
absolute), which is unsullied, immeasurable Aanandha Itself. 


Thri-karana-shuddhi is prescribed by the sages as essential for tasting the Aanandha of the 
Universal Absolute. That expression means, the purity of thought, word and deed. This purity is 
needed even for efficient working of the Organisation, in which you are working. In fact, it is 
important at all levels of human efforts. But, at the present time, there is no evidence of this 
purity anywhere. They play false to their professions, talking peace and fanning the flames of 
wat. 


Our Organisation must strive to correct this hypocrisy, and teach by precept and example, the 
straight path of sincerity and harmony. This Conference calls on scientists who are blind (though 
possessing eyesight) to open their eyes of wisdom, and see things whole, see things deeper than 
ever before. Man has become so insane that he limps though his legs are good, he is mad though 
his mind is sound, deaf though his ears are efficient enough; it has become urgent to warn him of 
this absurdity, and infuse some sanity into his behaviour. This Conference calls on him 'to awake 
into the higher reality. 


Service of man is service offered to God 


The many in the One---that is the real nature of Society. All for One, One for All, This has 
become a slogan rather than a fact. If it is realised in fact, you will find that it is the design of 
Nature that it should be so, and that it is a sign of advanced culture too. This Conference calls 
upon all to share their resources, power, skill and achievements with the rest. For, maanava seva 
(the service of man) is really Maadhava seva (service offered to God). There are various 
societies rendering social service nowadays, but, the service does not warm the heart; it is done 
as a cold routine affair, or as a showy performance, with a great deal of expensive hullabaloo! 
These societies have reduced the land to its present deplorable condition. 


The inclinations of the mind, the implications of speech, and the indications of deeds have to be 
co-ordinated and harmonised. That is the test of the success of our Organisation; that is the surest 
means of achieving it. Identify the Group with which you work as your own self. Do not allow 
this to be a copybook maxim, but try to put it into daily practice. Through the group you can earn 
Samastha-samarasa-sanubhuuthi, that is to say, "awareness of, and empathy with the feelings of 
one and all." That is the spring of unalloyed Bliss. 


We have at present persons who pride themselves on their encyclopaedic scholarship and 
technical skill; they claim to know the innermost secrets of Nature; they fly into outer Space and 
even land on the Moon. But, ask them, whether they have Aanandha and can stay in Aanandha, 
they will reply that they have yet to experience it. If they know everything worth knowing, why 
have they missed this? It is clear they are suffering under some delusion. 


All are activated by one Divine Force 


You, or at least the Andhras among you, would have heard or read about the pupils of 
Paramaanandaguru. Ten of them crossed a river, wading to the other bank. In order to find out 
whether all had arrived safe, one fellow counted the rest and declared there were only nine. Each 
of the ten counted the rest and everyone agreed there were only nine survivors. One of them had 
definitely been drowned. So, the ten started wailing aloud in their bereavement, and a passerby 
was drawn to the group in sympathy. He saw there were ten, all right. The mistake was---the man 
who counted left: himself out; he ignored himself, in counting the rest. 


This is the mistake everyone of these encyclopaedic intellects commit; they count everyone 
except themselves; they know everything except the workings of their own minds, and the 
methods by which they can attain inner calm. So, you must know who you are, and then, if 
necessary, try to know about other persons and objects. Now it is all topsyturvy. Just as all these, 
all the Organisational units, are being activated by One Divine Force, all are activated by One 
Principle. Resolve to identify it and experience it; then, the purpose of the Organisation is served, 
Use the unique characteristics of man---discrimination, wisdom, detachment---Viveka, Vijnaana 
and Vairaagya---and drive at that Realisation. 


To put it even more plainly, you will derive Aanandha only if you succeed in doing three 
exercises. 


(1) Forget the thing that has to be forgotten: Forget the objective world, ignore it, it is Asath, 
only relatively real, not absolutely Real. Forget the A-sath. Remember the first statement in the 
Prayer. Asatho maa sadh gamaya--Lead me from the unreal to the Real. 


(2) Give up that which has to be given up. The Jeevabhaava which is Darkness has to be given 
up, in order to attain Light which is the Dhevabhaava. You are not the body; you are not just an 
individual, not just a chance spark or a stray drop. You are a part of the Divine, a fraction of the 
Fire, a wave of the Ocean. This is the second statement in the Vedhic prayer---Thamaso maa 
jvothir gamaya---Lead me from darkness into Light. 


(3) You must reach the place which you have to reach, that is, Brahmathathwa. Brahma means, 
expanse, limitless presence; you have to pass beyond the limit to the limitless. Limit is death; 
beyond it, unaffected by it, is Immortality. So the prayer cited above adds as the third statement. 
Mruthyor maa amrutham gamaya---Lead me from death to Immortality. 


Dharma is acting according to Truth 


Do not accept the half-truth that you are a part of the objective world; hold fast to. the Truth that 
you are Divine in essence. Your form makes you declare you are human; but, really, you are 
Divine. Sathyam vadha---Utter Truth, is the Vedhic injunction. And this is the Truth. And, the 
injunction continues, Dharmam chara. Dharma is acting according to the Truth you have known. 
You have heard Pandiths expounding most elaborately the axiom, "Brahma Sathyam, jagath 
mithya"---"Brahman alone is real, the World that is the result of a creative act, that is undergoing 
transformations and that will meet with disintegration, is just an appearance on the basis of that 
Reality." 


You might hear such discourses from Pandiths and scholars from this platform too. But, observe 
how tenaciously these very persons are attached to this illusory world! They voice the Truth, but, 
deny It by their deeds. Jagath sathyam, they announce by their deeds, Brahma mithya, they 


appear to aver, when we watch their way of life! This is really a matter for merciless ridicule! 
Our Organisation must apply the touchstone of practice to any precept that the members might 
voice forth or profess. That is My desire. 


The Organisation has been established, not for publicizing any person or creed, or to provide 
berths for some ambitious individuals, from which they can exercise authority over others. It is 
as a means of Saadhana that the Organisation is to be understood. Take it in that attitude. Do not 
consider the rules as restrictions imposed by Me or as shackles on your freedom of action. They 
are devised to help you and others in the Saadhana you have entered upon. 


Two guide-lines, peculiar to this Organisation you should not neglect: (1)Act and then advise; 
practise first, precept second. Unless you yourself avoid the evil habits, and the undesirable 
practices, don't talk against them. (2) The rules, regulations, that we have laid down for the 
Organisation and its Units, have to be observed, scrupulously, down to the smallest dot and dash. 


If you miss a rule, the unit becomes weaker 


Now, however, most of the Units do not strictly follow these rules, they appear in the lists as 
Samithis and Units, but, in actual working, they do not deserve the place. Consider work through 
the Organisation as your very process of living. That work is the food on which you live. If you 
miss a meal, you become weak; if you miss a rule, the Unit becomes weaker. Not merely the 
office-bearers, but, any one of the members, if he fails to observe any one of the rules and 
regulations, he is weakening the Organisation and bringing it into disrepute. Members together 
form the Units. Its strength, its utility, its expansion, its efficacy, depend on disciplined 
obedience to rules. Faith in the discipline, marked out by the rules, is as the heart to the various 
limbs of the Organisation. Lack of discipline is the root cause of the disorder and discord that are 
undermining almost all the various types of association of men, from the simplest to the most 
complex. 


Besides these, there are certain matters I have to tell specially to the Executives and the Office- 
bearers, matters they have to implant in their hearts: Followers of all faiths can join our 
Organisations; there should be no opposition to their entry; on the other hand, they must be 
welcomed with sincerity and looked upon as brothers and sisters. No ill-feeling should be 
allowed upon as brothers and sisters. No ill-feeling should be allowed to sprout in your minds 
against, say Pakistanis or Muslims, or Americans, as a consequence of the passing phases of 
history. Motivated by anger against some one, to injure and insult the innocent, is bestial 
behaviour. No one connected with our Organisation should participate in or encourage such 
reprehensible behaviour. 


You must respect every individual who resides in Bhaarath as a Bhaaratheeya and love every 
such person. This is an Organisation dedicated to the promotion of Universal Love. Start pouring 
out Love to all the members of your Unit, and gradually, expand that Love to include all 
mankind and even the lower creatures. It is an insane idea to perform worship of God, as if He is 
distinct and different from creation. Do not believe that God will be pleased if He is so marked 
out, separated and set apart. 


Carry on the activities without any trace of negligence 


Love the God that is in all men, worship Him, offer Him what you can, dedicate to Him the 
Aanandha that you have. Do your daily duty with the Aanandha you fill your worship with. Be 


glad you have a duty to fulfil, a role to play in the dharma He is directing! Others have other 
roles. Others have their exits and entrances, their words to utter at the appropriate times, their 
gestures, their actions to go through. They are as earnest in their roles as you are in yours. Don't 
try to impose your roles on them! 


Office bearers should resolve to carry on the activities of their Units on the lines laid down, 
without trace of negligence. From now, the usual practice of meeting once a year in Conference, 
passing a few resolutions with great furore, and casting them aside that very day, will not be of 
any avail. Only those units of the Organisation are authentic, wherein the office-bearers practise 
and experience spiritual Aanandha, through adherence to the lines laid down here. The rest are 
mere nominal; they burden the lists with their names, and should be immediately removed. 
Enough for us, if there remain one or two where practice and preaching are correct and sincere. 
Quality is accepted; quantity is of no consequence. 


A place in the Samithi is for constant saadhana 


The District Presidents and the State Presidents have read reports of the activities of the 
Organisation in their areas; they also send them to Me, off and on. They contain routine activities 
of a demonstrative nature, but, few items that elevate and enthuse. They mention ‘poor feeding' 
(a word they are not ashamed to use), visits to hospitals, bhajans 'in jails, nagara sankeerthan, 
etc. For whose sake were these done? Not for the sake of the poor, or the patients or the 
prisoners, but remember, for your own sake! You take food for your own sake, you take 
medicine to cure your own illness, don't you? 


You serve, for the sake of deriving Aanandha, for the sake of realising your kinship with others, 
for approaching nearer and nearer to God who is in all, for your own mental and spiritual health 
and efficiency. Be convinced of that. You join the Samithi, you share in its activities, for your 
own sake; not for the sake of Sathya Sai or the Samithi started in that name. If you feel that you 
can earn fame or name, or social status, or some other type of gain by entering this Organisation, 
there is no place for you in it. This is a place for Saadhana, constant, vigilant Saadhana (spiritual 
striving). 


Those who have some thing specially important, some new and fruitful programme that they 
have adopted and found beneficent, they may now come forward to report on them. Why use the 
little time that we can spare to listen to routine reports and common items, which are observed 
everywhere? We must pay attention now more to the investigation into the causes for our not 
being able to achieve the success desired; you are welcome to elucidate the problem with your 
own suggestions, for, this is a gathering called together to develop Aanandha and accord. Where' 
have you failed and why?---think of these two problems. 


Then this Conference shall pay special attention to two fields of activity: Health and Education. I 
desire that more attention must be paid by you in the coming year to these two fields of service. 
A sound body is the essential requisite for a sound mind and a sound mind ensures a sound body. 
Health and education are intertwined fields. Engage your thoughts in these directions and make 
this gathering fruitful. 


Madras, 22-12-1971 


You can bolt your doors and windows against thieves, but, who 
can bolt the door against Death? The thieves---lust, anger, greed 
attachment, pride and hate---are honoured as welcome guests and 
the real well wishers like tranquillity and humility are shown the 
door. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


35. The Royal Road 


THE resolutions made at this Conference, the rules and regulations flamed here for the Units of 
the Organisation, must be taken by you as the Royal Road to the Divine Presence. They render 
the journey smooth and quick. As children of Bhaarath, you have to foster the ideals of its 
ancient culture guarding it by the discipline these rules prescribe. So far, as a result of mental and 
intellectual weakness, you are finding it impossible to adhere to those ideals and to observe the 
vow and restrictions that they impose. Though we have been laying down many rules, and 
restrictions and guidelines during the last five years for the proper working of the Units, and 
emphasising their importance, they have been more misused than made-use-of for the betterment 
of the Organisation. 


As a result of misuse, you find yourselves helpless in cleansing the blemishes in your own minds 
and eradicating the evils rampant in society. The brightness of the sky is hidden by a thick fog; 
so too, the fog of evil and vice darkens the heart and breeds atheism and other diseases. This has 
made you forget the very purpose of your existence, as well as of the Organisation, which has 
been established to help you. Take note of this while yet you may. 


Some men enter into even Aadhyathmic (spiritual) Organisations and secure places of 
importance there, with various ambitions and plans. They believe, often sincerely, that their own 
plans are the best and their methods are the best, spiritually. Many might do this on account of 
sheer ignorance of the purpose and plan of the Sathya Sai Organisation, which they enter. But, 
ignorance is no excuse! 


Aathma has no birth or death, nor it grows or weakens 


The nature of electricity is still a mystery; but man has devised a thousand ways of benefitting by 
it. Electricity is found everywhere, in nature; but;, it: can be collected, stored and utilised only 
through certain contrivances designed by man. The spiritual Aathma Shakthi (inner divine 
power) that is also everywhere is stored in a body and passed through the thin wires or nerves, it 
illumines and directs activity. These activities have to be oriented towards Aanandha, and not 
attachments to temporary pleasures. The Life Principle that flows as intelligence through every 
cell and nerve is also a reflection of the Aathma. 


That which is born has also to die; coming implies going. That which has no birth has no death 
either. The Aathma has no birth, no death, nor can you say, it spreads or grows, or weakens. It 
has no history, it is, that is all that can be said about it. It is ever Intelligence, ever Bliss. There is 
the urge to desire a thing; that is named Ichchaa Shakthi---but, it too is a derivative of the 
Aathma Shakthi, the Divine that is your core. Realise it as such and do not demean it by desiring 
deleterious objects. 


Desire, so sublimated, is the basis of Prema (Love). It is the fruit of the tree of God-ward 
directed Ichchaa shakthi. The fruit has the bitter rind (Vaaya) and the hard seeds (the cognition 
of distinctions); these have to be discarded, and the sweetness tasted. That sweet juice is the 
Aanandha the Aathma confers. Of course there are a few fortunate individuals who imbibe the 
juice itself, without the labour of peeling off the rind and picking out the seeds. Prahlaadha was 
of this kind---unaffected by Maaya or by the folly of 'awareness of distinctions’. From his very 
birth, he knew only the sweetness of the Name of the Lord, of the juice of the fruit from the Tree 
of Love. 


Each one of you has to pass through three stages 


No boy can join college, the moment he steps into school. Several stages have to be reached and 
got over---the Primary, the Middle, the Secondary, the Higher Secondary, and the Intermediate; 
so too, we have in the spiritual path, the stages of Work, Worship, Wisdom and finally, Sacrifice. 
Sacrifice is when the ripe fruit falls from the tree, sacrificing its affection and attachment, 
weaning itself away from its support and sustenance. Work is for the physical level; worship for 
the mental and wisdom for spiritual. You have to pass through the three stages, each one of you. 
When I say you, there are three you's! The one you think you are---namely, the body, the 
physical person; the one others think you are, the mental you, your passions, emotions, impulses, 
attitudes, beliefs, feelings; and the one you really are, namely, the Aathma, the Spirit, the real 
Reality of your Personality. 


Now, you must examine whether the Unit for which you are responsible is in the primary stage 
or any higher stage. Judging from the fact that this is the fifth year, we can assert that the 
Organisation is now in the Middle School stage---a stage during which discipline has to be 
vigilantly observed, so that the High School and College stages might prove beneficial. The 
larger the number of storeys you wish to erect, the deeper the foundation has to be laid. You are 
planning to construct the supremely majestic tower of Aathma-Realisation, and therefore, great 
attention has to be paid to the provision of a solid foundation of faith and discipline, of 
dedication and surrender. Examine your own activities in these Units and judge for yourselves, 
whether such a foundation is being laid therein. 


Follow the path laid down by saints 


Man has increased his capacity of construction and destruction a million-fold, by means of 
yanthras (machines) he has put together. An atom bomb causes destruction which several armies 
cannot accomplish. So too in the spiritual field, the latent forces in man can achieve the 
stupendous task of piercing the mystery of the Universe, through the manthras he had 
discovered. Manthra means ‘potent formula’. Man makes yanthras; manthra' makes man! The 
maker of yanthras is called a scientist; the knower of manthra is called a saint. When you follow 
the path laid down by the saints you can be sure of success, for, they have laid it with the purest 
of intentions, and with the noblest of ideals. 


The Lord is neither in Heaven, nor in Kailaash or Vaikuntha or Swarg. To believe that He is 
manifest only in one place or location and to journey thither is a superstition much to be 
deplored. He is everywhere, in every one, at all times. He is the witness of all, in all. He is the 
energy that fills space and time., and He is the energy that manifests as causation. The 
Organisation must implant this 'Truth in the minds of the members and spread this Truth, without 
fear and fumble. It must reveal man to himself, as a visible, moving embodiment of Divinity, in 
whom God shines, through whom God beckons. 


God is to be worshipped in and through man. This is the message that you have to put into daily 
practice. This is the main plank of the programme you have to carry out. You should not import 
the tactics and tricks of political power-hunting into the Units. Nor should there be any trace of 
dislike or distrust, on the score of nationality, language, caste, economic status, scholarship, age 
or sex. Revere the Aathma and derive aathma-aanandha (spiritual bliss) through Love. 


God is the origin of all languages 


Why attach false values to these exterior symbols? Why develop prejudice for the reason that a 
man was born on the other side of a political boundary, or calls on God in another language? 
God is the origin of all languages. Boundaries shift and are subject to revision, resettlement, and 
change. Twenty years ago, when some one from Bombay asked a farmer of Puttaparthi, where he 
belonged to, he got the reply, 'I am from Madras State.' But, Madras State has since broken into 
Aandhra State, and Thamil Nadu, so that the Aandhras and the Thamils have started developing 
antagonistic loyalties and a new narrow ideal. 


These are man-made differences, and should not interfere with God-ward activities. God has 
made the Universe as one single home for one single family. Each State is but an apartment in 
that mansion. Members of the Organisation must extend Love and Respect to persons belonging 
to any State, any religion, any caste or community, and speaking any language. 


To give you a small example: It happened just a week ago. A few years ago, in 1965, both 
Bangala Desh and Pakistan (they were both one State then) invaded India; recently, Bangla Desh 
sought refuge with India, since Pakistan decided to hold it down by terrorising the people! The 
people of Bhaarath did not in the least remember the enmity of the people of Bangla Desh in the 
past against them in their hour of mortal distress. They welcomed them with brotherly Love, and 
helped them with food, shelter and clothing, and saved millions of them from extinction. 


Love ignores logics, Seva respects no syllogism 


One can understand the spirit of renunciation and the depth of tolerance that is inherent in Indian 
noble response. Whoever is afflicted with calamity, at whatever time under whatever conditions, 
your heart must react without delay in sympathy shown in some practical manner. No one should 
be condemned as trash; even a little stick can serve as a tooth-pick! God has not made any man, 
wholly bad or wholly good; your likes and dislikes are inducing you to label them as such. 


Office-bearers of the Organisation, strive to establish yourselves more firmly in your own Truth, 
and strive to demonstrate in your behaviour that you are aware of the Truth that all men are 
sparks of the same Divine-Spirit. I consider Seva (service) as the most important activity of the 
Samithis, for it is the highest Saadhana. Do not entangle yourselves in pros and cons, in 
arguments for and against, whether this way or that, they are the consequence of wrong or 
perverted scholarship. Love ignores logics; Seva respects no syllogism. Try to observe the rules 
that have been framed through Love, to canalise the Love that you are required to cultivate. I 
have said this so often that all of you know my mind already--- " Start the Day with Love. Spend 
the Day with Love. Fill the Day with Love. End the Day with Love. That is the Way of God." 


The Samithi is the heart and units are the limbs 


First, it has been decided that the Sathya Sai Seva Samithi will hereafter be the key unit, of the 
Organisation. Units like Sathya Sai Sathsang, the Sathya Sai Baala Vikaas, the Sathya Sai Study 
Circle, the Sathya Sai Bhajana Mandali, and the Sathya Sai Seva Dhal will be subordinate to the 
Samithi, and supervised by it. The Samithi is the heart, and the units are the limbs. The limbs 
cannot act independently, as if they are a law unto themselves. 


During the Third All India Conference, the Mahila Vibhaag (the Unit in charge of women's 
activities) was separated from the men's sections; but, they were not affiliated and placed under 
the guidance of the Samithis concerned. Of course, the Vibhaag can have its own Chairman and 


Secretary, but both have to follow the advice and suggestions of the Chairman of the Seva 
Samithi, and the rules laid down for the Samithi. 


Each town shall have a single Samithi (organisation and unit); it shall not have more than one. It 
may have within its jurisdiction a hundred Bhajan Mandalis or a hundred groups engaged in 
various other activities. But, there shall be only one Samithi. 


Limits and activities of the Samithi 


Baala Vikaas (child progress section) and Seva Dhal---these are only limbs of the Samithi. But, 
Baala Vikaas, we have decided, will be the special activity of the Mahila Vibhaag alone. For, 
women can in a unique way, deal with children lovingly, affectionately, intelligently, and 
enthusiastically. The Baala Vikaas shall take in children in the age group of 5 to 12. From the 
age of 12 up to 18, children shall be in the Junior Seva Dhal. From 18 till 30, they will serve in 
the Seva Dhal, and after 30 they are entitled to become members of the Seva Samithis, especially 
those who evince dedication and a high sense of service. 


When the Baala Vikaas movement spreads, and children are ready to join High Schools, High 
Schools can be opened to receive them and continue their education on lines in tune with the 
ideals of the Organisation, and with the establishment of Sathya Sai colleges, the process will be 
completed entirely under Sathya Sai auspices. Thus, the resurgent culture of Bhaarath will be 
built on strong foundations. Men teachers can run Baala Vikaas classes; but, they can have only 
boys as pupils. 


Another course of action that was decided upon today is this: You all know that books are being 
written by all kinds of people in all manners of style and content, urged by all types of fancy, 
mostly with an eye on personal profit. But, hereafter, this shall stop: no book shall be published 
on Sai Literature as suits the fancy of the writer or the publisher. There is a Registered Body 
named the Shri Sathya Sai Education Foundation. The manuscript has to be submitted to the 
Foundation, and published through the Foundation in the manner approved by them. For, books 
transform or deform the faculties of man. Many write books with no relevance or experience, 
relying solely on their imagination and so, people are left in the wilderness, unable to separate 
fact from fiction, truth from falsehood. 


Flow of information must be unbroken and steady 


Again in almost all the languages of India and in English, we have a number of periodicals, 
under different names---Shaanthi, Prashaanthi, Sudha, Sanaathana Saarathi, etc.---causing 
confusion and complications. So, we shall have only a single monthly magazine in each language 
called everywhere, Sanaathana Saarathi. From now on, it will not be possible for these 
periodicals to be published according to the will and pleasure of people. If they are left as they 
are, there is likelihood of lowering of standards and even financial loss for the parties, and 
consequent distress. So, it has been decided to place the Sanaathana Saarathi of each linguistic 
area, on sound footing, both financially and in the range and authority of content. 


Another important; matter: The Organisation is not yet organised effectively! Reports of 
activities from the Units do not reach the Samithi, the Samithis are not reporting to the District 
Presidents and they in turn fail to inform the State Presidents, who are unable to present a full 
picture of the activities of the State to Me. The flow of information from below and of instruction 
and inspiration from above must be unbroken and steady. 


Adherance to these rules will strengthen the Organisation, which has as its aim the fostering of 
Bhaaratheeya culture as the example for the whole of humanity. This Organisation believes 
that the Aathma in each is the Aathma in all and that the God that each worships is the God that 
all worship. You cannot insist that in the Bhajans only songs on Sathya Sai should be sung! 
Fanaticism of that kind I very much dislike and condemn. For, all names and all forms denote 
Me only! You betray your ignorance of My truth when you stick to any one of My names and 
avoid the rest. When you have identified the Aathma principle and experienced its Glory, you 
pass beyond the realm of rules; but, until then, limits and lines of conduct have to be honoured. 


Use of the symbols of the Organisation 


The State Presidents have to pay immediate attention to this further point. In some States, 
peoples have started publicising the manifestations of My Power, and converting themselves into 
propagandists with a view to making a profit out of the transaction. There are some Units doing 
this type of business, still existing inside the Organisation. You must decide to dissociate these 
Units from the Organisation. Using our Name, many collect donations and contributions; so, 
those who are not aware of the norms of this Organisation are being misled and deceived. Efforts 
must be made to remove from the Organisation any one, however rich, however renowned as a 
scholar, however influential and important in society, if he transgresses the rules of Organisation. 
This must be done as soon as the transgression is known. In Kerala and in Mysore States, this has 
to be done without delay and without compunction. 


The symbol of the Organisation is "the Harmony of Religions, the Unity of all Faiths, the 
Acceptance of all Approaches." I find that this symbol is now being indiscriminately used in 
badges, letter heads, wedding cards, etc. and it is also being adapted and changed according to 
individual fancy by the users. This is creating confusion; for, there is no one identifiable symbol 
for the units of the Organisation or for the Sathya Sai Seva Dhal, etc. You must resolve to adopt 
the same design for letter heads used in official correspondence, the same symbol for badges all 
over the country. If you travel along the royal road of faith and discipline, you can reach the 
Royal Palace which you long to enter. 


Understand the basic similarities of various religions 


Four stages are mentioned in the spiritual progress: Saalokya (being in the Palace), Saameepya 
(being in the immediate Presence), Saaruupya (being privileged to be clothed with a share of 
regal authority) and Saayujya (becoming King oneself). In the Bible, Christ is said to have 
announced first, that he was Messenger from God, later, that he was the Son of God, and finally, 
that "I and My Father are One." Then, there is the further declaration of Identity with the Holy 
Ghost, too. In the Quoran too, similar ideas are propounded. The Sathya Sai Organisation has to 
seek out chances of studying and substantiating these basic similarities and promote love and 
mutual co-operation. 


These rules we are laying down might appear to some of you as knife-thrusts or hammer-strokes; 
but, they are meant to heal, and to weld. Bow to them and observe them in action sincerely--- 
your path will be soft and smooth, like a path strewn with floral petals. I bless you that you 
adhere to them and receive the benefits of discipline and devotion. 


Madras, 23-12-1971 


See all as but expressions of the same God, as appearances on the 
same screen, as bulbs lit by the same current, though of manifold 
colours and wattage. 


Feel that you and they are able to talk and walk, think and act 
because of the God within. 


Differences that strike you while you cast your eyes are illusory; 
you have not yet developed the vision that makes you apprehend 
the unity which is the truth of all the seeming diversity, that is all! 


The fault is in you, not the world. The world is One; but, each 
takes it to mean what pleases him most! 


Sri Sathya Sai 


36. Heroic adventure 


GOD gave this body so that you may use it to sanctify Time, through beneficial acts. Of course, 
man is ever anxious that he should get contentment and joy, as soon as possible with as little 
exertion as possible. But, he places more confidence on material comforts and material 
possessions, hoping that they can yield joy and content. There is no effort by him to ensure being 
born in good circumstances and surroundings. Goodness is natural to man; it is his nature, when 
it is untarnished. But, man relishes the tarnish, not the pure core. Falsehood with all its 
enticements is liked more than truth which wears simple clothes only. 


Consider this: Milk and curds are sold in the streets by vendors who shout about the excellence 
of their ware, but, no one runs to open the door, call them in and purchase the health-giving 
nectar! Toddy and arrack (home brewed liquors) are sold far from the village bounds; but, yet, 
people tramp the distance to where they are available, pay the price with no bargaining and 
consume the poisonous stuff, which robs them of all dignity! 


This is the tragedy! Good counsel though given with love is seldom listened to. Bad talk attracts 
people so much that they walk miles to listen to scandal and abuse! 


Man yields to senses instead of challenging them 


The essential nature of man is Divinity; his strength is that of the unconquerable spirit. But, this 
hero has reduced himself to a zero, and is grovelling in fear and falsehood! To achieve his 
nefarious plans, man is demonstrating courage and confidence. Once his mind is set on 
vengeance or crime, man becomes a fierce animal, ready to inflict wanton cruelties. Or the 
heroism is channelled into mountain climbing, deep sea diving or walking on space, or other 
adventurous acts. 


But, the most heroic adventure of all, the conquest of the senses and of their pulls is yet beyond 
him. When the senses challenge him he yields, instead of challenging them in return and 
overpowering them. Consider only the masters of their own impulses and passions as Heroes! 
And, no other. 


Look at Vaalmeeki. He was a brave dacoit; he was an intrepid highway robber, dreaded by all 
who journeyed on that road. One day, the Seven Sages happened to pass along that fateful road; 
they revealed to him how wicked his actions were, and painted before his mind's eye the horrors 
he was becoming heir to, as a result. They told him that those who now enjoyed the fruits of his 
robbery will not be sharers of those horrors, for, he alone was the culprit and he alone will have 
to suffer the punishment. 


That was enough to open his eyes; he left: off his evil pursuit and forsook family, profession and 
wealth. He retired into the jungle and plunged into the severest austerities. He became a New 
Hero, the hero of a new type of adventure. He became a great sage, honoured by posterity as the 
First Poet, the author of the Raamaayana. 


He gave up toddy and arrack, that is to say, the senses and their intoxicating poisons; he 
developed a taste for milk and curds, the Saathwik (pure) virtues, mastery over himself, the 
victory that confers the highest and the purest Joy. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, November 1971 


Make your heart soft; then, success is quick in saadhana Talk soft, 
talk sweet, talk only of God---that is the process of softening the 
subsoil. 


Develop compassion, sympathy; engage in service, understand the 
agony of poverty, disease, distress and despair; share both tears 
and cheers with others. 


That is the way to soften the heart, and help saadhana to succeed. 
Sri Sathya Sai 


37. Bhajan as saadhana 


THE Scriptures lay down Bhajan (group devotional singing), Naamasmaran (Remembering 
God's Name) and Sankeerthan (devotional music) as the Saadhanas (spiritual practices) of this 
Age. Bhajan is the process of singing your prayers to God, praising His glory and compassion, 
and pleading that He may fill you with His Grace. Dr. Hislop has as a result of many years of 
research, declared that prayer has a highly curative effect on the body and mind of man. That is 
the result of constant Bhajan and recital of the Name. Every Unit of the Organisation is enjoined 
to arrange for Nagarasankeerthan (moving choirs) to go around the streets, in the early hours of 
the day, Bhajan every evening and morning, for this very reason. 


But, Bhajan should not be gone through, as a painful necessity; it has to be a thrilling experience, 
which must leave the participants full of pure energy and elevated enthusiasm. But, this does not 
happen now. Either it is too mechanical or it is a medium for some people to exhibit their talents. 
The Bhajans are sung to parade one's compositions and these are sung during the group sittings, 
as if they are rehearsed there. The others are not able to follow; so they allow their minds to 
wander. Sing familiar Bhajans, so that all can share in the Aanandha. Also, pay attention to the 
tune, the meaning, the variety, the voice, the raaga, the thaal (the tune and the beat) and other 
fine points of the Bhajans. If your voice is not pleasant or sweet, keep quiet; that is the best 
service you can do. 


Do not cause discontent, discord and disharmony, insisting on singing, because you are an 
office-bearer, or something! The Bhajans must be sweet to the ear, arousing pictures of the glory 
and grandeur of Godhead, in the mind of the singers and listeners; they must refer to various 
Names and Forms of God, so that the Bhajan Sessions might fill every one with ecstasy. Bhajan 
is a Saadhana for all who share in it; that is why it is prescribed, for every Unit. 


Advice should come out of personal experience 


Youth is often found fault with by elders today, that they have lost reverence, humility, and piety 
that they ridicule temples, religious services and all signs of adoration or devotion directed 
towards God. They do not learn the art of meditation or sense-control, but cater to the most 
trivial whims, without regard to their harmful effects. All this is due to the hypocrisy of the 
elders. Those who teach them or preach to them about the rules of morality and religion, are 
patently breaking those very rules. They lead such atrociously wrong lives; but, they admonish, 
advise, and harangue, without the slightest twinge of conscience. This is easily discovered by the 
sharp-eyed young men and women. How then can they revere the parent or teacher, the elder or 
leader, the writer or the speaker, who sets about the task of 'educating' the rising generation? Let 
advice come out of personal experience; otherwise, keep mum! The very fact that you are happy 
and contented, while having faith in God, will induce others to develop faith; that is the best 
method of preaching. 


15-1-1972 


You desire to drink a sweet drink, but instead of sugar, you drop 
salt into the cup, imagining salt to be sugar. That is the state of 
man, today. He craves for peace, but, does not know how to attain 
it. 


The means he adopts do not lead him to the anticipated end. So, all 
the thirst and craving are just a pose; it is a fashionable slogan, 
and nothing more. 


Man must be sincere; his word must be in conformity with his 
feeling; his action must be in conformity with his word. Resolve on 
this practice, at least from today. Do not be false to yourself 


Sri Sathya Sai 


38. Give and gain 


For a world pursuing ever-receding happiness and peace and, as a consequence, blinded by the 
fog of disappointment and disease, the Divine is the Pillar of Light, that indicates the path to 
progress. Man has inherited this Realm of Work, this world which is but a vast factory, where he 
himself is fashioned from manhood to Godhood, if only he applies his energy and skill, 
diligently to the .transformation. Man must work, every moment of his life; he cannot avoid this 
burden. His very existence depends upon action, exertion, work. And, work results in either good 
or bad, big or small, powerful or paltry. So, man has to be active on the right lines, in order to 
avoid evil and pain. That is the duty he owes to himself. 


There may be differences among men, in physical strength, financial status, intellectual acumen- 
but, all are equal in the eye of God; all have the right and the potentiality to achieve the goal of 
beggar to the merging in Him. Note that everyone, from the beggar to the billionaire, is prompted 
by the urge to achieve Aanandha, supreme bliss, based on inner peace, unaffected by ups and 
downs. Every activity however elementary or earth-shaking, is subservient to this ideal. 


This Bliss Divine is not manufactured by any company, nor available in any shop. It is not 
something that can be earned from outside, and added to the sum of one's possessions. It has to 
sprout and grow from within., and fostered and treasured within. 


The individual cannot thrive in isolation 


Take the case of the contentment and pleasure that food imparts. A hungry man may hold 
bundles of currency notes in his grasp, or even plenty of eatables; but, unless he consumes the 
eatables or converts the currency into consumable food and eats them, and they become parts of 
him, no sense of satisfaction, can arise. Similarly, bliss too is an inner experience, an elevating 
exhilarating inner calm. It cannot be gained by the accumulation of impediments like cars and 
houses, land and gold, stocks and shares. How can a cash-box appease hunger or a pass book 
give peace? Aanandha is the goal that all seek, either individually or through social activity. 


Man is a social being, for, he can use society to urge him on towards the goal; society hands over 
to him the know-how; it gives him the training. It is not a haphazard group which gives him 
facilities for sensual pleasure; it should not be conceived in that light. Its purpose is much nobler. 
It is not an instrument for promoting his pursuit of power, authority or personal advance. 
Pleasure, pride, dominance, food---these ideals man shares with the bird and the beast. But; he is 
endowed with intelligence, discrimination, a sense of right, the skill to store knowledge in 
language and transmit it to subsequent generations. He knows that the security and stability of 
society is his own security and stability. The individual cannot thrive in isolation. This is the 
basis of the Vedhic prayer, Lokaa samasthaas sukhino bhavanthu---"May all worlds be happy." 
Man has to contribute his best, for the happiness of others, so that he may be happy. 


Renunciation makes life worthwhile 


And, what is the best he can contribute? Each has his particular duty, task, role as an individual 
and as a member of the society to which he belongs. Do that duty, carry on that task, play that 
role, as best as you can; that is how one can fulfil himself. The body tingles with health only 
when every limb, muscle, nerve, and artery and cell does its duty efficiently and well. So too, a 
factory or a society or a workshop can be happy, healthy, only when each worker or individual 
does his duty or functions well. 


But, it has become difficult nowadays to discover any one who is aware of his duty as a unit of 
the organisation or society to which he belongs or to the country or nation or to the world. Unless 
one develops virtue, uses skill, intelligence and discrimination in the most beneficial manner, 
directs his physical might with restrain, his life is wasted in bitterness and grief of others. 


The Vedhas declare: Na karmanaa, na prajayaa dhanena, thyaagenaike amruthathwam 
aanashuh---"Not by acts, nor by riches, nor by progeny, but, only by renunciation alone can 
immortality be gained." Renunciation, detachment; sacrifice, giving up---this alone can ensure 
the highest Realisation, Eternal Bliss. Renunciation is the Law of Life. That is why life is 
worthwhile and a source of happiness. 


You have to exhale what you inhale, eliminate what you have consumed, the blood that comes in 
at one point has to be immediately passed on to the adjacent point; it cannot be retained when it 
is received, for that would result in a boil, or some other serious illness. It is the same, in the 
social, economic, political and spiritual fields. This lesson that everything will be added into the 
person who gives up everything was taught in India since ages. Hence, India shone as the 
Thyaaga bhuumi, the Yoga bhuumi and the Karma bhuumi---the land of renunciation, the land of 
self-control and the land of uplifting activity. When the thyaaga (renunciation) way of life was 
neglected, it has slid into the roga (illness) way of life, a life full of weeping and wailing, of 
clamour for food at other people's doors. 


Udhyoga without yoga will be a handicap 


How can thyaaga develop without Yoga, the control of the agitations of desire, in the mind? You 
may have airconditioning, but without the conditioning of the mind, how can there be peace? 
You may control prices, production of steel or cloth, the distribution of food-grains, and a 
number of other things and processes; but unless you have mind control, the rest are barren 
exercises. Mind control is more heroic and beneficial than any other system of control. A 
running train cannot be stopped, even if thousands hang on to it and pull it back but a tiny button 
in the engine, when it is pressed by the driver can bring it to a halt. So too, the mind, if controlled 
can bring to a halt, all the various functions which are sought to be controlled. Now, enormous 
time and money are wasted to achieve unessential targets, but, the most important target, namely, 
mind control is being neglected. Yoga is the name for that system of control. Now, Yoga is 
neglected; Udh-yoga (job) is being sought after. Udhyoga without yoga will be a handicap, a 
hindrance. 


This is the reason why an insidious disease is now spreading fast---strikes! Strikes everywhere 
for everything by everybody---from the cooks in the kitchen to the custodians of law and order! 
The interests of the owner and the workers, the employer and the employees are intertwined; one 
cannot thrive without the other; they have to be of each other. Problems and tangles are bound to 
arise; both parties have the right and duty to solve them by mutual consultations and adjustments. 


Faith has to be cultivated, first and foremost 


The owner is the heart of the organisation; those who work in it, in the various fields of activity 
necessary to carry out its objectives are the limbs. The heart has to keep the limbs active; the 
limbs have to sustain the heart. Only these two are kin; only they are involved in the endeavour; 
the co-ordination is between these two, no third part; can set the problems aright. It is best to 
solve problems mutually, in love and with understanding. The welfare of both should not be 
hampered by ignorance or emotion. 


The secrets of individual and social peace have been discovered in this land of Bhaarath long 
ago. They have been put in practice for ages. It is a pity that in this very land, we have quarrels, 
fights, factions between individuals, villages, cities, communities and states. This is assuming the 
proportions of an earthquake, for, it is now a universal feature, affecting even the foundations of 
the human community. 


Faith has to be cultivated, first and foremost. It has to be nurtured in love; love is fostered by 
shaanthi (equanimity). Shaanthi can be got only when there is full reliance on God, complete 
surrender to the Divine Will. 


If virtue is lost, it is lost for ever 


The Peace of the World depends on peace and amity between nations; the peace of nations 
depends upon the peace between the concomitant units, the villages, the families and finally, the 
individuals of each family. So, every individual has a responsibility to love others, have faith in 
them, and revere them as sparks of the Divine. Every man has to cultivate the virtues of 
tolerance, forbearance and brotherliness. 


If one loses wealth, he may regain it, by some ruse or other. If he loses health, some doctor might 
prescribe a tonic to win it; back. If one loses status and authority, he may by sheer pluck gain 
them back. If virtue is lost, it is lost for ever; nothing can restore the pristine purity. So one has to 
be ever vigilant and never slacken. 


The greatest of the virtues is Love. Love is the basis of character. You may have all other 
desirable things in plenty; but, if you have no character, that is to say, virtue, which is all strung 
on Love you can have no genuine peace. Money comes and goes! But, morality? It comes and 
grows! Morality has to be grown in the heart by feeding it with Love, then only we can have 
justice, security, law and order. If love declines among the people, nations will weaken and 
mankind will perish. 


Duty is God, Work is Worship 


Love is the spring wheel of a factory. One has to work along with hundreds of others, with 
different temperaments, so one has to learn forbearance and equanimity. One has to create an 
atmosphere of tranquility around oneself. No one should be looked upon with envy, malice or 
hatred. Tranquility can be promoted, if each one does his duty, faithfully and efficiently; that is 
the highest Saadhana also. 


Duty is God; Work is Worship. When you do your duty to the best of your ability and skill, and 
to the best advantage of the organisation of which you are a limb, you have worshipped God and 
He will certainly be pleased. Your life is amidst yanthras (machines); when you convert your 
work into worship, the atmosphere will be one of manthras (formulae of praise of God), and not 
of yanthras! 


It is indeed a matter for surprise that the Kamaanis have ventured to start this enterprise, at a 
time when complicated problems are filling the industrial as well as other worlds. It is a bold 
adventurous step. The Kamaanis rely, more than anything else, on Divine Grace. That is the 
reason why I am here, inaugurating this factory, and giving you this message. This is real 
worship---the provision of livelihood for thousands of people through this enterprise. They are 
prepared to start even more factories, since they have firm faith in Divine Grace, which is sure to 
bless all such attempts. 


When man is not gainfully employed in congenial jobs, his mind wanders into devious ways and 
unsocial activities. When enough work is given to the mind and body, health and happiness and 
social security are sure to be found. One feels that life is not in vain. 


The Kamaanis are very good employers. All the Kamaani Brothers are living together in the 
same household in mutual love and hearty co-operation. It is a very happy home. I can assert that 
it is an ideal home, because I have observed them constantly for long. The family consists of a 
fairly large number of members; everyone is interested in spiritual practices and is engaged in 
some Saadhana or other, in the search for Aanandha. This factory run by them will reflect the 
same love and mutual co-operation among the workers and the Kamaanis, for this is an extension 
of the same unit. By maintaining this atmosphere, they can give joy to you, and you can give joy 
to them. 


I desire that you have, in this factory, some kind of Sathsang (devotional gathering), every week, 
when you can focus thoughts on the glory of God. You can meet every Sunday, at about 4.30 in 
the evening and engage yourselves in Bhajan (group devotional singing), or listen to some 
musical discourse, or some lecture on spiritual subjects or saintly personages. This will also keep 
you away from vulgar films, card games and other debilitating pursuits. Methods of recreation 
that weaken physical or mental strength have to be avoided. Re-create them, by making the mind 
dwell on the Divine. 


Peace and prosperity cannot drop down from the sky; they have to be striven for and acquired by 
sincere effort, dedicated to God, with intense and pure devotion; they have to be won by the 
cultivation of love, humility and reverence. Let the ideal Brotherhood of Man and Fatherhood of 
God guide you and lead you from success to success. 


Bangalore, 3-2-1972 


39. Thou and That 


EVERYONE engaged in teaching or learning or administering this institution where these three 
processes are carried on must try to know for what purpose they should be done and how best 
they can be done. After years of steady and impartial research, the sages of India have said that 
education has as its goal the realization of the Aathma (divine Self) and the manifestation of its 
inherent attributes of Sath-Chith-Aanandha (Being, awareness and bliss). Apart from instincts, 
impulses, emotions and passions which man shares with the boasts, he has some unique 
attributes like the urge to renounce and to serve, to attach himself to Truth, and to cultivate the 
qualities of tolerance, and forbearance. The Sathya Sai Colleges are endeavouring to encourage 
the manifestation of those and related traits of the higher character, and thereby to re-establish 
the spiritual renown of India. 


The very endeavour gives these young men a sense of joy and happy enthusiasm. You heard 
Satish of the Second year B.Com. class speak from his heart on the equanimity, peace and calm 
that the practice of the Saadhana of the constant Presence of God has given him. The Aanandha 
the boys have will certainly inspire their parents, their kith and kin and others. The youth of India 
will turn towards the path leading to Aanandha with as much alacrity (or even more) as they are 
now evincing in moving along the path leading to anxiety, fear and destruction. Therefore, there 
is no room for despondency. When these students become teachers, the number who can voyage 
happily on an even keel through the turbulent sea of life will increase. Injustice, untruth, 
unrighteousness will all be recognised as disgraceful, demeaning Social evils, instead of being 
tolerated as necessary evils. Truth, Justice, Love and Peace shall soon return to earth. 


The first step in the life-long pilgrimage 


The reorganisation of education is one of the many means towards this end. The Foundation 
Stone for the College Buildings that was laid now by the Governor of Mysore State is a step in 
this process, during which Colleges engaged in preparing the new generation, on proper lines 
will come up in every State of India. This Day is celebrated as Yugaadhi (Thelugu New Year 
day); the beginning of a New era. Every Era or span of time is called Yuga. The first Yuga 
according to the Puraanas was Kritha, when Truth reigned supreme. Next the Thretha Age or 
Yuga appeared---when the ideals of Righteous Living were upheld. In the Dwaapara Yuga that 
followed, the cleansing and sharpening of the intellect (Jnaanadheva thu Kaivalyam) in order to 
realize the Reality was propagated as the means to save mankind. In this Kali Yuga, the paths of 
devotion, of righteous deeds and of the acquisition of wisdom are all declared equally effective, 
so that people of different dispositions and temperaments can have the fortunate chance of the 
Truth being revealed to them. 


Education must open these paths before the children. When the child is first initiated into the 
alphabet, this ceremony is called Akshara-abhyaasa--Practice of the indestructible! Kshara is the 
material, objective, created, seen, experienced. A-Ashara is the non-material, subjective, creator, 
witness, experiencer. The letter A is the first step in this life-long pilgrimage to the source of life, 
Light and Love, the Divine, the Truth. It is a pilgrimage that ends when the emerged is merged in 
that from which it has emerged, when Thou realize that it is That, when Thwam knows that it is 
Thath. The stow of billions of births and deaths is summarised in the three words Thath Thwam 
Asi. 


The true Guru is Thath (That) and he reveals to Thwam (Thou), the fact of Asi (art). The true 
pupil is he Thwam thirsty for Tath and anxious to acquire the Asi wisdom. 


Brindhaavan, 16-3-1972 


Love is no merchandise; do not bargain about its cost. Let it flow 
clear from the heart, as a stream of Truth, a river of wisdom. Let it 
not emanate from the head, nor from the tongue. Let it emerge, full 


and free, from the heart. This is the highest duty, the noblest 
Godliness. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


40. The toughest armour 


INDIA has, at present, a great responsibility. She has to preserve in its pristine purity the culture 
she has inherited from the hoary past. This is a duty she owes to the world. That culture 
enshrines the highest human values and the most valid of keys to the understanding of human 
destiny. She must also spread these teachings among all mankind, in order that the cause of Truth 
and Universal Harmony and Peace be promoted. And, the teachings have to be lived and 
practised and experienced by every Indian, so that they may be listened to with faith by those for 
whom they are intended. Mere propaganda, without the proof of practical application discernible 
in the propagandist will bear no fruit. 


So everyone must study the elements of this Culture and live the ideals laid down therein; that is 
the best means of spreading it. In other countries, there is a composite culture, a certain 
uniformity of faith, and only a few religions of a kindred nature claiming the obeisance of the 
people. But, in India, we see the co-existence and even the co-operation of many faiths, many 
traditions and many culture-traits. India is a beautiful garden, where multicoloured beds of 
flowers add charm and fragrance to life. Every citizen of India has the privilege and pleasure of 
guarding and tending this lovely garden of Truth, Righteousness, Peace and Love. 


Indians have to cherish the memory of their martyrs 


How did this country become the source of this great message of Truth? A long line of heroes 
and martyrs struggled to set the example and elevate the ideal; they suffered untold misery and 
had often to sacrifice their all, including their lives, in their struggle. But, they won in the end 
and it is that heritage and memory that you have to cherish and foster. King Harischandhra 
willingly faced a series of tribulations and tortures in his single-pointed pursuit of Truth. The 
Paandavas exiled themselves into the forest for thirteen years and bore extreme penury and 
dishonour, in their determination to uphold Truth. Sri Raama was the very embodiment of Truth 
and Morality. From time immemorial, this country has made truth and righteous conduct the 
foundations of its culture. Every act and movement--material, moral, administrative and 
adhyaathmic (spiritual)---has been tested and evaluated on the touchstone of Truth and Morality. 
Here, no person can be honoured as great unless he is also good. 


Truth and Dharma (Right Conduct) are the most effective armour for us. Other countries rely on 
atom bombs and hydrogen bombs; for us, these two shields are enough. Some of you know, I 
believe, the story of Paandavas. Dharmaraaja (born of Dharma) was the eldest brother. He had 
on either side of him, the brothers Bheema and Arjuna. On either side of Bheema and Arjuna, 
stood the two other brothers, Nakula and Sahadheva. Arjuna was the embodiment of the clear 
sharp intellect and Bheema was the symbol of physical might and heroism. The lesson conveyed 
by this picture of' the brothers is: when Dharma or Righteousness is supported on either side by 
Intellectual Might and Physical Valour, success is assured. Only, the two, namely, intellect and 
courage must obey the dictates of Dharma and not decry it; or disregard its directives. 


When there is Peace there will be Divinity 


India stands forth among the nations of the world as Dharmaraaja, with her loyalty and steady 
faith in peace and mutual cooperation for noble ends. America is the Arjuna, ready with her 
weapons of incalculable destructive power. Russia is the Bheema, with her formidable might. 
India's strength lies in her adherence to Dharma. All other countries whose strength lies only in 


their fire-power can earn victory only when they surrender ultimately to the force of 
Righteousness. If we safeguard Dharma, Dharma in its turn will safeguard us. Dharma is the 
life-hood of Prema. Where there is Love, there will be Peace. Where there is Peace, there will be 
Divinity. And, where there is Divinity, there will be Bliss. 


These are eternal truths; but, Indians themselves are losing faith in them and they have started 
ridiculing them and refusing to practise them. Such persons are insulting their own mother; 
mother, and mother-country have to be revered equally, according to the scriptures. You honour 
the mother by obeying her and fulfilling her wishes, you honour mother-country by paying heed 
to the age-long traditions and hoary ideals that have stood the test of time. 


No one honours a renegade. He condemns himself by denying his country. Do not therefore get 
involved’ with borrowed ideologies, imported fashions or attitudes or apparels, and exciting 
notions of social behaviour. Youth, today, are ruined by this fascination for the false. Borrowed 
ideas cannot fit into the pattern of our culture. Sanaathana Dharma is the culture that has grown 
on this soil and best suited for maintaining peace and joy, in human communities. You cannot 
shine in borrowed feathers, for long. They can give I only temporary delight. So, do not distort or 
disfigure your culture by imitation or neglect. 


Man's innate nature is to revel in the Divine 


Resolve, before it is too late, to weed out the wrong and strange notions and fashions. Entertain 
the belief that God exists in every living being. All people are your people and all your people 
are God's people. When someone hurts you, or abuses you, mitigate the anger by the knowledge 
that 'you and he' are both one, in God. When your teeth bite your tongue, you do not punish your 
teeth; both tongue and teeth are yours, and both are equally loved by you. 


In the environment of Prema, there will always be peace and harmony. Regard God as Love, 
Living Love. In many instances, this Love is hidden by the fog of anger, greed or lust. Discard 
these temporary formations and associations and control the evil influence of these passions. 
Then only can you feel and express genuine Love. Love must be regulated and directed by 
intelligence and discrimination. Or else, it may cause even injury and defeat. 


When a person saw a fish struggling on a river bank because the waters receded leaving it high 
and dry, he sympathised with its plight and brought it home wrapped in his handkerchief. He 
found it struggling even when he put it to bed; so, he gave it a few teaspoonfuls of hot coffee. 
The poor fish could not survive such ignorant kindness! It died. If only he had put it back into 
river, it could have lived happily; even if you put it in the bowl studded with gems, it would be 
miserable. So too, it is man's innate nature to revel in the Divine; so, if you keep man in the 
world and pour material gains and comforts on him, he will still pine for God whom he knows to 
be the fountain-head of happiness. 


Attachments make you lose your freedom 


Suppose all of you who are in this hall now do not know or remember where you have .come 
from and where you have to go after this function. There will be utter confusion and panic; if you 
do not know who you are, where you came from and which is your destination, there will be 
fear, anxiety, anger and greed among you. 


Who is the real resident of this body? You are the positive aspect that is activating the negative 
aspect, the body. The life-breath repeats Soham every time you breathe. It means, I am He, I am 


God. What a profound authentic declaration, the breath is making, every moment of your life, 
while waking, dreaming or in deep sleep, whether you listen to it or not! If this simple lesson, 
this truth of our truth, which is being dinned all the 24 hours of the day does not alert you or 
inform you of your real task, how can you understand your Reality by the mere study of books? 


Three aspects to the Aathma concept 


Recognise the string that passes through every flower to make this one garland. When you see 
the flowers, the string is not seen; it is however the thing that holds them together. You can make 
from the silver cup you have, a plate or a casket or an idol. Names and Forms change but, silver 
they all are and will continue to be. Call out for Raama, or Krishna; they both come before you 
and announce "I am Raama, I am Krishna." But, who is this 'T' that is common to both Raama 
and Krishna? That common factor is the Aathma (spirit or divinity), as the Indian sages have 
declared. There are three aspects to this Aathma concept. What you think you are, is the Dheha 
Aathma, the Body Personality; what others think you are, is the individualised self, the 
Jeevaathma; and what you really are, is the Universal Soul, without limitations of Name and 
Form, the Param-aathma. 


Attachments make you lose your freedom. You can move freely, when you are not encumbered 
with burdens. Less luggage, more comfort, is a slogan for the journey of life. Reduce desires, 
loosen attachments; you win your freedom. The end of wisdom is freedom; the end of education 
is character; the end of culture is perfection; the end of knowledge is Love. Self-confidence is the 
basis of faith in God also. People who do not know who they are and who have no confidence in 
their own strength and power assert that there is no God. But, how can they declare that the God 
in whom you believe and who exists for you does not exist? They are free to assert that God does 
not exist for them; but, that assertion cannot make God Himself non-existent! 


There is a story about a Hindhi Pandith in Banaras. He used to pray for five minutes every morn- 
ing and for five minutes every evening, thus spending ten minutes a day in meditation on God. 
His colleagues laughed at him for wasting ten precious minutes on this silly wasteful habit. He 
replied, "Sirs! If really there is no God, I concede that ten minutes of my time are being wasted 
each day; but, if God exists, imagine, you are wasting 24 hours each day, without recognising 
Him and praying to Him! I feel that I am using these ten minutes in something .in which I have 
full faith. I am deriving great joy therefrom."' 


Do not try to find fault with others; search, rather, for your own. I direct you to implant three 
ideals in your hearts: (1) Do not forget God; (2) Do not put faith in the world you see around 
you; it is changing every second and does not last; (13) Do not be afraid. You are the 
imperishable Aathma that knows no fear. I want you also to banish two ideas from your hearts: 
(1) Forget the harm that anyone has done to you, and (2) Forget the good that you have done to 
others. Above all, develop Prema. Love all religions and all nations. Recognise and accept all 
religions as paths leading men to the same destination. All of them teach love and compassion, 
humility and forbearance. I bless all of you and ask you to promote love, sympathy and 
compassion towards all beings; God is present in everyone of them; and it is your duty to revere 
God in each of them. 


Kamaani Auditorium, New Delhi, 29-3-1972 


41. "My People" 


BHAKTHI (Devotion) has been defined as, "Saa Paraa Anurakthih Esware"---"It is supreme 
single-pointed intense attachment to the Lord." Such attachment can be evinced even by animals, 
as the legends, about Shiva at Kaalahasthi and of the elephant that worshipped Him there, 
describe. Young lads are capable of it, as the story of Dhuruva demonstrates. Women have 
proved that they are capable of cultivating that attachment, as Dhroupadhi did. 


The Moon has no inherent light of its own; the stars are sources of enormous quantities of light. 
But, starlight is so hazy and indistinct that it is as bad as non-existent, whereas, the Moon with 
borrowed light is able to help man much more and to brighten his nights with a delighting 
quantum of light. The secret is the nearness of the Moon to the source of light, the Sun, and to 
those who need it, namely, mankind on earth. The stars are too far off from either, to be of any 
service. And, of what use is all that brilliance if what they can offer is just a twinkle? The sky is 
studded with a billion stars but the illumination they shed is infinitesimal! 


God is more than a billion Suns but, if you are far away from Him, you cannot have either the 
warmth or the light. Of course, with God it is not special distance that counts; one has to endear 
himself to God. That is the process of Bhakthi. 


Recognise the authority of God over all 


But as a result of worldly needs and sensual greeds, man endeavours to curry the favour of all 
sorts and types of men, demeaning himself with low tricks and vulgar praise! Lokavaancha 
(worldly desires) takes you away from Lokesha (the Lord of all the Worlds). Learn a lesson from 
the stream. It rushes to the hollows, never to the heights. Bend before the lowly, the humble, the 
godly, the good; don't bend before the proud, the promoters of hate and greed. Those who have 
God in their hearts will always be self-effacing, not self-aggrandizing. If a man's head is heavy 
with ego, he will suffer from aches; he cannot sustain himself on Aanandha (bliss). Never yearn 
for authority over others; recognise the authority of God over all. Be immersed in Aanandha, and 
in Love. 


Man weakens himself, believing three impostors: Naama, Roopa and Guna. When he says that 
his name is such and such and when he answers 'Here I am' when that name is called, he is 
impostor number one. When he describes himself as iii or well, weak or strong, poor or rich, he 
is impostor number two! When he is depressed because he suffers loss or pain, and excited 
because he secured profit, he is imposter number three! He has no name; he has all the names 
that God has! He has no phases; his body has them; but he is not the body. His car may be out of 
order; his house may be crumbling; but he is unaffected. Loss or gain, pain and pleasure, the 
entire dual throng is delusion caused by the play of fancy of fact. 


Three knowledges to disperse the delusions 


These delusions have to be dispersed by the acquisition of three knowledges and the consequent 
mental attitudes: Aadhibhuutham, concerning all perishable things including the body and its 
appurtenances, that is to say, the Jeeva; Aadhidhaiva, concerning the Divine forces that prompt 
action the directions of space, ruling the ear; the Air, ruling the sense of touch; the Sun, presiding 
over the eye; the deity of the waters, Varuna, ruling over the tongue; the Ashwin Twins, ruling 
over the nose; Fire, presiding over speech; Indhra, over the hands; Upendhra over the feet; 
Mithra, over the alimentary system; Prajaapathi, over the generative; Chandhra or the Moon, 


presiding over the mind; in short, the Zshwara or Saguna (formful) aspect of God with various 
contributory attributes promoting man's progress here and hereafter; and lastly, the Aadhi- 
aathma, concerning the Aathma (spirit) that is the individualised being, the Universal eternal 
Aathma itself. 


The Aadhi-bhuutham or Jeeva-consciousness binds one with the shackles of I and Mine. The 
Ishwara-consciousness or the awareness of the attributes of God which energise and activate 
one's functions limits the Supreme into a particularised entity. When the Aadhi-aathama is 
achieved, delusion or Moha disappears and you attain Moha-Kshaya (lost-delusion)---Liberation. 
Arjuna acknowledges with gratitude towards the end of the Geetha dialogue, Nashtho Mohah 
(my delusion is lost), Smrhthir labdhah (1 have regained the memory). He had forgotten that he 
was the Aathma; he remembered it and was liberated from the prison he had built around 
himself. 


Man loses joy and peace by his own craving 


There was a rich man, a confirmed miser, who sought to hide his hoard in a place where no one 
could lay his hands on it. He decided to keep it inside a snake-hole. Poor fellow, he did not 
realise that if his gold was safe from others, it was inaccessible for him too! Man loses joy, his 
peace, his freedom by his own cleverness and craving. He devises stratagems in order to escape 
being entrapped by others but he is trapped, nevertheless, by his own tactics to catch blind-folded 
in a dark room the black cat which is not there! That is life, for most men. They won't believe 
wise men when they warn or convey correct information. 


Do not look upon the objective world as something to be exploited; it is something to be adopted 
and appreciated. Then, you can derive the maximum Aanandha out of the contact! At Delhi, 
lakhs of people were pouring in at all hours of the day and night, and clamouring for Dharshan 
(audience). Unless one group got Dharshan and moved on, there was no room for the next group 
pressing behind them to move forward. So, I got upon the terrace and gave them Aanandha. 
Truck-loads of people from Jullundher, Meerut, Paatiala and even places however farther off 
were arriving on all the days I stayed. They were all drawn by the Aanandha that Dharshan 
confers. 


Ganga of spirituality can never be polluted 


When every moment of stay in Delhi was thus packed with the sharing of Aanandha, Gulzarilal 
Nandha, President of the All- India Saadhu Samaaj, wanted to take Me to Kurukshethra. I told 
him, "How could I leave the thick flood of people pouring out their hearts in anguish, "Sai Baba! 
Dharshan Der!" (Sai Baba! Give us Dharshan!) and come with you to Kurukshethra? They will 
feel I have deserted them." But, he insisted so sincerely and argued so selflessly that I yielded to 
go, during the hot hours of the day, when I had some respite at Delhi from the pressure of the 
prayerful crowds. 


There I found a large assembly of over three lakhs of people. Among them were many 
Sanyaasins; the ochre robe was predominant all around. I had a surge of Aanandha, standing 
before that happy gathering, on ground that was familiar to Me, as a field for corrective teaching! 
I said that Sanyaasins (those who have renounced worldly desires) have a unique role in Society. 
The colour of their robes must indicate the colourlessness within. I warned them against the 
corrupting influence of politics and of institutionalism. They should not sacrifice their freedom, 
their simplicity and their role as vigilant witnesses to the wiles of pomp and pageantry. 


I described the political pressures that are undermining the spiritual culture of India in the name 
of secularism. I assured them that the Ganga of Sprirituality emerging from the Himaalayan 
ranges of Sathya, Dharma, Shaanthi and Prema can never be polluted by political tactics. For 
millennia, the lives of generations of Indians have been saturated in God; they have toiled for 
God; they have been fostered by God; God is the root; the bed-rock, the very breath of the 
millions of India. No one can dry it up, or blast it or deny it. 


Be aware at all times of the God within 


The truth about the individual, the Universe and God discovered by dedicated delving and 
announced through universal compassion can never be tarnished or argued away. Ambassador 
Keating of America told Me: "I cannot grasp the full import of Indian Culture through the study 
of books, nor can I vouchsafe the authenticity of the scriptures of this land. But, when I see in the 
Capital City of India in the Seventies of the twentieth century a phenomenon like this---five 
lakhs of ardent men and women milling around to get a heartening glimpse of this five-foot 
personality, I feel I can hear the heartbeats of this ancient people." 


When a person is sleeping on a cot in a room at night, and thick darkness prevails, you try to 
wake him up in order to talk with him. You grope around and when you touch a chair or shelf or 
book, you say to yourself, "Not this! Not this." At last, when you touch one toot, you are thrilled; 
you know, "This is He." "Once you have contacted God, get confirmed in Faith and by adhering 
to His Commands, attach yourselves to Him closer and closer," I told the gathering at 
Kurukshethra. 


I advised the Sanyaasins to give up anger, greed and envy; to eschew factionalism and pomp; to 
be aware at all times of the God within and the God without and so behave that all may be 
inspired to follow the spiritual path. I explained to them that without purity of consciousness, 
wisdom cannot dawn in the heart. 


We went to Meerut one evening, a place historically important during the days of British rule 
and even a big cantonment of the army. It was here that the British suffered their first reverse in 
days of the Mutiny. They now want a Sathya Sai College there! The gathering there was so huge 
and so thickly packed at the Assembly Place that cars could not proceed, nor could we, by foot. 
When we thought of returning, there was such weeping and wailing that I appeared on the dias, 
while they were wondering where I was and whether I had left; I gave them joy, singing a few 
Naamaavalis. 


In the Divine Path, there is no chance of failure 


I am telling you this, because it is a forecast of what you can expect in the coming days. I have 
been declaring since six or seven years that the day when millions will gather to benefit from the 
Avathaar (divine incarnation) is fast coming; I am advising you to garner and treasure all the 
Grace and all the Bliss you can, while you may, so that you can sustain yourselves ruminating on 
the sweetness of the memories and the experience. 


If you live on the level of the body and the individual, you will be entangled in food, fun and 
frolic, in ease, envy and pride. Forget it, ignore it, overcome it---you will have peace, joy and 
calm. In the Divine Path, there is no chance of failure; it is the Path of Love. 


We are having a Summer Camp for College Students at Brindhaavan in May---the entire month. 
The Chairman of the University Grants Commission, who has written a voluminous report on 


College Education, told at Delhi that his long cherished dream is now coming true, that what the 
Government cannot do, Bhagavaan is making a reality. We have a number of scholars and 
Pandiths coming to speak on various subjects to the students. Of course, all subjects are spiritual, 
there is nothing beyond the realm of the spirit. Even matter is spirit, basically. 


I desire that you should share your Aanandha with others and you should hold forth, in your 
daily life, conversation and activity, ideals which they can emulate and follow. There will be no 
shortage or hesitation in My giving Aanandha to you; any shortage or hesitation will only be in 
your accepting what is offered. Be vigilant that you do not miss the least part of the Bliss. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 8-4-1972 


Desire discolours the intelligence; it perverts judgement; it 
sharpens the appetites of the senses. It lends a false lure to the 
objective world. When desire disappears or is concentrated on 
God, Intelligence is self-luminous, it shines in its pristine 
splendour, and that splendour reveals the God within and without. 
That is the real Aathma Saakshaathkaara (Realisation of the Self). 


Sri Sathya Sai 


42. Tonic for youth 


MANIFESTATIONS of the Divine Aathma (Spirit). You are here before Me, resplendent with 
the inspiration you have imbibed from this atmosphere of peace and self-control, the vision you 
have gained about your own reality, the sense of mission you have cultivated, the resolutions you 
have invested yourselves into, and the invigorating contact you had during these thirty days with 
teachers who are sincere guides of youth. You have been taught the elements of yoga (spiritual 
communian) and dhyaana (meditation), the essential unity of all the different paths of Self- 
realisation, the correctives necessary for a life of peace and joy in this technological world. 


Tomorrow, when you leave for your homes, I am sure your hearts will-be hankering for God, 
though your bodies journey towards your native villages. I am glad at this; for the treasure of 
devotion is more precious than gold, silver and property. These cannot grant mental peace or 
lasting joy. Virtue is the real treasure chest; sterling character is the universally accepted 
'sterling'. The realisation that you are a wave of the Ocean of Bliss is the richest possession. 


You are witnessing the plight of the princes of India; it demonstrates that power, authority, 
status, sovereignity are all but flashes in the pan. Rains fill the tanks to the brim, and for a brief 
span of time, hordes of frogs croak around the shores acclaiming the glory and the wealth. Let 
the tank go dry one day, as it must; no single frog will stay to croak allegiance or praise. Fame 
and affluence are as unsteady as the homage of the frog. Glory is won, when you discover your 
Self and revel in its Divinity. 


Education must result in discovery of the Self 


Consider how well educated, how powerful, how strong physically, how heroic, were the epic 
personages, Raavana, Hiranyakashipu, Hiranyaaksha, Dhuryodhana. Each of them had all these 
in ample measure; but the absence of virtue, of the yearning to be righteous, of adherence to 
Dharma (moral code)---that flaw led to irreparable ruin. 


Prior to the confrontation on the field of battle, Dhuryodhana as well as his rival the Paandava 
Prince Arjuna hastened to Lord Krishna seeking aid. Krishna allowed them to choose for 
themselves. He placed before them two items of aid: the Army that would be an addition to one's 
militant potential, and Himself, the Divine Guide and Guardian, who would not be useful for the 
actual fighting in the battle. Dhuryodhana chose the army; he preferred quantity, manpower. 
Arjuna chose quality, God-power. Krishna was for him as valuable an acquisition as the conquest 
of the entire world. 


The individual must instal himself in a chariot with the wheels of Thyaaga (Detachment) and 
Sathya (Truth); the Lord will then accept the position of Charioteer; He will hold the reins 
(mind) and direct the horses (the senses) straight and safe over the road (the path of salvation 
through Self-realisation). 


Only practice and experience can give intelligence 


Aathmavidhya (science of the Self) by which one can become aware of the Infinite Eternal 
Absolute Self has to be pursued by everyone. Education must result in this discovery, or else it 
does not deserve the name. The process by which one gets skill to eke out his livelihood, or to 
exploit nature and his brethren cannot be education, in the real sense. Books only fill the brain 
with second-hand stuff; practice, experience, feeling, doing with one's own hand--these give 


insight and intelligence. Swotting is just waste of time and money. Book-learning helps you to 
gain marks at school and college. I prefer students, who do not acquire adverse 'remarks' in their 
records, even if their marks are a little less. 


Study must endow one with humility; but, today students are afflicted with aggressive audacity. 
We have in the field of education factions and fights that bedevil relations between students, 
teachers and administrators. Politicians are at the bottom of it all. Neither the students nor the 
teachers are to blame. Students have tender, eager, self-denying idealistic, compassionate hearts; 
that is the reason why I have given each of them immaculate white to wear this day, 
appropriately, at “White-field”. 


Kshethra means Field; your personality and person are the kshethra, but you must, by earning 
and maintaining purity, cognise the Kshethrajna, the Master of the Field. How stupid, how 
wasteful it is to fritter away the glorious destiny, echoing the angry outbursts of vainglorious 
climbers who misuse your energies for the destruction of the properties of innocent citizens and 
for terrorising the neighbourhood. When the reservoir is full, the water taps will flow; when the 
heart is the reservoir of love, sympathy and faith, acts, words and thoughts will help peace and 
joy. Politicians however do not recognise these needs; they fill the young hearts with hate, envy 
and greed, and spur them on to violence and vituperation. They draw them away from the 
classroom, the library and the laboratory and make them tramp the streets. They prod them to 
injure innocents, damage property and behave wildly, with fury. 


Indian culture never encourages the use of force 


Indian Culture, as you learnt at this Summer Camp from distinguished exponents never 
encourages the use of force for effecting changes in law or social conditions or people's attitudes. 
Gandhi directed the movement for Indian Independence along spiritual lines which drew courage 
and confidence, and communicated both to the people, from Naamasmaran, the recitation and 
reflection on the Names of God. He cleansed the heart of the nation, of hatred and envy, of fear 
and doubt. He stuck to the ideal and the path; you too should do the same. A student has study, 
as his ideal and his path. That study cannot be postponed or done slipshod. So, whatever the 
obstacle or temptation, it must be overcome. 


Students deserve-an atmosphere of peace; teachers too must teach in an atmosphere of peace and 
joy. Dhronaachaarya taught archery to Arjuna, as well as to his own son, Aswatthaama; but 
Arjuna received the lessons with avid enthusiasm, and so, he became the greatest archer of that 
era. Aswatthaama could not rise to that height. Attach yourselves to the teacher by means of 
earmmestness and humility; then, you get the best out of him. If knowledge is handed over in anger 
and discontent and if it is received in anger and discontent, how can the gift bear fruit? How can 
the receiver be strengthened by it? 


Treasure what your teachers taught with reverence 


I bless you that you may progress in life with the help of the ideal and inspiration you have 
garnered during these days at 'Brindhaavan---the discipline, the social conscience, the wisdom of 
the ages, the lessons of the past and of the future. Draw upon them whenever you are afflicted by 
doubt or despair. Put them into daily practice; meditate on them; reflect on their importance and 
significance. I shall reveal a truth: you got this chance as the reward for the merit you have 
accumulated in your past lives. 


I need not describe to you the affection that your teachers developed for you; you have 
yourselves witnessed how they were in tears while taking leave of you at the end of their series 
of lectures. What they taught you with such love you too should treasure with great reverence. 
Your Sadhguru (spiritual preceptor) is your Swaami, I will be with you evermore; so go back 
happily with courage born of self-confidence; share your aanandha and your new outlook with 
your parents, your friends and companions, kith and kin, teachers and the people with whom you 
come in contact. 


I exhort you to strive sincerely to serve others and serve your own best interests. 
I bless you that you may have success in your endeavours. 


Valedictory Discourse, Summer Course for College Students, Brindhaavan, 31-5-1972 


When man is able to master the senses, and direct them along 
more beneficent channels--- 


the eye seeing God's footprints in stars and rose-petals, 


the ear hearing God's voice in the throats of birds and peals of 
thunder, 


the tongue tasting God's sweetness in all that appeals to it, 


the nose discovering fragrance in everything that recalls the glory 
of God, 


the sense of touch content to clasp the hand of the forlorn and the 
distressed as the beloved children of God--- 


then, he can visualise the God installed in the cavity of the heart; 
that is the lesson the five-hooded Sesha (divine serpent) imparts! 


Sri Sathya Sai 


43. Teach by example 


EVERY limb of the body has a distinct name, form and function. Every nerve, muscle, and joint 
has its own share in the upkeep and growth of the body. The word 'body' denotes all these 
together. So too is the word 'Village' and, the name, 'Puttaparthi.' It denotes all the individuals, 
families and communities living and functioning together, here. If a single nerve or muscle or 
joint is diseased, the entire body suffers, loses efficiency. So too, even if one individual or family 
in the village has no ease, is distressed or disabled, anxious or afraid, 111 or bed-ridden, indigent 
or ignorant, the entire village is infected by the misery. When the toe is hit, the eye sheds tears; 
when the lowest and the poorest are hungry and oppressed, the highest and the richest are also 
affected. During the ages when each one was recognised as complementary parts of the same 
‘body-politic,' there was peace in the land, laughter in the field and festoons across the door. 


But, now, each limb endeavours to injure the other; there is no co-operation or co-ordination. 
And the body is lying prone, in pain. Living, happy living, is possible only in and through 
society; society cannot thrive on egoism, greed and envy, which turn one man's teeth and claws 
against another. 


Villages which are the cells of the body-politic are afflicted with this terrible malady today. So, 
this school is being established in order to guide children on right lines and to inspire the elders 
to be examples of tolerance, service and mutual love. Joy and peace have to be restored in this 
village through truth, goodness, justice and love. Each one can best perform the duty that has 
fallen to his lot only when he develops in himself an attitude of dedication to these ideals. 


Keep alive the roots of one's native culture 


Every village has to be equipped with four Aalayas (Houses). First, the Bhojan-aalaya (the 
Eating-house or Hotel), which must provide for a moderate price, clean sustaining food. Of 
course, man does not feed on such food only. He feeds on pure water and air and the food that he 
gorges through the eye, the tongue and the sense of touch has also to be free from pollution and 
poison Next, the Aarogya-aalaya (the Medicine-House, the Hospital). This has become essential, 
since man has neither healthy eating habits nor the inclination to adopt them. Third, the 
Vidhyaalaya.(the Learning-House, the School) which is a lamp lit to keep darkness away. The 
School must instruct the young and inspire the old, keep alive the roots of one's native culture. 
Last, the Deva-aalya (the House of God, the Temple, the Heart of the Community), pumping the 
life-blood of Faith, Reverence and Steadfastness throughout the body-politic. 


The School is influenced by the Village, as much as the Village is influenced by the School. 
Children learn at School for a few hours, during a few months of the year, a few disciplines and 
skills, and some chunks of information. They are already shaped, well nigh irreparably by their 
parents, kith and kin and elders. Children adore their elders and imbibe by imitation their 
prejudices and predilections. They watch the behaviour of the elders and value it more, though 
they may not follow their advice and admonitions. They can see through the veil of humbug and 
the pall of hypocrisy. 


Puttaparthi is a name adored throughout the world; it has become a holy word which gives 
comfort, consolation and courage to people of all lands. But, this village itself is far behind 
others in education. I am aware of this; I need not be told or informed about anything. I know 
that communication with nearby places where we have High Schools are frequently cut off by 


floods; boys and girls of this village have to trek mites to attend them. So, this High School has 
been resolved upon. 


Don't be misled into doubts and distress 


My activities are not for publicity or propaganda or even to confer joy on others! They are for 
conferring joy primarily on Me! I have no need to please others and to earn approval or 
appreciation. For, I and you are not distinct entities; you are I and I am you. I am the current that 
flows into every bulb and illumines it. Those who see Me as separate are seeing falsehood. I am 
in your hearts; you are in mine. Don't be misled into doubt and distress. Dogs may bark and 
jackals howl; but Truth moves majestically forward. 


Everyone in the village is a flower with its unique hue and fragrance. They are collected and 
strung as a garland for the Lord. The string that runs through all, that holds them together, that 
enables them to enhance the charm of the Lord (if ever that is possible!) is the Brahma-suuthra-- 
-the unifying thread called Brahma (the Universal Absolute). This Truth has to be revealed to 
everyone; it has to be implanted in the heart, so that each one can have the faith that can face 
both failure and fortune. That is the inner purpose of the School. 


This is the gift the School ensures. But, the giver will be happy only when the gift is utilised to 
the best advantage and not frittered away or east aside. The giver can be induced to give again 
and give more, only when the gift is accepted with intelligence and gratitude. There is an 
intention to raise the School into a College to serve the needs of this area, a College which can be 
affiliated with others of a similar type coming up in all the States of India in the Sathya Sai 
Scheme of Higher Education. 


Wisdom alone can bring peace 


There is a plan also of establishing in this village some opportunities for gainful employment so 
that no person suffers from the pangs of hunger. The intention is there; its execution depends on 
your enthusiasm and faith. The drug is effective and within reach; but unless it is consumed and 
the directions strictly adhered to, it cannot cure! Do not waste time in idle fantasies but 
demonstrate your sincerity and faith in practice---sending your children to school, facilitating 
their studies, and, providing them the environment necessary for progress. The vaults of the 
Reserve Bank have lots of money but of what use are they to you? Talking about them will not 
remove your poverty. Work alone can bring income; wisdom alone can bring peck. 


Gratitude to parents is a basic virtue; reverence to the parents is reverence to the past, to the 
traditions of the past, to the great treasure of wisdom that the past has garnered and preserved. I 
am spreading this message by Myself setting the example. The Kalyaanamandap that is fast 
coming up in the village will commemorate the 'father.' He was eager to serve the best interest of 
this village, as you all know. The Mandap will be a community Centre for religious ceremonies 
and the spread of spiritual ideals. This School will commemorate the 'mother'. 


My life is My Message, as I often declare. I have been re-emphasising the Upanishathic 
exhortation, "Speak Truth; act righteously; revere the mother as Divine, revere the father as 
Divine, revere the preceptor as Divine." I emphasise not only through words, but more by deeds. 
You must dedicate your skill, your earnings, your intelligence to the service of your parents and 
fulfil your duties as their progeny. If you fail in this, you do not deserve this glory of being an 
Indian, and a human. 


Puttaparthi, 20- 7-1972 


All good things have to be done the hard way. Ease and elevation 
cannot go together. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


44. Lessons from the Sea 


THIS is the World Teacher's Day, named afar the First Preceptor, the Codifier of Vedhic Texts, 
the Poet who compiled the great epic Mahaabhaaratha, famous as the Fifth Vedha, and of the 
other great text book of devotion, the Bhaagavatha--the Sage Vyaasa, the Aadi Guru (First or 
Primary Preceptor). In fact, the world itself is a great teacher, a constant guide and inspiration. 
That is the reason why man is surrounded and sustained by the World. Every bird, every animal, 
every tree, mountain and star, each tiny worm, has a lesson for man, if he has but the will and the 
thirst to learn. These make the world a veritable University for man; it is a Gurukul (sacred 
commune of preceptor with disciples) where he is a pupil from birth to death. 


Man soaks himself with lessons from the environment, whether he is aware of it or not. That is 
why those interested in his future urge him to seek Sathsang (good companionship), to avoid 
slander, faction, pride and violence. The first Guru is the mother; her example, her advice, her 
admonition affects man deepest and longest. The second is the father, who is admired by the 
child for his strength and knowledge and feared for the punishments he inflicts. Next is the 
teacher, who leads him and guides him into the maze of material knowledge. 


But, the Guru (spiritual preceptor) alone can open the inner eye and cleanse the inner instruments 
of intuition. He' induces you to question yourself, "Dheham?" (Am I this body or is this body 
only a vehicle which I am using) and discover the answer, "Naaham" (Not I; I am not this Body. 
No, I am the Seer, the Witness, the Spectator). Then the investigation starts to delve into the 
reality of the I, "Koham" (Who then am I?) and the answer reveals itself in the purified 
consciousness, "Soham" (Iam He); I am a spark of that Glory; I am Divine. 


Turn your mind towards Intelligence and Aanandha 


The gross body has its characteristics---height, weight, girth, proportion, name, caste, sect, 
nationality; it is a pot, a container, it is devised, designed; it disintegrates; it is destroyed. 'It 
cannot be 'you'. The subtle body is like the water in the pot; that too is poured by some one. It 
does not originate therein; it is no essential part of it; it is not its dharma. So it too is not 'you'. 
The causal body is affected by attachment and detachment, the world and its objects, through 
reaction and reflection. So, it too cannot be 'you'. 'You' are beyond all three. You are not limited 
by these three containers---one within the other, one finer than the other. 


There are five sheaths within which the I shines. Of these, the Anna-maya kosha (the material 
sheath), is the gross body. The subtle body consists of the next three sheaths, praana-maya (the 
vital sheath), Mano-maya (the mental sheath) and Vijnaana-maya (the intellectual sheath). The 
causal body is the Aanandha-maya Kosha (bliss conscious sheath). Even this is a limitation, a 
phase, a characteristic. The I has no such bounds or bondage. The guru who can make you 
cognise this I is your own mind. Turn it towards Intelligence and Aanandha, you are in the right 
path; turn it towards the vital, the material, you slide down the path of perdition. 


If you see only the One, your vision is clearest 


The Guru Poornima, the Full Moon day: dedicated to the Teacher, is to be spent in 
contemplation of the path that leads to liberation and in offering gratitude to the path-finders. 
There are now three types of Gurus available for man---those who rob the pupils of their 
possessions and fatten themselves; those who rob the pupils of their individuality and 
intelligence and elevate themselves into despotic potentates; and those who rob the pupils of 


their anxieties and agonies and, fulfil themselves as benefactors. Many Gurus insist that their 
followers should treat them with showy forms of worship this day and offer special donations at 
their feet. Claiming and accepting such superficial forms of adoration is contemptible. The pupil 
has to be “Sathatham Yoginah" (In constant divine communian), ever alert to be attached to 
higher ideals. The Master has to be a supreme unflinching example, in this Yoga. 


The Guru is Poornima--.full, undisturbed by any doubt, deficiency or sense of want. Like the 
Full Moon, he confers joy, cool comfort, and a sense of relief. Sit calm a few moments; you can 
yourself judge your attainments in this line. If you are dually minded, you are half blind still. If 
you see only the One, your vision is clearest; seeing double is a sign of optical disease. See only 
the One, the eternal, the true, the Divine. Rise up to the Divine; don't bring down Godhead to 
your human and even animal levels. Do not worship God as the picture before you, but, worship 
the picture before you as God, because God is in everything and can be grasped through every 
single symbol. There is nothing wherein He is not; there is no might or right, apart from Him. 


The eye sees; but, what is it that sees the eye that grasps the impressions gained by the eye? It is 
the mind. The objective world is the dhrushya (the seen); the eye is the dhrashtha (the seer); but, 
the eye itself is dhrushya to the mind which is the dhrashtha. Now, the mind is also dhrushya, so 
long as the Intellect is dhrashtha. Finally the Intellect is also dhrushya, for, the Aathma is the 
ultimate dhrashtha which observes as a Witness this mano-rama (play of the mind-principle). 


Learn lessons from the bee, the tree and the dog 


The mind is ever unsteady; it is "steady in its unsteadiness" as Arjuna complained to Krishna. It 
is fraught with disaster; it is deeprooted and difficult to suppress, says Arjuna. Krishna agrees but 
assures Arjuna that it can be tamed and rendered innocuous by acquiring wisdom and by 
cultivating renunciation. 


This morning someone from Delhi placed before Me this same problem. | told him that there is 
one simple solution but he responded with a sigh. He said, "I have approached many sages and 
everyone of them has a 'simple solution.’ It may be simple, for me they are impossibly difficult". 
I told him, "You are already engaged in performing even more difficult exercises than the one I 
propose to recommend. So, it will not be hard at all. Do not lose heart. You have inherent in you, 
vast potentiality, you can draw upon that reserve strength and succeed." Then, I gave him the 
example of a bumble bee. It is a small thing, judging from size but it bores through the toughest 
timber! There is a legend that it bored through the steely muscle of Karna's thigh! 


This same bumble bee settles at sunset on a lotus flower and drinks the intoxicating nectar. It 
falls into a stupor, overwhelmed by the elixir. While it is still on the task, the Sun sets and the 
petals close in, to make the bloom a bud, again! The bee is imprisoned in the softness; it has no 
strength to bore through the tender velvety veil! I told him, "Let your mind imbibe the nectar of 
the Name, let it taste the elixir of the Lotus Feet of the Lord, it will be incapacitated, rendered 
ineffective, incapable of harm." 


The sea teaches you many lessons 


You may have vast scholarship, fame and fortune. But, the bee can give you a lesson on how to 
be free from torment. The tree can teach you forbearance and tolerance. It offers shade to all, 
irrespective of age, sex or religion, nationality or economic status. It helps with fruit and shade 


even the foe who lays his axe on its trunk! The dog can teach you lessons in faith, selfless service 
and the process of dedication. 


Man disgraces himself by his ingratitude, even to God who has provided him with all his wealth. 
Today is Full Moon and the sea rolls and surges in great joy. It knows only the fullness of happy 
contentment. The Sun may lift clouds of vapour from its stock of water; the Sea does not 
whimper. The rain may fill its coffers with the rich riverine tribute; it does not exult. It teaches 
you equanimity---no depression, no exaltation. Watch the waves rolling one behind the other 
towards the shore! You will notice the waves bringing with them bits of flotsam and jetsam, 
bottles and twigs, logs and pieces of wreckage to be deposited on land. There is a constant 
struggle evident to maintain a clean face---a laudable Saadhana, which man can well adopt. 


Again, consider the quietness of the depths, the Prashaanthi (serenity) that reigns in the inner 
regions of its consciousness. On the surface, the sea appears restless, and full of fury. But, down 
below, it is established in peace. Man too has to be like the Sea, accepting it as his Guru. Accept 
the World as your Guru on this World Teacher's Day, the Guru Poornima. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 26- 7-1972 


God is the embodiment of sweetness. Attain Him by offering Him, 
who resides in all, the sweetness that He has dowered on you. 
Crush the cane in the mill of seva, boil it in the cauldron of 
penitence; decolorise it of all sensual itch; offer the crystallised 
sugar of compassionate love to Him. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


45. The simplest remedy 


MAN has become the bond-slave of lower instincts and desires. He is unable to distinguish 
between the low urges of lust and the elevating urge of Love. Prema (Love) is the first step on 
the road that leads to Divine Grace. But man wallows in lust for physical comfort and pleasure; 
he is haunted by that nefarious companion of lust, called anger. When lust is frustrated, anger 
overtakes him and he becomes bestial and even demonic, when lust envelops the heart of man, 
truth, justice, compassion and peace flee from it. The world degenerates into a snake pit, and 
God comes to rescue mankind from its doom. 


The Avathaar (Divine Incarnation) comes to reveal man to himself, to restore to him his 
birthright of Aathmic Bliss. He does not come to found a new creed, to breed a new faction, to 
instil a new God. If such a thing happens, it is the consequence of the evil in man. The Avathaar 
comes as man in order to demonstrate that Man is Divine, in order to be within reach of Man. 
The human mind cannot grasp the absolute, attributeless principle; it is abstract and beyond the 
reach of speech, mind and intellect. 


Fire is inherent in the match-stick but it is only when it is struck as a flame that we can benefit by 
it. The NMirguna (attributeless) has to manifest as Saguna (with qualities); the Niraakaara 
(Formless) has to appear with Form. Then only can Man listen, learn, understand, follow and be 
saved, through the Bliss of that experience. The Avathaar lights the flame of Realisation in each; 
and the age-old ignorance is destroyed in an instant. 


Significance of the name Krishna, the Avathaar bore 


When the righteous Paandavas were harassed by wicked Kauravas, the beauteous Krishna 
appeared and saved them. The Lord can never design violence and blood-shed. Love is His 
instrument; non-violence is His message. He achieves the correction of the evil-minded through 
education and example. But, it may be asked, "Why did Kurukshethra happen?" It was a surgical 
operation and therefore, cannot be described as an act of violence. The surgeon saves life 
through the beneficial use of his knife. 


Consider the name Krishna which the Avathaar bore; what a significant name! ‘Krishna' is 
derived from the root Krish which means (1) to attract, (2) to plough and cultivate, and (3) the 
Divine principle beyond time, space and causation. Krishna, like all Avathaars; attracts not only 
seekers, saints and sages but the simple, the innocent and the good. He draws also the curious, 
the critics, the skeptics and those who suffer from atheism. He draws them towards Himself by 
the irresistible charm of His person, by His invincible look, His voice, His flute, His counsel and 
His undaunted heroism. He is ever in a state of Bliss, spreading harmony, melody and beauty and 
around Him. He sings everywhere---in the peaceful pasture and lands of Brindhaavan and in the 
bloodsoaked battlefield of Kurukshethra. He holds the flute in His hand in one place and He 
wields the whip in the other. But what emerges is meaningful moving music, either Venugaana, 
or Bhagavadhgeetha! Gaanam and Geetha both mean song! 


Why does He attract all to His Presence? To plough the heart, prepare it for receiving the shower 
of Grace, to grow the seeds of Love, weed it of all evil thoughts which smother the crops of joy 
and to enable it to gather the harvest of Wisdom. That wisdom finds its fulfilment in Krishna 
Himself, for Krishna also means the Pure Essence, the Supreme Principle, the Sath-Chith- 
Aanandha. 


Make the gopees of Brindhaavan your guides 


The gopees (milkmaids) of Brindhaavan were inextricably involved in the Avathaar. They had 
Him indelibly imprinted on their hearts. He alone was real; the rest were also He. When Raadha, 
the most ardent aspirant among them was in agony at what she wailed about as Separation from 
Krishna (!), the Gopees, who gathered around her to turn her mind away from the infatuation, 
could not use any other words of consolation and comfort than Govindha! Dhaamodhara! 
Maadhava!---words that sent pangs of loss through Raadha's heart! When the Gopees brought 
milk, curds and butter for sale, and peddled them along the streets, they used to shout the names 
of the ware they had for sale. But the words that emerged were the words that had displaced all 
else---Govinda! Damodhara! Maadhava!---the loving Names of the Krishna they adored! When 
Akrura, the messenger from the wicked uncle of Krishna, took the Lord away from Brindhaavan 
with him, the Gopees, hurried across the road to stop him but even in their desperate protest, they 
could not utter any words except, Govindha, Dhaamodhara, Maadhava! 


God is the sugar that can make the tasteless drink of life into a sweet potion. Stir the sugar well 
so that each molecule of the water is saturated with its taste. The gopees are your guides in this 
saadhana. They had, as you also have, the Avathaar in their midst and so, their salvation was 
assured when they achieved purity and acquired faith. 


Avathaars manifested in the Kritha Yuga for preservation of Vedhic tradition, in the Thretha 
Yuga for the protection of Dharma and in the Dwaapara Yuga for the promulgation of the right 
of property. In the Kritha Yuga, the Avathaar saved the Vedhas from neglect, in the Thretha 
Yuga, He saved women from dishonour, and in the Dwaapara Yuga, He saved property from 
injustice. 

This Avathaar in Kali Age has a three-fold task 


Now, in this fourth Age, the Kali Yuga, all these three are in dire peril. The Vedhas are ridiculed, 
woman is tempted into unwomenly lives, and property itself is condemned as theft! So, the 
Avathaar has a three-fold task. Man has no purity in the heart, no sanctity in his emotions, no 
love in his deeds, no God in his prayers. 


Though the evil is thickest in this Kali Age, the remedy is the simplest. In the Kritha Yuga, the 
Saadhana (spiritual discipline) of escaping from ruin was hard. Years of austerity and abstinence 
were often profitless. The six-year old Dhruva had to perform penance for years in the recesses 
of wild forests before God conferred Grace. And the young boy Prahlaadha underwent 
unmentionable tortures unaware of the pain but aware only of the God in him. What is needed 
today to save oneself from anxiety and fear, here and hereafter, is dedication, diverting the mind 
towards God. If that is done, the pains of the physical body and pangs of the senses will not 
affect the mind. 


Dhyaana (meditation) is that inward journey, away from the objective world and the senses that 
run after it. The Upanishaths declare, Naayam Aathma bala heenena labhyah---"the Aathma 
cannot be attained by one devoid of strength." Bala (strength) means physical, vital, moral, 
intellectual and spiritual toughness. For all these are essential to establish mastery over the 
senses. You may do dhyaana but your senses are so "awake and active that a tiny mosquito 
arouses your passion and you swing your arm to slaughter it! 


Repentance purifes, contrition cleanses 


Long ago there was a very pious family on the banks of the Krishna river. It had vast landed 
estates. The parents had an only son who was well versed in scriptures and who was obedient 
and well behaved. But when the father died and the properties fell into his hand the son became a 
profligate and a libertine, with a gang of evil men always around him. He developed intimacy 
with a public woman and was so infatuated with her wiles that he swam across a flooded river, 
holding on to the corpse of his own wife who had earlier committed suicide in despair. He 
mistook the corpse for a log of wood floating down the stream. Suddenly he became aware of his 
plight; he blamed his eyes for leading him astray into sin; he blinded himself as a punishment 
and roamed about the holy land associated with the advent of the Lord as Krishna, singing His 
Name. That blind singer was Suurdas. With the Name on the lip and the picture of the glory on 
the mind, no evil can attract you. 


Repentance purifies, contrition cleanses. Krishna appeared before blind Suurdas and offered to 
restore his sight. But, Suurdas pleaded for inner vision and discarded the outward-bound 
eyesight. 


God is no stony-hearted despot. He is Compassion, He is Grace, personified. Once you have 
cleansed yourself by tears, He draws you near and grants you consolation and courage. Without a 
cleansed heart, realisation is impossible. Wisdom can enter only a purified mind. Saadhana--- 
slow and steady---can succeed in purifying it. Victory is yours if you model yore selves on 
Arjuna, and his yearning. 


Everyone of you can be Arjuna and achieve victory The last shloka of the Geetha was quoted 
now by Sri Bhagavantham. It says, "Yathra Yogeswarah Krishna Yathra  Paartho 
Dhanurdharah, Thathra Sreer Vijayo Bhuuthir Dhruvaa Neethir Mathir Mama"---"Where there 
is Krishna the Supreme Yogi and where also there is Arjuna bearing his bow, there victory for 
truth and justice is assured." This verse assures victory not only when the Mahaabhaaratha 
Arjuna wields the bow in the presence of Krishna. 


Everyone of you can be Arjuna and wield the bow and achieve victory. For the bow is but the 
symbol of courage and faith, of high resolve and undaunted calibre. And how can you become 
Arjunas? Arjuna means white, pure, unsullied, without blemish. As soon as you become that and 
hold the bow (the Upanishaths declare that the Pranava or Om is the arrow and God is the 
target), 'Krishna is ready with His Presence, for He is everywhere at every moment. There is no 
need to invite Him or instal Him. He will answer from your very heart. 


Janmaashtami day, Prashaanthi Nilayam, 3 1-8-1972 


You may say that progress is possible only through My Grace, but, 
though My Heart is soft as butter, it melts only when there is some 
warmth in your prayer. Unless you make some disciplined effort, 
some saadhana, Grace cannot descend on you. The yearning, the 
agony of unfulfilled aim melts My Heart. That is the Aavedhana 
(anguish) that wins Grace. 


How so many Navaraathris and Shivaraathris you may attend at 
this place, unless you illumine your heart and make it shine clear 


and pure, it will be shrouded in darkness, immersed in raathri 
(night) only. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


46. The sea-saw 


MAN is misled into believing that nature is his rival which has to be defeated and conquered; he 
struggles and suffers loss and pain in the process. He considers it heroic to undergo travail in 
what he calls conquest of nature. But, if only he feels kinship with nature, as equally saturated 
with divinity, and proclaiming with equal clarity the immanence of God, he can be happier and 
much more restful and content. When you see everywhere, on every inch of ground, in every 
being, small or big, the foot-print of God, nature is seen in a new vesture of glory, a 
manifestation that demands worship, rather than exploitation and enslavement. 


The ego in man sets him against all else; silence it and all becomes one's kith and kin. The ego is 
the first sprout from the seed of ignorance, which is not a positive acquisition, but only, the 
absence of knowledge. When knowledge shines, inner and outer natures are both seen as divine. 
There is nothing that is not IT. When this is experienced, love floods the heart and flows towards 
all. There is no independence; there is only interdependence, for all waves are equally dependent 
on the sea beneath. You use the word, 'my own'; who is this 'my' who owns you, and whom you 
own as yourself?. It is the Divine in you, and in all. Sueccha is the word in Sanskrit, for "one's 
desire," the iccha (desire) of sva (oneself). Since the self of one and the self of all else are the 
same, sveccha should be the common factor in all desires, namely, love. Listen to the voice of 
God, that warns, directs, prompts, and prevents; you cannot then be wrong. 


Direct all your powers towards God 


It may be said that love is a universal virtue and it is being manifested in human relations, more 
or less, by all. But, it is limited and poisoned by petty considerations and dried up by hatred and 
envy. Love must see the best in others and not the worst. Love cannot ignore the divinity in 
others. Blind men have the right to deny light; but, those with eyes, have no such explanation. 
When such men swear that they see only the many, and not the One, it is surely the fault of the 
vision. Try to correct it, through saadhana (spiritual discipline). 


You have three means of understanding: Icchaa-shakthi (the power of the Will), Kriyaa-shakthi 
(the power of Action) and Jnaana-shakthi (the power of Knowledge). Direct all three towards 
God; Desire Him, Serve Him and Know Him. Do not let senses and the emotions run away with 
you on their back. Hold them in check. Set before them the goal of God. If your emotions 
prescribe one direction, guide them in the contrary direction; that is the way to counter their evil. 


Once it happened that Krishna, Balaraama and Saathyaki who were quite little boys at that time, 
scarcely four or five years old, strayed into a thick jungle, all alone, when darkness fell, and there 
was no way of reaching Gokulam! Of course, as you must have guessed already, it was a 
stratagem of Krishna; even at that age, he would do nothing without a deep purpose behind it and 
the purpose would invariably be teaching some one some good lesson. They decided to spend the 
night, just where they were; Krishna put fright into them, with his descriptions of ghosts, ghouls 
and demons roaming in search of human prey. He proposed that two shall sleep for. three hours 
at a stretch while the other one kept watch. 


Anger can be subdued only for forbearance 


It was Saathyaki's duty to keep awake and be on the lookout, from 7 to 10; Balaraama was to be 
vigilant from 10 to 1 a.m. Krishna was to start his part of the duty at 1 and keep on till 4. 
Saathyaki sat up to 10 and Balaraama and Krishna laid themselves on beds of dried leaves and 


slept soundly. Meanwhile a demon did actually present himself, before the little Saathyaki. He 
fell upon the boy, who resisted heroically dealing and receiving hammer-strokes with fists, with 
a good number of clawing and biting in between. The demon had to retreat at last, leaving 
Saathyaki badly mauled, but, happy. The two brothers were sound asleep; they had not been 
disturbed in the least by the noise of the encounter. Saathyaki had met blow with blow, and dealt 
injury for injury. At 10, he awakened Balaraama and stretched his body on the heap of leaves, as 
if nothing had happened. The demon invited Balaraama too for combat and had to retreat 
humiliated, because Balaraama too was as fierce as he, and his blows were even more terrible 
than Saathyaki's. Balaraama too curled himself into the bed at 1 a.m, after waking up Krishna 
who was to keep watch until Brahma-muhuurtha, the auspicious hour when Gods are to be 
propitiated, that is, 4 a.m. 


The demon came roaring like a wounded tiger, and advanced ferociously at the little Divine Boy. 
Krishna turned his sweet charming face at him, and rewarded him with a lovely smile. That smile 
disarmed the demon; the longer he came under its influence, the weaker became his vengeance 
and venom. At last, the demon became as docile as a lamb; when the other two woke, they were 
surprised at the victory that Krishna had won by the weaponry of Love. You cannot destroy 
anger by anger, cruelty by cruelty, hatred by hatred. Anger can be subdued only by forbearance; 
cruelty can be overcome only by non-violence, hatred yields only charity and compassion. 


Become rulers of the inner empire 


Arjuna too once charged his eldest brother, Dharmaraaja, with callous indifference to the 
sufferings of his other brothers and of their queen, Dhroupadhi and her children; he flung arrows 
of scorn at him for his blind adherance to 'morality and righteousness', despite the heinous 
provocations to retaliation, that their cousins aimed at them. As a result, Arjuna told him, "Our 
mother lives apart from us, our wife is insulted in open court, we wander as exiles in the jungles, 
my son has been surrounded and done to death, and we have been defamed and disgraced 
beyond endurance. All the while, you have been putting up with all this ignominy, content with 
your clinging to virtue." 


When he had finished his tirade, Dharmaraaja replied calmly, with no sign of resentment, 
"Patience, tolerance, love---these alone can bring success; of what use is victory, if it is gained 
by falsehood and ferocity? Such a war will breed wars for ever. We shall act ever as if we are in 
the presence of God, as if God is watching and weighing every thought, word and deed. See 
yourselves in all, see all in yourselves; that is the road to lasting peace and joy. Let us not seek 
the outer empire; let us become rulers of the inner empire. Let us not try to defy the outer enemy, 
leaving the inner foe to grow in striking power. We have Krishna with us, and so, who can defeat 
us? We shall win through winning His Grace." 


Do not allow faith to be upset 


Never stray from the path of right, whatever the trouble or temptation. Do not loosen the grip;' do 
not turn back. Do not allow faith to be upset. If you attach importance to riches or children or 
fame or fortune, you are thereby-announcing that you are devoted, not: to God, but to riches, 
children and the rest. If you are devoted to God, how should you manifest that devotion? Let me 
tell you how. By manifesting divine qualities, divine virtues, divine love, divine strength. 
Become Sai, be Sai. 


When the river Chithravathi is boisterously rolling along, we call it a flood; when the waters 
have receded, we call it a river. When desires, plans, wishes, and yearnings roll along, we call it 
the 'mind'; when they subside, we call it ‘chittha' (consciousness). When the white cloth is dirty, 
it is mind; when the whiteness is restored by washing, it is chittha. When desires make you 
greedy to possess, it is mind; when love makes you revere and adore, sympathise and serve, then, 
it is chittha. The mind can be transformed into chittha, only through jijnaasa and saadhana 
(inquiry and discipline). Jijnaasa is the stage of studentship or apprenticeship; saadhana is 
working on a job; and when you go through these two stages, you can afford to be calm, 
contented, loving all and being loved by all, as the old man who retires on a pension. When you 
give expression to your innate Divinity, it takes the form of Love. Raamakrishna Paramahamsa 
could not tolerate someone walking on grass; he felt the weight of the feet and the crushing 
himself. 


View the Universe as the handiwork of God 


You have to busy yourselves with activity, in order to use time and skill to the best advantage. 
That is your duty and duty is God. The dull and the inert will hesitate to be active, for fear of 
exhaustion or failure, or loss. The emotional, passionate individuals will plunge headlong and 
crave for quick results and will be disappointed if they do not come in. The balanced persons will 
be active, because it is their duty, they will not be agitated by anything---failure or success. The 
godly will take up activity as a means of worshipping Cod, and they leave the result to God. 
They know that they are but instruments in the hands of God. The godly are following the 
Saathwik, but, due to sheer ignorance and the unquestioned obedience to the senses, man is 
suffering pain and grief; that is the sad state of affairs, not only in India but all over the world. 


Try to sanctify every item of work by dedicating it to some Divine end. The Universe is the 
handiwork of God, and therefore, meaningful and moral. View it as such and derive the utmost 
benefit. Without dedication, work is like a paper-flower, unfit to be offered to God; cheap, 
fragranceless, dry, tawdry. Offer God real flowers grown in the garden of your heart, fragrant, 
beautiful, delighting. Try to see everyone as a ray of God. 


Life is a see-saw, with man sitting on a plank, poised on the round log---Jnaana Shakthi, his 
basic nature of Wisdom. When the plank comes down to one side, it is Icchaa Shakthi---Bhakthi 
Yoga, emotional adoration; when it comes down on the other side, it is Krivaa-Shakthi---Karma 
Yoga, activity to adore men as embodiments of divinity, service to man, adoration of nature by 
fostering love and tenderness. So long as the see-saw is based on Jnaana, one is safe. Jnaana 
(Wisdom) is the awareness that God is all. He is the seed, the Universe is .the tree; instincts, 
impulses, emotions, passions---these are the branches and boughs and twigs; intelligence is the 
flower; pure unattached consciousness is the fruit; love is the sweetness in the fruit. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 26-9-1972 


The root of all religions, the substance of all scriptures, the 
rendezvous of all roads, the inspiration of all individuals is the 
Principle of Prema (Love). It is the firmest foundation for man's 
mission of life. It is the light that ensures world peace and world 
prosperity. 

Sri Sathya Sai 


47. Yajna: what it teaches 


THE Vedhapurusha Sapthaaha Jnaana Yajna, being celebrated every Dhasara at Prashaanthi 
Nilayam, is a rite that promotes the welfare and prosperity of the whole of mankind. But, it is 
difficult to convince doubters and disbelievers that this is the truth. Many feel that since such 
Vedhic ceremonies can be performed in orthodox style, with all the manthras uttered in correct 
style, only in India, their efficiency, if any, is confined to this land only, and so, they ask, how 
can this be beneficial in other regions where people have no faith in such rituals and hymns? 


Such doubters restrict the meaning of the word, Yajna. Yajna means, ‘any activity dedicated to 
the glory of God,' not merely, this activity prescribed in the ancient scriptures. Activity dedicated 
to the glory of God is being done, and can be done in all climes, in all realms, by all races. The 
'dedication' ensures success. Without it, there will inevitably arise anxiety, fear and faction. 
Every activity in the world is God-directed, God-ward moving, whether you know it or not. Only 
one has to be aware of it and share in the thrill of that knowledge. If God is not the inspirer and 
motivator, how can the Universe be moving in harmony, wheeling so smoothly? Else, there will 
be chaos, anarchy and an inferno of gamble. 


Charity and self-control are integral parts of Yagna 


Do not think that the Yajna is only this ceremony performed in this enclosure, marked out as 
specially holy, attended by readings and recitals from sacred texts and the chanting of Vedhic 
hymns, and nothing other than this. No. Yajna is a continuous process; every one who lives in the 
constant presence of God, and does all acts as dedicated to God is engaged in Yajna. 


Three processes go together in spiritual discipline, as laid down by the sages: Yajna, Dhaana and 
Thapas (Sacrifice, Charity and Self-control). They cannot be partitioned and particularised thus. 
Charity and self-control are integral parts of yagna. That is why Yajna is translated as Sacrifice, 
for, the process of charity or Dhaana is essential in yajna. Also thapas, that is to say, strict 
regulation of emotions and thought-processes, to ensure peace and faith. 


There are various yajnas prescribed by the Vedhas. This is the Vedhapurusha Yajna, a sacrificial 
ceremony dedicated to the Purusha extolled in the Vedhas, the Purusha mentioned in the 
Purusha Suuktha as constituting the Universe and subsuming it wholly as the limbs of His 
Cosmic Body. 


Every house-holder has the duty of performing for his own welfare and the welfare of the society 
in which he lives, five Yajnas like Pithryajana (yajna by which the forefathers are worshipped), 
Rishiyajna (vajna by which the sages are honoured, that is to say, by the study and practice of 
their teaching), Bhuuthayajna (yajna by which the animals and lower-beings are revered, that is 
to say, by provision of shelters, fodder etc.) and Dhevayajna (worship of God). 


The Vedhapurusha is the Purushotthama (the Supremest Person) for by His Will He manifested 
Himself as the cosmos and its components, out of Himself. There is nothing that is not He; so, 
how can you be different? In these matters, faith comes first; it has to. Believe that you are 
Divine; conduct yourselves in accordance with that sovereign status; then, you will be blessed 
with the Anubhuuthi---the experience, the vision, the realisation, the awareness, the bliss. And, as 
a result, you are merged in that everlasting Aanandha. 


The only one God can be reached by a thousand Names 


Remember, you cannot have the anubhava (experience) and the Aanandha (Bliss) first. And, you 
cannot postpone fail:h, until you get them. You cannot bargain: "Give me the Aanandha and 
then, I shall have faith." See the Purushotthama in all purushas. Purusha means, he who lives in 
the pura (port, city, or town). Each one of us is the resident and the sole resident of a distinct 
house of God. But, the Purushotthama---the 'Supreme Resident in all the cities---is God. You 
can recognise this Purushotthama, if you educate yourselves properly. 


Take this Yajna performed here. In this One Fire, offerings are made concurrently with the 
recitation of the names of God, enclosed in elaborate hymns. More than 3560 offerings are made 
each day, for seven days. Each name describes God as having a special form. But this One Fire 
consumes all the offerings, and through its intermission every one of the offerings reaches the 
One God, the One that really IS. 


Or, consider this: you perform worship with 1008 Names, a rite called Sahasranaama archana. 
You keep an idol or picture before you and offer one flower at a time at the feet of that symbol of 
God, repeating the names, one at a time. The one symbol of the One God is only One, though He 
can be reached by a thousand names. 


Though you are ackowledging only One in all these rites, proclaiming the One Adhwaithic (non- 
dualistic) Divine, your sense and your intellect and your mind, its pack of desires, insist on 
running after the Many. This is the Maaya (delusion) that casts its enchantment on weak and 
ignorant men. It urges man towards wild prolific greeds of the manyfaced senses. 


When you take food, do it in a prayerful mode 


To realise the One, the Universal Absolute, which personalises itself into God and Creation, 
there is no discipline more valuable and more effective than SEVA. All the 1008 Names of the 
Sahasranaama archana reach the One. All the 1000 names of thousand-faced society connote 
only the One God that plays in those 1000 roles. The One appears as if it is enshrined in the 1000 
bodies. This is the truth you have to realise and cherish as the most precious in life. 


You have observed that the Vedhic Pandiths (priestly scholars) are pouring ghee into the Fire, 
every time the recitation of a hymn is over. Every day, when you take food, you are offering 
eatables to the Fire that God has lit in you to digest food. You have to eat in a prayerful mode, in 
profound gratitude. The Geetha says that the fire which cooked the meal is God, the meal is God, 
the eater is God, the purpose of eating is to carry on the work entrusted by God or pleasing to 
God, and that the fruit of that work is, progress towards God. 


You must perform another yajna too, every day. Pour the egoistic desires and emotions, 
passions, impulses and acts into the flames of dedication and devotion. In fact, that is real Yajna, 
of which these are reflections and prompters, guides and prototypes. This yajna is only the 
concrete symbolic representation of the abstract underlying Truth. Just as a child is taught to 
pronounce the words, head, net, wave, garland, by making it associate the sounds and the letter- 
forms with pictures of the objects so named, through this kshara (temporary) symbol the 
Akshara thathwa (the Eternal Principle) is brought before the consciousness. 


Make every thought a longing for God 


This Puuja, this Yajna, and this Homa, are arranged here every Dhasara, in order to help you to 
learn that other, ever-lasting, abstract Yajna, which every one of you has to do, to save 
yourselves from fear, grief and anxiety. 


You must have noticed that the Pandiths close each day's Yajna with a prayer that calls for 
World Peace, peace for all mankind, peace and happiness, for there can be no peace without 
happiness and no happiness without peace. Lokaas samasthaas Sukhino bhavanthu, they pray. 
"May all the world have happiness, and peace." 


Peace of mind cannot be gained by wealth or fame or scholarship or skill. For that, you have to 
clean the mind, purify the heart, yearn for service of the divine forms that move around you. Do 
every deed as an act of worship; make every thought a longing for Him; change every word that 
comes from your tongue into a hymn in His praise. 


This is the lesson that you have to learn from Prashaanthi Nilayam, every Dhasara, during the 
week the Yajna is celebrated. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 11-10-1972 


Each of you has struggled upwards from the stone to plant, from 
plant to animal, from animal to man! Do not slide back into the 
beast; rise higher to Divinity, shining with the new effulgence of 
love. 


The Divine is the energy that animates, the urge that circulates the 
blood in your veins, that transmits knowledge and experience 
through the nerves, that correlates and collects for storage the 
impressions your senses gather, the conclusions your intelligence 
garners! 


Keep in line with the Divine, by means of Love, Truth and 
Goodness. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


48. Poornachandra 


A BUBBLE is born on water, from water and merges in water! Man is born in God and merges 
in God! This is the lesson India has been teaching her children as well as all men anywhere for 
centuries. She gave the message of Divinity to humanity. Festivals like Dhasara are designed to 
make man aware of his Divinity, to endow him with purity to become aware of his holiness, to 
imprint on his heart the wisdom won by the sages after years of yearning. The monastic heads, 
hereditary gurus, the leaders and rulers of the land are not inspiring people to awaken to this 
truth. Though millions get a glimpse of the ecstasy of union with the Divine Beauty and Divine 
Majesty from these festivals and pilgrimages, the real purpose of the festivals and the benefit one 
has to derive from the concourse of like-minded people is not understood or explained by any 
one. The holy teachings of our land are not being implemented by the so-called custodians of 
culture---the educationists, the preceptors and the gurus. 


Pilgrimages impress on people the lesson of unity; they bring together people from all corners of 
the world, irrespective of language or locality. The places of pilgrimage are also distributed all 
over the land. Festivals like the Dhasara at Prashaanthi Nilayam bring together Sadhakas from 
all the continents, irrespective of religion, caste, creed, and colour; they are all motivated by the 
same urge, to involve themselves more and more in attempts to realise their innate Divinity. 
They have met here to enjoy the supreme delight in the Holy presence of the Lord and to 
recognise the unity of all in the Divine Aathmic splendour. 


Desire knows no justification and has no end 


But man is caught in low desires. Desire is the sole cause of sorrow and distress. Sacrifice is the 
best means of avoiding desire and the consequent grief and disappointment. Several devotees 
come to Me and complain, "Lord! I am suffering from this problem," "I am suffering from some 
headache," "I am suffering from stomach ache." I give all of them the same reply, “Santhosham" 
(I am happy), to every one. When a bereaved wife tells Me that her husband has departed, then 
also I say Santhosham. You may wonder why I give the same reply to all such persons. 
Santhosham is not the common type of joy or happiness, the transient, trivial pleasure you get 
from worldly success or material gain. "San" means anything gained through fair means, 
honourable methods. Thosham is sacred, holy, exaltation, ecstasy. Of all the gifts that you 
receive from God, the greatest gift is Santhosham. The opposite of Santhosham is ‘Sorrow’, 
which is the fruit of aasha (desire) that arouses hope and almost always results in disappointment 
or despair. One aasha engenders another: one desire proliferates into a hundred, even when it is 
fulfilled. Aasha is like the shadow caused by the morning Sun---it gets longer when you run to 
catch it. It tantalises you and makes you a fool. It knows, no justification and has no end. So, 
Santhosham is the supreme blessing of the Lord, who in His infinite Love, puts an end to that 
unquenchable thirst. No wealth or other attainment can equal it in efficacy. Santhosham is the 
culmination of Desire in full contentment and sacred satiety. 


The sacred texts of India have abiding, vitality 


The culture of India has been exhorting people to learn this lesson and practise this discipline 
but, the glitter of the West with its scientific advance and technological superiority have enslaved 
the brain and hems of Indians and they pay no heed to the Voice of the Mother which warns and 
teaches. They are like the dull-witted inhabitants of the Gangetic basin who dig wells on the 
banks of the holy river---instead of drawing the sacred water itself for their needs! You should 


pledge yourself to protect, practise and promote the ancient time-tested culture of your country. 
It is not an accident that you are born in this land. A sacred responsibility is resting on your 
shoulders. The greatness of India is something unique; so is your good fortune to be living at a 
time when it is being fast recognised all over the world by anxiety ridden, fear torn, humans. 


A word about; Poets who read poems now. According to tradition only the Rishis who had 
intuitively cognised the hymns in. praise of God and the Divine in man were revered as Poets or 
kavis. Of course, rishis or sages were honoured as poets, and the appellation rishis was not given 
to 'poets.' Rishis could be called kavis, because, ‘kavi' meant he who understood the past, realised 
the present and educated people for the future. Since the poet has a purified consciousness, he 
could pronounce impartial judgement on the past, he could lay his finger on the ills and 'wells' of 
the present and he could recommend the paths for progress in the future. People could place faith 
in their words and listen to their call. They would not mislead or misinterpret. 


Genuine poets are aware of the three periods of time, can roam in their imagination over the 
three worlds and be ever fixed in consciousness with the three Divine Entities of the Trinity. The 
Shaasthras, Puraanas, Epics and other sacred texts of India have abiding vitality and validity, 
only because their authors had such unquestioned authority to guide and interpret the Age 'in 
which they lived and composed their works. 


The sages of India desired to establish peace on earth 


Vyaasa and Vaalmeeki underwent a long process of asceticism and study, as well as experience 
‘of spiritual bliss and thus lifted themselves upto the heights of rishihood, before they composed 
the epics and texts bearing their name. The question may be asked, "Why should they compose 
poetry, however exalted, after attaining rishihood? What was the urge that prompted them?" The 
answer is: "They were overcome with compassion, for the fellow-pilgrims struggling along the 
path they had-traversed; they were full of agony at the plight of fellow-beings who were 
sweltering in the heat of worldly entanglements." They desired to establish peace on earth and 
good-will among mankind. Their attention was ever on the Vedhic message, “Swayam theernah, 
paraan thaarayathi." "Themselves having crossed the Sea of’ Samsaara (change), they help 
others to do likewise." Themselves risen to the Divine, they helped others to rise. 


Nature has no beginning and no end 


One of the stages of development of beings into Divinity is Maanavathwa (Humanness), being 
endowed with Manas (mind), which is an instrument for bondage to, as well as for liberation 
from, physical shackles. Some people define 'Prakrithi' (the objective world) as a mere fancy of 
the mind. But, it 'is as valid, as real, as the Lord Himself. God has no beginning and no end. 
Nature or Prakrithi too has no beginning and no end. Prakrithi is a stream that flows from 
beyond time into the timeless future. The individual is the Purusha, the person who resides in 
this Pura (Body or Castle or Fort). There are two Purushas---the Kshara Purusha, and the 
Akshara Purusha. The Kshara Purusha is bound up with material life and so is subject to 
change. He is entangled with the five Koshas (Sheaths), the five Praanas (Vital Airs) the five 
Indhriyas (senses of perception). The Akshara Purusha is the Saakshi (Witness). 


There is another over-all Purusha, the Purushothama, who is beyond the three segments of time, 
the three Universes and is everywhere at the same moment and all moments. His Glory is evident 
in all things and beings. You should strive to escape from the identification with the body and 
feel that you are only the residents of the Body---the Kshara Purushas. Then, by saadhana you 


are able to cognise the Akshara Purusha, the Witness of even the Kshara Purusha, the Jeeva. By 
practising the unbroken presence of the Purushothama (Suprme person) who is resplendent in all 
creation, you can ultimately merge in Him, as the consummation of all the lives you have spent 
here below. 


Devotees who worked with a spirit of dedication 


Members of the Sai Organisation and those who adhere to the Universal path to Sai should not 
be carried away by ideas of inferiority or superiority based on differences of religion, caste or 
creed. They should honour Faith, Steadfastness, Sincerity, Purity, wherever found. There are 
some people who ascribe all the ills of Society to the prevalence of religion and the importance 
given to social divisions. They say all the unrest and turmoil prevalent today are the direct results 
of this system. This is not true. Diversity of religion and faith is conducive to the welfare of 
mankind. Division of labour is a genuinely beneficial social need. Life can be sanctified and 
elevated to a worshipful pilgrimage if only everyone clings to his way and sees it in its proper 
perspective. Idle brains exaggerate matters and cynics cause great social damage. Gulfs are 
widened by thoughtless criticism. If only all of you remember the twin principles of cohesion, 
the Fatherhood of God and the Brotherhood of Man, mankind will soon become a mighty family 
full of peace and joy. 


I must mention one instance of good work done by people who are actuated by sense of duty. 
This spacious shed, these lines of three storeyed flats, this addition and artistic alterations which 
are made in the Prashaanthi Mandhir are all examples of work done in the spirit of worship. 
Swaami confers blessings on the engineers whom He has called up to sit on the dais---for they 
have done signal service to provide more facilities for the streams of devotees who long to stay 
in Swaami's Presence. 


We have here the 82-year old engineer B. Sathyanaaraayana of Aandhra Pradesh, who has held 
positions of great responsibility and high usefulness in the past. He has worked with full fervour 
and enthusiasm using all skills for the works allotted to him. Joga Rao has shouldered the 
responsibilities laid on him as an Engineer by Swaami admirably well. He has worked night and 
day in a spirit of dedication. I bless them and their families. May they enjoy peace, health and 
happiness. 


Become free from the taint of selfishness 


This vastly spacious shed with all amenities of lighting and sound equipment where you are 
sitting comfortably in thousands, with this platform so broad and deep, and so impressively 
designed are the products of the dedication and sense of duly of another individual about whom I 
want to tell you. Keeping in mind the target date set by Swaami, Sri P.R. Kamani, one of the 
greatest of Swaami's Devotees, has personally supervised the erection of this shed. Supplying 
scarce articles like iron and cement and also the technical guidance and skill, with a smiling face 
and an exuberant heart, he sought to fulfil Swaami's Sankalpa and succeeded. Sri P.R. Kamani is 
responsible for giving you all so much delight. His devotion and the loving care and steady 
attention that he bestows on any work connected with Swaami is really remarkable. It is decided 
that this great auditorium shall be consecrated to the memory of Sri’ P. R. Kamani. From this 
day, it shall be known as Poornachandra Auditorium. 


Poornachandra, where we derive all this Aanandha is like the Full Moon, the embodiment and 


symbol of a full mind that is free from the taint of selfishness and wavering. It is my intention 
and desire that all those who use this Auditorium and who listen to and are inspired by the 
discourses and Special Programmes that happen here should also become ‘Full Moons', 
Sometimes, we pursue this or that fragment of the mind and derive some little Aanandha, 
spending our lives this way and that, but the highest fulfilment is to have the full expansion of 
the pure mind, which is symbolised by the Full Moon---Poornachandra. The mind is the Moon, 
the buddhi (intelligence) is the Sun and both are interacting with each other, rotating in the heart, 
which is the sky! In the sky, clouds of pleasure and sorrow, disappointment and success, joys and 
griefs, may be rolling along. But, in spite of these, the Sun and Moon carry on their allotted 
duties. So man too must carry on in a spirit of dedication, as P. R. Kamani did. We can assert; 
that there is no fulfilment greater than that, there is no merit higher than that, to be acquired by 
man. 


Because this great devotee has always cherished Swaami in his heart and was ceaselessly 
engaged in the thought of Swaami only, he is ever with Swaami and in Swaami. This Auditorium 
shall be known as Poornachandra---His memory, enshrined in that name, will live for ever. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 17-10-1972 


49. Why Shivam? 


THE construction of this Mandhir named Shivam is a special Saadhana for the residents of 
Bhaagyanagara (Hyderabad). Its appearance is unique, for it is to be built in the shape of a Linga, 
the form most approximate to the conception of the formless, attributeless Absolute. The Linga is 
the form of God, emerging from the Niraakara (formless) to the Saakara (formfilled). Other 
Aakaaras (Forms) are all subsumed in the Linga Form. Prakrithi, the objective world, is the 
base; it signifies that the Lord is established in that manifestation of His, which is the concrete 
presentation of His play, His potentiality and His Shakthi (Power). That is why the Lord is 
described as Shiva Shakthi Aathmaka Swaruupam:--"the Supreme which became the Shiva and 
the Shakthi," the latent and the patent. 


You will notice that the base has a horizontal superstructure, over which the cylindrical Linga is 
placed. The base is Sathyam, the structure over it is Shivam and the Linga is Sundharam. One is 
the flower, the second is the perfume and the third is the wind, the Formless that wafts the 
fragrance, which is the symbol of mangalam (auspiciousness) which is Shivam. Sathyam or 
(Truth) is the base on which the Universe and all that it implies rest. 


The message this building will convey is that man is the embodiment of Sathyam, Shivam and 
Sundharam, and it will call on all to live up to that glory. He has to realise the Truth and 
demonstrate in thought, word and deed that Truth is the very basis of his existence. Know the 
Truth and the Truth shall make you strong, steady kin with all, and free from the bonds of lust 
and hate. Man has to learn the lesson of Shivam: swallow the poison of anger and greed, and 
make it ineffective in its effort to harm the world. Spread consolation and comfort through 
speech and action. 


Man has to realise that he is Shivam 


Shiva wears the crescent on His crown so that the soft moonlight might mark out the pilgrim 
route to God, and make the journey less toilsome. He spreads joy and peace. But, the fiery, 
ferocious poison, Shiva hides behind the blue patch on His throat. That is a lesson for man: keep 
under restraint, within you, the qualities and tendencies that are anti-social, the poisonous hatreds 
and competitive greeds. The Shivam does not mean any particular God or unit of the Trinity. It 
includes all mankind, for man has to realise that he is Shivam. Then, the Sundharam too is a 
reminder that Truth is beauty, and Beauty is Divine, not mere physical beauty but, moral and 
spiritual beauty. Give up ugly thoughts, unpleasant speech and disgusting acts. Have the ideal of 
beauty ever in mind. 


Avadhaani said just now that such buildings are the landmarks of the Sai Era and that they 
should be built all over India. I have no such desire. I do not appreciate or encourage such 
accumulations of stone and cement, of brick and mortar. I long to reside in your hearts, fragrant 
with the incense of fine virtues, merciful intentions and compassionate emotions. That is the 
Shivam I desire, the Mandhir built of Truth, Beauty and Goodness. 


Inner Charm is the genuine Beauty. Seetha interned in Ashoka Vana in Lanka, was suddenly 
confronted by a monkey; but, that ugly creature struck her as full of beauty, when it brought her 
the long awaited message from Raama! The loveliness of the Vana (garden), the appealing 
scenery, the bright beautiful ware that Raavana spread before her could not win her heart; but, 
the one word, Raama endeared her to the strange monkey crouched on top of the tree under 
which she was encircled by ogresses. 


Smog of hatred and greed tarnish the temple towers 


The beauty of Nature is but a reflection of the Beauty that is God. But, like all images, it is not 
substantial. Flowers fade, clouds scatter into new patterns, physical charm is but a flash that 
disappears in a moment---but, Divine Beauty is eternal, full, free. That Swndharam, is Sathyam, 
unaffected by the passage of Time, unchanging with the location; that Sundharam is the real 
Shivam, the only Good that is. Pursuing paltry physical beauty leads man astray; it is as 
calamitous as the pursuit of trivial joy. 


Shivam is Goodness; the Body is for realising Godness, which is total goodness. But, the body is 
not itself goodness or godness; it is an instrument that breaks down every moment and that is 
rebuilt every moment getting weaker in the process. The father says proudly, My son is growing 
fast, but really, his life is ebbing fast. The body is valuable, only on account of its use in realising 
God. So also, a Mandhir or this Shivam is valuable only when you are able to realise the God 
that dwells therein. The Gopuram (Tower) of a temple or mandhir is like the raised hand of God 
calling on the weary pilgrim to halt and take rest, and proceed faster to the Goal he is seeking. In 
most places, these old towers are hidden in the forest of chimneys that have crowded around 
them in recent times. The smoke from these factories and the smog of hatred that emanate from 
faction and greed tarnish the atmosphere of the temple towers. 


Even the temples have been denigrated by the bargaining for fees and the collection of toll for 
religious services. The stream of Aanandha that flows from worship is interrupted by demands 
for monetary contributions. Temples are not allowed to pour into the social mind a constant 
stream of peace and joy. 


"Why this Mandhir? you may ask. Is it for My stay whenever I happen to visit Hyderabad? I do 
not need a huge building, nor the furniture and appliances you are proposing to collect here. It 
will serve more the needs of those who have now to follow Me around from house to house. 
Since I have no fixed residence, they are hard put to it, women and children, the well and the ill, 
to know where I will be available. This building will give them a place where they can await Me. 
It also gives Me another excuse to come to Hyderabad for, I am surely coming to 'open' this 
Shivam, when it is completed! 


Hyderabad, 25-10-1972 


50. Play the game 


BELIEVING that the body is All, and that there is no entity embodied in it---this is Mistake 
No.1. Ignoring or forgetting that there can be no wave without the ocean, no body without the 
Aathma (Divine Self), is Mistake No.2. The Aathma has no modification or mood. It is the 
individualised embodiment that undergoes modifications and is caught in moods. Once you 
know that you are in essence the Aathma, you too will be unaffected. 


Another characteristic of the individual is that he cannot be alone, separate from the rest. Like a 
drop of oil on water, he spreads; he reaches out and far. 'I' seeks other 'I's and seeks to become 
We. Life is a march from I to We. But, it usually strays from I to They. And does not reach the 
God, We. 


Intellect alone can direct man in the path of discrimination, between the true path and false, the 
proper step and the improper. This is the reason why man has been praying since ages, through 
the Gaayathri hymn: “Illumine me, prompt my intelligence, so that I may walk aright." 


The reasoning power of man is shaped, not only by the education he receives now, but. more by 
the impact of past lives and the import of future events. If the power is used for self- 
aggrandizement it feeds delusion; if it is used in service for others, it will promote the Revelation 
of Reality. Reason must examine the vagaries of the mind and make patent the Divinity, the 
resides and shines in every individual. 


Avathaars are ever alert, aware, alight 


Give away 'Love' to all; give up the ego; display heroism in service; with compassion to 
fellowmen, feel your intimate kinship with them. Visualise the Aathma that illumines all; derive 
unending Bliss therefrom. 


All who come embodied are Avathaars, that is to say, advents of the Divine, manifestations of 
God. What, then, is the special feature of Raama, Krishna, Buddha, Christ? Why do you 
celebrate their birthdays with such reverential enthusiasm? The speciality is this: they are aware; 
you are unaware of the Aathma which is the Truth. Awareness confers Grace, Glory, Majesty, 
Might, Splendour. Awareness confers liberation from bounds, from time, space and causation, 
from sleep, dream and wakefulness. For you, sleep is fiction, dream is fantasy and wakefulness a 
many-directional storm. Avathaars are ever alert, aware, alight. 


The wise man is he who keeps his reason sharp and clear, and sees things as they really are. He 
listens to the advice: 


Life is a Challenge, Meet it; 
Life is Love, Share it; 

Life is a Dream, Realise it; 
Life a Game, Play it. 


This is the real Pilgrim's progress. This is the Lion's march across the forest, fearless, masterful 
and victorious. The roar .of the lion makes all the denizens scamper in panic; so too the Halo of 
Wisdom scatters the dark brood of fear and doubt. 


Life sweeps along like a wild typhoon; the allotted years do melt like snow before the Sun; but, 
man wastes the precious chance, and strays into folly and frivolity. The yearning of the human 
soul, "From untruth lead me into Truth; from darkness lead me into Light; from death, lead me 
into Immortality,"---this is unrealised. Of what use is it to honour the Avathaar and hold the day 
when the Avathaar took human form as sacred? 


Plant the seeds of love in your hearts 


The message of the Avathaar must be born, must become alive, must grow in you, your heart--- 
that is the birthday, you have to celebrate. Celebrate the Avathaar's Birthday in your own village. 
You need not travel long distances to where I physically am. Plant the seeds of Love in your 
hearts, let them grow into trees of service and shower the sweet fruits of Aanandha. Share the 
Aanandha with all. That is the proper way to celebrate the Birthday. 


I have been telling you that My Life is My Message. I am exhorting you in the Upanishadhic 
way, "Revere the Mother as Divine, Revere the Father as Divine, Revere the Teacher as Divine, 
Revere the Guest as Divine." Now I am proceeding to the place where their bodies are entombed 
to offer, as I have advised you, to express gratitude and respect, to the parents. After that, the 
Prashaanthi Flag will be hoisted on the Mandhir. Hoist it on the shrines of your hearts, shrines 
where God is installed and realised in actual presence, every moment of your lives. 


Birthday Discourse, Prashaanthi Nilayam, 23-11-1972 


A red-hot iron hammer can be hammered into shape by a cold iron 
hammer. So too, a person red hot with emotion and passion can be 
hammered by the hammer that knows no heat of anger or hate. 
That is the reason Raama was able to defeat Raavana and destroy 
him. Why? 


The very word Sathwa means strength, power, vigour, vitality. For 
virtue is power, goodness is power. Raama and Lakshmana are 
Saathwik Mahaathmas, embodiments of the powers that 
righteousness can endow. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


51. The three bodies 


MAN is engaged in ceaseless search for happiness; but, he is incapable of defining what exactly 
is the essential component of happiness. So, he flits from one objective gain to another, ever 
discontented with himself, ever bothered by disappointment. He tries to possess, to accumulate, 
to acquire more and more of external junk, which cloud his vision and dulls his appetite for gains 
for lasting value. When can a man say, "I am fully happy; I need no more?" What is the nature of 
joy or comfort that external objects can give? Man does not pause to inquire. He is unaware that 
he himself is the embodiment of the highest and the most lasting happiness or Aanandha (Bliss). 
That flaw has led him into disaster and disease. 


Before seeking happiness through the senses, the mind and the intellect, man has to examine 
whether he is a bundle of senses, or a mind playing with them or an intellect that rationalises the 
mental cravings. The body is the gross body; the water which it is intended to contain and carry 
is the subtle body; the reality of the potter who shaped it and willed it is the causal body. The 
three bodies which each has are called respectively Sthuula (gross), Suukshma (subtle) and 
Karana (causal). Physical and vital sheaths are sthuula, mental and the intellectual sheaths are 
the Suukshma, and the Blissful or Aanandhamaya sheath is the Kaarana or Causal body of man. 
Behind the Aanandha is the spring of Aanandha, the Aathma. 


Three stages of Wisdom related to three bodies 


There are three stages of wisdom correlated to those three bodies: Jnaana, Sujnaana and 
Vijnaana. Knowledge that is gained by the analysis of the objective world and the similarities of 
the behaviour of its components is Jnaana. When this knowledge is further studied and practised 
to subserve the best interests of the individual society, it becomes Sujnaana, or beneficial 
wisdom. The intentions and urges that arise from the purified consciousness saturated with the 
Divine qualities emanating from the sage is Vijnaana, the Highest Wisdom. It is to be noted that 
the word Vijnaana is often misused to indicate mere Jnaana, or co-ordinated information, 
analysed information about sense perceptions arising out of contact with the material objective 
world. Bhaaratheeya Culture uses the word for the Supreme Wisdom, which denotes the seer, 
the saint. 


Intelligence, intellect, intuition---these three govern the thoughts and actions of man. One leads 
to another. This is the significance of the prayer with which Gandhi awakened the urge of 
liberation in this vast country, liberation not only from alien rule but also from alien tendencies 
and trends of thought. He caused the reverberation all over the land from a million throats of the 
prayer, Sabko sanmathi dhe Bhagavaan---"O Lord! Grant every one the equipment of beneficent 
intelligence." Once that is assured, progress is certain. 


Lessons to be learnt from Hanumaan's mission to Lanka 


Once the intelligence is purified and dedicated to spiritual effort, there should be no slipping 
back whatever the obstacle, whatever the temptation. Hanumaan, charged with the mission of 
discovering the place where Raavana had confined Seetha, decided that he should take a leap 
over the sea towards Lanka to search for her in that island of Raam that he carried in his heart 
and on his tongue. A mountain immersed at the bottom of the sea felt a strong urge to do him 
some little service, for, he was the instrument of God, and engaged in an exhausting adventure! 
Its name was Mynaaka. It rose above the waters and called upon Hanumaan to rest awhile on its 


crest, and refresh himself with the fruits upon the trees that grew thereon. Hanumaan declined to 
delay his landing in Lanka; he was engaged in a Divine Mission, which brooked no rest, no 
delay, no dallying. He turned a deaf ear to the importunities of Mynaaka, and sped forward to 
fulfil the command of the Lord. 


Ponder over this incident: Consider the compassion and the eagerness to serve which the ‘inert! 
massive mountain felt! Consider the steadfastness, the un-deviating faith, the single-pointed 
loyalty of the monkey, Hanumaan! Do they not teach invaluable lessons to man---lessons of 
heart that melts at suffering, a head that refuses to swerve from the path of duty? 


The whole duty of man is to engage himself in good acts with the gross body, scatter good 
thoughts and good influences around him with his subtle body, and earn self-realisation and Bliss 
through his causal body. 


Birthday Discourse, Prashaanthi Nilayam, 23-11-1972 


To search for God with the instruments of the laboratory is like 
trying to cure pain in the stomach by pouring drops into the eye. 
There is a technique and a special instrument for that purpose, 
which the pastmasters in that science have developed and spoken 
about. 


Equip yourselves with a clear eye, through detachment and love, 
sharpen your sense of discrimination, viveka, so that it has no 
prejudice or predilection; then, you can see God in you, around 
you, in all that you know and feel and are. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


52. For me, from me 


THE mother who bore you, the father who fostered you and the teacher who opened your eye to 
the mystery of Nature in and around you, have all to be revered. However high you may rise in 
social status, however huge may be your bank account, if your parents are neglected in distress, 
your life has been a tragic waste. Parents are mightily happy, when their children evince the 
slightest regard for their comfort. Any little sign of gratitude is welcomed by them with delight. 
If you have no urge to please them and make them happy, how can you ever hope to please God? 


The envelope might cost a naya paisa only; inside it, the bit of paper might be shoddy and soiled. 
The scribbling on it might be full of blotches; the letters might be higgledy piggledy, but, when 
the child writes to the mother, she reads and appreciates the letters with tears of joy. The 
envelope might be a deluxe one costing five rupees, the letters may be of gold, printed in choice 
antique type in an aristocratic press; but, she will not be interested even to look at it. The mother 
seeks love, craves for gratitude, thirsts after sympathy. She values feeling, not external display. 


The Divine Mother too is moved by the same feeling. She does not appreciate demonstrative 
trappings like matted hair, rosaries, marks on forehead or sacredotal robes. She values sincerity, 
yearning, virtue, compassion, love. 


Minds of men are cesspools of desire 


The Vedhas declare that Her Grace, that is to say, Immortality, can be achieved by Thyaaga 
(detachment), rather than by hectic activity, or affluence or progeny. Give up; do not grasp in 
clenched fists. Release; do not bind and get bound. The units of the Sathya Sai Seva Organisation 
must emphasise through example and personal practice that no joy is equal to the joy of sharing, 
giving, renouncing. 


You can understand this better when you pay attention to the behaviour of children. They are like 
realised souls, without attachment. There are three motives that rule man: rathi (attachment), 
praapthi (acquisition) and thusti (bliss). Rathi is the desire to contact the objective world; 
praapthi is the craving to possess the object; the thusti is the Aanandha (Supreme Bliss) 
available when the secret of Nature is realised. Examine the contents of a child's pocket. You 
will find a few pebbles, a piece of glass, or a twig or flower. The child gets from these more joy 
than an adult derives from a wad of notes. The child does not crave to possess and to deny 
others. It does not accumulate for coming days, or for the mere pleasure of becoming renowned 
as an accumulator. The child may have a dirt-covered body, but its mind is free from dirt; elders 
are scrupulous about physical cleanliness but, their minds are cesspools of desire, of hate, envy 
and clogging slush. 


Shed all envy and grow greatly in Love 


This is because the real nature of God, Nature and Man is not understood. Man is but a wave of 
the ocean which is God. Nature is just a manifestation of the same God, appearing as having 
diversity, and as good-bad, gentle-cruel, useful-useless, and, such other dual attributes. Desire to 
acquire or anxiety to avoid comes because man is caught in this duality, which is fundamentally, 
a creation of his own mind. 


Man caught up in the tangle of desire, craves for much fruit with little effort; the man who is 
detached from the temptations of the objective world craves for a little fruit, but, is prepared to 


undergo much effort for the same. Just a little sign of Grace endows him with immeasurable 
delight, Aanandha. 

"For me," "to me"---This is animal desire. "From me, by me"---this offering is a sign of the 
Divine nature in man. Share, then the sense of One-ness gets established; you lose all fear and 
shed all envy, and grow greatly in Love. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 24-11-1972 


When devotion shines full, the sky in the heart becomes a bowl of 
beauty and life is transformed into a charming avenue of 
Aanandha (bliss). That beauty of heart, that Aanandha in life can 
be won through the mind, if the lesson of Guru Poornima day is 
remembered and realised. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


53. To three Pandiths 


THE wise are those who know the Aathma (Divine Self). They distinguish between That and 
This, Zhath and Thwam, the Absolute and the Relative, the Universal and Particular, that is 
falsely conceived as separate from the Universal. When he experiences the Truth that he is the 
Absolute Aathma, man is endowed with Supreme Bliss. It is sheer waste if one has no such 
experience but has pored over mountains of spiritual texts or earned fame as a deep scholar. 


Man alone has the ability to understand the phenomenal world around him. He can grasp the 
ways and waywardness of the world; he can delve into its evolution and involution, its 
contraction and expansion. Therefore, he has to give it only a relative value, and follow as his 
only goal, the search for the Aathma and the attainment of the Aathma. And, the search has to be 
through continuous, consistent Saadhana. Boundless spiritual potential is encased in every being. 
]n man, it expresses itself as Jnaana (Supreme Wisdom). 


Man is neither a bit of clod, nor a bundle of flesh. He has in him the inexhaustible spring of 
Aanandha (Divine Bliss). A person is not just the body, with its limbs and other mechanisms. 
The Aathma is the Divine Person. The soul is the Personality. And the person realises Aanandha 
only when the Aathma is cognised. This achievement cannot be won through riches or authority 
of office, scholarship or status, fame or force. Discarding this perennial Aanandha, man imagines 
the sensual pleasures to be Aanandha and he spends his life in fruitless pursuits. He wanders 
about in the thorny jungles and desert sands. He humiliates himself and crawls and cringes for 
favours from all and sundry. This is the consequence of the ignorance that blinds. 


Man must die triumphant over death 


Man is equipped with a return ticket, when he takes birth. Holding it in his grasp he earns and 
spends, rises and falls, sings and dances, weeps and wails, forgetting the end of the journey. But, 
though he forgets, the wagon of life moves towards the cemetery, which is its terminus. It brings 
no glory to man if he is tied helplessly to the wheel of birth and death. His glory and greatness 
consists in disentangling himself from that revolving wheel. 


Before death nips life, and thrusts him on to another birth, he must by means of Saadhana learn 
the mystery of the Aathma. When death comes one must be glad to meet it since he comes for the 
last time and there will be no more birth for him. Man weeps when he is born; he should not 
weep when he dies. He must die triumphant over death. Otherwise, he lives only to consume tons 
of food, as a burden upon the earth. You seek to escape pain and grief; but, they are inescapable. 


Life is as a dream. In the dream, you experience joy and grief; but when you realise that both joy 
and grief are unreal, when you awake into the consciousness of the Aathma, you will no more 
have the thrill of joy or the despondency of pain. You will not have any longer fear or anxiety, 
fear of death or anxiety about the future. 


The mind is the architect of your progress or decline. For the fool, the mind is a formidable 
dinosaur; for the intelligent, the mind is an angel. The trained mind is torn by fear; the pure 
elevated mind is placid and unruffled, like that of the homeless sage. The Vedhas teach how to 
purify the mind and render it a useful tool. 


Pandiths must themselves shine as inspirers 


Nothing is uncaused in the Universe. Every being, object, incident has been caused by the primal 
Cause and its direction or guidance' The Shaasthras (spiritual sciences) yearn for the discovery 
of that unseen Principle. Through sheer ignorance and perversity, the Shaasthras have been 
ignored and set aside, and man is misleading himself into the belief that his fancies are true, just 
and beneficial. Man has thrown his "humanness" into the crater of cruelty forgetting his best 
interests, under the influence of hatred, envy, conceit and power. He has cast aside the expanse 
of his culture. As a result peace has flown from the heart of man, from the fold of society and the 
boundaries of nations. 


The Pandiths and Scholars who have gathered today under the auspices of the Prashaanthi 
Vidhwan-Mahaasabha must promote and set themselves up as pioneers and examples for the task 
of making people aware of the greatness of Sanaathana Dharma, and of the Vedhas and 
Shaasthras in which is enshrined Dharma (righteousness). They must teach the people the 
Principle of the Aathma, and themselves shine as inspirers through their own practice of what 
they teach. Immersed in Sath-Chith-Aanandha (Sheer bliss in the total awareness of the Supreme 
Reality) themselves, they must communicate that joy and that wisdom to others. Plant in every 
heart the seed of Truth; I bless that you succeed in leading men into that Bliss of fullness and 
fulfilment. 


Prashaanthi Nilayam, 3-12-1972 


Sath-sangh means Meeting the Sath, the Sath which is spoken of 
while extolling God as Sath-Chith-Aanandha. Sath is the Existence 
Principle, the IS that is the basic truth of the Universe. Align with 
the Truth, the Sath in you, the Sathya (Reality) on which the 
Mithya (false) is imposed by minds that do not see light. By 
dwelling in that Sath, the flame is lit, light dawns, darkness flees 
and Jnaana Bhaaskara (the Sun of Realisation) rises. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


54. He whom Christ announced 


RELIGIONS arise from the minds of good men, who crave to make all men good; they strive to 
eliminate evil and cure the bad. They are many, since they have to be adjusted to the individuals, 
their activities, their professions and roles, their character and characteristics. The individual has 
to start observing the limits and laws laid down, and derive joy and strength thereby. And, then, 
his cleansed mind will lead the way, to higher and higher stages. He and the society of which he 
is a unit will benefit thereby. 


It is therefore appropriate that the Birthday of Jesus, who felt the need to save mankind and who 
strove to achieve it, is celebrated; but, the celebration must take the form of adherence to the 
teachings, loyalty to the principles, practising the disciplines and experiencing the Awareness of 
the Divine that he sought to arouse. 


These days, the world is deriving satisfaction in mere words, and in witnessing clever rules 
designed to cover up one's faults. The Birthdays of the Great are honoured by such hypocrisy and 
external pomp. There is no examination in the light of the message they gave, nor, any effort to 
practise it and derive the bliss it promises. 


The Great Teachers belong to mankind. It is wrong to believe that Jesus belongs only to the 
Christians and the Christmas is a holy festival for the West only. To accept one of them as one's 
own and discard the rest as belonging to others, is a sign of pettiness. Christ, Raama, Krishna--- 
they are for all men everywhere. 


Man's life is conditioned by feelings and deeds 


The various limbs and organs together form a body; various nations and communities together 
form the world. The sustenance given by Divine Grace circulates in every part of the body, 
helping it to function in unison. The stream of Love, endowed by Divine Grace, has to circulate 
in every State and community to make the world live in Peace and Joy. If this truth is realised, 
there will arise no idea of difference. 


If the members of a family are at loggerheads, the lands and other possessions of the family will 
be uncared for, and be either wasted or lost. The separation of one member will also be a big 
loss, for, the Grace that sustains the family will diminish and get lost. When a hand is amputated, 
the limb loses its function, and a great deal of blood too is lost during the removal. So too, the 
Divine Grace of Love is lost when a country sets itself apart: it also becomes a weak and 
functionless limb of the World community. 


Division, difference and distinction cuts one off from the life-giving Grace, that feeds every cell 
of the body and every individual in the World. The World is sustained by the self-same Grace. A 
tree requires for its growth, soil, sunlight and atmosphere. But, more than these three, it requires 
the seed. Man's life is conditioned by feelings and. deeds, and the consequences of 'these feelings 
and deeds. But, his existence, his very Is-ness, depends on the Will of God. 


Growing trees may differ, according to the nature of the soil, the quantity of sunlight and the 
quality of the soil. So too, men may differ according to the consequences of the types of feelings 
and deeds that emanate from them. But, just as it is true to say that" the seeds are the same, is 
One, without any difference, the variety of forms, the variety of emotions and attitudes, the 
variety of communities and loyalties are the result of man's ignoring his fundamental Unity in the 
one Divine Will, and his acting contrary to that Unity. 


Meaning of three statements made by Christ 


The moving water of a river has the Moon in its depths; the still water of a lake has also the 
Moon underneath; the sky has the Moon up above. The Moon in the flowing river is broken and 
fragmentary, it flows fast, apparently, with the floods. The Moon in the lake is calm, unmoved, 
undistracted. These two are but reflections of the real Moon in the sky. The Moon reflected in 
the flood is the Individual Soul, engaged in activity, embroiled in-Maaya, cause and effect. The 
Moon reflected in the placid face of the lake is the Yogi, the Saint, who has attained balance, 
equipoise, peace, dwelling in the One. The real Moon in the sky is the Eternal Witness, the 
Absolute, the Primal Principle. 


Christ spoke of these three, when He made, one after the other, three statements. Referring to the 
active individual soul, the flickering Moon, he said, "I am the Messenger of God;" referring to 
himself as the Yogi, who has risen beyond dualities, and attained balance, he said, "I am the Son 
of God." Realising that these two are but reflections, and that the real Moon is the Witness in the 
sky, that he too is the Formless, Nameless Absolute, he declared, towards the end of his life, "I 
and My Father are ONE." 


All beings are images of the Universal Aathma, in the names and forms they have apparently 
assumed. This is the truth, enclosed, elaborated 'and demonstrated in the spiritual texts of India, 
which form the basis of Bhaaratheeya culture. The essence of all religions and faiths then, is 
this: the merging in this Unity. The goal of all spiritual endeavour is this: the merging in this 
Unity. The object of all enquiry is this: to cognise this Unity. But, this patent fact is ignored, and 
persons create strife, anxiety and unrest for themselves and perpetrate horrors to hold forth the 
support, the disunity so dear to their fractioned minds. 


People today relish the very things religion condemned 


The passage of time has clouded the splendour of the message, the fascination exercised by the 
material and the worldly has drawn them away from the path, and the expansion of science and 
technology has made them conceited and wrong-headed. So, people now relish the very things 
prohibited and promote the very things condemned by religion. All religions teach that one 
should revere the parents and evince gratitude to them; but, ridiculing them and neglecting them 
have become fashionable now. All religions lay down that the aged are to be honoured, since 
they are the repositories of experience and their guidance is indispensable; but, now elders and 
the aged are treated as nuisances and handicapped. All religions insist on truth; but now, the man 
who sticks to truth is laughed at as if he were a fool. Cruelty and violence, condemned by all 
religions, have raised themselves to the status of weapons of progress and means for desirable 
ends. However, the basic truths of religion are not affected or tarnished by the evil that men 
practise or the competitive propaganda they indulge in. 


On Christ's Birthday, sacrifice at least a desire or two 


Only those who are not keen on practising the message will waste their energies in condemning 
other religions and glorifying their own. And, once you enter sincerely into the path of spiritual 
practice, the urge to find faults in others or publish one's own excellences will disappear. Such 
people will celebrate the Birthday of the Founders in a spirit of dedication only, deepening the 
faith in their hearts and revering its doctrines by more intense practice rather than by more 
emphatic argumentation. If one has the yearning to reach the goal, one has to follow the path that 
leads to it. When you learn to reach God, you have to observe the guidelines He has marked out. 


You need not dwell on His name, or His lineaments all the time! That may not take you far. But, 
walk along the Path; every step will bring you near. When you need to reach a village, you have 
to rise and move towards it; it will not rise and move towards you! When you need to reach God, 
rise and move, as He has directed you to. By this means alone you can make life worthwhile. 


Jesus taught simple practical lessons in spiritual advancement for the good of mankind; He 
manifested Divine Powers to instil faith in the validity of his teachings; he marked out the path 
that can confer on men the sweet nectar of Aanandha. He exhorted people by precept and 
example to cultivate the virtues of charity, compassion, forbearance, love and faith. These are not 
separate and distinct qualities, they are only the many facets of the Divine in Man, which he has 
to recognise and develop. 


Significance of the story related to Christ's birth 


People talk of the sacrifice of Christ as evidence by His crucifixion. But, he was surrounded and 
bound, and crowned by the crowd who captured Him with a crown of thorns, and later, nailed to 
the cross by his captors. A person bound and beaten by the police cannot say that he has 
sacrificed anything, for, he is not a free man. Let us pay attention to the sacrifice that Jesus made 
while free, out of his own volition. He sacrificed his happiness, prosperity, comfort, safety and 
position; he braved the enmity of the powerful. He refused to yield or compromise. He 
renounced the 'ego', which is the toughest thing to get rid of. Honour Him for these. He willingly 
sacrificed the desires with which the body torments man; this is sacrifice greater than the 
sacrifice of the body under duress. The celebration of His birthday has to be marked by your 
sacrificing at least a desire or two, and conquering at least the more disastrous urges of the ego. 


The followers of Jesus have got broken into schisms on various counts; but, the life of Christ is a 
lesson of Unity. When Christ was on the cross, ill-feelings towards the men who tortured Him 
troubled Him. Suddenly he heard a voice alerting him. "All Life is One, my dear Son{ Be alike 
to every one!" This was followed by another admonition, "Death is the Dress of Life." As one 
casts of the worn clothes and dons another set, so, the soul dons and doffs bodies. Therefore, 
Jesus was warned against hate and ill-feelings, as well as the lamentation to which man is heir. 


Manifestations seen when Christ was born 


The lives of such personalities are lived out, in order to establish the welfare of humanity, the 
prosperity and peace of the world, and individual liberation from bondage to sensual desires and 
passions. This is illustrated by the strange phenomenons that occur at the time of their Advent. It 
is believed that when Christ was born there were such manifestations. The ruler of the realm had 
ordered a census, and each had to be counted in his own village. So Mary and her husband 
moved along the road that led to his native village. Mary was with child; the pains started mid- 
way; they knew no one in the hamlet through which they were passing; so they took refuge in a 
cowshed. Joseph made ready the space between the cows, and went out into the road at midnight, 
to seek some woman who could help. But, soon, he heard the Baby's cry. 


And, the story says, there was a Star in the sky, which fell with a New Light, and this led a few 
Tibetans and others to the place where the Saviour was born. This story is read and taken on trust 
by many, though stars do not fall or even slide down so suddenly. What the story signifies is this: 
There was a huge halo of splendour illuminating the sky over the village when Christ was born. 
This meant that He, who was to overcome the darkness of evil and ignorance had taken birth, 
that He will spread the Light of Love in the heart of man and councils of humanity. 


Use and misuse of wealth and wisdom 


Appearances of splendour, and other signs to herald the era that has dawned are natural when 
incarnations happen on earth. Jesus was to shatter the darkness that had enveloped the world and 
the aura of light was a sign that announced the event. The Masters arrive in answer to man's 
prayer. "Thamaso maa jyothir gamaya" (Lead us from darkness unto Light!) 


If each one does his duty, in the spirit of - dedication, the Light can illumine all, but, if the doors 
of the heart are shut against the Light, how can darkness disappear? You cannot sit back, and 
expect the Incarnation to bring peace and joy into you. The incarnation comes to warn, to guide, 
to awaken, to lay down the path, and shed the light of Love on it. But, man has to listen, learn 
and obey with hope and faith. 


There is a tale told of old that Wisdom and Wealth once quarrelled loud and long, about their 
relative importance. Wealth argued that without it, the body will be weak, the brain hazy and 
wisdom a will-o-the-wisp. Wisdom retorted that, without it man cannot even distinguish wealth 
from non-wealth or know how to earn it or use it. The Soul intervened and told them that they 
were both equally important, but, only when properly used. Wealth without wisdom becomes an 
instrument of exploitation and tyranny: wisdom without wealth becomes mere fantasy and a 
bundle of blueprint. Use makes them worthwhile; misuse makes them disastrous. 


It is like the knife in the hands of a maniac, which becomes an instrument for murder; in the 
hands of a surgeon, it becomes an instrument which saves a life! Are you doing good with 
wealth? Are you benefitting others by means of wisdom?---that is the test. This day, Christmas, 
when we celebrate the birth of Christ, resolve to lead the lives of loving service to the weak, the 
helpless, the distressed, the disconsolate. Cultivate tolerance and forbearance, charity and 
magnanimity. Hold dear the ideals He laid down and practise them, in your daily lives. 


The best way of celebrating the Birth of Christ 


The ways in which Christmas is being celebrated now show how far men have moved away from 
those ideals, how much ignominy they are heaping on his name! The midnight hour is revered; 
illumination is arranged; the Christmas Tree is set up; and then, the night is spent in drinking and 
dance. It is a day of Holy Aanandha, but, the Aanandha is reduced to the level of the poisoning 
excitement of intoxication! 


Drink is so pernicious an evil habit, that when man puts the bottle in, he himself gets into the 
bottle and cannot escape! First man drinks wine, then the wine drinks more wine; and finally, the 
wine drinks man himself! He is sunk and drowned in drink. Liquor destroys the humanity in 
man! How then can it develop the Divinity in him? One must dance in Divine Bliss; instead, 
sensual dance is indulged in as a deleterious substitute! Make your hearts pure, your activities 
holy, and your feelings beneficial to all. That is the best way of celebrating the Birth of Christ. 


There is one point that I cannot but bring to your special notice today. At the moment when Jesus 
was merging in the Supreme Principle of Divinity, He communicated some news to his 
followers, which has been interpreted in a variety of ways by commentators and those who relish 
the piling of writings on writings and meanings upon meanings, until it all swells up into a huge 
mess. 


Christ's announcement of the Advent of Baba 


The statement itself has been manipulated and tangled into a conundrum. The statement of Christ 
is simple: “He who sent me among you will come again!" and he pointed to a Lamb. The Lamb 
is merely a symbol, a sign. It stands for the Voice---Ba-Ba; the announcement was the Advent of 
Baba. "His Name will be Truth," Christ declared. Sathya means Truth. "He will wear a robe of 
red, a bloodred robe." (Here Baba pointed to the robe He was wearing!). "He will be short, with a 
crown (of hair). The Lamb is the sign and symbol of Love." 


Christ did not declare that he will come again. He said, "He who made me will come again." 
That Ba-ba is this Baba and Sai, the short, curly-hair-crowned red-robed Baba, is come. He is not 
only in this Form, but, he is in every one of you, as the dweller in the Heart. He is there, short, 
with a robe of the colour of the blood that fills it. 


The great axioms of Bhaaratheeya culture found in the Vedhas---Ishwarassarvabhuuthaanaam, 
Isaavaa-vamidham sarvam, Vasudhevassarvamidham---"God is the inner Motivator of all 
beings. All this is enveloped in God, All this is Vaasudheva, the Divine"---are to be in every one. 
This is the inner mystery of Incarnation, God incarnating in all! All are One; The One is All. 


There is only one God; He is Omnipresent. There is only one religion, the Religion of Love; 
there is only one caste, the Caste of Humanity; there is only one language, the Language of the 
Heart. 


Bangalore, 24-12-1972 


Roga denies you ease and peace. The roga (disease) can be cured 
by yoga (Divine communian), not by bhoga (material enjoyment). 


Bhoga means catering to the whims and wildness of the senses. 


Yoga means the regulation and reform of the impulses of the mind 
which run after goals laid down by the senses/ 


Make the senses the servants of the intelligence, not the overlords 
of the mind. 


Tell them that the mind is dethroned, it is non-existent/ 
Sensuousness is a disease. 


Sri Sathya Sai 


