1. Divinise Every Moment 


If you wish to embark on a new life, you need not wait for the arrival of a new year. To wait for 
a whole year means waiting for twelve months and so many days, hours, minutes and seconds. 
Treat every second as new. Sanctify every moment of your life. This has to be done by realising 
the unity of Sath (the Divine) and Chith (the individual Consciousness). When this union is 
achieved, Ananda (Spiritual Bliss) is experienced. This is the primary task before everyone. 
Every second should be regarded as an expression of the Divine. This New Year Day relates to 
the Christian Era. December and January may come and go (every year) but God neither comes 
nor goes. 


In this context, you have to bear in mind three things. One is that which, after it goes, will not 
come back. The second one is that which, after it comes will not leave. The third is the one that 
neither comes nor goes. That which, when it comes, will not go is Jnaana (spiritual wisdom). 
When this sublime knowledge comes to one, it would not leave him. The knowledge which 
comes and goes relates to the waking and sleeping states. Knowledge of Supreme Reality, when 
once it is acquired, will never go away. The knowledge that is lost is not true knowledge. 


Ignorance is the thing which, once it is gone, will not return. If it returns, it is "ignorance piled on 
ignorance." This has been described in Vedantic parlance as Mithya in Mithya delusion within a 
delusion. 


Surrender to the Divine present everywhere 


That which does not come and does not leave is Aatma Thathwa (the Aatmic Principle). That 
which is omnipresent, where can it go? Where is the place for it to go? You set up a door to 
separate one place from a place outside it. If there is no place outside, there will be no need for a 
door. There is no place where the Divine is not present. Where, then, can the Divine come or go? 


Such questions are the products of confused book knowledge. The state of mind of the confused 
person is described in a song by a Gopika (Cowherd girl). The doubting mind calls for closing 
the door of the mind (to truth). The person with faith asks for the opening of the door. Seeing the 
plight of the Gopika, who is racked by both doubt and faith, Radha was amused. Radha 
observed: 


When the whole Universe is the mansion of the Lord, 
Where is the need for a street or a door? 

When the cosmic Lord is shining within, 

Where is the need for a door? 


When one offers one's entire life to the Lord and sheds tears of bliss, that is all that is needed. As 
long as there is no such complete surrender, there will be need for doors and the like. Why are 
doors erected? To regulate the entry and exit of persons. But, it is the irony of the present Kali or 
Dark Age that the door is kept open for the entry of all kinds of undesirable creatures. Man's 
mind is kept open for the entry of evil thoughts. The door should be barred against the inroads of 
egoism and acquisitive impulses. The door (of the mind) should be kept sacred. 


Regard the entire cosmos as the great mansion of the Supreme Lord. It has no streets or doors. 
Total surrender is the way to enter the mansion. 


The advent of a New Year is greeted by welcoming the New Year and bidding farewell to the old 
one. This is the practice in the ordinary world. But it is not entirely a worldly affair. 


Qualify yourselves to enter the Kingdom of God 


The observance of the beginning of a New Year is based on the statements of the Siddhaanthi 
(the almanac maker). The almanac is an artificial man-made work and is not related to anything 
permanent or unchanging. The sun and the moon remain unchanged. The calendar is a man-made 
device. For the Divine, there is no coming or going. God transcends such conceptions. He is the 
Lord of what is called the Kingdom of God. Each one has to acquire the qualification to enter 
that Kingdom. All are not entitled to enter it. But every human being should aspire to achieve 
that right. That is the essential purpose of human birth. Man is bound by his actions in this world. 
The actions should be good. Be pure in your speech. Develop a sacred vision. Purify your hearts. 


Discourse at Prashanthi Mandir to a vast gathering of devotees from all parts of world, 1 Jan 
1992 


2. Manifest Your-Divinity 


The Lord of the cosmos permeates the entire universe. 

Remaining invisible in the visible universe, 

The cosmic consciousness illumines everything 

Like the thread that runs through a necklace of gems. 

All things happen, good and bad, according to the dictates of Time. 
Time is the cause of joy and sorrow, gain and loss. 

Realise that Time is the cause of all happenings in the world. 

There is none who is not subject to the sway of Time. 


Embodiments of Divine Love! Time moves fast like a whirlwind. Each one's life span is getting 
reduced every moment, like a melting block of ice. Time passes even before man realises his 
duties in life. The human body is not easily acquired. The end of man's life should not be to 
waste his precious human birth without realising its primary purpose. 


It is the duty of every man to realise the purpose of life and utilise his time in the performance of 
his duties to sanctify his existence. Given the will, there is nothing that man cannot achieve in 
this world. But before embarking on any enterprise, man should recognise his abilities and 
endowments. 


Today's man, who claims to know everything and engages in exploring space, is unable to 
experience bliss. If one acquires the ability to explore the stars or walk on the moon, but is 
unable to understand his own true nature, he misses his integral consciousness. This 
consciousness is not related to knowledge of the external world. It can be experienced only by 
turning one's vision inward. Only when he has samagratha bhaavam (integral awareness) will he 
have the fight perception of a sage. Only such integral vision can confer bliss. The greatest cause 
of bondage 


When people speak about man's bondage, what is it that binds man? Man can liberate himself 
only when he knows what it is that binds him. Are wife and children the bonds? No. Is it 
property? No. Are they sensual desires? No. The greatest cause of bondage is the failure to know 
himself. An individual who is not aware of his true self cannot escape from sorrow. As long as 
sorrow is there, bliss cannot be experienced. 


What is the sorrow that envelops man? Sorrow envelops man in three ways and afflicts him in 
many ways. One source of sorrow is Asath (the unreal). The second cause is Thamas (the 
darkness of ignorance). The third cause is death. In this context the Vedanta mentions three 
categories: Prakruthi (nature), Jivaatma (the individual soul) and Parmamaatma (the Cosmic 
Spirit). 


As long as man does not give up what he ought to renounce, he will not experience bliss. As long 
as he is not aware of what he ought to know he cannot get bliss. Bliss will elude man until he 
reaches the goal he should aim at. 


Give up the fascination for the world 


What is it that man should give up? What is it that he ought to know? What is his goal? What has 
to be given up is Jagath-bhaavam (the fascination for the world). The reason is the world is not 
different from God. â€œEashaavaasyam idham jagath" (God dwells in the Universe). "Viswam 
Vishnu-swaroopam." (The entire cosmos is the embodiment of the Supreme). Disregarding this 
profound and sacred truth, man is becoming a prey to grief by his worldly attachments. The 
world should not be treated as merely physical, but should be looked upon as a Divine 
manifestation. It is only when man is filled with godly thoughts that he will be rid of sorrow. 
Hence, what should be given up is worldliness. Then alone Aatmaananda (the Bliss of the Spirit) 
can be got. 


The second thing that has to be given up is Jiva Bhaava (the feeling of separate individuality). 
Who is a Jiva? Jiva is God. "The Jiva (the individual self) resides in the body. God dwells in the 
heart." They come together and engage in mutual sport. There is a Director who directs the play 
of the puppets. Both good and bad are present in the puppets. The Jivaatma (the individual self) 
and the Divine principle are not two distinct and separate entities. Out of ignorance, man forgets 
the basic reality and cherishes delusions which cause sorrow. It is like a man who is seized with 
fear when he mistakes a rope for a snake. When the truth is known the fear goes. Likewise man, 
looking at the world, considers it a separate phenomenal entity--Jiva Thathwa. But in reality it is 
Divine. When the Divine nature of the cosmos is understood, man is free from the delusion of 
separateness. 


The Divine Master illumines the entire cosmos 
And the cosmos shines in the Divine. 
God and the cosmos are inseparable friends. 
This is the prime dictum of Sai. 

Human destiny is realisation of his divinity 


What is the destination that man should attain? It is the original home from where he came 
(Swasthaanam) What is this original home? It is the awareness of one's own true self. It is for the 
realisation of this truth that the body has been given to man by the Divine. Where can one search 
for one's self? Can the search be made outside of you? No. 


Similarly, the search for God in the external is futile. "His hands and feet are everywhere. His 
eyes, head and mouth are everywhere. He stands forth encompassing everything in the cosmos" 
(Stanza from the Bhagavad Gita). When the Divine is omnipresent, it is foolish for man to search 
for God in some place. 


Hence the destination for man is the realisation of his divinity (the original source). This 
realisation must come through the Vedantic process of exclusion ("Nethi, nethi" "not this, not 
this"). "I am not the body. I am not the intellect. I am not the Will. I am not the Antha Karana, 
the inner instrument." All these are only instruments. Man should realise: "I am the Master of all 
of them." When by this process of elimination man realises his true Serf, he is freed from sorrow. 


Man's most precious and sacred gift from God is Buddhi (intelligence). The intelligence that 
should be used for seeking the Aatma (Spirit) is being used by man today to seek Annam (food). 
When you are given a mirror to recognise your face, if you turn it in the reverse direction, how 


can you see your face? Use the mirror of Buddhi to recognise your true self. That is known as 
Saakshaatkaaram----direct vision of one's true Self. 


Unfortunately man today seeks to know everything except his own true nature. He asks 
everyone: "Who are you?" but does not put the question, "Who am I?" One who does not know 
himself, what right has he to seek about others? Such an enquiry proceeds from ignorance. 
Without the awareness of his own true self, man can never attain bliss. 


God contains everything within Himself 


It is to set men on the path of such self-enquiry that the celebration of the New Year is intended. 
God as the embodiment of Time, is worshipped by the name Samvathsara (year). This name also 
means that God contains within Himself everything. God is also known by the name 
Kaalaathmaka (the Time Spirit). God incarnates on earth for revealing to man his divine essence. 
Man has been endowed with intelligence (as Dheemantha) so that he may use it for discovering 
the Divine within him. 


The name Samvathsara represents the cosmic manifestation of the Divine. The Divine displays 
four kinds of glorious potencies (Vibhuthis) as the Supreme Omni-Self. As such, He is called 
Chathuraatma. This means He is the Self that embodies three potencies. The three are: 
Vaasudheva, Sankarshana and Aniruddha. When these three Vibhuthis are understood the fourth 
one, Pradyumna becomes intelligible. The meaning of the four potencies 


Vaasudeva indicates that the entire cosmos is the Lord's dwelling place. It also means that He is 
the Supreme Master of the Universe. This means that the Divine resides in all beings as the 
Indwelling Spirit. Moreover, He pervades the entire Universe. The Upanishad describes Him as 
"Narayana who is inside and outside and pervades everything." 


Sankarshana refers to the divine's capacity to attract and transform all beings. All beings, 
moreover, have emerged from Him. The name is also associated with His power to transfer any 
object from one place to another. The child that was in the womb of Devaki was transferred to 
the womb of Rohini (another wife of Vasudhva) and for this mason the child got the name 
Sankarshana (another name for Balarama, the elder brother of Sri Krishna). The name 
Sankarshana also means one who attracts what is pure. Sam (pure) Karshana (attracts). 


Aniruddha is one who is beyond the control of anyone. He can be swayed only by His grace and 
not by any other means. This term applies to one who is all-pervading, all-powerful and all- 
knowing. 


Pradyumna refers to one who possesses Aiswarya (infinite wealth). He confers by His grace all 
prosperity and happiness on those who adore, worship and love the Lord. Aiswarya includes not 
only material wealth, but every kind of wealth such as health, knowledge, intelligence and virtue. 


Another name of the Divine is "Bhagavan." The term "Bhaga" represents six attributes: Divine 
wealth, righteousness, power, fame, detachment and Supreme Wisdom. The Lord is called 
"Bhagavan" because He has these six attributes. 


Thus every name of the Lord is related to specific attributes and not an expression of the 
devotee's feelings or fancies. 


Because of the Divine's myriad attributes, the sages hailed Him as "Om Samvathsaraaya 
Namah." 


As the Creator of the Universe and as the One from whom everything emerged, God is also 
called Yugadi (The initiator of every Yuga or Aeon). He is the One who willed to become the 
Many. 


The one Aatma that has different names and forms 


What is the unity that prevails in the multiplicity? This is illustrated by the example of a huge 
mansion within which them are rooms and halls for different purposes. When all the dividing 
walls are removed, only the main mansion remains. All beings in the world have different names 
and forms as embodied beings. When the embodiment is taken away only the one Aatma in all of 
them remains. The sense of separateness is a creation of the mind. When this feeling, born of 
ignorance goes, the Godliness in man will shine. 


Every man has within him a Kalpatharu (wish-fulfilling tree). But around it there is a wild 
growth of bushes. When you clear away the bushes, the tree can be seen. That tree is the Self 
within each one. This Self is covered by man's sensory desires. When the desires are removed, 
the Self is recognised. Although the Self is in man, no attempt is made to realise it. How can a 
man who is involved in external pursuits realise his inner Reality? The fight method has to be 
adopted to attain the desired objective. The first requisite for the purpose is faith. There must be 
an unshakeable faith in God. Man's beliefs today are liable to be blown away like dried leaves. 
Man should strive to experience the Divine with firm faith, through weal and woe. 


Man is inherently Divine 


Embodiments of Divine Love! Man who is the embodiment of the immortal Spirit, identifies 
himself with his body and falls a prey to worldly desires. How can such a person be a true 
devotee of God, even if he calls himself a Bhaktha (devotee)? Such a man is only a devotee of 
Prakruthi (the phenomenal world of Nature). If you regard even Prakruthi as Divine, it will be a 
good thing. But even here, men separate the Paramaatma (Divine) from Prakruthi (Nature). As 
long as this sense of separation exists, all forms of japa and worship, performed even over many 
lives, are of no avail. 


What is Srishti (creation)? Srishti is an expression of the will of God. This is called Prakruthi. 
Everyone who emanates from Prakruthi should have divine qualities. That which has emerged 
from the Divine should have divine qualities and not the traits of an animal or a demon. A human 
being without the feeling of compassion or love is not human at all. Every human being should 
manifest his inherent divinity. He should make himself a "messenger" of God. Instead, he 
behaves like a "miss-inger of God," as one who has "missed" what he should know about 
himself. 


When man realises his true nature and his role in life, he becomes one with God. This is 
described in Vedanta as the Thurija-avastha--the fourth state of consciousness in which the 
individual Spirit is one with the Universal. It is a transcendental state which is beyond the body 
and the mind--beyond the waking, dream and deep sleep states. 


What do we understand by the term Vyakthi (individual)? This term is applied to one who 
manifests the unmanifested Divine Power hidden within him. It is meaningless to apply it to 
anyone who does not manifest the Divine with him. 


The Cosmic form of Divinity 


Manifesting one's inner divinity does not mean producing something new. Divinity is inherent in 
man. It is called Swabhaava (one's true nature)--the Aatmic nature. It is the Aatma that confers 
all powers on man. Those who bemoan their weakness are not aware of their inherent potential 
and are not putting it to fight use. The first feeling which one has to get rid of is the identification 
of his physical form with his real self. Those who ask, "Where is God?" do not realise that all 
they see in the cosmos is a manifestation of the Divine. That is why the scripture declares, 
"Pashyannapi cha na pashyathi mudho" (Even while seeing, the foolish one does not see). Man 
is all the time seeing the universe around him and yet declares he has not seen God. What is the 
form of the Cosmos? Is it not Divine? You are seeing the Divine in the form of the physical 
universe. In the Bhagavad Gita this cosmic form of the Lord is described as Viswa Viraata 
Ruupa. What is Viswa ? It is the whole cosmos. The Viswa Viraata Ruupa is the collective form 
of everything in the universe. 


No attempt is made to understand the inner meaning of such expressions as Viswa Viraata 
Ruupa. The intellect is used to misinterpret words and create confusion. What is needed is 
understanding through the heart. Even a highly evolved person like Arjuna confessed to Krishna 
that the mind is ever wavering and fickle. Are the intellectuals of today, with all their degrees, 
greater than Arjuna? Not at all. Above all degrees and intellectual attainments, one needs the 
grace of God. Krishna recognised Arjuna as His devotee. That is the supreme accomplishment. 


The abode of the Lord is the heart 


When you earn from the Lord the epithet of Bhaktha (God's devotee) you will be equal with 
Arjuna. God is not calling you as His devotee. It is not enough if you style yourself a devotee of 
God. God should hail you as His devotee. It is only when your devotion is acknowledged by the 
Lord that you can call yourself a devotee. If you have not received the acknowledgement, it may 
mean that you have given the wrong address in your devotion. The correct address of the Lord is 
Hridayavaasi--the Indweller in the Heart. This means that you must continue with your devotion 
to God untill your own conscience is satisfied. To achieve this satisfaction you have to purify 
yourself constantly. This means that you have to get rid of your bad qualities, bad thoughts and 
bad actions. 


Body is an instrument for realisation of Dharma 


Realise that the body has been given to you for the service of others. How is this service to be 
rendered? Through righteous and pure means. The body is an instrument for the realisation of 
Dharma (Righteousness). This truth is allegorically conveyed by the example of the Pandavas in 
the Mahabharatha. The Pandava brothers (Bheema, Arjuna, Nakula and Sahadeva) and Draupadi 
representing Prakruthi (Nature) followed Truth and Righteousness as represented by Dharmaraja 
(the eldest of the Pandavas) and sanctified their lives. 


This applies to every human being. It is only when he adheres to Truth and Righteousness that he 
can realise the Aatma. Worship of the Divine must stem from the heart. When devotion flows 
from the heart, the voice of the Divine can be experienced in silence--Sabda Brahman (sound of 
the Supreme Spirit). This was the experience of Ramakrishna Paramahamsa. He observed perfect 
silence awaiting the voice of God at any moment. Can the Divine voice be heard in the 
cacophony of daily sounds? No. Devotees must practice reticence. When speech is restrained, the 
voice of the Spirit within makes itself heard. That is subtler than the human breath. 


It is only through Prapathi or total surrender, that the Divine can be experienced. It is an 
experience that can be had every moment of your life. 


Prashanthi Nilayam, I Jan 1992 


You say, "Seeing is believing! I will believe in God only if I see 
Him " But are all things seen or heard or touched or tasted, as real 
as they seem ? Is it the eye that sees? Your eye may be open and 
turned in one direction, but if your mind is wandering elsewhere, 
you will not notice anything at all. You see things only through the 
illumination of the Aatma. You love only because the Aatma is 
Love. You know because the Aatma is knowledge. 


Sathya Sai Baba 


3. How To Be Near and Dear To God 


Of what avail is it to be 

A scholar or clever intellectual 

If one does not practice even a 

Fraction of what one knows ? 

Not all the luxuries and pleasures of the world 
Will give a man contentment and peace. 

Only when he realises the truth of the Spirit 
Will he experience true peace and contentment. 


Dear Students! Embodiments of Divine Love! Whatever a man sees in the world rouses fear in 
him. Detachment alone can free him from fear. Failing to grasp this profound truth, man is al- 
lowing his desires to multiply. As long as man is attached to the body, he cannot get over the 
desire to possess the objects that attract him. A man afflicted with mamatva (the acquisitive im- 
pulse) can never get rid of worries. To overcome this attachment and possessiveness, the ancient 
sages, from Vedic times, pursued their studies. The sages believed that self-control promoted 
humility and that humility was the true index of fight education. 


System of education promoted by ancients 


Control of the senses is essential for realising humility. Education should be pursued for 
achieving control of the senses. The ancients esteemed only that system of education which 
promoted Indhriyanigraha (control of the senses). 


Control of the senses is called Dhama (in metaphysical parlance). The vicissitudes of time, place 
and circumstances have resulted in the term Dhama getting reversed in today's student 
community into the term Madha (arrogance). The reason is the disappearance of humility and 
reverence from the students. Indulgence in sensory pleasures has become their primary concern. 


Students should regard control of the senses as their foremost guiding principle. In the old days, 
students who achieved serf-control received a diploma in true education called Saakshara. The 
inner significance of this title is that the recipient is one who has mastered his senses and 
recognised his inherent Divinity. When Dhama (self-control) turns into Madha (conceit), 
Saakshara gets reversed and we have Rakshasa in its place. Consequently the student who 
practised Dhama and displayed humility and reverence was regarded as Saakshara and the 
student who was filled with arrogance and egoism was characterised as Rakshasa (a demon). 


Scholarship without humility and reverence 


It is not enough if one becomes a mere scholar. Even if one has mastered all the scriptures, if he 
lacks humility and reverence and has no self-control, the ancients regarded such learning as 
Rakshasa Vidya (demonic knowledge). During Vedic times, the people believed in human 
values, had faith in God and led pure and sacred lives. The advance of science and technology 
has enabled man to produce weapons of mass annihilation. Scientists who can manufacture such 
destructive weapons are unable to secure peace of mind. A scientist who has acquired mastery 


over the elements is unable to get rid of the fear that haunts him. The scientists do not enjoy the 
sense of peace and security experienced by common people and are wasting their lives. 


The educational process is more concerned with imparting bookish knowledge, while education 
itself is sought only as a means for earning a living. This link between education and 
employment should be severed. Education should be the means for acquiring Vijnana (wisdom). 


The world today consists of two types of persons: those who are consumed by excessive desires 
and those who have no desires. The desireless person treats with indifference all worldly things. 
The desire-filled man will not be satisfied even if he is offered a mountain of gold (the Meru 
mountain). In the Ramayana there was a demonic character named Kabandha, who had his head 
in his stomach and who used his long arms to catch whatever object he could to fill his stomach. 
Most students seem like Kabandha to be concerned only about earning a living. 


The primary object of education is not to ensure how one can fill his stomach. The Lord, who 
gave a stomach, will not fail to provide the necessary sustenance. Man, who should seek the 
Aatma or God, is searching for Annam (food). In the world today, three-fourths of the people 
appear to be Kabandhas and not truly educated persons. In all their actions--whether in sports or 
other fields--they are concerned with only selfish interests. 


Recognise your duties and responsibilities 


There are today two aspects relating to man which have to be considered. One relates to a 
person's rights. The other relates to one's duties. Most people are concerned only about their 
rights and engage themselves in struggles to secure them. But they do not recognise their 
responsibilities. In all the different fields----social, political, economic and even spiritual--men 
do not recognise their responsibilities and duties. They want high positions and emoluments. The 
entire life is wasted in the pursuit of such desires. No one considers whether he is performing the 
quantum of work for the salary he receives, whether he is discharging his duties properly and 
fulfilling his responsibilities. 


Such an attitude is prevalent not only in mundane affairs, but also in the spiritual field. Everyone 
says, "I want God. I want Moksha (Liberation). I want to ensure my Yogakshemam (well-being 
here and hereafter)." But he does not make the necessary effort to achieve these desires. "I have 
no time for bhajans (devotional chants). I can't do any sadhana (spiritual practice). I have no 
time to think of God"--this is his attitude. But still he wants God. With such a narrow outlook, 
how can a man know what his fights are? To get anything you want from a shop, you have to pay 
the price. But is man, who wants God to ensure his well-being, prepared to pay the price for 
getting it? Is he prepared to offer to God the sacrifice he has to make to secure his Yogakshema? 
Does he offer the love that has to be given to secure peace, prosperity and security? 


Man today seeks to get something without paying the price for it. But the Lord cannot be 
deceived. He offers the appropriate reward for each action according to its nature--whether it be 
gain or loss, good or bad. We will be entitled to expect what we desire from God only if we 
make the appropriate offering to God. No one is prepared to offer anything to God, but everyone 
is eager to get something from God. 


Be grateful to those who help you 


People go about preaching to others. How far are they practising what they preach? Many call 
upon others to make sacrifices. What sacrifices are they making? People expect others to be 
grateful to them for what they have received. How far are they themselves grateful to those from 


whom they have received benefits? There is no point in investigating all kinds of things in the 
world. The first thing one should do is to enquire into the truth about himself. Only then will he 
be competent to enquire into the conduct of others. 


The devotion and faith of devotees today can be compared to a dried leaf which can be blown 
away by a slight breeze. A true devotee, on the contrary, will remain unshaken like a ball of iron 
whatever the trials or tribulations he may have to face. Many devotees, who are voluble in their 
speech, ostentatious in theft display of devotion, are swept off their feet when they encounter any 
adversity. When their expectations are not realised, they develop all kinds of aversions. They 
make no efforts to recognise their own faults. 


Students, for instance, nourish a grievance that Swami is not smiling at them, that Swami does 
not talk to them, but they do not enquire within themselves why Swami is acting in this manner 
and in what way they have violated Bhagavan's injunctions. If they examine their own conduct in 
this manner, there would be no room for them to entertain such thoughts about Swami. 


It is not truly human to commit mistakes 


Many feel that it is human to err and that Bhagavan should forgive their lapses. In fact, if they 
are truly human, they should not commit mistakes at all. Even if sometimes a mistake is 
committed, wittingly or unwittingly, it should not be repeated again. It is a grievous error to 
think that it is natural for a human being to err. Such feeling should not be entertained at all by 
anyone. Every man should realise, "I am not weak. I am not an animal. I am not a demon. I am a 
man." When a man has this conviction he will not commit mistakes. 


When a man is described as Nara, it means that he is the very embodiment of the Aatma (Spirit). 
The Aatma cannot be affected by any taint. It is the attachment to the body which is the cause of 
bad thoughts, bad desires and bad actions. It is the one who is a slave to his senses, who is a prey 
to such impulses. To follow the directives of the senses is a mark of the animal. To be guided by 
the Aatma is the sign of the human. No one should attempt to justify his weaknesses and lapses 
as natural to a human being. They should be regarded as signs of mental debility. You should 
continually strive to master your senses. When you have truly acquired sense-control, you will 
experience the power of the Divine within you. 


Become the captor and not captive of the senses 


There is a story which illustrates what happens when the agency intended for control of the 
senses becomes itself a victim of the senses. Once upon a time the government of a country set 
up a border force to prevent the entry of hostile foreign elements. A camp was set up on the 
border. A soldier who was keeping vigil caught an enemy intruder entering the country. After 
catching him, he shouted aloud that he had caught an enemy. The captain, who heard his shout 
from his tent, asked the soldier to bring the captive to his tent. The soldier said that the man was 
refusing to come. Then the captain asked the soldier himself to come. The soldier said that the 
intruder would not let him go! This illustrates the plight of educated students today. Education, 
which should enable them to acquire mastery over the senses, has made them captives of the 
senses. 


Students should not give way to such weakness. They must develop spiritual strength. They must 
keep out the bad qualities which-afflict them. Those who cannot do this can never become good 
students. 


Men should regard the senses as potential enemies. They should not be allowed to have their 
own way. They should be subject to one's control and direction. What is the easiest way to 
achieve this mastery? Only the spiritual path. 


Let conscience prevail 


If there is real faith and devotion in a man, the senses will be powerless against him. It is the 
decline in faith and devotion which has led to man becoming a slave of the senses. Students 
should, therefore, examine before they do anything whether it is good or bad, fight or wrong, and 
act according to the dictates of their conscience. Even in respect of the conscience, certain facts 
should be borne in mind. The promptings of intellectual reasoning should not be identified with 
the dictates of the conscience. The directives should come from the heart. 


When you dive deep into a problem and enquire whether what you should do is in the interest of 
your friends and society in general, your conscience will give you the right answer. You should 
not be guided by intellectual reasoning which has a selfish element in it. You should be guided 
by a concern for the collective interests of society at large. That alone is the true voice of 
conscience. This kind of broad social conscience should be developed through education. 


Students! You have performed a variety of gymnastic feats. You have distinguished yourselves 
in a variety of games and sports. Although these games have a value of their own in the physical 
field, there is something greater than all of them. Life is a game, play it! Treat life itself as a big 
game. To achieve a good name and success in this game, you have to cultivate good habits. Good 
thoughts, good speech and good actions are the disciplines required in this game. When so much 
practice and effort are required to achieve success in games like tennis, how much more effort is 
needed to succeed in the game of life! In this game, if you wish to achieve a good name, uphold 
your ideals, and realise the Divine. You have to observe in your daily life, right thinking, right 
conduct and right attitudes. 


Longevity and the good life 


Students! You have to take a resolve today to restore the ancient culture and tradition of Bharath. 
Life is wasting away every moment. People are growing older every minute, forgetting their 
duties. In this situation, what is it that you have to achieve? All that you wish to accomplish, you 
must set out to achieve now when you are in the vigour of youth. Man's lifespan, which should 
be a hundred years, is shortened by the misuse of the body. The length of man's life is 
determined by his own actions. A man's bad thoughts, his hatreds, his jealousy and bitterness are 
shearing his life into bits every moment. 


Anger shortens a man's life. This can be seen from everyday experience. When a man gets angry, 
his temperature rises. The blood gets heated up. In the process the nerves get weaker and as a 
consequence all organs in the body also get weaker. This weakness may last for six months. One 
moment of anger will deprive a man of the energy got from six months of food. Every fit of 
anger shortens a man's life span. Regardless of the temporary satisfaction a man may derive by 
the display of anger, it causes greater damage to the individual concerned than to others. 
Likewise, hatred and envy are equally debilitating in their effect. Egoism and attachment also 
have similar deleterious effects on man's life. 


Transcend the body and mind to attain the Divine 


Man is made up of three constituents---the body, the mind and the Aatma. Man needs the body 
for performing actions. But if the actions are done without using the discriminating power of the 


mind, man will be behaving like an animal, which acts on impulse. Moreover, if the mind, 
without relying on the eternal and ever-pure Aatma, follows the demands of the body and the 
senses, the actions will be demonic. The combination of mind and body leads to demonic 
qualities. When one is installed in the Aatmic principle, transcending the body and the mind, he 
attains the Divine. 


The ancient sages divinised their lives by control of the senses, by observing spiritual discipline 
and by successfully carrying on their daily avocations. These are the means by which men can 
transform themselves into sages. For effecting this transformation, students will have to cultivate 
faith and devotion. Spiritual education is greater than all other types of education. This was 
declared by Krishna in the Gita. Rivers are distinct in their names and forms, but when they 
merge in the ocean, they become one. Likewise, all kinds of studies and practices, when they are 
merged in the ocean of spiritual knowledge, become one. 


The Lord's offer to man 


Make your heart pure so that it becomes a worthy abode of the Divine. What should be a 
Ksheerasaagara (an ocean of milk) has been turned by man's misdeeds into an ocean of brine. 
Sanctify all your thoughts, words and deeds. Only then you will deserve the title Saakshara 
(truly educated). 


The Lord made three declarations: "Son! I shall give you what you ask. If you search for Me, 
you shall find Me. When you knock at My door, I shall open it." But man today asks for favours 
not from God but from Nature. He searches not for God but for worldly pleasures. He knocks not 
at the doors of Liberation but at the gates of Hell. 


What you should ask for is the grace of the Divine. What you should search for is God. And you 
should knock at the doors of the gate to Liberation. Man is acting contrary to God's injunctions. 
If only man followed God's commands he would be divinising his life. 


Man's frailties have made him distant from God. A student (in his speech earlier) said that to be 
away from God was a "living death." Man should strive to be "near and dear" to God. Many who 
are "near" to God are not "dear" to God. For instance, here in Prashanthi Nilayam you see 
devotees who have come from distant countries like Argentina, Australia and America out of 
their love for God. Many who are near Swami may meditate on God but they do not dedicate 
their lives to God. Only by dedication can they become "dear" to God. Students should strive to 
be both near and dear to God. 


Outsiders coming to Prashanthi Nilayam, on seeing the students, feel: "How lucky are these 
students! Swami is always talking to them and moving with them." But they are not aware who 
are really "near" to Swami. 


Saint Thyagaraja's confession 


The saint Thyagaraja's experiences provide an illustration of the dilemma confronting devotees. 
Once while experiencing troubles and undergoing indignities from others, Thyagaraja wondered 
whether the troubles he had to go through were due to deficiencies in his devotion or whether Sri 
Rama was not potent enough to help him. Convinced about his own devotion, he attributed his 
troubles to Rama's inability to relieve him. Such doubts often arise in the minds of devotees. 
After meditating over this matter, he realised that Rama's power was limitless and that the defect 
lay in his own devotion. He composed a song which described how devotion to Rama had 
enabled Hanuman to leap over the ocean and how it had enabled Lakshmana and Bharatha to 


perform heroic deeds. Thyagaraja confessed that in doubting Rama's powers he had been guilty 
of weakness in his devotion. 


If Swami did not possess such power, is it conceivable that people would come seeking Swami's 
grace from distant countries like Argentina and Australia? No one issued any invitation to them. 
Are they less intelligent than any of you? The fact that they have come here at great expense, 
prepared to put up with many inconveniences, shows the depth of their devotion. 


Therefore, you should not entertain complaints against God or blame Him for your difficulties. If 
Swami did not have the power, would people of different faiths and from different countries 
come to Him and experience their oneness? What is the Will that is able to accomplish this? If 
you enquire along these lines, you will discover the jejuneness of your attitudes. It is your small- 
mindedness, which accounts for such reactions. Therefore, develop a broad outlook and a wide 
vision. 

All the students of our Institute of Higher Learning should prove themselves to be ideal men 
wherever they go. You should earn a good name from everyone. 


Students who have won prizes in sports should realise that by their conduct they should earn the 
esteem and love of Swami. All kinds of titles are conferred on people today. But the title which 
all of you should aim at is that you are Amruthasya Puthraah (Children of Immortality). 


Install God in your hearts and make Him the basis for all your actions. Then all your actions will. 
become sacred. Bring a good name to your parents, to your society and to the land of your birth. 


Institute Auditorium, Prashanthi Nilayam, 14 Jan 1992 


4. The Sacred Message Of A Holy Festival 


The Sun appeared serenely peaceful. 

The day started to get shorter. 

And the chill wind blew fiercely. 

The fields were ripe with the golden crop. 

The farmers rejoiced in singing. 

The buds of flowers blossomed 

On the banks of rivers like garlands. 

Farmers were bringing home the newly harvested grain. 
And hailed the arrival of the sweet 

Festival of Sankraanthi. 


Embodiments of the Divine Aatma! Many persons in the world have expounded in different 
ways the nature of divinity. Even in Bharath, although from ancient times profound spiritual 
truths have been proclaimed and propagated, the minds of men have not turned towards the 
sublime. It is the minds of men that need to be changed, not their external appearances. Men are 
judged by their qualities, not their garments. 


"Yath Dhrishvam Thannashyam" (That which is perceived is perishable). Everything associated 
with the phenomenal world is continually changing. That which is subject to change is 
impermanent. What is unchanging is the eternal. By attaching excessive value to the changing 
things of the world, man is making himself remote from the changeless and eternal Reality. Men 
should endeavour to realise the eternal and unchanging Aatma (Omni-Self). 


Significance of Sun's entry into Capricorn 


In a year, the Sun passes through the 12 houses of the Zodiac in 12 months. The Sun's entry into 
each house of the Zodiac is described as a Sankramana. Kraanthi means change. Sankraanthi 
means a sacred change. The Sun's entry into every house in the Zodiac is not considered as 
equally holy. What, then, is the reason for giving special importance and sacredness to Makara 
Sankramana, the entry of the Sun into Makara (Capricorn)? Besides the physical qualifies 
associated with the Sun's movement into each house of the Zodiac, there is an inner spiritual 
significance relating to the Makara Sankramana. 


The Sun's entry into Capricorn takes place in mid passage between the months of Margasheersha 
and Pushyami. In the Bhagavad Gita, Sri Krishna has declared: "Among the months I am the 
month of Margasheersha." The Margasheersha month is the crown among the 12 months. What 
is the reason? Among the planets of the solar system, the Sun is the presiding deity. Without the 
Sun the life process in the world will cease. During the month of Margasheersha, the world 
experiences the abundance of the harvested food grains, which sustain and confer joy on the 
people. Every farmer's granary is filled with grain. The weather during the season is cool and 
pleasant. It is an appropriate time for enjoying peaceful rest. It is the time when man is free from 
the burdens of daily toil and can devote his time to enjoyment with his children and his cattle. 


Every experience is reflection of the Inner Being 


However, what is the connection between these physical comforts and the spiritual significance 
of this season? Man is a lover of the beautiful. He rejoices at the sight of good food. It may be 
asked whether this joy, which he experiences is related solely to physical things or has it an inner 
spiritual basis? It is not the body that experiences joy. It is the A atma (the Indwelling Spirit). 
The joy that one derives from looking at others is not related to the body but the Aatma. What the 
eye sees, the ear hears, the mind thinks, or the heart feels, all of them are experiences of the 
Aatma. The senses are only instruments. Every experience is a reflection of the Inner Being. 
Only when this truth is recognised will it be possible to comprehend to some extent the nature of 
the Divine. 


For all actions, the inspirer, the performer and the experiencer is the Sun-God. For man, caught 
up in a meaningless existence and going through an endless round of futile activities, the Sun- 
God stands out as the exemplar of tireless and selfless service. He enjoys no respite from work. 
He is above praise and censure. He carries on his duties with absolute equanimity. Everything he 
does is only for the well-being of the world and not for causing any harm. It is only man's senses 
which prove helpful or harmful to him. When man submits to his senses, they become his 
enemies. When man masters the senses they become his friends. Friends and enemies result from 
the strength or weakness of men. 


Earlier, a student in his speech mentioned that to Vibhishana, who believed in God, Rama was a 
friend. To the unbelieving Ravana, Rama became an enemy. Hence, man's happiness or sorrow 
stems from his belief or disbelief. 


Faith leads to God 


The primary motto for man should be Sraddha (faith or trust). The ancients declared: "Believe 
and Live." Without Faith you cannot live happily. Only when you have the belief that one is your 
mother you develop love for her. Likewise, a woman loves a baby only when she feels he is her 
child. In the same manner, the recognition of the Divine arises from Faith. 


Where there is Faith, there is Love. 
Where there is Love, there is Peace. 
Where there is Peace, there is Truth. 
Where there is Truth, there is Bliss. 
Where there is Bliss, there is God. 
Thus it is Faith that reminds us of God. 


All that is taught or learnt today appears to consist of pompous verbiage concerning the external 
world. Doubtless, there is a great deal of talk about Divinity and Spirituality. But one cannot 
notice in these preachers any sacred mark of Truth, Love or Peace associated with Godly men. 
Are men to be esteemed for the clothes they wear, the speeches they make, or the "punditry" they 
display? No. The only person worthy of esteem as a wise man is the one whose actions 
correspond to his thoughts and words. The Divine judges men by their thoughts and motives. 
God sees only the inner purity of man's motives and not his external appearance or the power and 
pelf he possesses. Valmiki, Nanda, Kuchela, Gajendra (the Lord of the Elephants), the child 
Dhruva, the illiterate Sabari, Vidura and Hanuman are all examples of beings who enjoyed God's 


grace only through their devotion and not because of birth, wealth, scholarship, or any other 
accomplishment. 


Entertain good thoughts and good feelings 


What is Bhakthi (Devotion)? Bhakthi is directing one's sacred love towards God. Man gets bound 
by his attachment, through egoism, to the transient things of the world. 


Your primary task is to discharge your duty. This does not mean renouncing worldly life or your 
obligations to your family. Keep your mind serene and unruffled. All the changes affect the 
external. They do not affect the internal experience. Entertain always good thoughts and good 
feelings. 


In this connection, an incident from Jesus's life may serve as a good example. Jesus saw in the 
market place a woman who was being stoned by people around her as one who had gone astray. 
Jesus approached them and said: "Oh People! you are all persecuting this woman for some 
physical misconduct. Think how many such sins you are committing mentally. Whoever has not 
committed such a sin even mentally, let him cast the first stone. All others have no fight to throw 
stones at her!" 


People go on judging who is a sinner and who is a pure person, but they should enquire within 
themselves how far they are sinners or meritorious. Everyone must try to keep his mind free 
from bad thoughts. The Sankraanthi Festival is intended to make people embark on this exercise 
in transformation. 


Symbolism of Sankraanthi celebration 


In the Dwapara Yuga the cowherds and cowherdesses used to experience boundless joy in the 
presence of Krishna, forgetting themselves in their devotion to the Lord. On Sankraanthi Day 
they used to employ cow-dung as a sacred means for cleansing purposes. They demonstrated 
also the inner significance of the Sankraanthi celebration. They placed three balls of cow-dung in 
front of their houses, fixing three pumpkin flowers on their top and went round singing and 
dancing in adoration of Krishna. 


What is the significance of these three balls of cow-dung? People are inclined to despise cow- 
dung. But in the eyes of the Gopikas they were sacred. In olden days, people used to sprinkle 
water mixed with cow-dung in front of their houses. The cow-dung helped to destroy the bacteria 
in the atmosphere. The cow-dung was considered a symbol of health and happiness. The first 
cow-dung ball represented Krishna, who was worshipped as Gopala (the protector of cows). 
Krishna was adored as the bestower of joy and health. The second cowdung ball was placed as a 
symbol of the Govardhana Hill which Krishna lifted and thereby demonstrated His divinity. The 
third cow-dung ball symbolised the cow, which is the source of health and joy for the people as 
the giver of milk. Gopala, Govardhana and Go (the cow) were worshipped in this manner. 


Among vegetables the pumpkin has a place of honour as the largest in size. The Gopikas looked 
upon the pumpkin as a symbol of large-heartedness. Hence, pumpkins were offered as fitting 
gifts on Sankraanthi Day. What is the gain from this offering? The pumpkin does not rot quickly. 
It can be preserved for a long period. Any number of edible preparations can be made from it. It 
can also be used in combination with many other vegetables. Because of its distinct qualities, the 
offer of a pumpkin also meant making an offering of one's virtues. 


Develop harmony towards everyone 


Sankraanthi is a holy day for many reasons. It was the day on which Aadhi Shankara took 
Sanyasa (renounced all worldly ties and donned the ochre robe). On this day it is the usual 
custom to offer to people a mixture of jaggery and Thil (sesame). Jaggery is sweet and is a 
symbol of love. Thil is also known as sneha, which means friendship. Therefore, the offer of the 
jaggery-thil mixture means offering to people love surcharged with friendliness. Develop 
harmony towards everyone. Much of what passes for friendship today consists in associating 
with persons when they are affluent and benefiting from their money. When they are in distress, 
the same persons will not even look at them. This is not friendship at all. True friendship must 
emanate from the heart and should remain unaffected by weal or woe. In fact, God alone can be 
an unfailing friend in all situations. He is with you, above you, below you, beside you and 
around you. 


The profound message of Sankraanthi 


Today people do not rely on such Divine friendship. They place their faith in the transient things 
of the world. The message of Sankraanthi is the promotion of love among one's kith and kin and 
friends by all of them coming together to celebrate this festival. It is on this day that the "Ganga" 
bull trainers take their decorated animals from house to house, play music in front of the homes 
and make the bulls demonstrate their skills before the family gatherings. 


The bulls are also made to give demonstrations in the market place with a view to promoting 
fellow feeling and harmony. The girls in every home will take their younger brothers to such 
demonstrations. The trainer of these animals will be dressed in a special way and display large 
caste-marks on his forehead. He will carry a small whip which is used for training the bull. The 
bull will be taught to respond to instructions designed to promote love and happiness in the home 
by relating the story of the wedding of Rama and Sita. Rama and Sita represent the Omni-Self 
and Prakruthi (Nature) respectively. Their union is to be celebrated by the offering of one's love 
to the Divine couple. Thus, the performance of the sacred bull on 'Sankraanthi day conveyed a 
profound message to the people. 


Because Sankraanthi was deemed the most important festival, it was the day on which the 
newlywed bridegroom visited the bride's home. It was the day on which many people called on 
others as a mark of goodwill. There were rejoicing in every home because of the get-together of 
all kinsfolk. (Swami recited a poem describing how the young girls in the family celebrated the 
occasion by cutting jokes and playing tricks). 


The Sankraanthi festival was thus designed to promote harmony and love in the family, to make 
people realise the unity of the Creator and creation, to teach the people their obligation to instil 
heroism in them by making the Sun-God their example, and, above all, to make them realise 
their inherent Divinity. This is the sacred purpose of the Sankraanthi festival. 


Sankraanthi festival: then and now 


Today such a holy festival has been converted into a day for the enjoyment of jaggery and thil, 
totally missing its inner significance. People are immersed in the darkness of self-indulgence. 


Rice cooked with jaggery is a special preparation for Sankraanthi day. What is the mason for 
this? In the olden days, this sweet rice was prepared to celebrate the gathering of the harvest and 
after the cows had been fed with the sweet rice, it was scattered over the fields. On the third day, 
all the cattle used to be decorated and taken round the bazaar in procession. For this reason, the 


festival was called in Tamil Nadu "Maattuppongal"--the Pongal festival of the cattle. The bull is 
much more than a mere quadruped. As the vehicle of Shiva, it has an honoured place in the Shiva 
temple as Nandi. Its eyes are always directed towards the Lord in the sanctum. The Nandi is 
worshipped before one enters the sanctum. 


Develop faith in God and serve fellowmen 


The Sankraanthi festival should be regarded as the day on which man turns his vision towards 
God. Man's life may be compared to a stalk of sugar cane. Like the cane, which is hard and has 
many knots, life is full of difficulties. But these difficulties have to be overcome to enjoy the 
bliss of the Divine, just as the sugarcane has to be crushed and its juice converted into jaggery to 
enjoy the permanent sweetness of jaggery. 


Enduring bliss can be got only by overcoming trials and tribulations. Gold cannot be made into 
an attractive jewel without its being subjected to the process of melting in a crucible and being 
beaten into the required shape. When I address devotees as Bangaaru (Golden one), I am 
considering you as precious beings. But only by going through the vicissitudes of life with 
forbearance can you become attractive jewels. You should not allow yourselves to be 
overwhelmed by difficulties. 


Develop self-confidence and have firm faith in God. With unshakeable faith, dedicate yourselves 
to the service of your fellowmen and lead exemplary lives. 


Today the Sun-God begins his northward journey, Uttarayana. The noble and heroic warrior 
Bhishma waited for fifty six days so that he could give up his life in Uttarayana. 


Do your duty like the Sun 


The Sun, in entering on his northward journey, hailed the Himalayas in the north as the 
beauteous abode of Lord Shiva. The heart should be regarded as the abode of the Lord and the 
vision should be turned to experience the Divine. The human heart itself symbolises the 
Himalayas as the abode of purity and peace. 


The Sun's northward journey is a pointer to the path man should take to realise God. The Sun is 
the supreme example of selfless and tireless service. The world cannot survive without the Sun. 
Life on earth is possible only because of the Sun. The Sun teaches man the lesson of humble 
devotion to duty, without any conceit. The Sun is the supreme example for everyone that he 
should do his duty with devotion and dedication. Doing one's duty is the greatest Yoga, as 
pointed out by Krishna in the Gita. Let your actions and thoughts be good. You will then 
experience the Bliss Divine. 


Sankraanthi is intended to bring about various changes in man's attitude so that he may sanctify 
his fife. It is a festival not intended for Bharathiyas alone. Its message has a meaning for 
everyone in the world. It has a message for people of all climes, creeds and countries. Kraanthi 
(change) and Shanthi (peace) both reside in the heart. You need not search for them in the 
outside world. Discover them within you. This is your duty. Serve your parents and society. Lead 
a Godly life, dedicating all your actions to God. Live in Love! 


Poornachandra Auditorium Sankraanthi Day, 15 Jan 1992 


What exactly is the cause of all grief? It is the attachment to the 
body that produces grief as well as its immediate precursors: 
affection and hate. These two are the results of the intellect 
considering some things and conditions as beneficial, and some 
other things and conditions as harmful. This is a delusion, this idea 
of beneficence and malevolence. Still you get attached to objects 
that are considered beneficial, and you start hating the others. But, 
from the highest point of view, there is neither. The distinction is 
just meaningless. There is no two at all. How can there be good 
and bad then? To see two where there is only one, that is delusion 
or ignorance. The ignorance that plunged Arjuna into grief was of 
this nature-- seeing many, when there is only ONE. 


Sathya Sai Baba 


5. Graama Seva is Rama Seva 


Union is strength, 

With unity anything can be achieved, 
Like ants which collectively 

Can destroy even a python. 

The honour of a community 

Rests on its morality. 

Without morality the community 
Loses its honour and name. 

Only that can be called a community 
In which morality is cherished. 
Hearken! You noble sons of Bharath 
To this profound truth. 


Embodiments of the Divine Spirit! Village Officers who have gathered here! If an individual is 
to progress, or a village is to develop or a nation is to be prosperous, social consciousness and the 
sense of unity are essential. Unity protects man. Disunity makes man a prey to worries of all 
kinds. "Sanghe bali Kali Yuge" (In union lies strength in the Kali Age). This adage proclaims 
that there is no greater strength than that derived from unity. 


When we recall the past history of Bharath, we find that various invaders--Muslims, the 
Portuguese, the French and the British---overran the country and tried to change the ancient 
culture and institutions of the country. The nation did not lack men of valour or scholarship or 
eminent political leaders or men of science. But because there was no unity amongst them, the 
nation was subjected to various calamities. 


Unity is the supreme need for Bharathiyas 


Unity should be the supreme watchword for Bharathiyas. Freedom was achieved but not unity. 
This is because of the steady eclipse of an all-embracing vision. Parochial fanaticism, caste and 
religious dissension, and selfish and self-centred ambitions have combined to degrade human 
qualities to their nadir. Another potent factor responsible for the moral decline in the country is 
the absence of a feeling of national oneness and the regard for a common national culture. 


In the Mahabharatha, Dharmaraja once made a significant declaration. He said, "When an 
outsider attacks our country, we will all stand as one, all the 105 of us (the hundred Kauravas and 
the five Pandava brothers). But when there are internal differences, only the five of us will be 
together." The lesson of this statement is that when the national interests are at stake, all in the 
country should be united as brothers. All should work in unison, but in matters affecting 
individuals, differences may remain. 


The four pillars of national edifice 


The situation in the country today demands that all Bharathiyas should unite as brothers to strive 
for the progress, the prosperity and the well-being of the nation. This means that in the interests 


of the nation and the society, four things are essential: Equality, Unity, Co-operation and 
Fraternity. These are like four pillars of the national edifice. If any one of these is absent, the 
edifice will collapse. Hence, the people should cherish equality and unity. 


For the divinity inherent in man, man himself is the authority. The term "Man" is derived from 
the term "Mind." Mind means an aggregation of thoughts. And thoughts account for the joys and 
sorrows experienced in daily life. Hence, it is only when the mind is filled with pure thoughts 
that human existence becomes meaningful. 


When the headman in a village deems himself a servant of the village, he will be able to render 
selfless service. Can a person obsessed with power have a pure heart? No. Hence, the village 
chief should become the servant of the village. 


The village officials are like a bridge between the Government and the people. It is only when 
this bridge is safe and sound that there can be good relations between the Government and the 
people. 


When we speak about village officials, we should remember that in the villages Graama 
Adhikari (village officer) means one who has no antipathy towards anyone in the village. He is 
one who treats all alike. It is only when such terms are understood properly and people act 
accordingly that a person leads a meaningful existence. 


On the vast ocean, countless waves appear. Each wave appears different from another. But 
despite these differences the waves are not different from the ocean. The waves arise from the 
ocean and are of the same stuff as the ocean. Likewise, although human beings appear different 
from each other, it has to be realised that all of them have emerged from the ocean of Sath-chith- 
ananda. Forgetting this truth and identifying themselves with the impermanent body, many are 
falling a prey to various troubles. For people who are caught up in the coils of mundane desires 
and pursuits, the beacon of spirituality is showing the path to emancipation. Spirituality is 
fundamental for man to reveal to him the means for the blossoming of his qualities. 


Look upon the entire mankind as one family 


Spirituality, however, does not mean leading a solitary, ascetic life. Spirituality means looking 
upon the whole of mankind as one family and realising the unity in diversity. This is the essence 
of Indian Culture. 


This ancient culture, rooted in the villages, spread over the. years to the cities. Today the 
situation is reversed. The practices of the cities are spreading to the villages. Modem education 
and modem ways of living cannot serve to improve the quality of life. People must ponder over 
the values of the culture that has come down to us form ancient times. 


The well-being of the village determines the well-being of the nation. By providing the essential 
amenities for the people in the villages, promoting mutual co-operation amongst them and 
developing fraternal feelings among them, the progress of the village has to be ensured. At the 
individual level, there may be differences. But these should be set aside and all efforts 
concentrated on the development of the village as a whole. 


When rain falls from the sky, the rain water is totally pure. But depending on the nature of the 
place where it falls, the name and form of the water become various. Likewise, there may be 
diversity among men on account of regional and other factors, but the historical reasons for this 
diversity will have to be borne in mind. 


Conduct yourselves in an ideal and sacred manner 


Embodiments of Divine Love! It is only when you equip yourselves well as village officials that 
the villagers will enjoy peace and prosperity. What is past is past. But the furore is dependent on 
what you do in the present. Your actions in the present will determine the shape of things in the 
future. If you wish to secure a great future, you have to conduct yourselves in the present in an 
ideal and sacred manner. 


If today such a large number of village officers have gathered here for a training programme, it 
must be regarded as an exemplary occasion. There may be differences and problems of various 
kinds among you as individuals. But setting them aside, you should concentrate on the promotion 
of national well-being. Regard the nation's welfare as your welfare. Entertain the sacred feeling 
that the nation's good is your good. There can be no nobler feeling than this for a human being. 
The true mark of a human being is the cultivation of a broad outlook. When you have such a 
vision, you can transform the national scene. The nation's welfare depends on the individual. The 
individual's welfare depends on the family. The welfare of the family is bound up with the 
condition of the village and so on right up to.the national level. At the base of all is the indi- 
vidual. And only when all the individuals in a community act in unison can the society progress. 


Unity, is, therefore, the essential means for accomplishing anything. Today senior officers from 
the district and the State capital and several Ministers have come here to launch this vital 
programme. I desire that all of you should extend your wholehearted co-operation to them so that 
the villages in this district may serve as an ideal example to the rest of the State. 


There should be no place for factions 


You must take note of one important factor. There are in the villages many factions and rival 
groups. Village officers should see that there is no room for these divisive forces. Today, in 
every village there are several factions. This is not good at all. The man who does not feel that 
this is his Motherland and has no love for his country or mother tongue is a soulless corpse. 
Every villager should feel proud of his village and feel himself one with everyone else in the 
village. You must strive your best to promote such a sense of unity. 


The Minister admitted that the remuneration that was being offered to you is meagre. But you 
should not be swayed by this factor. When you discharge your duties well, your remuneration 
also will improve. Regardless of the remuneration, you must dedicate yourselves to the 
development of your respective villages. Whatever amenities you may need for doing your work, 
you should not resort to senseless methods like strikes for securing redress. Resorting to such 
methods means causing harm to the villages for securing selfish gains. Bandhs and strikes have 
become utterly senseless actions causing a great deal of inconvenience to the public. There is 
nothing heroic about these forms of agitation. They are disrupting the political fabric, If the 
village officers act with courage and devotion today, they can do a great deal of good to the 
people. 


The role of village headmen 


Act with courage and dedication to ensure the prosperity of the villages and strive to earn a good 
name for yourselves. This is the foremost task before you. In olden days, the village headman 
was regarded with great respect and looked upon as "the Lion of the village." This does not mean 
that he was lording over the villagers and terrorising them. Rather, he was their protector as the 
chief of the village. 


Sri Diwakar Reddy (the Revenue Minister) said that the village officer was to the village what 
the Collector was for the district and a Minister was for the State. He has to properly discharge 
his duties with regard to collection of taxes and other matters. Village officers should consider 
themselves fortunate that this position has been conferred on them. They have to live up to the 
responsibility entrusted to them. If they pride themselves on their official status and ignore their 
responsibilities, they will be guilty of treason to the village and the nation. 


Rights and duties are like two wheels of a cart 


Men have both duties and rights, but today they are more concerned about rights than duties. 
Rights and duties are like the two wheels of a cart or the two wings of a bird. Both are essential. 
When duties are discharged properly, rights will be secured of their own accord. If everyone 
examines within himself how far he is carrying out his duties, he will realise how his rights are 
also protected. 


In ancient times, when there were no minister or district officials, the village headman was all in 
all. He cared for the welfare of the villagers and the villagers lived in unity and harmony. Today, 
every family appears to be a house divided. There is no unity. If the five fingers in a hand do not 
function in unity, the hand will be useless. There are five qualities in man: Sathya, Dharma, 
Shanthi, Prema and Ahimsa (Truth, Right conduct, Peace, Love and Non-violence). These 
human qualities have to be fostered. Today peace is absent because fear of sin and love of God 
have declined and man has degraded himself. If we have fear of sin, love of God and morality in 
society, mankind will be truly human and there will be harmony in society. 


When you cultivate human qualities like compassion and love and act in unison with a sense of 
mutual regard and friendliness, you can render valuable service to the people. By your 
performance, you must make Anantapur district an example and an ideal for the whole of India. 


Graama Seva is Rama Seva (Service to the village is service to God). There is no value in 
worshipping Rama if you do not serve your Graama (village) well. But if they have not installed 
Rama in their hearts, what use is there in building a temple for Rama? Sanctify your hearts and 
make the village a shrine in your hearts for the Lord. When you make service to the village your 
service to Sri Rama, you will be promoting your welfare in every way, economically, socially, 
morally and spiritually. You need not strive for salvation as a separate goal. Service to the village 
will itself ensure Mukthi (liberation). Bear this truth in mind and act up to it in your daily life. 
This is my message to all of you. I wish you all happiness, peace and prosperity. 


Address to Village Administrative Officers from Anantapur district in the Institute Auditorium at 
Prashanthi Nilayam, 


16 Feb 1992 


When man is able to master the senses, and direct them along 
more beneficent channels--the eye seeing God's footprints in stars 
and rose petals, the ear hearing God's voice in the throats of birds 
and peals of thunder, the tongue tasting God's sweetness in all that 
appeals to it; the nose discovering fragrance in everything that 
recalls the glory of God, the sense of touch content to clasp the 
hand of the forlorn and the distressed as the beloved children of 
God -- then, he can visualise the God installed in the cavity of the 


heart; that is the lesson the five-hooded Sesha (divine serpent) 
imparts! 


Sathya Sai Baba 


6. The Mansion Of Life 


You do not need a lamp 

To see a lamp that is burning brilliantly. 
Likewise there is no need for 

Any other knowledge to know the One 

Who is the very embodiment of all knowledge. 


When birds and beasts that have known no education 
Lead regulated lives, it is a pity 
That an intelligent human being 


Does not have this sense. 


Students! Embodiments of Divine Love! Life is a four-storied mansion. For any edifice to be 
strong, the foundation has to be strong. The mansion is visible to the beholders. Its architecture is 
attractive and pleasing. But the foundation has no such attractions. Nevertheless the safety of the 
mansion depends on the strength of the foundation. Every part of the mansion may have its own 
attractive feature. But the foundation has no feeling of pride about its being the base on which 
the mansion stands nor does it desire that anyone should take notice of it. The foundation is 
unaffected by praise or blame. 


The four floors of the mansion of life 


The first floor of the mansion (of life) is Brahmacharya (celibacy). The second floor is the 
Grihastha (householder) stage. The third is Vaanaprastha (recluse). The fourth is the stage of 
Sanyasa (renunciant). 


Many persons pass through all the four stages. Some go through only three of them and some 
others only two. But irrespective of the number of stages, the foundation is the base. 


The first stage (or floor) is that of Brahmacharya. You students who are in the first floor of the 
mansion of life have to ensure the firmness of the foundation. This foundation consists of 
humility, reverence, morality and integrity. The strength of the foundation depends on these four 
constituents. 


Unfortunately, the nation today is affected by the consequences of seven grievous sins. The first 
is business without morality. The second is politics without principle; third, education without 
character; fourth, worship without sacrifice; fifth, wealth without hard work; sixth, human 
existence without regard for scriptures; seventh, devotion without austerity. These are the seven 
deadly sins that are ravaging the nation. The country will regain prosperity and peace only when 
all these are banished and we have morality in business, principles in politics, educated men who 
have character and work is the basis of wealth. The mansion of man's life should be built on 
these virtues. But unfortunately today morality and integrity have declined and the spirit of 
sacrifice is on the wane. 


Because these qualities are lacking among students, the nation is suffering from disorders and 
violence. 


Although these statements may not be quite palatable to the students to hear, they should realise 
what the public feels about the present situation. 


The actor should relate strictly to his role 


Anyone's thoughts and actions should be related to the role he has to play. If there is no such 
correspondence between one's role and one's conduct, the social fabric will be shaken. 


Once upon a time a strolling actor, Pagati Veshagaadu, presented himself before a king in the 
role of Aadhi Sankaracharya. The king, welcoming the Acharya, gave him an honoured seat and 
enquired about his welfare. In keeping with his role, the visiting actor recited a stanza. "Birth is 
sorrow, old age is a curse, marriage brings sorrow. The end is the most sorrowful of all; 
therefore, beware! beware! There is no mother or father, friend or kinsman. Neither wealth nor 
home abides. Therefore, beware! beware !" He preached in this manner the truth about the 
ephemeral nature of human existence. At the end, before the "Sankaracharya" was leaving, the 
king offered him gold coins in a silver plate. He told the king: "I don't accept this." He declared 
that immortality can be attained only by sacrifice and not by karmas, wealth or progeny as stated 
in the Upanishadic stanza: "Thyage Neike Amrithathwam Aanashuh." He left the palace, 
informing the king that he would present himself the next day in a different role. 


The next day he appeared as a well-dressed danseuse and danced before the king in his audience 
chamber. The dance was so superb that the entire audience was enraptured. The king offered the 
dancer a plateful of gold coins. The "danseuse" said that what was offered was too meagre and 
asked for more. The king said: "Yesterday you refused to take the gold coins I offered. Today 
you say these are too meagre. What is the mystery behind these different attitudes?" 


The actor replied, "The behaviour is in accord with the role. Yesterday I appeared in the role of 
Sankaracharya and I behaved as Sankaracharya would have done. Today I have come as a dancer 
and I am behaving as a dancer would." 


The inner meaning of this story is that when people do not act according to their roles in the 
different stages in life--Brahmacharya, Grihastha, Vaanaprastha and Sanyasa---the nation will 
be morally ruined. 


Students and teachers should act up to their roles 


It is only when students conduct themselves according to the role assigned to them that they will 
acquit themselves well as students. If they do not behave properly as students, the culture and 
traditions of the entire community are undermined. Likewise, if teachers do not act up to their 
roles as teachers, the good name of the teaching profession is tarnished. 


When householders do not discharge the duties of householders, they bring the Grihastha 
tradition itself into bad repute. 


Divine operates to reduce the burdens of people 


Whatever the role one has to play at any place or time, and in any capacity, he has to act up to 
that role properly. It will be seen from the Puranas that this principle applies to the Divine also 
(when the Divine appears in human form). This may be illustrated by a small story from Sri 
Krishna's life in the Dwapara Yuga. Once a Gopika went to a well to bring two pitchers of water. 


After placing one pitcher on her head, she wanted someone to place the other water-filled pitcher 
on the first one. At that time, Krishna came there and she asked him to place the water-filled 
pitcher on the first one. Krishna refused to do so. Soon another Gopika came along and helped 
the first Gopika. The Gopika carrying the two pitchers reached her home. 


Krishna followed her to the house and without even waiting to be asked, he took the top pitcher 
from the Gopika's head and placed it down. She was surprised at Krishna's strange behaviour. 
She asked him, "Krishna, at the well, you refused to place the pitcher on my head when I 
appealed to you to help me. Now you take it down from the head without my asking. What is the 
inner meaning of this action?" Krishna replied, "Oh Gopika! I am wont to remove the burdens 
borne by people and not to add to them." 


This shows that the Divine operates only to reduce the burdens of the people and not to increase 
them. It means that there are rules which govern the role which each one has to play in life. Men, 
however, find it difficult to act upon this truth. 


Man is a seeker of happiness. He is essentially the repository of happiness. But not realising this 
truth about himself, man goes after happiness all over the world. 


He pursues studies in the belief that scholarship will give him happiness. But happiness eludes 
him. He tries to find happiness in work and fails to get it. Seeking happiness in married life, he 
meets with disappointment. Nor does he get it through children. Then he gets absorbed in the 
acquisition of wealth in the belief that wealth will give him the means of securing happiness. At 
the end of it all, he finds himself a pitiful creature when the wealth he acquired is either stolen or 
misused by his profligate progeny. 


He then realises that all his earlier efforts to secure happiness gave him only some temporary 
satisfaction but not any lasting joy. A wealthy man behaves like a dog in the manger. He will 
neither enjoy his wealth nor give it for good causes. A rich man should realise that sacrifice 
should be the hallmark of a wealthy man and that true happiness is to be got through sacrifice. 


The five kinds of afflictions 


What is it that prevents man from securing enduring happiness? There are five kinds of Kleshas 
(sufferings) which stand in the way. The first one is Avidya (ignorance). Asthitha-Klesha 
(unsteadiness) is another. Abhinivesha-Klesha (immaturity) is another. Raaga-Klesha 
(attachment) is the fourth. Dwesha-Klesha (hatred) is the fifth. These five types of suffering 
afflict man. 


Avidya (ignorance) is one kind of suffering. What is this ignorance? In the scriptures, the 
question is asked: "Who is a murkha (fool)?" The answer is given: "One who identifies himself 
with the body." By this kind of identification the foolish one forgets his true nature. The day he 
realises that he is not the body but the eternal Indwelling Spirit, that day he experiences true 
bliss. The body, the mind and the intellect are all instruments. These are called Karanas. It is a 
sign of ignorance to identify one's Self with these instruments. Avidya-Klesha is the suffering 
arising out of ignorance. As long as man has a body, he experiences various kinds of sorrow. 


What is the saga of this body? "In childhood, the young lad sports with his companions. In youth 
he falls a prey to sensuous enjoyment. In middle age he is lost in the pursuit of wealth. Unable to 
give up attachments, he is caught up in the cage of karma (action and reaction), and at the end he 
returns to the dust." This is the real truth about the body. Man is thus pursued by a myriad 
sorrows because of his identification with the body. 


Mind is the cause of all desires and pains 


The second Klesha is Abhinivesha-Klesha. For all kinds of desires and pains the cause is the 
mind. All desires arise in the mind. When desires are not fulfilled, hatred arises. If the desires are 
realised, the man loses his mental balance. Failing to realise how the mind is the cause of sorrow 
and giving a free rein to desires is Abhinivesha-Klesha (suffering due to mental infirmity). Only 
when man is able to give up desires and disregard the mind, which is the cause of desires, will he 
be able to experience Ananda (bliss). 


The third is, Asthitha-Klesha (suffering due to unsteadiness). This suffering arises from an 
insatiable appetite for all kinds of things. It is the result of one being immersed in the vagaries of 
the senses. To regard as enduring the sensuous pleasures which are impermanent is the cause of 
this type of suffering. 


Raaga-Klesha refers to the suffering arising out of attachment of all kinds. All other evil 
tendencies in man like hatred, envy, etc., have their root in Raaga. It is this attachment which 
ruins the entire life of man. There should be a limit to one's attachment to persons and things. 
Excessive attachment is the cause of sorrow. Man is unable to derive happiness from excessive 
possessions. 


Dwesha-Klesha (the suffering caused by hatred) arises when a man fails to obtain what he seeks 
from someone. This is the result of selfishness and self-seeking. 


Every action begets a corresponding reaction 


Man's failure to secure happiness is due to these five factors. You are today in the stage of 
students--the first storey in the mansion of life. When you arm yourselves with adequate 
safeguard at this stage, the rest of your journey will be safe and secure. The basic qualities 
required for the successful completion of the other three Ashramas (stages) in life will have to be 
acquired now itself. If in the stage of Brahmacharya (celibate studentship) you do not acquire 
these qualities, the other stages in your life will be mined. 


Students! Having in view your future, you have to make right use of the present and follow the 
right path. You are allowing yourselves to drift from moment to moment. You are giving way to 
the attractions of the moment, failing to comprehend what is transient and what is permanent. 
You are laying up endless troubles for the future. 


The Lord created everything in the Universe, but kept nothing for Himself. Every creature has 
been given complete freedom. Everyone is free to enjoy anything he likes. But there is one 
limitation. For every action, there is a corresponding reaction. You are free to do as you please 
subject to this rule. If you use the freedom given to you to indulge in wrongful acts, the 
consequences are bound to be bad. These results are not caused by God but are the fruits of your 
own actions. The Lord inflicts no harm on anybody. Everything that happens to you is the 
consequence of your own thoughts and actions. 


Prabhaava and Swabhaava 


Students! Lured by the external, man is forgetting his true nature. The Prabhaava (external 
trappings) are the products of Praarabdham (past action). The observance of Purushaarthas (the 
practices prescribed for the different stages) determines one's Swabhaava (nature). Prabhaava is 
momentary and evanescent. Swabhaava is enduring. Today, the permanent and the enduring is 


being ignored, while the transient and the trivial are being pursued assiduously. The 
consequences of this misplaced effort are inescapable. 


This freedom given by the Divine to man should be exercised with a due sense of detachment. 
Examine for a moment how various objects in creation are conducting themselves. For instance, 
a tree bears sweet fruits. But it does not enjoy the fruits itself. It offers them to others for 
enjoyment. What a spirit of sacrifice is displayed by the tree! The Lord created the rivers. But the 
rivers do not use for their own benefit even a drop of their water. The water is offered to those 
who seek it. Likewise, the cow does not consume the milk it produces, but offers it to its calf and 
to others. 


Selfishness is the worst disease of man 


But man, despite all his intelligence and knowledge, does not exhibit this sense of sacrifice. He 
keeps all that he earns for the benefit of himself and his kith and kin and makes no sacrifice at 
all. Consequently, man is haunted by all kinds of troubles. He is a victim of many diseases. 
Neither birds nor beasts are subject to such afflictions. They are content to live on whatever they 
can get. But man consumes a variety of foods and invites a variety of maladies. 


The worst disease to which man is subject is selfishness. Only when man is able to rid himself of 
selfishness will he be able to understand the meaning of life and experience real Divine bliss. 
Birds, beasts and trees display the spirit of sacrifice. Man alone is the exception. When man is 
animated by sacrifice, he will become sublime. If selfishness grows, he loses his radiance and 
vitality. 


The lesson provided by three great devotees 


The life-stories of three great devotees--Thyagaraja, Goparaju (Ramadas) and Potharaju (the 
author of the Telugu Bhagavatham)--show what sacrifices they were prepared to make out of 
their devotion to the Lord. They were totally indifferent to material gains in their love for the 
Lord. 


These three devotees by their sacrifices made themselves Rajus (rulers) of the world. This means 
that only those who make the highest sacrifice are entitled to be called Rajus (monarchs). Today, 
only the wealthy are regarded as "kings." But real kings are those who are prepared to make 
every kind of sacrifice. At Rishikesh, the sadhus are greeted by the pilgrims as Maharaj. In the 
eyes of the devotees, only those who have given up everything are entitled to be called 
Maharajas. Maharaja means King of Kings. The term is appropriate only for the person who 
makes the greatest sacrifice. 


It is a pity that today people are wasting their lives in the pursuit of meaningless desires. The true 
purpose of education is to make one recognise truth. The rationale of education consists in the 
quest for truth. Realisation of Truth is the Goal. "Sathyvasya Sathyam" (The Truth of Truths) is 
how God has been defined. 


Students! While you are acting the role of students, you should conduct yourselves according to 
the role of Vidyaarthis (those who have to seek knowledge) and not behave as Vishayaarthis 
(seekers of sensuous pleasures). Otherwise, you will be degrading yourselves. 


Humility is the hallmark of true education. Truth and integrity are essential qualities for students. 
The means to acquire these qualities is devotion to God. Without these attainments, education is 
a futile exercise. 


You all know how the village folk and the tribal population lead more virtuous lives than most 
"educated" persons. Immoral practices are on the increase in places where there are colleges, 
universities and courts. More honesty and integrity and compassion and fellow-feeling seem to 
prevail among the people in the remote forest areas. The "educated" are doing more harm to 
society today than the uneducated. 


Compassion is the greatest wealth 


This is not proper education. You must set an example to the world. You must correct your faults 
and avoid committing them in the future. Love God and earn His love. Redeem your lives by 
developing compassion and kindness. All other accomplishments and sadhanas are of no avail. 
Compassion is the greatest wealth. Purity of heart comes foremost. 


Students should take note of two things. One is the health of your body depends on the purity of 
your blood. The other is: you can always enjoy real bliss as long as your devotion is pure and 
unsullied. With purity of body and mind, you are assured of the highest bliss. When you have 
achieved this, you can carry on your normal lives with ease. 


Because of the uniqueness of our University, you have to demonstrate its exemplary character. 
You have to take in whatever good things you can from others, but you should lead your own 
ideal life. This is the lesson to be learnt from a tree, which draws its sustenance from the soil, the 
water, the air, and the sun, but remains true to its own nature as a tree. Surrender yourselves to 
God and not to anyone else. 


Discourse at the Institute Auditorium after the distribution of prizes to Secondary School 
students who had participated in the Annual Sports and Cultural Meet in January. 20 Feb 1992 


Elation at profit, joy and cheer, dejection at loss and misery, these 
are the natural characteristics common to all mortals. What, then, 
is the excellence of the Sadhaka? He should not forget the 
principle, "Be vigilant and suffer the inevitable, gladly." When 
difficulties and losses overwhelm you, do not lose heart and 
precipitate some action but meditate calmly on how they ever came 
to be. Try to discover simple means of overcoming them or 
avoiding them in an atmosphere of Shanthi. 


Sathya Sai Baba 


7. Power Of The Divine Name 


When rains fall, if seeds have not been sown, 
Will there be any crop in the field? 

If seeds are sown, but there is no rain 
Will any crop come up in the field? 
Both rain and seeds are needed 

For the harvest to be reaped. 

Likewise, Divine Grace will bear fruit 
Only when there is also human effort, 
When the thoughts in the mind are good 
They will be reflected in the actions; 
When the thoughts are ill-disposed 

The fruits thereof will be equally bad. 


Embodiments of Divine Love! The world is based on three entities: Fire, the Sun and the Moon. 
No one can deny the existence of these three. "Hethu Krisaanu Bhaanu Himakarathe." Krisaanu 
means the Fire principle. Bhaanu refers to the Sun and Himakara refers to the Moon. The 
combination of these three attracts and sustains all beings in the world. They give pleasure, 
provoke wonder and also delude men. Because they give pleasure, the three are called "Rama." 
In the word "Rama" there are three sounds: Ra, Aa, Ma. "Ra" refers to Agni (Fire). "Aa" refers to 
the Sun and "Ma" refers to the Moon. The combination of these three entities represents the 
"Rama Principle." 


The name is fundamental for all objects 


All objects in the world can be cognised by name and form and nothing else. All objects are 
identified by their names. The form is derived from the name. Hence, for everything in the 
world, the name is primary and fundamental. 


The Divine Name is highly potent. Even the wish-fulfilling celestial cow, Kama Dhenu, when it 
is tethered to the post, comes under control. Likewise, when the Supreme Lord, the Indweller in 
all hearts, is bound by the rope of Bhakthi (devotion) and tethered to the post of the tongue, He 
gets bound to the devotee. There are only two means by which the Lord can be bound or 
enjoyed, namely, through the name and through Love. The name can be "Rama," "Hari" or 
"Hara" or any other name, because the All-pervading Divine bears all names. 


The name "Rama" is not confined only to the son of Dasaratha. The Aatma that confers bliss is 
known as Rama. The sage Vasishta gave the name Rama to Emperor Dasaratha's son. The name 
Rama symbolises the universal attributes of the Divine such as omniscience, omnipotence and 
omnifelicity. 


The sage Valmiki composed the Ramayana in a hundred crores (a thousand billion) of stanzas. 
He prayed to the Lord that the stanzas should be divided equally among the denizens of the three 
worlds. When the stanzas were thus divided and distributed, one stanza of 32 syllables alone 


remained. After 30 syllables were equally divided, only two syllables remained undistributed. 
These two syllables have become the names of the Divine such as Rama, Had, Hara and Saayee. 
These names can be recited by people of any country or faith. They are not confined exclusively 
to any faith or country. Any person with a pure and loving heart can recite any of these names. 
No blame will attach to him. 


Divine Name can convert poison to nectar 


The potency of the Divine Name is such that it can convert even poison into nectar. This is 
illustrated by an episode from the life of Meera. She was a queen. But she was so much absorbed 
in her devotion to Krishna that she would sing and dance with ecstasy unmindful of whether she 
was in a palace or in a crowded bazaar. Her brother-in-law, who was incensed at such conduct in 
public places by the queen, was not aware of what true devotion meant. Meera had no body 
consciousness at all. A true devotee should be totally free from the sense of "I" and "Mine." 


Feeling that Meera's conduct was casting a slur on the royal family's prestige and reputation, her 
brother-in-law decided to do away with her by giving her a cup of milk mixed with poison. 
Having dedicated herself heart and soul to Krishna, Meera used to take any food only after 
offering it to Krishna. When she offered the milk given to her to Krishna before drinking it, the 
Lord accepted all the poison in it and made the entire milk pure. In this way, Meera 
demonstrated to the world the power of the Lord's name and the greatness of devotion to the 
Lord. 


Very few in the world try to find out how the Name emerged, how it is to be pronounced and 
what is its potency. The authority for and exponent of the glory of the Lord's name is the 
Bhagavatham. 


From the navel to the tongue 


Yasoda did not know where Balarama and Krishna were born. She brought them up as her own 
children. They were born in Mathura, but grew up in Gokulam. They grew in the womb of 
Devaki (the wife of Vasudheva). But they lived and played in Yasoda's house. 


When we try to explore the inner meaning of these events, we realise the Divine story unfolded 
by them. Balarama and Krishna were both in Mathura. Mathura signifies the navel. Devaki 
represents the Divine Shakthi. The Naadam (Divine sound) represented by the names Balarama 
and Krishna emerging from the womb of the Divine Shakthi, proceeding to Gokulam, 
represented by the mouth, was playing on the tongue, represented by Yasoda. "Rama" signifies 
one who gives delight. "Krishna" means one who attracts. 


The Divine name thus has its origin in the navel and its sacredness should be safeguarded when 
it is uttered by the tongue. Thus, Nama-smarana, remembrance of the name of the Lord, implies 
chanting the name from one's inmost being and preserving its sacredness. 


What is the significance of the word Nama? "Na + Aa + Ma," according to the science of 
numerology, amounts to a total of 7. Na--O, Aa=2, Ma=5. The total is 7. Seven is associated with 
the Sapthasvaras in music (Sa, Ri, Ga, Ma, Pa, Da, Ni). The Sun's rays are made up of seven 
colours. There are seven oceans in the world. The supreme sages are seven in number 
Saptharishis. It is significant that certain religious observances are spread over seven days---- 
Sapthaaham. 


Potency of Rama-Nama 


The name "Rama" has a unique spiritual significance. "Ra" represents the Paramaatma, "Ma" 
represents the individual soul and "Aa" brings the two together. The Divine Name thus 
demonstrates the unifying principle. 


The Puranas relate a story regarding the potency of the Rama name. Once Easwara wanted to 
choose a leader for the host of ganas (Divine entities). Gana refers to the Devas. Easwara 
summoned all the deities and told them that whoever amongst them goes round the earth 
quickest will be made the leader of the Deva ganas. The different deities got on to their 
respective vehicles and set out on the round-the-world trip. Ganapathi, the elder son of Easwara, 
was one of them. He was originally called "Lambodhara" because of his big belly. His vehicle 
was a rat. Sitting on the rodent Lambodhara entered the race to go round the world. On his way, 
Narada saw him and enquired about his mission. Lambodhara was put out by the facts that a lone 
Brahmin had confronted him in his trip and put the inauspicious question as to where he was 
going. He feared that his trip would be a failure. Narada approached Lambodhara with a smile 
and told him that he was well aware of Lambodhara's mission. But, he declared that only if 
Lambodhara acted up to the Vedic injunctions would he be successful in his mission. Narada 
explained what this Vedic injunction was. All the Vedas have extolled the potency of the Lord's 
name. "As a vast banyan tree is potentially immanent in a little seed, the entire universe is 
potentially contained in the Lord's name. The cosmos is, therefore, not different from the Name. 
If you go round the Name, you will have gone round the world. If the deities object to this claim, 
I shall bear witness on your behalf," declared Narada. 


How Lambodhara became Ganapathi 


Lambodhara said: "Well, if that is so, what is that name?" Narada replied: "I shall impart that 
name to you only if you are prepared to carry out my words." "Yes, I shall do so implicitly," said 
Lambodhara. "Write the two letters "Ra" and "Ma" and go round them. Then go back to 
Easwara," said Narada. "This is the name which delights the universe. The entire world is 
contained within this name. Going round the name is equivalent to going round the world," 
declared Narada. 


Lambodhara acted according to Narada's advice and went back to Easwara. As the one who had 
found the truth about the potency of the Rama name, Lambodhara became the chief of the Ganas 
and got the name Ganapathi (the chief of the Divine entities). Easwara blessed his son with the 
words: "As the chief of the Ganas, you will be the first deity to be worshipped on all auspicious 
occasions and at all religious ceremonies before the commencement of the functions." 


This is the inner meaning of the worship of Ganapathi at all religious functions. Ganapathi is also 
called "Siddhi Ganapathi" and "Buddhi Ganapathi." Ganapathi is noted for His acute 
intelligence. "Siddhi" and "Buddhi" are His powers. Because He possesses these powers and is 
capable of ensuring that any undertaking is carried out without impediments, He is known as the 
remover of obstacles--Vighneswara. 


Consider how Ganapathi got his overlordship of the Ganas. It was solely through the name of the 
Lord. How potent is this name can be explored by you. 


Entire cosmos rests on the basis of Name 


In the name "Rama," the three deities--Agni, Sun and Moon--are present. From where have these 
three deifies originated? The Sun has the power to scorch the earth from millions of miles away. 


Who are the parents of the Sun? Should they not be even more powerful than the Sun? There is, 
then, the Fire principle. Fire can destroy anything. Who are the parents of Agni? The Moon is the 
source of coolness and light. Who are the parents of the Moon? If the enquiry is made regarding 
the parents of these three powerful entities, it will be found that God is the parent. 


Everything has come from God. The common people do not make this basic enquiry into the 
root cause of all things. Nothing can exist without a basis. Even scientists are now engaged in 
trying to discover this basis. In fact, the Name is the basis and the entire cosmos rests on it. The 
Name is the easiest means to identify anything or any person. Hence, the best way to recognise 
God and envisage His form is through the Name. The Name is always auspicious. 


Every human being experiences three kinds of night. One is a moon-lit night. A second is a dark 
night. The third is a night half-dark and half-lit by the moon. But, apart from these three, there is 
one night which is more sacred and unique. That is Shivarathri. This is the night devoted to the 
chanting of the sacred name of Shiva. This means that the entire night should be devoted to 
recitation of the auspicious name of Shiva. 


God is one and one only 


Unfortunately, in this Kali Age, people observe the vigil of Shivarathri by seeing three cinema 
shows all through the night or playing cards or seeing some dramas. This cannot be called 
"Shivarathri." What is true vigil on Shivarathri night? It is to devote every moment of the night 
to thoughts of God and recite His name. This alone is Shivarathri. Shiva means auspicious, not 
Easwara. God has innumerable names. There is no difference at all between Hari and Hara. The 
differences between the two names have been created by Vaishnavites and Shaivites, but God 
has no such sectarian differences. God is one and one only. There may be many names and forms 
but Divinity is one alone. 


Many worshippers go to Tirupathi. Vaishnavites repeat the name: "Venkataramana, 
Venkataramana!" They derive satisfaction from repeating this name. Ramana is favoured by 
Vaishnavites. They carry a mark of three vertical lines on their foreheads. Shaivites go to the 
Thirumula temple and repeat the name: "Venkateshvara! Venkateshvara." They derive some 
satisfaction from using the word Easwara. The Shaivites carry on their foreheads three horizontal 
lines of vibhuthi. These marks are the difference between the two sects. But the Lord in the 
temple is one and the same, whether he is called Venkataramana or Venkateswara. 


Meaning of the four weapons in Vishnu's hands 


Moreover, Vaishnavites consider that Vishnu carries four insignia in His four hands--Sanka 
(conch), Chakra (discus), Gadha (mace) and Padma (lotus). The conch is a symbol of sound. 
This means that the entire universe is in God's hand. The chakra (discus) symbolises the Wheel 
of Time. The inner significance of this is that God holds Time in His grip. The lotus is a symbol 
of the heart. God holds in His hand the hearts of all beings. The mace is a symbol of prowess. 
God is the possessor of all power and strength. This is the esoteric meaning of the weapons 
attributed to Vishnu. 


Easwara bears in one hand a Damaruka (kettledrum). In another hand He carries a conch. The 
kettledrum symbolises sound. In another hand, Easwara carries a trident, which symbolises the 
three aspects of Time--the past, the present and the future. Thus, Easwara is also Lord of Sound 
and Time. 


When the attributes of the Divine are studied in this manner, it will be found that divinity in any 
name or form bears all the attributes and potencies. Among the glorious attributes of the Divine, 
Sadhaashivamayee (perpetual auspiciousness) is one. Comprehending the significance of the 
name, eschewing all differences, remembering the glories of the Lord, people should sanctify 
their lives by utilising the sacred days like Shivarathri for the purpose intended by Bharathiya 
tradition. 


Embodiments of the Divine Aatma! Remember that the Indwelling Spirit in everyone is the same 
Divine. He is called Hridayavaasi---the dweller in the Heart. 


Buddhi transcends the Indriyas 


You must consider the distinction between mind and heart. Heart refers to the blood-pumping 
organ in the body. This heart produces pure blood and circulates it to every part of the body. The 
Mind is not related to the body. It transcends the body. It is associated with the Universal 
Consciousness. There are two other agencies: the Buddhi and the Medhas. The Medhas is the 
agency that controls all Jndriyas (organs). It is described as the "Control room." Buddhi, 
however, is not related to the body. The Medhas is related to the Indriyas (the instruments of 
perception and action). "Buddhigraahyam atheendhriyam," it is said. The Buddhi transcends the 
Indriyas. When a person says, "My Buddhi was preoccupied with something else," it shows that 
the Buddhi is beyond the body. Hence, both the mind and Buddhi are related to the Aatma and 
not the body. 


Men are accustomed to treat the mind as part of the body. This relates only to the sensory 
activities of the mind. This mind is made up of thoughts and doubts. But the mind that is 
associated with the Divine Aatma transcends the body. Consequently, it is only when the 
ordinary thought processes are extinguished that the divinity within can be experienced. The 
consciousness that goes beyond thought is a reflection of the Aatma. 


Distinction between Aham and Ahamkaara 


The Aatma, the Buddhi and the mind are three in one. This unified consciousness transcends the 
sense of "I" and "Mine." It may be called Aham. Aham means Consciousness. In the Aatma, the 
Aham abides as a subtle entity. When the Aham acquires a form, it becomes Ahamkaara, the 
Ego. The distinction between Aham and Ahamkaara should be understood. To identify the Aham 
with the corporeal form is Ahamkaara--the Ego feeling. Aham transcends the Ahamkaara (the 
physical form). When the identification of the Self with the body is given up, the state of "â€œAham 
Brahmaasmi" (1 am Brahman) is realised. Brahman and Aatma are the same. Brahman refers to 
the Universal Consciousness that is present in all beings. 


The consciousness that is present in the body is called Aatma. It is called Conscience. The 
distinction between the Conscience and the Universal Consciousness should be noted. 
Conscience is a reflection of the Consciousness. When the Conscience ultimately leaves the 
body, it merges in the Universal Consciousness and becomes one with it. This process may be 
likened to the oneness that occurs when the air within a balloon joins the atmospheric air outside. 
This is the process of the many merging with the One. The individual self is the Bhuthaatma. 
The Universal Self is the Paramaatma. The individual self confined within a body is like the air 
confined within a balloon. When the individual self sheds its attachments relating to the body 
and develops universal love, it overcomes the confines of the body. It merges in the vast, infinite 
Love. This merger is described as Mukthi, Moksha or Liberation. The correct name for this 


consummation is Saayujyam (oneness with the Universal). It is comparable to the merger of a 
river in the ocean from which it had its origin. 


Brahma-Jnaana exists within everyone 


Once this merger of Consciousness takes place, there is no reversal of the process. The 
individual self has become the Universal, as when a drop of water is put into the ocean and 
becomes one with it. As long as the individual self is attached to the body and maintains its 
separateness from the Universal Self, it cannot escape the succession of birth and death. But once 
it casts off its separateness and becomes one with the Omni-Self, there is no further return to the 
cycle of birth and death--Punarjanma na vidhyathe. 


This Brahma-Jnaana (awareness of the Divine) cannot be got from any external source. It exists 
within everyone. Once the delusion of separateness in which the individual is enveloped goes, 
the resplendent Awareness manifests itself. All other knowledge relates to the external world. 
This external knowledge is only "a reflection of the Inner Being." It is entirely wrong to imagine 
that one can acquire knowledge of the Inner Reality by exploring Prakruthi (Nature). The Omni- 
Self is not to be realised through the understanding of the phenomenal world. You have come 
from the Paramaatma (the OmniSelf). This truth has to be understood. The fountain-source of all 
knowledge is within you. The Jnaani (wise one) is not the one who has a great deal of book 
knowledge or knowledge of the physical universe. 


The true Jnaani is one who is aware of the Self within and lives accordingly. Many who 
discourse elaborately on the glories of God do not lead a Godly life. Of what use is their 
scriptural knowledge? What fight have they to exhort others, when they themselves do not 
practice what they preach? This was the message of Jesus when he saw a woman being stoned by 
a crowd for her sinful conduct. He told the crowd: "If there is anyone among you who has not 
sinned mentally, let him cast the stone at her." 


The proper way to observe Shivarathri 


Festivals like Shivarathri are intended to make people cultivate auspicious and Godly qualities. 
To listen to a Divine discourse on Shivarathri day and forget all about its message after leaving 
the hall is not the way to observe Shivarathri. It may well be called "Shavarathri" (a Night of 
Death). 


The difference between "Shiva" (what is auspicious) and "Shava" (a lifeless corpse) can be 
understood from the process of breathing and cessation of breathing. The process of inhaling and 
exhaling conveys the message of union with God--So-Ham (He is I). It is the consciousness of 
this oneness that is auspicious. When this consciousness is absent, inauspiciousness (or death) 
sets in. 


There has to be a complete absence of body consciousness. It was by forgetting the body 
completely while chanting the Name of Rama that Ratnakara, the dacoit, became Valmiki the 
supreme poet (who gave the Ramayana to the world). He was so completely absorbed in 
chanting the name that he was oblivious to the anthill that had grown over him. 


Shivarathri is the day that is devoted to the contemplation of God. It does not come only once a 
year. Every night can be a Shivarathri. Even if you are not able to contemplate on God all 
through the night, it is enough if you think of God before going to bed and when you wake up in 
the morning. 


Again, whatever manner in which you may think of God, the results will be good. There is a 
story to illustrate this. Once a father took his son to the temple and advised him to keep vigil all 
night in the sanctum sanctorum. After some time, both the priest and the father dozed off. But the 
young lad, who was keeping vigil, observed a mouse repeatedly nibbling at the fruit and other 
edibles kept as offering to the deity. He felt sad that the mouse should be nibbling away at what 
was intended for God. Because he was thinking in this manner about God all night his life 
became sanctified. But neither the priest nor the others in the temple got the benefit of Divine 
grace. What is important is that devotion should be expressed in some form. 


Different devotees are bound to differ in their ways of worshipping God. But whatever the 
method of worship, there must be one-pointed devotion. Develop the love of God. Love towards 
God is devotion. Love towards the world is attachment. Devote this entire night to chanting the 
name of God. Life can be immensely sanctified through bhajans. 


Poornachandra Auditorium, 2 Mar 1992 


8. Purify The World By Sankeerthana 


There is no age like the Kali Age, none at all. 

Where by mere meditation on the name of the Lord, 
The Supreme Goal is realised Oh Blessed One! 

Even a multi-millionaire has to be content 

With ordinary raiment and food 

He cannot live on a diet of gold 

When Time is unpropitious, a stick may turn into a snake 
While, when it is favourable, dust may turn to gold. 
The wheel of Time can make a scholar a dumb animal, 

And a dumb man can become a saint, 

And a wealthy man may become a plaything of the 
Goddess of Poverty at one time. 

Whatever your prayers, you cannot get 

What you are not destined to get. 

Don't cherish, Oh young man, any desires. 

Lead instead a noble life with intelligence. 

What more can I tell you 

The good people assembled here ? 


Embodiments of Divine Love! "Samyak-keerthanam Sankeerthanam" (Congregational singing of 
bhajans is the best of bhajans). There is a big difference between Keerthanam and 
Sankeerthanam. Keerthanam is an individual affair. It is singing by an individual for the 
fulfilment of his prayers. Sankeerthanam aims at the well-being of the whole universe. This is 
also described as Saamaajika bhajans (community singing). This method of singing bhajans was 
first initiated by Guru Nanak, the founder of Sikhism. 


Sankeerthana aims at demonstrating unity in diversity. When all the participants combine to sing 
in unison with one voice, it is described as Sankeerthana. 


Four kinds of Sankeerthana 


Sankeerthana is of four kinds: One is Guna Sankeerthana; two, Leela Sankeerthana; three, 
Bhaava Sankeerthana; four, Naama Sankeerthana. 


Guna Sankeerthana applies to the kind of bhajan in which the devotee recites the auspicious 
qualities of the Divine, experiences oneness with the Divine, and acquires the Godly qualities. 
Thyagaraja had recourse to this type of singing. In one of his keerthanas, he exclaimed: "Oh 
Lord! You are beyond all words. Is it possible for even Brahma or other Gods to extol your 
glorious exploits? I am waiting for your grace. Hearken to my entreaties. You restored to the 
preceptor the son whom the Lord of Death had taken away. You conquered the God of Love. 


You liberated from prison Vasudheva and Devaki. You protected Draupadi when she appealed to 
you in despair. You were the guardian of the Pandavas. You relieved Kuchela of his poverty. 
You saved 16,000 damsels from subjection." In this manner, Thyagaraja recounted the great 
qualities of God in his songs. 


Gita Govindam is a form of Leela Sankeerthana 


Leela Sankeerthana refers to the enjoyment by the devotee of the sacred sport of the Divine in 
ecstatic dancing and singing and being totally absorbed in it. This is exemplified by the Gita 
Govindam of Jayadeva. 


Bhaava Sankeerthana: This is illustrated by Radha alone, who expresses her different feelings 
towards God and identifies herself with the Divine in every mood of devotion. She expressed her 
devotion in the five forms of Santha (Serenity), Sakhya (friendliness), Vaatsalya (eternal love), 
Anuraaga (affection)and Madhura (sweetness). Radha and Meera were the exponents of Bhaava 
Sankeerthana. 


Naama Sankeerthana: Chaithanya was the exponent of this form of Keerthana. "All names are 
yours. There is nothing in this cosmos which does not bear the imprint of your name or form"-- 
"Sarvaroopa Dharam Shaantham Sarvanaama-dharam Shivam Satchidaananda roopam 
Advaitham Sathyam Shivam Sundaram" (Swami sang this sloka). Chaithanya revelled in singing 
the name of the Lord as signifying all that was beautiful and glorious in the universe. 


While in each of the previous aeons the devotees adopted one or another methods of singing the 
glories, it is the supreme good fortune of the residents of Prashanthi Nilayam to enjoy all the four 
forms of Sankeerthana. The bhajans sung here are a combination of all the four forms of 
Sankeerthana. 


The significance of Naamalikhitam 


There is yet another special form of glorifying the name of the Lord. This is Naamalikhitam 
(writing the Name of the Lord). Contemplating on the name of the Lord mentally, uttering the 
name by mouth and writing the name by hand serve to perform Trikarana Suddhi (purify the 
mind, the speech and the action). 


The name of the Lord has been glorified in different ways all over the .world. Jayadeva was one 
who enjoyed always the /eelas (sport) of the Divine, experienced the presence of the Divine 
within him, devoted every one of his daily activities to enjoying the sport of the Divine, felt that 
he had no use for anything other than God's love, merged his love in Divine Love and thereby 
became the very embodiment of Divine Love. As people did not comprehend the spiritual 
significance of his keerthanas, they misunderstood and misinterpreted the meaning of Jayadeva's 
Ashtapadhis (octaves). 


Hanuman, after the completion of his mission in Lanka, went to Sita to receive her blessings 
before returning to Rama. At that time, Mother Sita blessed Hanuman in this manner: 
"Hanuman! You are full of prowess, intelligence and fortitude. May you never grow old." This 
did not give joy to Hanuman. Noticing his sense of disappointment, Sita blessed him again: 
"Live as an immortal." Even this did not please Hanuman. Sita then blessed him again: 
"Hanuman! You are full of virtues! May the dwellers in the three worlds extol your qualities." 
Hanuman felt embarrassed and bent his head as if he was ashamed to hear her praise him. 
Observing Hanuman's reactions, Sita finally blessed him thus: "May Sri Rama always love you!" 


The moment he heard these words, Hanuman was in rapture. "This was all that I wanted," he 
declared. "I must be worthy of Rama's love. A life without Rama's love is an utter waste. It is a 
living death. The only thing I desire is Rama's love." 


Hanuman was proficient in music. There was none that could excel him in singing. Even Narada 
and Tumbura could not prevail against him. Such a great singer continued always to chant the 
name of Rama. 


Devotional singing is outpouring of love to God 


What then is the essence of Sankeerthana? Its essential purpose is to earn the love of God. 
Combining one's voice, tune, feeling and rhythm to the appropriate beat of the song, the devotee 
should immerse himself in the singing. Harmonising the feeling with devotion and Love, the 
sacred words of the song should be an outpouring of love towards God. That alone is devotional 
singing. 


When the song is rendered without understanding the meaning of the words and without any 
inner feeling or genuine love for God, it is a mechanical performance. Bhaava (feeling), Raaga 
(melody) and Thaala (rhythm) are the essentials for proper singing. 


Even the name Bharath signifies the combination of these three elements. (Bha-Ra-Tha). In 
every action in daily life, the combination of these three elements should be observed. This rule 
can be applied even to one's studies. Bhaava, in relation to study of a subject, means 
understanding the subject thoroughly. Raaga implies cultivating a love for the subject and 
Thaala means expressing one's knowledge coherently and clearly. 


Understand the meaning of songs while rendering 


In the rendering of Thyagaraja's songs, the failure to observe the meaning of the words of the 
song has produced bizarre results. Thyagaraja's songs are in Telugu. Tamil musicians, who are 
experts in music, rendering Thyagaraja's songs have often mangled the words of the songs and 
made them meaningless. In one of his songs, Thyagaraja sang: "Ne pogadakunte neekemi 
kodhavu Rama?" (If I do not praise you, what do you lose Oh Rama?). A Tamil musician sang 
the song in such a manner that it meant: "If I eat pakodas, what do you lose?" It is essential to 
ensure that the meaning of the words, the emotional feeling of the composer and the melody of 
the song are all brought out in rendering the songs during Nagarsankeerthan and in bhajans. 
Where one does not understand the meanings of the words, he should get the meaning from those 
who know. 


Embodiments of Divine Love! Regard community singing as sacred devotional exercise. Even if 
you have no musical ability, utter the names of the Lord with feeling and love. 


There is no greater means of God-realisation in the Kali Yuga than chanting the names of the 
Lord. Dhyana (meditation) in Kritha Yuga, Yajna (sacrifice) in Thretha Yuga, Archana (worship 
of idols) in Dwapara Yuga and Naama Sankeerthana (Reciting the name of the Lord) in Kali 
Yuga are the methods prescribed for realising the Divine. 


Remembering the Name is the panacea. When the name is chanted as a song set to music, it 
delights the heart immensely. Many pandits recite the names as slokas (verse). They do not 
experience the intense yearning expressed in the stanzas. Some actors are able to pronounce the 
words loud and clear, but without any depth of feeling. But when the names are sung 


melodiously they appeal to the hearts of the singers and the listeners. Even non-believers and 
agnostics nod their heads in appreciation when they listen to devotional music. 


A song sung melodiously tugs at the heart-stings 


The words of a song can be expressed in prosaic manner which has no appeal to the listener. But 
when they are sung melodiously as in the song: "Rama! Nannu Kaapaadu" "Rama! save me," 
they tug at the heart-strings. (Swami sang the song to demonstrate its appeal). Such sweetness is 
contained in the song when it is rendered melodiously. 


Everyone, whether he is well-versed in music or not, should listen attentively to the singer and 
try to repeat the words of the song with feeling. 


Some persons attending bhajans do not move their lips at all. They may say that they are singing 
the songs mentally within themselves. This is not proper. If you have devotional feeling, it 
should be expressed by the tongue joining in the bhajan. Only then can it be called 
Sankeerthana--singing in unison with others. You must sing the names aloud, full-throated, as 
far as the voice can reach. Only then the Divine will respond in full measure and shower His 
grace. No one will go to the rescue of a drowning man if his cries are feeble. Only when he cries 
aloud at the top of his voice will the cries be heard and people will rush to save him. 
Sankeerthana means singing with abandon and fervour. 


Everyone should realise that every limb and organ in the body has been given to man to be used 
for a sacred purpose the tongue to utter the Lord's name, the hands to offer worship, the feet to 
go to the temple and so on. These organs should not be used for frivolous and unholy purposes. 
Sanctifying every one of the sense organs, man should purify the mind and contemplate on God. 


The only means to purify the polluted world 


Embodiments of Divine Love! It is impossible to describe the sweetness and sacredness of the 
name of the Lord. The intensity of the devotion with which you chant the name of the Lord will 
yield commensurate benefits and confer joy on you. All should strive to chant the names in 
unison. Today, all the five elements in the world--space, air, fire, water and the earth--are 
polluted. You cannot get pure water or pure air. The sounds you hear are impure. The earth is 
polluted. The Kali Yuga has become Kalmasha Yuga (the age of impurity). To purify all this the 
only means is chanting the names of the Lord. 


Today people spend most of their time watching the TV and Video screens. Is it any surprise if 
children born in these circumstances are TV products? They behave as actors from childhood. 
They indulge in stunts. Only the parents are to blame. In olden times, when a woman was 
enceinte, she used to hear stories about Prahlada, Sathyavaan and other noble characters. The 
child in the womb was influenced by such stories. 


Atmosphere is purified by chanting Divine Name 


Experiments in Russia and other countries have demonstrated the relationship between the food 
one consumes and one's mental attitudes. It was found, for instance, that a child which had been 
fed on apple juice while it was growing in the womb, exhibited a love for apples after birth. 


The recitation of the names of the Lord will help to purify the atmosphere as a result of the 
sacred sound waves getting absorbed in the atmosphere. The power of sound waves is evident 
from the way radio waves are transmitted and received over long distances. The atmosphere that 
has been polluted by impure sound waves can be purified by the chanting of the Divine Name. 


Likewise, sacred thoughts, pure speech and pure actions will purify other polluted elements. 
There is no better purifying agent than this. Crores (one crore is ten million) are being spent to 
purify the Ganges water. Of what use is this exercise if the Ganges continues to be polluted by 
the discharge of drainage water into the river? First prevent the flow of filthy effluents into the 
Ganges. 


In the same manner, the evil thoughts arising in the mind should be diverted; and it should be 
filled with pure, Godly thoughts by reciting the Divine name. 


Everyone participating in bhajans should sing the name of the Lord and thereby serve to purify 
the atmosphere and promote the well-being of the nation. 


Poornachandra Auditorium, 3 Mar 1992 


You must see, hear, study, observe, experience and reflect. Only 
then, can you understand me. You will learn then that I am Love 
(Prema); that I give only one thing, Bliss (Ananda) through Love. 
My task is to grant solace, courage, and Peace (Shanthi). That is 
to say, my characteristics are the ancient, authentic ones. Only the 
manifested form is new. 


Sathya Sai Baba 


9. The Head and The Heart 


If the thoughts in the mind are good 
The sequel will be equally beneficial 
If the thoughts in the mind are impure 
The resulting actions will be likewise. 


Yad Bhaavam Thadbhavathi (As one feels, that he becomes). As are the thoughts, so are the 
results. As is the seed, so is the plant. As is the flour, so is the bread. 


In the human body, there are two important organs. One is the heart and the other is the head. All 
the actions in the world, all their consequences, originate in the head. The Vedas have declared 
that all things that originate in the head relate to the Pravritthi Marga (the External Path) and 
those that arise from the heart relate to the Nivritthi Marga (the Inward Path). All that you think, 
all that you do, all your achievements, gains and losses, are all related to the head (to thoughts). 
All that comes out of the head relates to Prakruthi (the phenomenal world), grows from it and 
ultimately merges in it. Hence, all thoughts are associated with the Prakruthi (external world). 
But, feelings like .peace, kindness, compassion, forbearance and love emanate from the heart. 
These transcend Prakruthi (external phenomena). Consequently, what should be cherished in the 
heart should be pure and sacred, and nothing that. is sullied. 


The human heart that should be like Asheera (milk) in its purity is today unfortunately polluted 
and kshara (saline) like sea water. The Lord resides wherever there is purity of the milky ocean. 
It is for this reason that the Lord was described by the devotees as Ksheerasaagara Sayana (the 
One who reclines on the Ocean of Milk). 


Lord dwells only in pure Sathwik heart 


Ksheera or milk represents that which 1s Sathwik, pure and sacred. The heart should be pure and 
untainted like milk. It is only in such a pure Sathwik heart that the Lord will choose to dwell. 


Alas! Man's heart today, instead of being a Ksheerasaagara (ocean of milk), is Kshaarasaagara 
(filled with brine). In the Ocean of Milk, dreadful aquatic creatures like whales and crocodiles 
will not flourish. These creatures can only survive and grow in an ocean of brine. In the saltish 
ocean (of the heart) what are the creatures that flourish? They are bad qualifies like lust, hatred, 
greed, envy and pride. If man is filled today with all these bad qualities, what does it signify? It 
shows that man's heart is bereft of the milk (of good qualities). If it had been pure as milk, them 
would have been no place for any qualities other than the godly virtues. 


Fill your heads with sacred thoughts 


Today there seems to be no limit to man's desires. The entire human life is spent in the pursuit of 
these desires. Every moment is filled with insatiable wants. Man's head is filled with these 
desires. If only the head is filled with sacred thoughts, it will get sanctified. 


How is this change to be effected? Food is an important factor. When pure, sacred and 
wholesome food is taken in moderation, that food itself will transform the head. The head will be 
turned towards God. Thus, Food, Head and God are the three whose unity will divinise man. 


Even Sathwik food (food. which is conducive to the promotion of good qualities) should be 
consumed in moderation. If there is no purity, wholesomeness and moderation in the food, the 
man turns Thamasik (evil minded). In due course, this leads to the development of Rajasik 
qualities (anger, etc). 


What, then, is the proper food for man? Man possesses five organs of perception: the mouth, the 
ears, the eyes, the nose and the skin. What is regarded as Sathwik food is taken through the 
mouth. But what kind of food are the other senses consuming? The eyes are "consuming" 
Rajasik food (seeing ugly and undesirable things). Looking here and there like crows, the eyes 
are taking in impure "food" of all kinds. The eyes thus do not receive proper food. See no evil, 
see what is good. 


Now, what is it that the ears hear? They are listening all the time to scandal, idle gossip, bad 
stories about others. They do not listen to the name of God or anything that is sacred and good. 
Why should anyone listen to such gossip? He should be concerned only about his affairs. 
Transforming himself, he should share his good thoughts with others. It is totally wrong to 
interest oneself in bad things about others. Hear no evil; hear what is good. 


Multiple role of the tongue 


Now we come to speech. The tongue is a very powerful organ. The eyes can only see. The ears 
can only hear. But the tongue has a double function: speech and taste. Hence, the tongue has to 
be kept under rigorous control. Only then the food that is consumed through the mouth will be 
pure and sacred. 


The tongue is prone to indulge in several undesirable activities: talking ill of others, talking 
excessively, idle gossip and the like. Of the four kinds of misbehaviour by the tongue, the first is 
excessive talking with others. Talking endlessly with all kinds of persons is an evil. The second 
evil tendency is abusing others. The third evil is making fun of others. The fourth is indulging in 
falsehood. By indulging in these four forms of abuse of the tongue, man's life is rendered unholy. 


Recognising the greatness of the tongue, Saint Jayadeva declared: "Oh tongue! You know what 
is sweet and relish what delights the heart. You must utter what is true and beneficial. Therefore, 
rejoice in uttering the names of the Lord and in nothing else." The tongue is the cause of 
greatness in a man or his downfall. There must be harmony between speech and action. If your 
actions do not correspond to your words, your life will be mined. Therefore the tongue should be 
"fed" properly. It should be "fed" with good thoughts, good words and good actions so that it 
may behave properly. 


The importance of sense of touch 


Then, there is the sparsa (sense of touch). Avoid touching others. The meaning of this rule will 
not be apparent on the surface. But it is highly significant from a deeper sense. The ancient sages 
used to seek secluded spots and engage themselves in meditation. The mason is there is a divine 
energy within the body, a kind of current flowing in it. This divine energy is in everyone. 


When a house is electrified, an earth wire is also fixed to protect people from electric shocks. 
When a person is meditating, a divine energy is generated in him. The earth also has an energy 
(gravitational energy) which attracts objects towards itself. That is the reason why when a person 
sits in meditation, he uses a wooden plank one inch above the ground, spreads a deer-skin on it 
and covers it with a cloth. The cloth serves as a cushion protecting the meditator from any pricks 


from the deerskin. This kind of meditation is called Sukhadhyana (meditation in comfort). The 
wooden plank acts as an insulator, preventing the energy from passing down. 


It should be recognised that there is a divine energy in the human body. When this divine energy 
comes into contact with the body of another person, it is likely to receive the bad thoughts in the 
latter. If the other person is a good man, you may receive good thoughts from the contact. But 
you cannot decide who is good and who is bad. Hence, if you sit apart during meditation, you 
may experience highly elevating thoughts. Some persons say: "Swami! I do not entertain any bad 
thoughts in my mind. But somehow bad thoughts infiltrate into the mind. How does this 
happen?" The reason is: Other people's bad thoughts enter your mind. It is by close association 
with bad persons that bad ideas enter the head. 


Significance of Paadanamaskar 


The idea behind bowing one's head at the feet of Bhagavan is that thereby sacred thoughts enter 
the devotee's mind. This means that when one comes in contact with Bhagavan's feet, the sacred 
impulses from them flow to the devotee. When the devotee's head touches the Lord's feet, the 
Lord's divine energy flows towards him. This implies that you should keep contact with only 
pure objects and keep away from impure objects. 


You are affected by whatever you touch. For instance, if you touch fire, it scalds. Fire can burn 
even iron. It is so potent. But when the fire is extinguished, the residue is mere charcoal. When 
you touch charcoal, your hand becomes black. Thus, in either case, the contact is not beneficial. 


But, what happens when you come into contact with divine fire? All your bad thoughts and bad 
actions are reduced to ashes. This is the sanctity attaching to the performance of Paada- 
namaskar (prostrating at the Feet of the Lord). When you associate with anyone, you are affected 
by the qualities of the other person. That is why, it has been said: "Through association with the 
good, develop detachment and solitude. Through seclusion, steady the mind. Through steadiness 
of the mind, get rid of all delusions. Freedom from delusions is Liberation." (Bhagavan recited 
the relevant stanza from Bhaja Govindam). 


Choose to become dear and near to God 


Good company is thus most essential. Take for instance, a piece of charcoal. If it is to bum, it has 
to be brought close to a piece of burning charcoal. It will bum better if a fan is turned towards 
both. This is the result of being both "near and dear" (to the source of fire). This applies to 
devotees as well. There are many who are "near" to Bhagavan. But they are like frogs in a lotus 
pond. The frogs are near to the lotus, but do not taste its honey. But bees come from remote 
distances to taste the honey in the lotus. If the frogs were aware of the sweetness of the honey, 
they would not have let the bees come near. It is, therefore not enough if you are near. You have 
also to become dear to the Lord. 


You must be both near and dear. If you love the Lord, but are far from Him, you suffer the pangs 
of separation like a mother who is worried when she has no news from her son who is abroad. 
Thus both love and nearness are necessary. This is the value of having darshan of the Lord. 


Vedanta has declared: "Dharshanam paapa naashanam" (Sight of the Lord destroys all sins). 
"Sambhashanam Sankata naashanam" (Conversing with the Lord destroys all grief). 
"Sparshanam Karma vimochanam" (The touch of the Divine liberates one from all karmic 


bonds). What you should seek is Karma vimochanam (freedom from the bondage of one's 
actions). 


"Sambhashanam Sankatanaasanam." You can recognise the truth of this declaration from your 
own experience. Some may have doubts whether the touch of the Lord will destroy all their 
karmic bonds or whether the darshan of the Lord will destroy all sins. But there can be no doubts 
regarding the effect of Sambhashanam. 


When you are conversing with Swami you forget all your sorrows. You forget even your worries 
and anxieties. This is direct experiential proof of the truth of this dictum. As long as you are 
conversing with Swami you are in a blissful state. Whatever your worries, when you are 
conversing with Swami in the interview room you forget everything. From this, you should infer 
that the darshan of the Lord can destroy all sins, even though you may not know it. Many people 
don't recognise this fact. For all difficulties and sorrows, the mind is responsible. Most people 
are not conscious of their own feelings. If one's thoughts are good, they are bound to lead to 
good results. 


The results of our past karma are born with us 


As you sow, so shall you reap. This is an inescapable fact. If your thoughts are of one kind, how 
can you expect the results to be different? When you are born, the Creator sends you with a 
necklace round your neck made up of the results of your good and bad deeds in the previous life 
reckoned most meticulously. 


When anyone accuses you and if you do not respond to it in a like manner, but ignore it, the 
accusation returns to the accuser like a registered letter which the addressee declines to accept. 
An incident in the life of Buddha illustrates this truth. 


How to react when you are accused 


There used to be a village-chief who did not like Buddha's way of life. He used to look upon him 
as a lazy person who was gathering round him young men and making them lead an idle life. 
Buddha who was aware of the man's attitude, went to his house one day with his disciples and 
begged for alms â€œBhavathi! Bhikshaam Dehi" (Oh blessed one! offer me alms). The headman, 
who had espied Buddha approaching the house and begging for alms, shouted: "You lazy fellow! 
You don't deserve any alms. Get out! You have been wasting your time." The headman went on 
abusing Buddha, calling him all kinds of names. Buddha was amused and was smiling. 


After exhausting his abuses, the headman calmed down and asked Buddha, "Sire! I have a doubt. 
Will you clear it?" Buddha said, "What is your doubt? Speak out." The headman asked how 
Buddha had remained unaffected by all the abuse he had levelled against the latter. Buddha said, 
"I came to you begging for food. Supposing you had brought the food and I had refused to take 
it, what would you have done with the food?" The man replied, "I would have taken it back." 
Buddha then said, "Now, instead of food, you gave me all your abuse. I refused to receive it. 
What happens to it? It goes back to you. I have no connection with it." The headman learnt a 
good lesson. 


You should not be concerned with the goodness or badness of others. You have to entertain good 
thoughts and direct your, mind towards God. Bliss is got by experiencing oneness with the 
Divine. 


The Vedantic message of oneness has been perverted by exponents who promoted divisive 
tendencies. The supreme message of the Vedas is unity as proclaimed in the manthra: "Sahanaa 
vavathu, Sahanau bhunakthu, Saha veeryam Karavaavahai" (May we be protected together. May 
we be nourished together. May we work together with great energy.) 


Let us all work together. Only then will there be peace. (Swami recited a Telugu poem 
conveying the purport of the Sanskrit stanza from the Shvethaashvathara Upanishad). What a 
great message is conveyed by this prayer! The pandits however, are interpreting the message in 
different ways and causing divisions. Vedamaatha (Mother Veda) sought to promote oneness 
and a universal vision by its all-embracing message. Fill the heart with love and Divine feeling 


Man today receives all kinds of knowledge in his head in a distorted form and behaves like a 
demented being. Whatever he reads, whatever he hears, he fills his mind with all sorts of things 
about the world. When he wakes up in the morning he starts reading the newspaper to know what 
is happening in one country or another and stuffs his mind with a lot of junk. Does he fill his 
heart with any divine feeling? Instead of stuffing the head with a mass of rubbish, he should try 
to fill his heart with love. Without love in the heart, you are only another newspaper. From the 
time of waking to the time of going to bed, the day is punctuated by eating breakfast, lunch and 
dinner. What is the meaning in indulging in this repetitive routine day after day? What is the new 
thing that you should do? It is contemplation on God. Are you making any effort in this 
direction? 


Science and technology are advancing apace. They are penetrating the depths of space. But is the 
slightest movement being made to explore the depths of the heart? Man has not moved even half 
an inch to understand his heart. 


Scientists do not acquire any experience of life 


It is by exploring the internal that man will discover the truth and not by going far out into space. 
The entire preoccupation of science is with the study of matter. 


What is it you find when you go far out into space? There is nothing there. If you need air, you 
have to carry it from the earth. Travel in space has thus become a kind of picnic! You carry 
everything you need from here. There is nothing there. The water you need and the food you 
require lie at your feet. All the metals, the diamonds or anything else you want are all underneath 
your feet. Above the head (in space) there is nothing. They spend crores to go out into space. But 
when they need food, they have to come back to the earth. 


A proper understanding of how the senses function is a function of science. Without knowing 
how to control the senses, what is the use of all other scientific knowledge? Many scientists 
ultimately qualify themselves for places in the mental hospital. Burying themselves in a dark 
laboratory and performing experiments all their lives, they expire without acquiring any 
experience of life. 


Follow the heart--not the head 


Students! Take care of your heart. Do not follow the head. Take into your head all that is useful. 
But transmit it to the heart. That will generate real energy. That is Sath. That is imperishable 
energy. What is received in the head comes and goes. The head seeks happiness. But this 
happiness is temporary. It is satisfaction of needs and desires as they arise from time to time. 
You are hungry, you take food and you feel happy. But this lasts only for a few hours till you 


feel hungry again. This kind of happiness comes and goes. This process relates to the head. But 
the heart is concerned with securing lasting bliss. 


You must understand the difference between the head and the heart. The head is content to carry 
out temporary obligations. The heart is concerned with what is permanent. Once bliss is secured, 
all that the head seeks will also be got. 


Students! The story of Emperor Bali teaches you that in no circumstance should you go back on 
your plighted word. Bali was prepared to discard the advice and warning of the guru 
Sukracharya, in order to fulfil the promise he gave to Vamana, even if it cost him his kingdom or 
his life. 


Truth is the food that sustains speech. Likewise, you should feed your senses with wholesome 
food by listening to sacred things, seeing what is holy and speaking what is true and good. 
Consuming wholesome food through the mouth is not enough. Everything that you take in 
through all your senses should be pure. 


Dedicate the sweet period of your life to God 


Students! This is the most sacred stage in your life. It is a sweet period. It is a time that should be 
dedicated to the Divine. Does anyone offer an unripe or overripe fruit to the Divine? Only a ripe 
fruit, rich with sweet juice, is offered to God. You are neither an unripe fruit nor a spoiled fruit. 
You are good, ripe fruit. It is such a fruit that should be offered to God. That is the proper kind of 
sacrifice to be made in one's life. 


The Upanishad has proclaimed that immortality can be attained only through sacrifice and not 
through good actions, progeny or wealth. You cannot take with you, when you pass away, even a 
handful of earth. So, make the best use of your years now by leading a selfless, dedicated life. 
Thereby you should earn God's grace and share it with others. This is the secret of a meaningful 
life. 


Kalyana Mandap, Brindavan, 15 Mar 1992 


10. Hold Fast To The Lord 


When sandalwood is rubbed repeatedly, 

the fragrance from it increases; 

When the sugarcane is chewed again and again, 
the juice gets sweeter. 

When gold is heated in the crucible repeatedly, 
it becomes pure and brighter. 

The noble ones adhere to righteousness 

through all the vicissitudes of life. 


Embodiments of Divine Love! Human life is supremely precious in this world. But not all are 
alive to this truth. Wherein lies this preciousness? Humanness does not consist merely in the 
physical and the mundane. â€œShareeram Aadhyam khalu Dharmasaadhanam" (Verily, the body is 
the primary requisite for the realisation of Dharma). It is for the pursuit of Righteousness that 
this body has been given to man. God is the repository of Ananda (Bliss). He is eternal. Among 
the myriad names of the Divine, the greatest is Sath-chith-ananda. Sath means that which is 
unchanging at all times--past, present and future. It remains the same irrespective of time, place 
and circumstance. It transcends time, space and conditions. 


Chith means paripurna jnaana (complete awareness). It comprehends full knowledge of 
everything--social, moral, physical, scientific and spiritual. It is the undercurrent of every kind of 
knowledge. Where Sath and Chith exist together, there is Ananda (Bliss). 


Humanness originates from Ananda, grows in Ananda and merges in Ananda. This bliss is the 
goal of man. Man is born in bliss. To manifest bliss is the duty of man. This is the secret of the 
human saga. 


It is a sheer folly to search for bliss outside 


Every individual makes a variety of efforts to experience bliss. From infancy to old age, man 
dedicates every effort of his to secure bliss. But, this bliss is not to be found in the places he 
searches. When he is the very embodiment of bliss, to seek for it outside himself is sheer folly. 
Does any man in the world search for himself outside himself? If such search is a sign of 
ignorance, equally the search for bliss outside one's self is a mark of ignorance. 


Water can exist without fish, but fish cannot exist out of water. A branch is part of a tree. A child 
is part of the mother. A branch cannot survive apart from the tree. The child cannot live without 
the mother. Likewise, the human existence is based on the Divine. Man is a spark of the Divine. 
Without the Divine, man cannot experience bliss. Unfortunately, on account of the perversions of 
the Kali Age, men express verbal acceptance of this truth, but do not experience it 
wholeheartedly and hence seek, by their own efforts, to find the bliss by exploring the 
phenomenal world. 


Understand your true self 


What is the origin of man? Wherefrom has he come? What is his original home? No one tries to 
investigate these matters in the proper manner. Man exists, he moves about, eats and lives, but 


wherefrom has he come? Basing himself on his corporeal form, he declares that he has come 
from Madras, Bombay or some other place. Similarly, reckoning on the profession in which he is 
engaged, he describes himself as a doctor, a lawyer, an agriculturist or something else. By 
relating himself to a place, a country or a profession, he cannot understand his real self. 


What is this true self? The answer is Manuja or Maanava. What does Manu signify? It refers to 
Swayambhu Manu (the self-created Manu). Ja means birth. Manuja refers to one who has had his 
birth from Manu. Man is called Manuja because he has originated from the self-born Manu. Man 
does not recognise this fact. Consequently, even though he is the embodiment of Sath-chith- 
ananda, he desperately seeks bliss elsewhere. What is the reason? Oblivious to the Jnaana 
(higher knowledge), he lives in ignorance' in a dream world of illusions. Immersed in this 
sleeping state, he forgets his nature. One may be a president, an emperor or a prime minister, but 
in the sleeping state he is not conscious of his position. In the dreams he experiences in this state, 
he considers them to be real and feels that these are his true state. In that dream state, a poor man 
may think he is an emperor (or a President). But the moment he wakes up, he is conscious of his 
real position and status. 


Wake up from the sleep of ignorance 


Likewise, man in his dream state of Ajnaana (ignorance) forgetting his true form of Sath-chith- 
ananda, identifies himself with a country, a profession or a physical form. It is this ignorance 
that envelops man in delusion. Just as one cannot see the rice when it is covered by husk, or see 
the water underneath a layer of moss, or the sun covered by a cloud, a man enveloped in 
ignorance is unable to see his true self. Hence it is that the Upanishads have exhorted man to 
wake up from his sleep of ignorance and realise his true nature. When the husk is removed, the 
rice is visible. It was there in the paddy. But because of the husk coveting it, it could not be seen. 


All objects that are enveloped in this manner are liable to change and are impermanent. The 
Veda has declared: "Whatever is perceived is liable to perish." That is, all objects in the 
phenomenal world are bound to perish sometime or other. Man sees with his physical eyes all 
objects in the world, moving and non-moving. All these will disappear in due course in the 
stream of Time. Neither the eye that sees nor the object that is seen is permanent. 


All beings in creation are endowed with eyes. What is the special significance of the eyes 
possessed by man? What is the unique significance of human existence? Having been born as a 
human being, it will be unfortunate if man is content with the physical vision. Man must acquire 
Jnaana netram (the eye of Wisdom). Without it, of what avail is one's education? What is the use 
of one's intelligence or one's mental powers? What is a man worth if he is unable to recognise the 
divinity within him? 

Man is the crown of creation. That is why the scriptures have praised the noble virtues man is 
capable of manifesting. Hence, as a human being one must strive to acquire the eye of wisdom. 
The physical eyes are inept. You cannot see your own eyes. These imperfect eyes, how can they 
see the highly subtle. mind? The eyes which are unable to see the mind, how can they see the 
Aatma (the Indwelling Spirit)? One who is unable to understand himself, how can he expect to 
understand others? The physical eyes will never be able to see the Aatma. 


Man is unable to comprehend his true nature 


The most important thing in this world is the Aatma-Jivitham (life of the Spirit). Bodily 
existence, mental life or intellectual life cannot be considered true living at all. Man's main 


preoccupation appears to be with nurturing the body and wasting it until death. Falling a prey to 
the forces of time, space and circumstances, man is unable to comprehend his true nature. From 
dawn to dusk man is engaged in enquiring into various matters. He studies many books and 
makes many investigations. But what is the outcome of all this? He has learnt nothing. The 
satisfaction he derives from time to time from these endeavours ends in disappointment. They 
are like the pursuit of a mirage. They do not serve to quench one's thirst. They may appear like 
water, but there is no water in them. 


All pleasures derived from Prakruthi (the phenomenal world) may appear to confer happiness, 
but they do not confer real happiness and bliss, because they are not lasting. They come and go, 
leaving a trail of misery. 


Real conqueror is one who has subdued his mind 


Sankaracharya posed the question: "Who is a real conqueror in this world?" His disciples gave 
different answers. One disciple said that a real conqueror was one who had subdued the world 
and brought it under his sway. Another said that the man who scaled the Himalayas and planted a 
flag on its summit was a great conqueror. Another declared that one who crossed the oceans was 
a hero. Sankaracharya listened to these replies with a smile and said: "Dear students! you are 
looking at conquests solely in worldly terms. Viewed in this way, anyone can achieve victories. 
An animal can fight another and establish its victory. Likewise, there can be a victor among 
birds. Birds cross oceans and fly over the Himalayas. Where is the victory in all this? Nothing at 
all." Sankaracharya declared: "Only the person who has subdued his mind is a real conqueror." It 
is a mental aberration to think that one has achieved a victory without subduing his mind. 


The mind is associated with the moon. It resembles the moon in not being self-luminous. If the 
moon shines at night, wherefrom does it derive its light? The moon shines by reflecting the light 
of the Sun. It must be noted that the Sun shines effulgently, His light is very powerful. One 
cannot dare to look at it directly. But moonlight is cool and comforting. Although the light from 
the sun and the light from the moon have the same source, what accounts for the difference 
between them? 


With regard to the mind, it will be seen that when filled with desires, it has a thamasik quality. 
Where the thamasik quality prevails, there is darkness. When the mind's desires are fulfilled, it 
experiences coolness. When desires are not satisfied, the mind is restless. But if does not get 
heated. Such is the nature of the mind. 


It is not easy for anyone to control the mind. The mind has been described as a bundle of 
thoughts and fancies. It is not possible to stop the thought process even for a moment. The mind 
experiences a ceaseless flow of thoughts like the endless waves of the ocean. Sankaracharya said 
that the true victor is one who is able to conquer this ceaseless flow of thoughts in the mind. 


The sensesâ€™ sway over man 


Today men boast about their myriad achievements. But all these are accompanied by anxiety. So, 
these achievements are not significant. Man assumes that he is investigating various phenomena. 
This is not so. It is man's senses which are experimenting with him. Man imagines that he is 
making use of his sense organs. Not at all. The truth is the senses are sporting with man. Man is 
not alive to this fact. If man really mastered the senses and had full sway over them, he would 
not be subject to vicharam (anxiety). It is the senses that are holding sway over man. They are 


utilising man for their enjoyment, with the result that man has become a weakling. He is a victim 
of peacelessness. He is a prey to many troubles. 


How, then, are the senses to be brought under control? It should be recognised that the senses are 
merely instruments. They are called Karanams, that is, instruments. These instruments should be 
wielded by you. You should not become their plaything. Unfortunately this is not the case now. 
Man has become an instrument in the grip of the senses. As a result, he is powerless to act 
properly. Nor is that all. He is even misusing the senses. Hence, it is essential to bring the senses 
under one's control. Only then will the senses be powerless to cause any harm to man. 


The Aatma is the seer--not the eyes 


Take for instance, the power of sight. You think that it is the eyes that see (any object). No. The 
eye is inert matter. Who is it that sees? The seer is Aatma. When you notice the lights of a car, 
you think that the bulbs are burning. But the bulbs are burning because of the current they are 
getting. 


Consider the ears. People are listening to the broadcast from their loudspeakers. They may 
consider the loudspeakers as the source of the sounds they hear. But if there is no current, the 
loudspeakers will be silent. Here, again, it is the current that is the basic factor. The ears are like 
a loudspeaker. It is because of the current of Aatma that the ears are able to hear. 


Hence, for the functioning of all sense organs the Aatma is basic. Without mentioning this term, 
the scientists call this prime mover as power or energy. This energy is of no use without matter. 
Equally, matter is of no use without energy. God can be defined as Matter + Energy -God. 


The functioning of the Divine must be seen in this combination. For instance, one cannot see 
without eyes. This is true. The eyes are able to see a person only by the help of sunlight. At the 
same time, the sunlight by itself is of no use. There are any number of blind people in the world. 
They are unable to see the effulgence of the sun. But for that reason can they deny the existence 
of the sun? The blind cannot see the sun, but those with eyes can see. 


However great a scholar may be, when he is asleep, he cannot see the world. But a totally 
illiterate person, who is awake, can see the world. To see things in the waking state, no 
scholarship or intelligence is needed. Man needs the eye of wisdom to see the good and bad 
things in the world. 


Special significance of Yugadi 


Today is the beginning of the new year (Yugadi). What is the first rithu (season) of this year? It 
is Vasantha-rithu (the season of Spring). What is the most important month in the year? It is 
Chaithramasa (the first month of the new year). The Shuklapaksha (bright fortnight) is the better 
part of the month. Among the days, the first day of the lunar month is important. As all these 
important elements are present today, it has special significance as marking the commencement 
of a new year (described as Yugadi). 


This is the Kali Yuga. There are four yugas (aeons) Kritha, Thretha, Dwapara and Kali. How do 
Bharathiyas celebrate the advent of the new year? After a sacred bath in the morning, they put on 
new clothes, eat sweet preparations and celebrate the day as a festive occasion. These 
celebrations have gone on for many years. But how far have the people imbibed the truths 
underlying these celebrations? The garments are new, but the natures are unchanged. It is not 


enough to wear new clothes. The qualities must change. Without a reformation in character there 
is no meaning in observing these festivals. 


Yugadi is related purely to the phenomenal world 


Bharathiyas have been observing the birthdays of Avatars as festival days. The birthdays of the 
founders of various faiths have also been observed as festivals. The death anniversaries of 
wicked persons as well as of holy men have been observed as festivals. But the Yugadi 
celebration is not related to the birth of any Avatar or the birth or death of any saint or prophet. It 
is related purely to Prakruthi (the phenomenal world). It is important for one and all. It is an 
occasion for comprehending the nature of the universe. When we want to know who is God, the 
answer is found in Prakruthi. It is the visible manifestation of God. 


This earth revolves round itself hundreds of miles in an hour. What is it that happens because of 
these revolutions? You have night and day. Because of this succession of night and day, man is 
able to take rest. Moreover, the earth is moving round the sun at the speed of thousands of miles 
an hour. Because of this motion, the seasons occur and we have rains, crops and harvests. Thus, 
without expecting any return, Nature is nourishing man. 


Good prospects for the year "Angeerasa" 


There are sixty years in the Hindhu almanac's cycle of years, starting with Prabhava and ending 
with Akshaya. The present year is the sixth in the cycle, bearing the name Angeerasa. It conveys 
the message relating to the six primary enemies of man (lust, anger, delusion, greed, pride and 
envy). All these enemies are present in every limb of man. 


There are nine deities presiding over the events of the year. They are the Sun and other planets. 
Among these nine, six are beneficent in this year. During this year, by and large, only auspicious 
things will occur. Moreover, there will be no shortage of food-grains and other agricultural 
produce. The monsoon will be normal. Prices, however, will continue to rise because of the 
misguided policies of governments. But the administration in general will be peaceful and 
orderly. Political disorders will be less. Individual differences and antagonisms may exist, but 
there will be no serious disorders. This is because all the principal ruling planets are friendly 
towards each other and are of good disposition. When a ruler and his commander-in-chief are at 
variance, the nation suffers. This year, the ruler and the commander-in-chief among the planets 
are friends. This has beneficial effects on the world. 


Angeerasa is one of the names of the Lord. It means that God as Rasa (essence) flows in every 
anga (limb) of man. Because the year bears the Lord's name, it is bound to be a godly year. 
Devotional activities will grow. But they are likely to be more in the nature of preaching and 
propagation than practice and performance. Devotion should express itself in conduct. Ninety- 
nine out of every hundred persons in the world profess devotion, but not one of them displays 
any godly virtues. Devotion is preached and professed out of selfish interests and not as a means 
to God-realisation. 


You must hold fast to one ideal. Today man lives his life without any ideal. He has to understand 
what is his goal in life. The goal is Aatma (the Divine). It is Sath-chith-ananda (Being- 
Awareness-Bliss). This Sath-chith-ananda is within man. People eat inert things and worship 
inert objects, wasting their lives, but ignore the divinity that is present in the same objects in 
subtle form as Chaithanya (Consciousness). Any act done with love will be immensely helpful. 
Animals serve man by toiling and helping to grow crops. But man treats such animals harshly. 


He harms the creatures which serve him. But he offers worship to images of animals such as 
Nandi. What folly is this! 


Firm faith and clear vision are essential 


God is omnipresent. But he should be experienced as present in subtle form as Consciousness. 
This divine feeling should arise in man. The entire Cosmos is pervaded by the Divine, declares 
the Upanishad--"Isaavaasyam idham Sarvam" Divinity is present in every human being. Man 
today is more intent on dividing the One into the many than on realising the unity that subsumes 
the diversity. To recognise the unity that underlies the multiplicity is the primary task before man 
today. 


You must develop faith and see to it that it is firm and unchanging. Firm faith and a clear vision 
are essential. Men proclaim their faith in God when their desires are fulfilled, but deride Him 
when they are not realised. These desires are often petty and trivial. Men do not realise that God 
is waiting to fulfil much greater desires. Ignorant of the immensely valuable treasures in God's 
treasury, man seeks cheap trinkets. Instead of a diamond, man asks for a piece of charcoal. Not 
getting it, he feels disappointed. God wishes to give you a diamond. You do not have the 
patience to wait until you get it. Men will wait hours in a queue to catch a bus or buy a film 
ticket but will not devote five minutes to think of God. 


Develop an optimistic attitude in life 


Your attitude to God should not be based on the fulfilment or non-fulfilment of petty desires. 
You must feel that whatever happens to you is for your own good. You must have the firm belief 
that whether your wishes are fulfilled or not, nothing harmful will happen to you. Be firm in your 
faith in weal and woe. Develop an optimistic attitude towards life. When there is a glass half full 
of water the optimist is glad to see the water in it while the pessimist is sorry it is half empty. 
One must recognise both the truths. 


For instance, it is true that there is no rose without a thorn. The wise man must pick up the rose 
without touching the thorn. The optimist looks up at the night-sky and enjoys the cool moonlight. 
The pessimist looks down at the ground and feels depressed over the darkness below. Hence, you 
must look up. Aiming low is a crime. Do not look downwards. Develop sublime thoughts. It is 
because man today lacks sublime thoughts that he is a prey to disappointments. Why is he 
disappointed? Because he has built up expectations. If he does his duty without expectation, 
there will be no disappointment. 


Duty is God. Work is worship. The results come of their own accord. The weak-minded man 
meets with failures. The strong-minded man accomplishes whatever he wants. Turn your mind 
towards God. You will then be free from bondage. It is because you are all the time involved in 
worldly pursuits that you get bound. 


Love is God. Live in Love 


A pure mind is like a pearl in the oyster. Worldly life is like an ocean. In that ocean you can find 
the pearl of a pure mind within the oyster of the human body. This pearl is the Aatmic truth. It is 
immaculately pure, without attributes, eternal and unchanging. Its effulgence and purity are 
beyond compare. The Aatma has no legs but moves faster than anything else. It has no hands but 
can grasp anything. It has no eyes, but there is nothing in the universe it cannot see. To 
experience this Aatma, the only means is the way of Love. When you are filled with Love, the 
Lord is easily attained. Love is God. Live in Love. 


Our life must be lived in Love. Years may come and go. Seasons may change. Wars may be 
going on. But if only you have a drop of Divine Grace, you will be able to accomplish anything. 
To receive the benefit of such grace, you have to direct your vision inwards. Unfortunately, all 
your vision is turned outwards. What you see depends on the direction of your vision. Therefore, 
convert your vision into Premadhrishti (a vision of Love). 


It is said that the cosmos is mithya (illusory) and the Brahman (Absolute) alone is real. This is 
not correct. The Jagath (Cosmos) is also real. When you have the love-filled vision, the whole 
cosmos appears Brahmanayam (permeated by the Absolute). When you see the world with the 
physical eye it appears as a bundle of miseries from birth to death. Love of God is the only way 
out of this misery. Acquire this love at least now. There is nothing greater than this that I can 
convey to you. 


Practise at least some part of what you hear 


Embodiments of the Divine Aatma! You listen to many discourses and exhortations from great 
speakers. They do not become part of you unless you practice at least some part of what you 
hear. Whatever position one may hold in any bank, what belongs to him in it is only the amount 
of his deposit in it. Likewise, whatever great teachings you may listen to, only that part of the 
teachings which you practice belongs to you. All that you merely hear is not yours. 


Wealth and education are not good or bad in themselves. This depends on how each individual 
uses them. When they are used for right ends, they become good. This calls for purity of the 
heart. 


Treat all experiences with equanimity 


On Yugadi day, it is the practice among the rural folk to eat what is called "Yugadi pachchadi" 
(New Year savoury). This chutney is made from neem flowers, mango juice, honey, sugar and 
other ingredients with different tastes. The inner significance of this preparation is to indicate 
that life is a mix-rare of good and bad, joy and sorrow and all of them have to be treated alike. 
All experiences have to be treated with equanimity. Everyone should make a resolve that he will 
face calmly whatever happens in this year, accepting it with good grace. Welcome everything. 
Do not bemoan over anything untoward. Consider everything as for your own good. Men should 
rise above sorrow and happiness, success and failure. This is the primary message of the Yugadi 
festival. Everything that occurs should be treated as a gift from God. 


This world is a mixture of pleasure and pain, which are inseparable. Pleasure is the outcome of 
pain. By developing equal-mindedness, you must cherish faith in God. Fill your hearts with Love 
of God, and perform your duties with dedication. This is the foremost duty of man. 


Kalyana Mandap, Brindavan, Yugadi Day, 4 Apr 1992 


Greed is the monstrous evil that drags man down. When Ravana 
lay dying, Rama directed His brother, Lakshmana, to go to him 
and learn from him the secrets of successful statecraft! Ravana 
taught him that a king who is eager to win glory must suppress 
greed as soon as it lifts its head, and welcome the smallest chance 
to do good to others, without the slightest procrastination! He had 
learnt the lesson through bitter experience! 


Sathya Sai Baba 


11. Parents and Teachers Must Set The Example 


In this worm life is transient, 
Wealth and youth are not permanent; 
Equally impermanent are wife and children; 


Only Truth and reputation are lasting. 


Concerned only with one's good and teaching the truth, 
The preceptor may chastise or beat one, 

Like the mother who administers unpalatable medicine 
For the good of her child 

Do not forget this truth. 


What greater gift is there than the gift of food? 
What greater deity is there than one's parents ? 


What greater morality is there than promoting the public good? 


What righteousness can excel more than compassion ? 


Is there any gain superior to the company of the good? 


Is there any disability worse than enmity ? 

Is there any death on earth worse than infamy? 

Is there anything more valuable than lasting fame ? 

Can anything be more sustaining than remembrance of the Lord? 


Is there a heaven higher than inner joy ? 


Embodiments of the Divine Aatma! If children are to be persons of good character, adhering to 
good practices, the parents should be of good character and exemplary conduct. 


The great teacher, Adi Sankaracharya, was the child of parents who were highly virtuous and 
noble in their conduct. For the great name attained by Ramakrishna Paramahamsa and Swami 
Vivekananda, the credit goes to their parents. Many great men achieved name and fame by 
following in the footsteps of their parents. 


A lesson Gandhi learnt as a boy 


If Gandhi, who was an ordinary person, was able to achieve greatness and world renown, it was 
because of the lessons in good behaviour which he learnt from his mother. The mother used to 


observe a vow: she would take her food only after the cuckoo sang in the morning. Once when 
Gandhi was a boy, the mother was waiting for a long time to hear the call of the cuckoo. 
Observing this, Gandhi went out of the house, imitated the call of the cuckoo and came in and 
told his mother that the cuckoo had sung and that she could take her food. The mother, who saw 
through her son's trickery, slapped him on the cheek and said, "You wicked fellow; what sin 
must I have committed to bear a son like you?" She felt sad that such a child should have been 
born to her. Her grief touched the heart of Gandhi. From that moment Gandhi took a firm resolve 
never to utter a lie again. 


In his childhood, Gandhi used to be full of fear. There was a maid in his home called Rambha. 
Gandhi disclosed to her how he was always afraid. Rambha told him: "Child, always recite the 
name of Rama. By chanting Rama's name, your fear will go away." From that time Gandhi was 
always chanting the name of Rama. The habit of reciting Rama's name, which began in his 
boyhood, continued fight up to the moment of his passing. Nor was that all. By adhering to the 
chanting of Rama's name, Gandhiji was able to achieve his aim of winning the country's freedom 
by non-violent means. For such a life of purity and virtue, the parents were primarily responsible. 


Today parents themselves lack refined qualifies 


Unfortunately, today, because the parents themselves have no purity of character and lack 
refined qualities, and do not lead regulated lives, evil practices and wickedness are growing all 
over the world. When the parents get up from their beds abusing each other, their children get up 
assailing each other. Because of the malefic effects of the Kali age, parents tend to be 
quarrelsome. Fathers are behaving like Hiranya Kashyapa. Because of such parents, Bharath is 
witnessing the spread of unrighteousness and evil practices. 


In days of yore the people of Bharath earned name and fame by leading virtuous and sacred fives 
and were an example to the world. The children of today take after their parents. The tree is 
based on the seed and the seed determines the nature of the tree. For the evil ways and bad 
behaviour of children today, the parents alone are to be blamed. Few parents choose to tell their 
children to speak the truth, to act righteously and earn a good name. Because of such bad parents, 
the nation is forfeiting its good name. It is better that such children are not born at all. They are a 
disgrace to their parents and to their country. Their education and their jobs may help to bring to 
them power, position and wealth but do not serve to promote in them such virtues as compassion, 
kindness and sacrifice. All their acquisitions have no permanence. 


Whatever strength one may possesses, without the strength of the Divine, he is a weakling. What 
happened to a valiant person like Kama? He had physical prowess, intellectual abilities and great 
scholarship but lacking Divine support, he met with a pitiable end. 


Teachers' failure to teach the right path 


For all the ills with which the nation is afflicted today, the parents and teachers are responsible. 
The teachers do not punish the students (for their lapses). Because the students are not punished 
for their mistakes, they behave as they please. The teachers are responsible for the sins of the 
students. They do not teach the students the right path. They transmit only book knowledge, but 
do not teach fight knowledge, wise living and higher values. If there are no morals and no human 
values, a man becomes a demon. 


Only he is a real man who harmonises in his life the body, the mind and the Aatma. A life based 
on the body and the senses is an animal existence. One who is totally dominated by the thoughts 


and fancies of the mind is a demon. One who ignores the calls of the body and the mind and 
follows the call of the Spirit is Divine. The animal, the demonic and the Divine possibilities are 
immanent in the human condition. Hence, one who values only the body and follows the 
inclinations of the senses is comparable to an animal. In a sense, the animal may be considered 
superior to such a man because it has "a season and a reason" for its behaviour. But one having 
the human form, who craves for sensuous pleasures alone, is worse than an animal. 


Character is more important than wealth 


Even for these three kinds of behaviour, the parents and teachers are responsible. They are 
responsible for the good or bad conduct of the students. It is the parents who lead children to the 
highest levels or cause their fall to the lowest depths. 


Parents are concerned solely about the material welfare of their children and have no concern for 
their moral and spiritual well-being. When a child is born, the parents desire that he should be 
educated, sent abroad, encouraged to make as much money as possible there by whatever means. 
This is all that they teach their children. People today earn money in so many different ways, 
from begging to dacoity. It is not wealth that is important. Character is primary. Parents do not 
teach the children to cultivate good qualities. They do not control children who go astray. They 
condone the lapses of the children and often encourage them in their bad habits. They are 
encouraged in their wrong ways even as Duryodhana was encouraged by his father, 
Dhritharashtra. It is because of such parents that the children today take to wrong courses. 


Dhritharashtra was not only physically blind, but lacked also the eyes of wisdom. He was totally 
blind. Parents today are tending to be equally blind. They don't correct the mistakes of their 
children or chastise them. They are afraid that the children might run away and commit suicide. 
Parents have the right to warn and correct their children. Why should they be afraid to do so? 
What does it matter what happens to such wicked children? Instead of being a running sore for 
the parents, it is better they are no more. Death is preferable to infamy. Nor is there greater 
wealth than fame. Better to have a renowned son who is short-lived than an infamous son with 
long life. 


Ensure world peace by winning God's love 


The foremost thing which man has to acquire today is God's love. This love will secure world 
peace, peace in society and peace in the home. Through the individual's love and morality, there 
will be peace and security in the home. By individuals winning the love of God, society secures 
peace and order. When the people have got the love of God, the world as a whole enjoys peace 
and happiness. 


Happiness and peace are not to be found in wealth, position or power. All these generate only 
fear and anxiety and not peace and happiness. Today, even highly educated persons do not 
recognise this truth, pose as devotees, but follow the examples of their parents. Hiranya 
Kashyapa tried all methods to divert his son, Prahlada, from devotion to God. The child was 
subjected to every conceivable kind of torture and ordeal: trampling by elephants, biting by 
cobras and immersion in the sea. But Prahlada's devotion to the Lord saved him. Disregarding 
his perverse father, Prahlada held fast to the Lord. 


Noble and Divine feelings are absent today 


There is nothing great about being a father. No father can rejoice merely when a son is born. 
Only when the people praise the virtues of the son will the father rejoice over his birth. A 


righteous son redeems himself and his family. Verily, they alone are fit to be called parents who 
bring up such virtuous children. 


Prahlada declared, "He alone is a father who tells his son: Child, realise God. He is a true Guru 
who leads the disciple to God." Such teachers and parents have become rare these days. All that 
had brought fame and glory to the country in the past has become a waste because of the decline 
of moral values and behaviour. The educational system is utterly vitiated. There is no attempt to 
promote human qualities. Noble and Divine feelings are absent. It is utterly unbecoming of those 
who call themselves human beings to behave like animals with no devotion to God. 


What does the word "Bhagavan" mean? It is not a nominal title. "Brahmethi, Paramaatmethi, 
Bhaga Ithi Sah," says the Veda. That is, Bhagavan is the One who is the Supreme Absolute and 
Over-Soul. The word Bhaga means Sambhartha and Bhartha. Sambhartha is one who is 
responsible for creation of the cosmos. Bhartha refers to one who sustains and protects the 
cosmos. This means that Bhagavan is One who has the power of creation and protection. "Bhaâ€ 
means kaanthi (effulgence) and Shanthi (peace). "Ga" means one who is all-pervading, "vaan" 
means the one who has the capacity. Thus, "Bhagavan" refers to one who illumines and confers 
peace on the universe. 


Man today does not seek to comprehend the inner meaning of Divinity. Them is nothing in this 
world apart from the Divine. All that is seen in the phenomenal world is permeated by the 
Divine. The egoistic conceit of man, which makes him feel that he is the doer and enjoyer, is the 
cause of his ruin. This egoism has to be routed out. Man must seek to manifest his divinity. Only 
then can peace and security be established in the world. 


Responsibility of parents towards children 


Every effort has to be made to experience Divine love and purity. One who has secured love can 
accomplish anything. Nothing is beyond his reach. Hence, one should be worthy of God's grace. 
Without Divine grace, man is no more than an animal. Man should strive to control his senses, 
develop good qualifies and lead an ideal life. Parents are primarily responsible for bringing up 
children who will lead such ideal lives. - Therefore, they have to reform themselves. 


Today parents all over the country are worried about the conduct of their children and are not at 
all happy. They lament about the behaviour of their children, but do not realise that they are 
themselves to be blamed. If the parents had brought up the children on fight lines, would they go 
astray? Pampering the children in various ways, they are allowed to go about like street dogs. 
How can such boys be reformed? It is impossible. When wealth grows, arrogance increases and 
morality declines. 


Men should realise that without God's love, human existence is utterly valueless. A bird like 
Jatayu earned God's grace. A simple old woman like Sabari won God's love. But men today, 
despite their scholarship and scientific knowledge, are making no attempts to secure God's love. 
What is the use of this education or science? True science should serve to promote the progress 
of the nation. But today, in the name of science, the world is being destroyed. 


Education should not breed a class of parasites, who exploit others. It should help to promote 
good qualities. 


Victory can be won only with God's grace 


Students should remember that this country was known in the past as a land where people led 
truthful and righteous lives. Krishna told Arjuna that he should consider God and Dharma 
(Righteousness) as most important. Because the Pandavas adhered to Righteousness and had 
firm faith in God, they could ultimately enjoy all prosperity and happiness. Because of their love 
for God, they could bear with fortitude all troubles and difficulties. What was the fate of the 
Kauravas who ignored God? Not one of Dhritharashtra's hundred sons survived. Despite all the 
resources they had and the valiant commanders who were on their side, God was not on their 
side. 


True victory can be won only by God's grace. Students! Strive for securing the love of God. 
Today, love is being misused for satisfying the senses, with deplorable results. (Swami related 
the dialogue between Yajnavalkya and his wife, Maithreyee, over attachment to the things of the 
world and pointed out how Maithreyee was as ready to give up worldly possessions as the sage 
himself). 


Today, such couples are rare. There must be such couples who will give birth to virtuous 
children. Only virtuous children can bring a good name to the country. 


Of what use is a son who does not use his hands to perform good deeds, who does not use his 
tongue to utter the Lord's name and who does not cherish in his mind truth and compassion? This 
is the triple purity that makes human life sublime. 


Students should dedicate their lives to the service of others. Cultivate love. Remember the great 
mothers in the past who gave to the world Avatars from time to time. What is the inner 
significance of observing today as Mother's day? It means that women should become such great 
mothers. The fathers should be exemplary in their conduct. When the fathers are not setting the 
fight example, the children should be such as to have the courage to correct the parents. But 
unfortunately there are neither exemplary parents nor exemplary children. 


Students! Fill your hearts with love. 
Kalyana Mandap, Brindavan, 6 May 1992 


I am always emphasising the value of Service as a Sadhana for 
realising the Oneness of all in God and the oneness of one's self 
with God. I do not recommend the giving up of Karma, for it is not 
possible. What is generally meant by Karmasanyas is the giving up 
of rites and rituals prescribed by the Scriptures. I call upon you to 
adhere to a new rite, Seva a new Yaga, Sacrifice of the Ego, a new 
ritual of worship, Saranagathi, dedication of all thoughts, words 
and deeds at the Lotus Feet of the Lord and acceptance of all that 
happens as Grace from Him 


Sathya Sai Baba 


12. No Greater Sin Than Ingratitude 


When rain falls on a sandy bed, it seeps down; 
When the same rain falls on a bed of clay, 

it remains sweet water; 

When raindrops fall into an oyster, 

they become pearls. 

Likewise, devotion results in what one deserves. 


Embodiments of Divine Love! For all names and forms in the world, there is one that is basic. 
Without that basis no object can have a name or form. For instance, here is a tumbler. It has 
name and form. But its primary base is silver. When the tumbler is melted, what remains is only 
the silver. What happened to the earlier name and form? They have merged in the silver. 


Likewise, the basic truth underlying all the myriad names and forms in the world is the Sathwik 
principle. It is pure Sathya. It is Divine. It is this Divine Principle that enables everything to have 
a name and form. 


"Ekoham Bahushyaam" (I am One, let me become the Many). It was by the Will of the Divine 
that all the myriad objects came into existence. The basic principle in this multiplicity is oneness. 
Between the numbers one and nine, nine is the larger number. But, in fact, the number nine is 
made up of nine ones (1 + 1 + 1...). One is the basic number. So also all the diversity has 
emanated from the One. 


Life is an interlude between birth and death 


What is the meaning of human life? It is an interlude between birth and death. In this interlude, 
men are victims of a variety of desires. There is no harmony between men's thoughts, words and 
actions. What is the reason? Man's actions are not in accordance with his thoughts. 


Man's thoughts are full of ideals. But he makes no effort to act up to these ideals. He thinks in 
one way, speaks in another way and acts in a different way. Consequently, he is subject to all 
kinds of sorrow and disorder. This is because he fails to satisfy his conscience. A man without 
self-satisfaction can have no peace. When can self-satisfaction be realised? When them is unity 
and harmony in thought, word and deed: to speak as you feel and to act up to your words. 


Man today is racked by all kinds of troubles. Are these troubles designed to make man miserable 
or to elevate him to a higher level of existence? Every trouble is really a step in elevating man. If 
there are no troubles, man will have no proper lessons. Troubles constitute good lessons. Trouble 
and pleasure are inextricably mixed and cannot be separated from each other by anyone. Pleasure 
has no separate existence. It is the fruit of pain. This basic truth is not recognised by man. When 
grief smites him, he succumbs to it. He gloats over some happy experience. His entire life is 
bound up with these varying experiences of pleasure and pain. 


Therefore, man has to cultivate the sense of equanimity in pleasure and suffering. There is a joy 
in sorrow. There is suffering in happiness. It is only when man cultivates the sense of equanimity 
in all circumstances, in pleasure or pain, that he will be able to experience peace. 


Thoughts are basis for the actions 


All experiences of pleasure and pain have their origin in the thoughts of man. Thought is like the 
seed of a tree, which in due course puts forth branches, leaves, flowers and fruits. All that you 
see in a tree has come from a small seed. Likewise, although man's thought is subtle, it contains 
potentially the entire universe. The atom is the microcosm of the Universe. Students are aware of 
the huge size of the banyan tree. Its seed, however, is very small. The seed and the tree are 
essentially one. 


Man has to keep a watch over his thoughts because they form the basis for his actions. When his 
wishes are fulfilled, he is content. When they are not realised, he feels disappointed. Man does 
not enquire into the causes of these divergent results. His failures are the result of his own 
shortcomings. When his heart is pure, his actions yield beneficial results. His thoughts are the 
cause of the success or failure of his efforts. Hence, man must utilise his thoughts in the proper 
manner. His vision of the world depends on how he looks at it. "As he feels, so he becomes." 
When one's thoughts are sublime, the results are also sublime. 


Man owes the society for all his achievements 


Man receives help from various people in the world. Without such help, men cannot progress 
towards a higher level of existence. In childhood, the mother looks after the child. In boyhood, 
the father provides for his education. Later, he is involved in activities with friends. And then his 
kith and kin involve him in family relationships. Thus various persons assist man in his life. 
Without the help of various people, no one can progress towards a higher life. 


A man who has derived help in this manner, what help is he rendering to his fellowmen? It is 
good to render help to one who has helped you. It is even greater to-help one who has done you 
harm. When this is the case, it is essential that man should serve the society that has helped him 
in so many ways. He owes to society the name and position he has achieved. Hence he must 
render service. This was the dictum of sage Vyasa as the distilled essence of his eighteen 
Puranas: "It is meritorious to render help to others; it is sinful to do them harm." This means: 
Help ever, hurt never. Do not cause harm to anyone. If you can help anyone, do so. 


The difference between mistake and sin 


Once Duryodhana declared, "I know what is good and what is bad. I also know that bad 
consequences will follow bad actions. But I am impelled to do only bad deeds. I know what is 
good. I know that good deeds will yield good results. But my mind is not inclined towards doing 
good. What is the reason for this? It is the absence of purity in my thoughts. My heart is filled 
with selfishness. My life has grown in the soil of selfishness. Out of selfishness I am seeking 
gains for myself. For selfish reasons I am harassing the Pandavas. I am aware of this. I am doing 
all this consciously." 


If one commits a wrong unwittingly, he is guilty of committing a mistake. But if he commits it 
deliberately, he is committing a sin. This is the difference between a mistake and a sin. 


In this context, it may be pointed out that Karna is a great example of one who cherished 
gratitude for the good done to him. He was not only a great donor who gave away whatever was 
sought from him. His loyalty to his master was unbounded. He was ever ready to lay down his 
life for his master. 


The ruler of Panchala announced that his daughter Draupadi would be given in marriage to any 
bowman who could bring down an overhanging fish-yantra by looking at its reflection in water. 
Rulers from many countries had assembled there. Draupadi was no ordinary woman. She 
emanated from a blaze of fire. Who was worthy of her hand in marriage? Those taking part in the 
wedding contest had to abide by one of two conditions. Either he should be a ruler or a 
Kshatriya. Karna was a great warrior. He had come to take part in the contest. Unfortunately, he 
was not the ruler of any state and he was a charioteer's son, not a Kshatriya. For these reasons, he 
was asked to withdraw from the contest. He felt depressed that in spite of all his other 
accomplishments he could not take part in the contest. As he was walking back, Duryodhana got 
up with the feeling, "There is no one equal in prowess to Karna excepting Arjuna. With Karna on 
my side I can always deal with the Pandavas." He came to Karna's help at that moment. In that 
assemblage, he made Kama King of Angadesa. 


For that one act of magnanimity, by which he was made a ruler, Kama pledged himself to serve 
Duryodhana by shedding the last drop of blood for him. 


Later on, the Kauravas and Pandavas had gathered their forces for war. Krishna had tried his best 
to prevent the Armageddon as he knew the infinite calamities war brought in its train. He went as 
an envoy of the Pandavas to plead for a peaceful settlement with the Kauravas. Arjuna told 
Krishna that it was futile to parley with the wicked Kauravas and that they should get ready for 
battle. 


A mother's love is unbounded 


A day before the battle was to begin, Kunthi, the mother of the Pandavas, realised what was 
impending. She was the mother of Karna also. Karna was her first-born who was the child of a 
boon from the Sun-God. She was aware of his extraordinary powers and sought an opportunity to 
meet him. There may be bad sons, but there is no bad mother. A mother's love is unbounded. 
One day, Karna was performing Sandhya vandanam in the morning after taking a bath in the 
river. Getting news of this from her maids, Kunthi went to the river bank. Karna was in 
meditation. Kunthi stood behind him. As she stood, she was overwhelmed by grief at seeing him 
after a long time. She was also stricken with sorrow at the prospect of her near and dear ones 
dying in the impending battle. 


Kunthi reveals that Karna was her son 


Unable to bear the grief, she wailed aloud. Karna emerged suddenly from his meditation. He saw 
Kunthidevi before him. He did not know that she was his mother, though he knew she was the 
mother of the Pandavas. He asked her, "Mother! Why are you in such great sorrow? I am Karna 
the son of Radha. I offer my salutations to you. Please let me know the cause of your grief." 


Kunthi replied, "Dear child, you are not the son of Radha. You are my son. You were born to me 
as a boon from the Sun-God. To avoid public ignominy, I left you on the Ganga. I am a great 
sinner. I pitilessly abandoned you on the Ganga though you were a new-born babe. For selfish 
reasons, to safeguard my name, I abandoned you in this manner. You are my eldest son. The 
Pandavas are your brothers and Dharmaraja is your younger brother. Dear son, give me one 
promise. If all of you were united, you could rule the entire world. You could become the 
emperor. All the Pandavas will obey and follow your footsteps like a shadow. I give you my 
word. Do not bear any enmity towards the Pandavas in the impending battle. Consider them in 
your heart as your brothers. Ponder over the sorrow that afflicts your mother." 


When Karna heard these words, he was caught in a whirl and his mind was in confusion. "I had 
heard now and then about the secret of my origin, but never before from the mouth of my 
mother. The Pandavas are indeed my brothers. I am Kunthidevi's son. But at this juncture, am I 
to abide by my mother's words? Or am I to show my gratitude to my master?" Kama debated 
thus within himself. 


Karna's refusal to betray his master 


He told Kunthi: "Whether he was a wicked or an unrighteous person, it was Duryodhana who 
gave me a position of honour and raised me to my present state. I cannot betray my master. But, 
because you are my Mother, I will give you one promise declared Kama. "Promise to the mother 
is one thing; loyalty to the master is a different thing. The former is in the nature of a fight. The 
latter is a responsibility. They are like the two wheels of a chariot or the two wings of a bird. 
They go together. Mother, I give you this promise. When the occasion arises, I shall spare 
Dharmaraja, Bheema, Nakula and Sahadeva. I will not harm them. But I will not spare Arjuna. If 
in this battle I lose my life, the five Pandavas will be your sons. In case Arjuna dies, you will still 
have five sons. I will take the place of Arjuna among the Pandavas. In any case, there will be no 
diminution in the number of your five sons. This is my plighted word." 


Saying this, Kama caught hold of his mother's feet and said, "Mother! The other day, in the court 
of Dhrupadha, Duryodhana saved my honour. I know he is a wicked man. I also know that the 
Pandavas are the very embodiment of Dharma. But I will be worse than a cruel animal in the 
forest if I forget the good done to me by Duryodhana. I have to show my gratitude to my master. 
In this respect, there can be no change in my attitude," declared Kama. 


No atonement for betraying the Divine 


Later, Karna gave away even the earrings given to him by the Sun-God. And he offered to Indra 
the armour he was wearing. He even laid down his life for his master. But he did not give up the 
gratitude he owed to Duryodhana. 


It must be remembered that there is a means of atoning for the killing of a Brahmin or a cow or 
an infant. But there is no way of atoning for betraying the preceptor or the Divine. If you turn 
ungrateful you will be worse than a wild beast. 


Kunthi then declared: "I shall be happy if you remain a man with such high ideals. Let me tell 
you there is no one who can slay Arjuna. You bear animosity towards Arjuna. I am content with 
your promise. It is enough if you spare Dharmaraja, Bheema, Nakula and Sahadeva." 


In this context, observe how much gratitude existed among the Pandavas. Dharmaraja, Bheema 
and Arjuna were the sons of Kunthi. Nakula and Sahadeva were the sons of Madri (the second 
wife of Pandu). When Madri was about to commit Sari on her husband's funeral pyre, 
Dharmaraja gave her a promise. He said, "Mother! You are about to give up your life for the 
sake of my father. I shall look after your sons with even greater concern than for my uterine 
brothers. Whatever differences may arise between us, I shall treat them as my own brothers." He 
gave this pledge to Madri. 


In the Mahabharatha, during the stay of the Pandavas in exile, the four brothers--Bheema, 
Arjuna, Nakula and Sahadeva---died at a pond where they had gone to bring water because they 
refused to answer the questions which the guardian Yaksha (spirit) of the pond wished to put to 
them before they were allowed to take the water. Dharmaraja then came to the pond and 
answered all the questions put to him by the Yaksha. 


The Yaksha was so pleased with the replies that he granted a boon to Dharmaraja. He was 
prepared to restore to life one of the four brothers whom Dharmaraja would name. Dharmaraja 
promptly asked that Nakula or Sahadeva might be restored to life. The Yaksha wondered why 
Dharmaraja did not ask for the restoration of one of his own brothers, Bheema or Arjuna, but 
preferred one of the two stepbrothers. Dharmaraja replied that as he was there as a surviving son 
for his mother Kunthi, he wanted that a son of his stepmother, Madri, should be alive. 
Dharmaraja mentioned the pledge he had given to Madri. Appreciating the large-mindedness of 
Dharmaraja, the Yaksha restored all the four brothers to life. 


Gratitude is a great virtue 


Gratitude is a great virtue. When the power of gratitude is realised, it will be seen that it can give 
benefits much more than anyone can imagine. If out of narrow-mindedness, men become 
ungrateful, they will suffer grievously. If such is the case in regard to purely human 
relationships, how much more rewarding gratitude can be when it is offered to God? 


Dear Students! This is a period of innocence and inexperience in your life. You are filled with 
desires. You tend to be selfish and self-centred. But even so, you can make your lives sacred and 
meaningful by carrying out the injunctions of the Divine. If you adhere to this one rule, you will 
redeem your lives and promote the welfare of your families and your society. Although 
Dharmaraja asked only for the restoration to life of only one stepbrother, the Yaksha revived all 
the brothers. 


Karna stands out as the supreme exemplar of gratitude. He demonstrated what it means to be 
grateful to one who has helped you, even if he happens to be a wicked person. 


Kalyana Mandap, Brindavan, 10 May 1992 


13. Love The Motherland: Serve The World 


English education has become all-important; 
Spiritual education has receded; 

How, then, can purity of heart be experienced? 
That purity alone is the backbone of education. 
Ignorant of the high ideals of 

The Divine culture of Bharath, 

Bharathiyas make no effort to know their heritage. 
What greater misfortune can there be than this? 


Dear Students! True Bharathiya education consists in instilling in the students reverence for 
Bharath and its cultural heritage. It is not politics that will protect Bharath. Nor will bombs and 
arms protect it. It is the patriotism and spirit of sacrifice enshrined in the hearts of the people and 
their spiritual outlook that will protect the nation. Hence students today should be filled with the 
spirit of sacrifice, cultivate selfless devotion to the country and prepare themselves to pursue the 
spiritual path. Only such students--boys and girls---can protect the nation and safeguard its 
security. 


Bharathiya education is not a prison-house 


Bharathiya education is not the kind of education which makes one spend a lot of money to 
acquire a degree and then go about with a begging bowl for jobs. It aims at promoting self- 
reliance, instilling in the student the noble idea of promoting the progress of the country in a 
spirit of sacrifice and leading a joyous life of dedicated service to the people. It seeks to promote 
unity in diversity. It prepares the minds of students to fight against all forms of injustice, 
corruption and wickedness afflicting society. 


Bharathiya education is not a prison-house for creating mental slavery or bondage to a job. It 
proclaims in strident terms: "The One abides as the Inner Spirit in all beings." It calls upon 
everyone to manifest his divinity. Thus, true Bharathiya education seeks to instil patriotism, 
promote the spirit of sacrifice, and encourage spiritual pursuits and thereby lead an ideal life. 


Students! Education does not mean imparting worldly knowledge for leading a mundane 
existence. True education should inspire one with feelings and thoughts to lead an ideal life. 


When a man is born, he is endowed with limited capacities. But owing to the misuse of the 
senses and the limitless growth of desires, these capacities are wasted away. As a consequence, 
he becomes prematurely old and dies. Hence, these limited capacities should be properly used by 
controlling the senses, thereby prolonging one's life, and dedicating one's knowledge and talents 
to the service of society. It is only when students develop character and integrity that they will be 
able to transform the moral climate of the word around them. It is because education has failed to 
transform human behaviour that there is no mental or spiritual development among them. For 
this purpose, a system of Dharma (moral order) has to be established that will promote both 
worldly and other-worldly well-being. Only then will humanity be divinised. 


Three qualities and three Gunas 


A student has to possess three qualities. â€œSarva loka hithe rathaah" (Rejoicing in the well-being 
of the entire world). This is the first quality. The student must wish for the welfare of every 
country. The second quality is "Sarvajnaana Sambhavaah" (acquire all knowledge). This means 
that his knowledge should not be confined only to worldly matters. His knowledge should 
comprehend the spiritual. Every man is endowed with Jnaana (knowledge). This assumes many 
forms. It is not mere intellectual exercise or mental speculation. It does not mean living in a 
dream world. It is not a product of the imagination. Jnaana, in its profound sense, is the 
experience of oneness--"Ekaika dharshanam." "Adwaitha dharshanam jnaanam" (Perception of 
the One alone is Wisdom), declares the scripture. Them is no duality in this Jnaana. Ajnaana 
(ignorance) is the reverse of this awareness. This awareness should be reflected every moment, 
in every step of a human being. 


To acquire such awareness or knowledge, one has to secure three capacities. One, a healthy 
body, two, sense control, three, restraining the mind. If any one of these three is lacking, the 
awareness will be incomplete. All three should be in the right condition. If there is a defect in 
any one of them, full Sathwik knowledge cannot be got. 


Abuse of the senses 


The reason for the prevalence of various ailments among students today is the dissipation of 
energy caused by the abuse of the senses. For instance, the eye has a limited capacity to see. So 
the eyes should be used up to their capacity. This is the rationale for the motto: "See no evil. See 
what is good." 


The ears also have limits to what they can hear. You should not let the ears hear whatever you 
like. Thereby, the ears lose their power of hearing. 


The tongue is a powerful organ, but it also is subject to certain limits. By indulging in excessive 
speech, using harsh words and unpleasant language, the tongue's power is weakened. The 
tongue's power of speech is diminished by four practises: uttering falsehood, abusing others, 
indulging in slander, and excessive talking. 


In this manner, the powers of the senses are being wasted by their misuse. As a result, one's life 
itself gets debilitated. 


It is not difficult to go through the education process. By some effort, marks may be scored. But 
neither the blossoming of intelligence nor the unfoldment of good qualities can be witnessed in 
such students. The scoring of high marks or winning of high rank is not great in itself. What is 
important is the transformation of the mind. In the pursuit of education, practising what one 
learns is most essential. The external gains derived from education are accompanied by an equal 
amount of losses. The powers of intelligence and discrimination are lost. Knowledge of what is 
good, what is significant and what is supreme wisdom is lost. People are becoming slaves of the 
senses. The Kathopanishad declared: "The slave of the senses is a fool. Only the man who 
subdues the senses is a hero." 


Anyone who misuses his senses is a fool 


Here is an illustration. Ravana was a greater scholar than Rama. He was a master of sixty-four 
categories of knowledge. He knew also knowledge about the training of cows and elephants. 
Despite all these accomplishments, Ravana was described by Valmiki as a muurkha (a stubborn 


fool). Rama was described as Dharmamuurthi (the very image of righteousness). Despite all his 
knowledge, Ravana failed to keep his senses under control. Because he let his senses have free 
play, he became a fool. Anyone who misuses his senses is a fool, whatever the extent of his 
knowledge. Rama had full control of his senses and maintained perfect equipoise in all 
circumstances, whether of joy or grief. When he had to leave for the forest at the very moment 
that had been fixed for his coronation, he left for the forest with serene equanimity. He was 
unaffected by gains or losses, pleasure or pain. Life is a mixture of happiness and misery. 


Students! Your first task is to cultivate control over the senses. Only the student who has mastery 
over the senses can be heroic in his life and be strong and effulgent as a diamond. The one who 
is a slave of the senses will be a slave of the world. Self-control must be the primary aim of 
education. 


Students today are not filled with love for the country. They are also lacking in self-confidence. 
And there is no sign of faith in the Spirit in them. Students therefore should cherish patriotism 
and develop self-confidence. Only then will they be in a position to make use of their education 
for serving the country and promoting the well-being and prosperity of the nation. 


Ideals in life are very important 


Educated persons today are totally immersed in selfish pursuits. They do not think of service to 
others or the good of the nation. They are concerned about their jobs even before they complete 
their education. The link between education and employment should be completely snapped. 
Education should be for life and not for a living. 


It is not earning a livelihood that is important. What matters is the ideals for which you live. The 
primary purpose of education is to enable one to manifest the divinity within him. When students 
pursue education in this spirit, they will promote the welfare of the nation, of society and their 
own good. 


Therefore, education should not be pursued as a means for achieving a desired end. This is a 
degrading attitude. All worldly desires can confer only limited pleasure. How, then, is one to 
achieve lasting bliss? It cannot be got through the body. Only through inner experience can 
lasting bliss be secured. Then alone is there fulfilment in life. 


Today there is no harmony between thought, word and deed. Thinking in one way, speaking in a 
different way, and acting in a different way, men are getting themselves bound by their own 
contradictions. In the process, they are deceiving themselves. 


Keep desires within limits 


Education should be pursued, not merely for acquiring degrees, but for cultivating human values. 
All riches are ephemeral. Do not become slaves of wealth. Become subjects of good qualities. 
Wealth without character is worthless. Life becomes an ideal one when character constitutes 
one's wealth. The blossoming of one's character leads to radiance in life. 


When a child is born, he is innocent of all desires. As he grows older, desires multiply. These 
desires have to be kept within limits. Life is a long journey and the less luggage you carry, the 
greater the comfort. Reducing desires is the true mark of civilisation. The government has 
imposed ceilings on land, on houses, and on many other things. But there is no ceiling on desires. 
Education should lead to restraint on desires. 


It should be realised that every organ in the body has a limit to what it can do. It is dangerous to 
use it beyond that limit. This applies to almost everything in life. Whenever the limit is 
exceeded, there is an adverse consequence. Excessive light will burn the retina. A deafening 
noise may damage the eardrum. 


Students! You are not unaware of the situation in the world today. Wherever you turn, there is 
disorder and violence. Man has been given two boons. Sukham and Shanthi (happiness and 
peace). Every person in the world, from a king to a beggar, desires only these two. But what is 
the happiness that he should seek? Is it physical, mental, or material pleasure? Men are not sure 
about what kind of happiness they want and wherefrom they can get it. If it is sensory pleasure 
that they want, they will find that these are only momentary and that they are weakened at the 
end. This is no pleasure at all. What about peace? People consider freedom from worry as peace. 
Thyagaraja declared that there can be no pleasure without peace. How is peace to be secured? 
Only when desires are reduced will peace be secured. As desires grow, peace is lost. 


Develop contentment to put an end to desires 


Man is a prey to insatiable desires. As soon as he realises one desire, he develops a desire for 
something more attractive. He wants to become a legislator. Soon after he becomes one, he 
wants to become a minister and thereafter the Chief Minister. He is not content with that. He 
desires to go to Delhi. There is no end to these desires. Man should develop contentment. The 
discontented man loses in many ways. A student may desire to score high marks, but he should 
not wish that others should not fare equally well. This selfish attitude is unbecoming. All should 
fare equally well in the examinations. All should achieve excellence. Students should have this 
broadminded attitude. 


Rejoice in the success of others 


The stage of the student is like that of a tender sapling. When it is tended properly, it will grow 
into a good tree. From this young age you should see that the mind does not go astray. Do not 
give room for envy, hatred and arrogance. Rejoice in the success of others. Success will come to 
you of its own accord. Yield place to persons weaker than yourself in queuing for the bus. Shed 
the desire to get ahead of others. Do not always think narrowly about your own position. It is 
only when you develop a broad outlook that you will be able to emerge in the years to come as 
leaders of the nations. You are the leaders of tomorrow. It is only if you develop fight attitudes 
now that you will be able to play your roles properly in the future. Purify your hearts. Control 
your senses. This is the fight path. 


Spirituality does not mean mere meditation or worship. It means getting rid of the pollution in 
the mind. Students should be known for their serenity and orderliness. Instead, we find that there 
is excitement and agitation wherever a few students gather. This should not be allowed to 
happen. 


Students! Yesterday Natesan brought two life-size figures of lions in bronze from his collection 
of antiques. You may wonder why these lions have been displayed on the stage. Many may be 
under the impression that they are kept for decorative purposes. But I considered them from a 
sacred point of view. 


The lion is esteemed as the king of animals. It is not prone to commit anything mean or lowly. It 
is only when it is hungry that it kills an animal. It does not kill animals wantonly. Because it is 
known for its nobility of character it has been dubbed the King of animals. It has been said that 


human birth is rare among living beings. Hence every man should strive to become a lion among 
men. You should not fall a prey to weakness or fear. Be lions and not sheep. 


Our students should become lions who will protect the people as leaders. They should be content 
to use their abilities for satisfying their minimum needs. Do not get involved in foolhardy 
adventure. Observe the proper limits in the use of your talents, wealth or position. Pledge 
yourselves to promote the advancement of the country with determination, courage and spirit of 
sacrifice. Go forward with courage. "God is by your side. God is the Indweller in the heart." 
Have this confidence in yourself. This confidence begets courage. 


Mr. Justice Chandhrachud said that the first requisite is courage. What kind of courage? The one 
who is filled with doubts perishes--"Samshayaathma vinasyathi." Never become "Doubting 
Thomases." Only when you are free from doubts will you become heroic. Doubts will disappear 
where there is self-confidence. â€œShradhavaan labhathe Jnaanam" (The earnest aspirant gains 
supreme wisdom). It is lack of earnestness that gives rise to doubts. Students should develop firm 
faith in sacrifice, patriotism and the spiritual goal. There is no need to tell you more about this, as 
you are familiar with all this as students of the Sathya Sai Institute. But there are quite a few new 
things which you have to learn. And there are many things which you have learnt which you 
have to put into practice and experience the fruits thereof. Moreover, you have to share and 
rejoice with others your experiences. That is the way to experience real bliss. 


Develop firm faith in God 


Students! The Vice-chancellor expressed a wish that Swami should bless the students with 
knowledge of Bharath's culture as embodied in great works like the Mahabharatha and the 
Ramayana. These works are of value not only to Bharathiyas but to the whole of mankind. 
However, it is not enough if you merely listen to these discourses in the Summer Course. You 
should try to transform yourselves as a result. Without such transformation the Summer Course 
will be in vain. Therefore, cherish in your hearts whatever is said here. Develop firm faith in 
God. It is the loss of faith in God that has led to the degradation of mankind today. The existence 
of the Divine is demonstrated, even by science, in many ways. For instance, the sun, the moon, 
the earth and other planets are moving in their different orbits according to certain speeds. It will 
be disastrous for the world if they change their courses. There must be an unknown power which 
determines their movements. Without such a power they would not be following their prescribed 
courses. Who has determined these orbits and limits? We must ponder over this. 


We drop an object from the hand. We see the object falling to the ground. But we do not see the 
power of attraction of the earth---the power of gravitational attraction. The gravitational force is 
there even though you don't see it. To deny what you cannot see is a mark of ignorance. 


How the Divine works 


To give another example. During World War II, millions of men died in Europe. Two years after 
the war ended, the children who were born were predominantly males. What is the mason for 
this? It is the need for maintaining a balance between the ratio of men and women in the 
population. If such a balance is not maintained, the human race will be extinct. What is the 
power that maintains such a balance? It is the will of the Divine. 


Whoever enquires deeply into the workings of the Divine cannot fail to notice this. There is at 
the base of everything a power that is at work. That is divinity. Ignoring this, and placing his 
faith egoistically in some other power, man is falling a prey to ashanthi (unrest). He is a slave to 


his conceit as a doer and enjoyer. This is wrong. There is a principle that is the Prime Mover. 
There is a power which governs the Cosmic process. Few attempt to recognise this. 


However, it may be asked, if God is controlling everything, what is the need for human effort? 
God is like the electric current. But even if the current is there, you must have a bulb to obtain 
light. It is only when the bulb is switched on to the current that the bulb will burn. Students 
should understand how the four values Sathya, Dharma, Shanthi, and Prema, are interrelated. If 
a bulb is to shed light, it has to be connected to a switch by a wire and current should flow in the 
wire. Sathya is the current. Dharma is the wire. Shanthi is the bulb. Prema is the light. When the 
current of Truth is connected to the wire of Righteousness and enters the bulb of Peace, you have 
the light of Love. You can see how all the four are essential. Human effort and Divine Grace 
should come together like the joining of the negative and positive ends of an electric circuit, to 
accomplish anything. 


Students! Fill your hearts with the resolve to promote the welfare of the nation. Do not succumb 
to selfishness and careerism. Dedicate your lives to the well-being of the world and the 
promotion of world peace. 


Institute Auditorium, Brindavan, 21 May 1992 


Drop the delusion that you have become old or diseased, or that 
you have become weak and debilitated. Some people count the 
years and grieve over advancing age and shudder like cowards 
afraid of Death. But remember, elation is Heaven, despondency is 
hell. Have always some work to do and do it so well that you get 
Joy. 

Sathya Sai Baba 


14. From Knowledge To Wisdom 


Not one in a hundred among today's students 
Cares to study the prescribed texts. 

They are anxious only to secure a pass 
Modern education has become a farce. 


Vidya dhadhaathi Vinayam (Education confers humility). Humility does not mean merely an 
external show of respect. The true meaning of humility is the absence of a feeling of Ahamkaara 
and Mamakaara (egoism and the pride of possession). Education should aim at inculcating such 
an attitude among students. Every man should cultivate such feelings of egolessness and 
detachment and lead his life on this basis. 


"Adhyaatma Vidya Vidhyaanaam" (Among studies, I am the study of the spiritual), declared 
Lord Krishna in the Gita. He also observed, "I am the embodiment of spiritual knowledge," in 
the Gita. Pursuing spiritual studies, the ancient sages realised spiritual truths and divinised their 
lives. The greatness and glory of Bharath are based on its spiritual heritage. The true wealth of 
Bharath consists in its spirituality. If spirituality declines in this land, the nation will go to seed. 


Together with this spirituality it is essential to have morality. Morality means ethical behaviour. 
It is the supreme duty of students to demonstrate such conduct in their daily life. A characterless 
student can never enjoy peace or happiness. Morality, thus, determines humanness and leads to 
spiritual illumination. Students should recognise this truth. It was for this reason that in ancient 
times the people of Bharath propagated constantly the value of morality and proclaimed the 
greatness of spirituality. 


Goodness is present within everyone 


Students! "Through perseverance anything can be accomplished," is a well-known adage. For 
instance, goodness in a person is like a piece of burning charcoal. However, the fire in it is 
covered by the ashes of worldly desires. When the ashes are removed by sadhana (spiritual 
practice) the fire of goodness is revealed. Without this sadhana, the goodness will not be 
manifest. In fact, in every man, goodness is shining within as an effulgent light. But this remains 
invisible because it is enveloped in a cloak of worldly attachments. 


Science and technology are making rapid strides today. But along with scientific knowledge, 
ignorance is also growing pari passu. Vijnaana means light. Where there is light there can be no 
darkness. So where them is Vijnaana there is no room for ignorance. But today we notice that 
everywhere, every moment ignorance is apparent. This means that the light of Vijnaana 
(scientific knowledge) is not shining brightly enough. If we had the full light of Vijnaana, them 
would be no sign of ignorance at all. It is clear, therefore, that the light of Vijnaana (science) 
today is not comparable to the light of prajnaana (the fight of complete awareness). Vijnaana is 
form of ignorance. 


It is obvious, therefore, that more than knowledge, what is essential is the refinement of human 
behaviour and Samskara (conduct). Sacrifice and charity are more important than wealth or 
position. Hence, for every individual, practical knowledge of the world is more essential than 
mere adhikaaram (position or authority). The first prerequisite for this is the promotion of 
human values. 


Human values come first 


Because of the absence of human values, it has been impossible to demonstrate the value of 
human existence. Man, therefore, has to start with the cultivation of human values. These human 
values can be developed only by spiritual practices and by no other means. Only when a seed is 
planted in the soil and watered can it sprout and grow from a sapling into a big tree. 


But if the seed is kept in a tin and watered, it will only rot. Likewise with human values, it is 
only when they are implanted in a heart that is sacred and spiritual and nurtured there, that they 
will flourish and shine in all their splendour. Unfortunately, today man's heart is filled with 
narrow selfish concerns. His love is confined to himself and his nearest kith and kin. He does not 
realise that his welfare and the welfare of his family are dependent on the well-being of the 
society. This interrelationship should be grasped by students. They should take a firm resolve to 
eschew selfishness and self-interest and dedicate themselves to the service of society. When the 
society fares well, the nation also will be prosperous. Students should realise the integral unity of 
their individual well-being and the well-being of the society and the nation. 


Spirituality should manifest in your behaviour 


Man aspires for a fruit that is ripe and sweet. Whatever the quality of the seed, if the fruit is 
unripe it will not be enjoyable. No one likes a tasteless fruit. Likewise, society will shun an 
individual who lacks a social consciousness. A student who seeks to earn the respect and regard 
of society should conduct himself properly. He should be a person of integrity. Spirituality 
should be manifested in his behaviour. He should set an example to others. Most students today 
are lacking in such idealism. 


Students tend to have narrow ideas and petty objectives. They have no conception of human 
values. Whatever studies one may pursue or position one may occupy, one must cherish human 
values. 


As a youth, one tends to be hot blooded and conceited. Puffed up with pride, he treats others as 
men of straw. Most students today are immersed in trivial chatter and meaningless pastimes. 
Sacred and ennobling ideas have no appeal for them. In this situation, when they enter on their 
studies, they develop arrogance and ostentation and get into evil ways. They are filled with bad 
thoughts, bad feelings and indulge in bad actions. In the process the primary purpose of 
education is forgotten. Education is regarded as an exercise in getting acquainted with books. He 
forgets that the aim of education is to understand the purpose of life. He relies on the strength of 
body, wealth, position and scholarship and forgets that true strength is derived from 
Righteousness and Divine Grace. Without the power of Righteousness and the grace of the 
Divine, all other forms of strength are of no use. The world has plenty of men with wealth, 
physical prowess, position and authority. Have any of these given them mental peace? No. They 
can only confer name and fame in the mundane sphere. They cannot confer peace or happiness. 
Recognising this truth, students should consider the royal road that will take them to the fight 
goal in the future. 


Man's best friends and worst enemies 


The foremost thing that should be considered by the students today is how to get rid of the bad 
thoughts and bad desires in which they are enveloped. They are the worst enemies of man. 
Man's best friends are good thoughts and good intentions and good behaviour. 


From ancient times it has been the greatness and glory of Bharath to proclaim to the world the 
message of human welfare and praying for the good of all mankind. The world acclaimed the 
fame of Bharath. In those days no other country enjoyed such peace and prosperity as Bharath. 
Bharath was esteemed as the spiritual leader among nations. She was regarded as the preceptor 
for all countries. It is a sign of thoughtlessness for students to forget the greatness of Bharath's 
sacred culture, develop a fascination for exotic manners and customs, and give up Bharath's own 
traditions and practices. It is good for the well-being of every nation to adhere to its own 
traditions and practices. Students should learn to stand on their own legs and not depend on 
others. You must rely on the Divine and not become subservient to others in worldly matters. 
That alone is swechcha (true freedom). 


Act according to dictates of your conscience 


Swechcha means knowledge of the Aatma (Spirit). Self-control is true freedom. Spiritual bliss is 
freedom. Self-realisation is freedom. Swa + Ichcha = Swechcha. Swechcha does not consist in 
living according to one's whims and fancies, indulging in the fleeting pleasures of the senses and 
wasting one's entire life in experiencing momentary joys. Swechcha (freedom) means acting 
according to the dictates of one's conscience. 


In his address earlier this morning, Dr. G. Ventaktaraman mentioned that the Divine, after 
creation, did not keep all powers within Himself but gave them to mankind. This is true. God is 
the Creator. He created everything in the Cosmos. But He did not retain within His hands the 
responsibilities relating to the Creation. He gave to human beings all capacities. But He laid 
down a condition relating to the use of these capacities. Men are free to live as they like. They 
can utilise all the material objects in creation. There can be no objection to this from anyone, not 
even from God. But, the Divine has declared that there is no escape from the consequences of 
one's action. This has to be properly understood. 


No one can go against the laws of Nature 


For instance, in the morning's lecture a good illustration was given. The wind blows; rains fall. In 
the Dwapara age, Indra caused a heavy downpour. The people who were affected by the deluge, 
prayed to the Lord: "Oh Lord! We and our cattle are suffering from this downpour. Save us from 
the rain." The Lord replied: "I cannot stop this rain. Whatever has to happen in nature has to go 
on. But I have the right to protect you from its adverse effects. Rain comes according to the laws 
of Nature. These natural phenomena should go on in their respective ways. But, having regard to 
your devotion and prayers, I shall lift this hill and provide shelter to all of you. But I will not stop 
the rain." (The reference is to the lifting of the Govardhana mountain by Sri Krishna). 


Now, the wind has the power to blow out a lamp. The Divine has endowed the lamp with the 
power to shed light. The powers of the wind and of light are derived from God. But it is foolish 
for anyone to order the wind not to blow out the lamp. What one can do is to protect the lamp 
from the blast of wind by fixing a chimney. This is within human capacity. 


Through these examples you should learn how to regulate the forces of Nature and not seek to go 
against natural laws. It follows that man has the freedom to enjoy the things provided by the 
Creator. 


But man should exercise his discrimination to determine what are beneficial for him and what 
are not fit to be used. Because all things are available, one should not use them as he likes for the 
simple reason that each use is accompanied by its natural consequences. One cannot avoid these 


consequences. If you are prepared to face the consequences, you can act as you want. What is 
happening, however, is enjoyment of something with relish and later bemoaning the adverse 
aftereffects. This is a mark of mental weakness. 


Prakruthi (Nature) is like a mirror. It reflects your action. Standing before a mirror, you offer a 
Namaskar to it. The image in the mirror reflects your actions. If you attempt to hit the image, the 
reflection will hit back. Basing on this law of action and reaction, the Vedanta declared: 
"Yadbhaavam Thadbhavathi." (Whatever your thought, that you become). 


Hence, in the realm of natural phenomena, whatever actions you do will be followed by 
consequences which are inescapable, sometime or other. 


No escape from the consequences of your actions 


Students! As human beings, you have to ascertain by the use of your intelligence and Vijnaana 
(discriminating power) what are the actions that are proper and what are to be avoided. Whatever 
appears to be good, you better do it. But, if knowing that something is wrong, you do it, you can 
never escape from its consequences. The Lord created the Cosmos and offered it to mankind. 
Consequently, the responsibility for properly utilising all objects in the world rests on humanity 
and not on the Lord. If men use things in the right way and benefit from them, they will 
experience happiness. If you misuse them or put them to wrong uses, you will have to bear the 
troubles resulting therefrom. This is the lesson to be learnt through Vidya (education). 


What is the meaning of Vidya? It means Jnaana (knowledge). Is it worldly knowledge or 
spiritual knowledge? Is it experience of the external or the internal? The meaning of knowledge 
will vary according to whether it relates to the external or the internal. Students should enquire 
into both of these. After such enquiry, they should try to reconcile both of them in practice. 


Do as you would be done by 


The divinity present in man is present everywhere. It is not limited to man. It is common to all 
living creatures. You should realise that, if what is done by others causes pain to you, similar 
action by you will cause similar pain to others. If you desire others to show respect towards you, 
show that respect to others first yourself. It is not possible for you to win the esteem of others 
without your showing the same feeling towards them. 


The world is governed by three principles: Reaction, Reflection and Resound. Hence you should 
see that your actions, your vision and your words are right. For every man, humility and 
reverence are valuable ornaments. Humility is the hallmark of right education. Humility is lost 
when men are filled with self-pride, or discontentment. Humility should be observed in all 
circumstances. It should be manifested from the heart. Egoism is an acquisition from outside. 
The arrogance of knowledge is an acquired vice. In young persons, it is destructive of human 
values. 


Students! Remember that adolescence is an intermediate stage in one's life. It comes in the 
middle and passes off quickly. In the brief period that it lasts, it appears glamorous but only for a 
fleeting moment. Hence, one should be very careful how this period in one's life is used. Adi 
Sankara declared: "There is pain at birth. Old age is painful. Therefore, be vigilant always." All 
relationships and all possessions are temporary. One should not get deluded by them. All things 
pass away in due course. Only the Divine abides forever. Only the present matters, because both 
the past and future are in the present. Today's sapling has come out of yesterday's seed and is the 
parent of the tree into which it will grow. Don't worry about the future or brood over the past. 


Make good use of the present. Then life will be filled with joy. Be happy. That will lead you to 
union with God. 


Insatiable desires result in disappointment 


In the railway journey of life, students are like long-distance passengers. They should not burden 
themselves with too many desires. Reasonable aspirations to achieve distinction in one or other 
field are legitimate. But there should be a limit to such desires. Insatiable desires result in 
disappointments which cause mental disability. Man forfeits peace largely because of the desire 
to amass and hoard wealth. As birds and animals have no such tendencies, they lead a freer and 
more contented life. 


Students! You are entitled to become masters of Nature. Do not become its bond-slaves. Make 
faith in God the breath of your life. Realise that you have to share with others whatever you 
acquire by way of knowledge or wealth. It was the spirit of sacrifice and sharing which made 
Bharath famous in the past. Today the spirit of sacrifice has given place to selfish enjoyment. 
This has become a cause of disease. 


The truly educated person is one who uses his knowledge for the good of others. He is entitled to 
be called a Jnaani (a man of wisdom). Knowledge which is used for sense-enjoyment or for the 
satisfaction of worldly desires is not Jnaana (wisdom). 


Students! Become messengers of peace and security for the world. Prepare yourselves to make 
sacrifices for the world rather than to derive personal benefits from it. Derive joy from 
renunciation and not from sensuous pleasures. 


Auditorium at Brindavan, 22 May 1992 


15. Rise From Animality To Divinity 


Man is dogged by two defects 

Which prevent him from thinking of God; 
He conceals his myriad faults; 

And proclaims the minor faults in others. 


Students! Bharath was contributing to the security and prosperity of the world from ancient times 
by its adherence to the spiritual path. From then to this day, the message: "Let all the people of 
the world be happy" has been the ideal of Bharath. Many persons in various places, at various 
times, immersed themselves in experiencing the joy of the Spirit. 


Today, because of the influence of modernism and modernity, young men and women treat with 
levity the very term spirituality. There is a reason for this attitude. Over the centuries, the people 
in the country were mouthing spiritual sayings, parrot-like, without understanding their 
meanings, with the result that students today are unable to understand the true meaning of 
spirituality. Even scholars and men of spiritual eminence have been unable to convey the 
spiritual message to the young people of today in a manner that is meaningful to them and 
appeals to their hearts. 


The impression that is conveyed to the young people is that spirituality consists solely in good 
actions like performing bhajans, offering puja (worship), reciting the names of the Lord, going 
on pilgrimages and visiting temples. The primary reason for this is the failure on the part of the 
propagators to comprehend the profound message of the Vedas and Vedangas and realise the 
underlying truths embedded in the great epics and Puranas. 


The true meanings of spirituality 


No one among the young men and women today understands what is the meaning of spirituality. 
They imagine that spirituality means meditation on God, bathing in sacred waters, and visiting 
holy Shrines. This is not the correct meaning of spirituality. Spirituality means destroying the 
animal nature in man and making him realise his divine consciousness. Spirituality implies that 
one should not develop egoistic pride on account of the divine potencies in man but utilise them 
for achieving spiritual strength. Spirituality calls for the recognition of the manifold capacities 
manifesting in man as emanating from the Spirit and not from the mind. It means developing the 
faith that all powers come from the Divine. 


Spirituality does not mean proceeding from the human to the Divine. It seeks to unfold the 
divinity in man. Spirituality does not mean passing from the mundane to the Divine. Spirituality 
means making man manifest the divinity in him. 


People today have the wrong impression that spirituality is concerned with the journey from the 
mundane world to the higher realm and vice versa. Because of this mistaken view, students today 
are in a state of confusion about spirituality. Spirituality appears meaningless to them. 


Spirituality is the realisation of the role of the Spirit in daily life. It is a way of life. Our entire 
life is bound up with the Spirit. All the powers of man are derived from the Spirit. It is totally 
wrong to think that Spirituality is divorced from daily life and that our daily concerns have no 
relation to spirituality. Nor does spirituality mean leading a lonely and secluded life. True 


spirituality calls for the recognition of the oneness of all mankind and to demonstrate the 
spiritual truth underlying this Divine unity. 


All our actions are related to the Spirit 


Our entire life is bound up with the spiritual. Whatever one says, whatever one does, whatever 
one thinks, all of it is related to the Spirit. Spirituality is the expression of the promptings of the 
Inner Spirit. The good deeds by the external instruments of the body cannot be deemed spiritual. 


The very first thing one has to do is to destroy the animal nature in man. Without eliminating the 
animal nature, all rituals and acts of charity are of no avail. Of what use is it to foster one's 
animal instincts, while doing acts of charity or conforming to religious injunctions? As a man 
grows older, his desires also grow, instead of diminishing. Performing external rituals without 
subduing the animal nature, men are only pursuing wrong courses. However much one may 
contemplate on God, from time to time he is a prey to Raaga (attachment) and Dwesha (hatred). 
These two animal propensities have to be got rid of at the outset. 


Strive to overcome the animal nature 


People participate in bhajans. This is doubtless a good act, but it is only an auxiliary element in 
spiritual discipline. People take part in bhajans, but are they transforming their attitudes as a 
result? No. All the animal qualities like bad feelings remain along with participation in bhajans. 
Without getting rid of such attitudes, the continuous participation in bhajans is of no value. 
Without removing the animal nature, a singer of bhajans continues to be a sinner. The bhajans 
should be used as a means for overcoming the animal nature. Participation in bhajans and 
performing of worship should lead to the elimination of animal qualifies. Without the conquest 
of animal nature, all forms of external worship are of no use. 


People expatiate on the greatness of Bharathiya scripture and praise the glory of the Vedas. But 
all scriptures are intended to promote right practices and not merely to be used as texts for 
reading. Of what use is it merely to read these scriptures as a routine ritual without practising 
their teachings? The sacred books of the different religions--whether it be the Vedas, the Bible or 
the Koran--are intended to promote spiritual practices and not be used for ritualistic reading. 
Even eminent scholars treat these scriptures only as texts for paaraayana (ritualistic recitation). 
It is because of the mistaken notions of these scholars that young people today have failed to 
grasp the true import of spirituality. 


All the spiritual propaganda that is carried on today is totally divorced from practice, with the 
result that spirituality has made little impact on the youth today. The young do not get a 
compelling vision of spiritual truths. Here is an illustration. 


In ancient times, people used to perform Yagas and Yajnas (religious sacrifices). These sacrifices 
were being performed according to the rules laid down in the scriptures. But while conforming to 
the prescribed procedures, few understood the inner meaning of these sacrifices. All their lives 
were spent in external observances. In the performance of sacrifice, they used to offer cows or 
other dumb animals as bali (sacrifice) and propagated the view that such offerings were in 
accordance with spiritual injunctions. This was a great mistake. These were meaningless 
practices. 


Offer your animality to God 


What does pashuthva (animal nature) mean (when it is used with reference to the sacrifice of 
animals)? Pashuthva (Animal nature) refers to Jiva Thathwa (one's way of life). The manner of 
living in which dehabhraanthi (delusion regarding the body) is prevalent is pashuthva (animal 
existence). What is the delusion regarding the body? It is the identification of the body with the 
Self (the "I"). This is the mark of the animal nature in man. The real meaning of animal sacrifice 
is the sacrifice of the animal nature in man. Everyone has to get rid of Ahamkaara and 
Mamakaara (egoism and the sense of "mine"). Without sacrificing these animal tendencies, 
sacrificing dumb animals is unworthy of human beings. 


God accepts the bad and gives good in return 


The word bali is used with references to the sacrifices in Yagas. What is the bali that is to offered 
in the sacrifice? It is the offering of one's bad qualities and bad thoughts as an offering to the 
Divine. How can one offer bad things to God? God alone can accept such offerings and give 
good things in return. No one else in the world will accept the bad and give what is good in 
return. This kind of exchange is possible only for the Divine. An example for this may be had 
from ordinary life. 


There is a soiled and tattered currency note with you. No one is prepared to accept it from you. 
But when it is tendered to the Reserve Bank, which issued it, it is bound to accept it and issue a 
new note in return. Likewise, who is competent to accept one's bad thoughts, perverse feelings 
and evil intentions? Only the Almighty can accept them. He is the Spiritual Reserve Bank that 
will accept the soiled notes of your mind and give in return good currency (in the form of good 
thoughts). 


Hence, offerings should be made only to those who are competent to receive them. All bad 
thoughts and feelings should be offered to God so that we may receive, by His grace, good 
thoughts and feelings in return. Spirituality, thus, means transforming one's life into an ideal one 
by offering one's bad qualities to the Lord and receiving from Him good qualities in return. 


In ancient times they used to perform Aswamedha Yaga (Horse Sacrifice). What does the "Horse 
Sacrifice" mean? By Aswam (horse) is meant that which is restless. The horse cannot remain 
steady even for a moment. It will be always shaking one part or the other of its body. The horse 
is an animal which represents the unsteady mind. The word Medha in Aswamedha literally 
means the mind. Thus to perform the Horse Sacrifice really means to offer the restless mind to 
God. 


Meaning of horse sacrifice 


The horse is not only restless but it also runs fast while riding thereon. So also, man's mind is 
both restless and very fast-moving. That is why Arjuna complained to Krishna (during the Gita 
dialogue) that the mind is restless, strong, obstinate and dangerous. Such a highly fickle mind 
which is comparable to the horse (an animal) should be surrendered to God as a sacrificial 
offering. This indeed is the real meaning behind the Horse sacrifice. But nowadays everyone is 
misguided by the outer meaning only, and nobody takes the trouble of knowing the inner 
meaning. 


Some may try to argue that in olden days animals were sacrificed during Yajnas and Yagas 
(sacrificial rites). But they are not correct. Only a few ignorant Pandits (scholars) and misguided 
elders used to indulge in animal sacrifice. But those who recognised the inner meaning of this 


ritual used to give prime importance to the sacrifice of the beastly qualities in man while 
performing such religious ceremonies. The sum and substance of the various religions 
observances is to destroy the animality in man. Here is one more example to illustrate this point. 


Inner significance of Nandi in from of Easwara 


In temples of Easwara (or Shiva), you find Nandi (image of bull) in front of the deity. What is 
the inner significance of this? The usual reply you get is that Nandi is the Vahana (vehicle) of 
Easwara; as if He could not afford to have a better vehicle than a bull. This is a wrong idea. The 
truth is that just as the Lingam is the symbol of the Lord (Easwara), Nandi (bull) is the symbol 
for Jiva (individual soul). Therefore, just like the Nandi, man should turn away from Prakruthi 
and direct all his attention towards Easwara only. 


There are some more meanings for this symbolism. For instance, it is said that no one should 
stand between Easwara and Nandi. One should have the vision of Easwara by looking through 
the space in between the two ears of Nandi. The underlying idea is that through the Sadhana of 
using its ears to listen about Easwara alone, the animality in the bull becomes transformed into 
divinity and because of its merger with Easwara it is called Nandeeshvara (Bull-God). Thus the 
lesson of the symbolism is that man should also try to merge with God, by following the example 
of the Nandi. 


His Story is History 


Students! Try to understand the correct meaning of what is recorded in the Charithra or history 
of Bharath which is highly sacred. Charithra (history) is derived from â€œcharayalu" (the actual 
actions) of people but not from mere writings or discourses. Practising, experiencing, enjoying 
bliss, and sharing the bliss with others--is Charithra which is called History, in the English 
language. In other words, "His Story is History." It means that the story of God is History. 
Students should understand such inner meanings. What is meant by Rama Charithra (History of 
Rama)? What Rama did during His lifetime is His Charithra or History. How He had mastered 
His senses and mind during all the vicissitudes of life, how He was neither elated by pleasure nor 
depressed by pain, how He accepted His exile into the forest with the same happy countenance 
with which he had prepared Himself for His coronation. This story of His which describes His 
equanimity under all circumstances of pleasure or pain and loss or gain, is what is known as 
History. 


Running towards pleasures and fleeing from pain is characteristic of animality. An animal rashes 
towards you when you show it the green grass in your hand, but it will run away from you when 
you show it the cane in your hand. Thus, attraction to what appears to be good and repulsion 
from what appears to be bad is the nature of animals. But man should be prepared to confront 
both with equanimity because in this worldly life these pairs of opposites always go together. No 
one can separate pain from pleasure, sorrow from joy, or loss from gain since they are 
inextricably intertwined. We can never find anywhere unadulterated pleasure or pain separate 
from each other. The fruit of pain is pleasure and vice versa. 


When a son is born, the father celebrates it as a great festival, distributes sweets to all, and 
dances with joy. But when that son dies, he becomes depressed with sorrow. Thus the same son 
is the cause of both joy and sorrow to the father. Birth and death are the root causes for joy and 
sorrow. But, for whom are these births and deaths? Death is for that which is born, and birth is 
for that which has died. If there is no birth, there is no death. This body is the root cause for birth 


and death as well as for Ahamkaar and Mamakaar (the feelings of "I" and "Mine"). Only because 
the father had seen and experienced the form of his son, he is afflicted when that form of his son 
is taken away from him. The very same "father" had never wept for that very same son before the 
latter was born in that form. 


Do not forget your divine source, Aatma 


Today we are fascinated only by the form. We are being tormented by this transient form which 
is but a reflection. We are to take cognisance not of the form but of our divine source. Aatma 
(Self) is our source, which is also called Adhyaatma, because it is Aadhi + Aatma, 1.e. the Aatma 
which is Aadhi (the beginning or source). Hence we should get back to our source. Then alone 
can we experience total (unalloyed) bliss. 


If you bring a fish and keep it in a gold vessel studded with all the nine precious gems, it will not 
at all feel happy. On the contrary, it will struggle restlessly to get back to its source, namely, 
water. So also, we have strayed away from Aatma, our source. Having been enticed by the 
worldly pleasures like wealth, gold, vehicles and other properties, we are forgetting our very 
source. When we deeply ponder over this matter, the fish seems to be more intelligent than man. 
Why? Because that fish has not forgotten its source, while man who, despite all his education, 
intelligence, culture and sophistication, has forgotten his source. 


Our bodies are like vessels. Whatever changes the vessels may undergo, our source will never 
change. For example a silver plate, a silver tumbler and a silver box--the names and forms of 
these three articles are different. The ways in which they are made use of will also be different. 
But when any one of these three articles is melted, what remains is silver alone. In other words, 
in spite of the change in the names and forms of the articles, there is no change in the silver 
which is the common substratum of all of them. Similarly whatever names and forms we may 
assume, the common substratum of all these forms will continue to be the same Aatma which is 
changeless. Always remembering this fact is what is called "Spirituality." 


Reduce your desires to escape from miseries 


Sacrificing your ego is Sathwik (pure and noble), while sacrificing any animal is Thamasik 
(impure and ignoble). Today you need to enter into the Sathwik life and sublimate your human 
nature into divine nature. This, indeed, is the primary goal of your life's journey. Every man 
undertakes the usual pilgrimages and other routine good activities like charity, etc. But all these 
will not save him from worries, until and unless he gives up Ahamkaara and Mamakaara i.e. "I" 
and "Mine." 


A rich man bundled up all the necessary luggage in his bed-holder and started on a pilgrimage. 
He visited Kasi (Benares), Prayag, Haridwar, etc. Although tired with the day-long journey, he 
could not sleep during the nights. During the day time, he used to have darshan (the holy sight) 
of beautiful images of Gods and Goddesses and bathe in the sacred waters of holy rivers. He was 
happy that by these religious activities his sins were being washed away. However, when he 
investigated into the reason for his not getting sleep during the nights, he found that there were 
lots of bugs in his bedding. He should get rid of those bugs. Then only he can have sound sleep. 
In the same manner, in our bedstead called the body there are any number of bugs, namely, 
endless desires of various types. As long as these desires are there, one cannot escape from 
miseries wherever one might go. One should, therefore, reduce one's desires. 


Do not entertain imaginary aspirations 


Students of today are the victims of several kinds of desires. No sooner does a student step into 
the college than he thinks of getting his degree immediately and going abroad for higher studies. 
You should not give room to such fanciful desires which will sap your mental powers. During 
your stay in the college, concentrate whole-heartedly on your studies. Don't entertain all sorts of 
unrealistic and imaginary aspirations. What is supremely important is the present. 


Whenever undesirable feelings like anger, hatred, jealously etc., raise their ugly heads in you, 
crush them down forthwith. For instance, when somebody criticises or abuses you, you will get 
angry immediately. But you should not react to such things on the spur of the moment. You must 
coolly reflect thus: "Am I having in me any defects which he has pointed out? In case these 
defects are in me, will it not be a mistake on my part to criticise or abuse him in retaliation? 
Suppose there are no defects at all in me, then why should I get angry?" When you reflect like 
this, your anger will leave at once and you will become calm and cool. 


"My life is My message" 


Students! I am an ideal example in this respect. That is why I say, "My Life is My Message." 
Many will be criticising Me, while many others will be praising Me. But I am neither depressed 
by their criticism nor elated by their praise. Why? Because, if some people mention about 
whatever qualities are actually in Me, I need not pay any attention to them; if anyone attributes to 
Me what is factually not in Me, I need not be worded about it. For instance, if someone calls me 
"Butta Thala Sai Baba" (i.e. Sai Baba with a basket-like crown of hair), I should by all means 
accept their remark because I have such a bushy hair on My head. On the contrary if anybody 
accosts Me as "Batta Thala Sai Baba" (1.e. baldheaded Sai Baba), why should I accept it? I have 
no bald head. So if defects which I do not have are pointed out directly even in My very 
presence, I do not accept them; hence I am not upset by them. That is the fight "determination," 
indicating self-confidence. It is not good for you to be either elated or dejected by others' 
remarks, without having confidence in yourself. So, first and foremost, you should develop self- 
confidence. 


Students! If anybody asks you, "who are you?" You will reply, "I am a man." This is only a half 
truth. What is the other half of the truth? It is: "I am not an animal." Thus, the full truth is: "I am 
a man; I am not an animal." When you recognise the second half of the truth that you are not an 
animal, you will not give room to any bestial qualities in you. 


If, in this impressionable age, you firmly establish such sacred ideas and feelings in your heart, 
you will turn out to be ideal persons in this world. All histories are sacred--whether they pertain 
to Bharath, Islam or Christian. It is in their followers that you find all sorts of omissions and 
commissions. They are full of animality. That is why the hatred between one religion and 
another is ever on the increase. However, there is nothing wrong with the religions per se. All 
religions have preached good things only. Men should recognise this fact and conduct 
themselves accordingly. What is wrong with religions if only your minds are good? Good and 
bad are creations of your mind only. 


Transform from animality to divinity 


You should not be misguided by the worldly and superficial meanings, and forget the inner 
meanings. This is the crux of spirituality. The waywardness of your mind prevails in the gross 
state of wakefulness as well as in the subtle state of dreaming. How can you change such a fickle 


mind? If you keep away from animality during waking state, then animality will not enter even 
in your dreams. 


Students! Embodiments of Love! In the first instance, try to understand correctly the meaning of 
spirituality. You should transform your nature from human to divine. You must direct your 
attention to God. Nandi could become Easwara, only because it turned its attention to God. 
Similarly, Hanuman, the monkey, and Garuda, the bird, became dear to the Lord. Therefore, if 
you get rid of your animality, you will become Pashupathi (the Lord of all beings). 


Some tips to control anger and hatred 


You should not become a victim of the feelings of anger, hatred, ego or pride which may arise in 
you. When such feelings arise in you, sit silently for a few minutes. Instead of doing so, you 
must not give vent to your anger by scolding or beating others as you like. How to put this into 
practice? As soon as you get angry, you should immediately leave that place and go out into the 
open and quietly walk a furlong. Then your anger will disappear. An easier method than this is to 
stand before a mirror and look into your own angry face. You will dislike your own face and 
look upon it with disgust or aversion. Then try to laugh heartily and your anger will leave you. 


If you find it difficult even to do this, go into your bathroom and turn the water tap on. To the 
accompaniment of the tune of the sound created by the water flowing from the tap, begin to sing 
a good song. Then your anger will certainly disappear. Or else, drink a glass of cold water. Like 
this, you have to seek ways and means of regaining a calm and peaceful mood. Instead of doing 
so, if you allow your anger to grow, restlessness will also grow along with that anger depriving 
you of peace of mind. You should never give tit for tat, or word for word. 


The less you talk, the more will become your mental power. With the increase in your mental 
capacity, there will be increase in your power of discrimination too. Consequently, you will give 
up "individual discrimination" and resort to "fundamental discrimination." Because of this, you 
will begin to consider the good of the world at large rather than your own individual welfare. 
You must cultivate such broad feelings from this young age itself. 


Strive to gain "practical knowledge" 


What is the reason for the students of Bharath taking to wrong paths and becoming victims of 
unrest? They are not making any effort to understand matters in the proper perspective and to act 
accordingly. One should try to understand everything thoroughly, and not rash forward blindly 
into all matters. Then only you will gain "practical knowledge," and that will guide you along the 
desirable and sacred path. You will find guideposts here and there on the roadside, to indicate 
which path you should take to reach any particular place. The ups and downs in the path can be 
experienced only by those who tread the path, but not by the guidepost. Most of the books today 
are like the guideposts. However, you must not be like mere guideposts. You should actually 
practice and get the experience. 


Expand your love 


Students! You can gain all things through love alone. Without this love, you cannot obtain 
anything. Love can win over even the strongest of enemies. True love is desireless and natural. It 
is based on the Aatmic relationship. A small example for such love: a mother is walking along 
the street, carrying her young baby. If you happen to be walking behind them, that child will 
smile on seeing you, and naturally you will also smile at the child. Who is that child and who are 
you? Although them is no relationship whatsoever between the two of you, the child is able to 


make you smile. What a profound bliss would you experience in such love! If you weep, you 
have to weep alone. But if you laugh, others too will laugh. It is such love and bliss that will 
make you one with God. Therefore expand your love and thereby experience expanded bliss. 


Institute Auditorium, Brindavan, 24 May 1992 


16. Perennial Message Of The Ramayana 


Sweeter than sugar is Rama's name 

Tastier than curds and 

Much sweeter than honey. 

Full of nectarine sweetness is Rama's name, 
Chant ever and anon the name of Rama. 


Students! The Ramayana depicts the triple qualifies of Sathwa, Rajas and Thamas. The 
relevance of the Ramayana is not confined to a particular time, place or circumstances. It is of 
universal significance for all times. Its relevance is not limited to India alone. 


The Ramayana holds out Rama as an embodiment of ideal qualities. As a son, friend, husband, 
master and ruler, He was an ideal without a parallel. In the world one may be an ideal son, but 
not an ideal friend. One may be an ideal friend, but not an ideal brother. But Rama stands out 
unique as an embodiment of all ideal attributes. 


Students should note an important aspect relating to the breaking of the bow of Shiva at the court 
of Janaka. Though the bow was broken, the string connecting the two ends of the bow did not 
break at all, for the two ends of the bow stand for Sita and Rama--Prakruthi and Purusha. In fact 
the bond between Rama and Sita, Paramaatma and Prakruthi is an unbreakable one. The 
Ramayana demonstrates the inseparable bond between Prakruthi and Purusha. 


The Ramayana has been divided into two sections: the Puurva Ramayana and the Utthara 
Ramayana. The Puurva Ramayana deals with the valorous deeds of Rama, his victory over 
indomitable heroes like Parashursama, Vaali and Ravana. These events speak of the dauntless 
courage, the matchless valour and the immense physical and mental prowess of Sri Rama. The 
Utthara Ramayana (the latter half is suffused with Karuna (compassion) and seeks to install the 
Rama Thathwa (The Rama Principle) in the hearts of the people. 


Rama has no equals as a ruler 


The Ramayana exemplifies the amity and harmony which should prevail among the members of 
a family.. It extols the glory of ideal brotherhood, noble friendship and the greatness of love and 
affection. Rama was an ideal ruler who ruled his people with due regard to their likes and 
dislikes, having their welfare as his primary concern. As a ruler Rama has no equals. He was a 
veritable mine of strength, virtue and love. Hence it is essential that every student should take 
Rama as an ideal to be emulated and derive happiness by practising the ideal of Sri Rama. 


The first canto in the Ramayana is called Baalakaanda (the canto describing the boyhood of Sri 
Rama). Sage Viswamithra came to Dasaratha and sought the help of his two sons, Rama and 
Lakshmana, for protecting his Yaga (sacrifices). Rama and Lakshmana were fourteen years old 
when the Sage sought their help. When Dasaratha was hesitating to send his sons in view of their 
tender age, Viswamithra remarked, "O! Dasaratha! 


Swayed by paternal affection, you have mistaken them to be mere mortals, of flesh and blood, 
whereas in fact they are Divine incarnations. Do not give vent to sadness. They are the 
embodiments of Divinity. Send your sons with me without any hesitation". 


The three Gunas in the form of three women 


Rama, while going with the Sage, encountered three women of three different temperaments. 
The first woman he confronted was Tataki of Thamasik temperament. The Thamasik nature 
makes a person mistake truth for untruth and untruth for truth. It robs one of the capacity for 
discrimination. Rama killed Tataki while keeping guard over the performance of Viswamitra's 
Yajna. The two brothers saw to it that the Yajna was performed without any obstruction. 


After the successful completion of the Yajna, Viswamithra proceeded to Mithila, accompanied 
by Rama and Lakshmana. On the way Rama came to the hermitage of Sage Gauthama. There he 
absolved Ahalya of the curse which had turned her into a stone. Ahalya might be deemed a 
woman of Rajasik temperament. After imparting moral advice to Ahalya, Rama went to Mithila 
with Viswamithra. 


It was in Mithila that Rama encountered Sita, representing the Sathwik quality. Having killed 
Tataki of the Thamasik temperament and redeemed Ahalya representing the Rajasik tem- 
perament, He accepted Sita, who represented the Sathwik quality. The marriage of Sita and Rama 
is symbolic of the union between Prakruthi and Paramaatma. The citizens of Mithila greatly 
rejoiced hearing about the prospective marriage of Rama and Sita. (Swami recited in His own 
mellifluous voice a ballad in praise of the wedding of Rama and Sita). 


Manifestation of three Gunas in Sita's wedding 


One of the rites in the marriage ceremony in India is Thalambraalu the act of pouring rice on the 
head of the bridegroom by the bride. Since Janaka, the father of Sita, was immensely rich, he 
arranged for the pouring, of pearls instead of rice. Sita held a palmful of pearls in her hand over 
Rama's head. The white pearls in the palms of Sita shone with reddish splendour as her palms 
were of reddish hue. When she poured the pearls on the white turban Rama wore for the 
occasion, the pearls shone with the white hue of the turban. The pearls rolling down the body of 
Sri Rama assumed a dark colour reflecting the bluish colour of Sri Rama. 


The pearls shining with reddish hue in the hands of Sita are symbolic of the Rajo Guna, 
conveying the message that one is of Rajasik nature in the company of Prakruthi. The pearls 
shining with whitish splendour are symbolic of the Sathwa Guna indicating the fact that one 
acquires the Sathwik nature in the company of God. The nature of persons who belonged neither 
to Prakruthi nor God will be Thamasik persons like the colour of the pearls that rolled down 
from Rama's head. People of divine orientation shine with Sathwik serenity and purity. People 
with a worldly outlook display Rajasik quality while those who are neither worldly nor Godly 
are Thamasik. 


Three qualities of Rama's friends and enemies 


As Sri Rama was a king, His friends too were kings. Jambavan, the king of the forest, was a 
Sathwik friend. He became a friend of Rama out of sheer love for him. Sugriva, the king of the 
monkeys, was a Rajasik friend of Rama, who sought Rama's friendship for securing his help. It is 
out of desire for getting relief from his troubles and tribulations that he sought the help of Rama. 
Sugriva wanted his kingdom and wife to be restored to him. The third friend was Vibhishana, the 
brother of Ravana. He represents the Thamasik quality, as he belonged to a Rakshasa family. 


Rama had three enemies, whose qualities represent the three Gunas. The first enemy was Vaali, a 
Sathwik enemy because, at the end, he acknowledged his mistakes and accepted the punishment 


meted out to him by Rama. Ravana was the second enemy, who harboured hatred for Rama. He 
refused to acknowledge his mistake and was responsible for the downfall of his country. He was 
a Rajasik enemy because a Rajasik enemy never acknowledges his mistakes. The third enemy, 
Kumbhakarna, was a Thamasik enemy. A Thamasik person is one who mistakes good to be bad 
and bad to be good. Rama put an end to all these enemies. 


Rama, the redeemer of the fallen 


Rama was the redeemer of the fallen----Pathithapaavana. He redeemed and gave salvation to 
three characters in the Ramayana. They are Sabari, Guha and Jatayu. Sabari was a helpless and 
hapless old woman with no one to look after her. Her preceptor told her about Lord Rama. She 
was yearning for the arrival of Ramachandra whom she considered to be her saviour. She was 
deeply absorbed in the contemplation of Rama's name at all times and in all places. One day sage 
Matanga said to her, "O, Sabari, Lord Narayana has descended on the earth in the form of Rama. 
He is living in the garb of an ascetic. He will be soon arriving here. But I will not be alive at the 
time of his arrival. He is an embodiment of immaculate purity. Greet him and honour him with 
devotion." 


From that day, Sabari started preparing herself for the arrival of Sri Rama. Since she thought that 
Rama might ask her to give him something to eat, she would gather all sorts of fruits, and to 
satisfy herself that the fruits were sweet, she would taste them first and keep only the sweetest 
ones for her Lord. That was how Sabari transformed herself into a Sathwik devotee. Rama 
responded to her inmost prayers and Sabari in the end merged herself in Rama. 


Guha, the forest chief, was another to be redeemed by Rama. Though he was a friend of Rama, 
his life as a forester was filled with wrongful acts; nevertheless, he never gave up contemplation 
of Lord Rama's name. Among the fallen, he belonged to the Rajasik category because of his 
worldly life. 


The third pathitha to be redeemed by Rama was Jatayu. He yearned to serve Rama and was 
eagerly waiting for the arrival of Rama from the day Rama entered the forest, as an ascetic. A 
great opportunity to serve Rama's cause presented itself to him. When he sighted Ravana 
carrying Sita away he fought to the bitter end to rescue Sita from Ravana. When he fell mortally 
wounded and succumbed to the injuries, Lord Rama performed the last rites for Jatayu, a service 
denied to his father Dasaratha. 


What the names of Dasaratha and Ravana signify 


After crossing the sea of Moha (infatuation), Rama encountered in Lanka the three brothers 
representing the three qualities of Sathwa, Rajas and Thamas. He crowned Vibhishana, of the 
serene temperament, King of Lanka, and destroyed Ravana and Kumbhakarna, who symbolised 
Rajasik and Thamasik qualifies. 


Who was Dasaratha? Dasaratha was the emperor of Ayodhya. The word Dasaratha signifies the 
body endowed with ten senses. These ten senses are five karmendriyas and five jnanendriyas. 


Dasaratha is the chariot drawn by the ten senses. The three wives of Dasaratha represent the 
three qualities, Kausalya symbolising Sathwik quality, Sumitra, Rajasik quality and Kaikeyi, 
Thamasik quality. 


Who was Ravana? Ravana is described as a demon with ten heads. These ten heads are the six 
vices, namely desire, anger, greed, infatuation, pride and jealousy and Manas (mind), Buddhi 


(intellect), Chitta (will) and Ahamkaara (Ego). Since these ten are present in every human being, 
all men are Ravana indeed! Whoever beheads all these ten heads in fact becomes a Rama. It is 
God alone who can behead ten heads! When a man surrenders himself to God, all these ten heads 
will go and he will merge in Rama. 


Four brothers are embodiments of four Vedas 


Who are Rama, Lakshmana, Bharatha and Satrughna? The four Vedas came in the form of the 
four brothers to the abode of Dasaratha and sported there. Rama was Rig Veda and Lakshmana, 
who closely followed Rama, was Yajur Veda. Bharatha who always delighted in chanting Rama's 
name, was Sama Veda and Satrughna, who obeyed the commands of the three brothers and 
surrendered himself completely to them, was Atharva Veda. Hence the four brothers were the 
embodiments of the four Vedas. 


Lord Rama was Pranava itself (AUM). The three brothers are the syllables of "A," ""U" and "M" 
in Omkaara. Lakshmana was "A," Bharatha was "U" and Satrughna was '"M," and the Lord was 
the Pranava. 


We can realise the sacredness of the Ramayana when we comprehend its inner significance, 
instead of being absorbed only in the external form of the narrative. 


Institute Auditorium, Brindavan, 25 May 1992 


The easiest path to Self-realisation is the surrender of ego: 
sharanaagathi. 


Sathya Sai Baba 


17. The Mysteries Of Creation 


In this world, birds and beasts lead 
regulated lives though they lack education; 
Why does man lack this sense 

though he is endowed with intelligence ? 


Embodiments of Divine Love! Today's man has learnt to fly in the air like birds, and swim in the 
sea like fish. But he has not learnt how to live as man on the earth. Science can teach man such 
things as flying in the air and swimming in the sea. However, it is only religion but not science, 
that can teach him how to live as man on the earth. So if science were to foster the all-round 
development of man, it has to seek the aid of religion. Religion does not mean blind adherence to 
some beliefs. On the other hand, religion helps man to attain the goal of human life based on 
discrimination and sacred values. 


All religions teach only what is good, 
One should understand them properly 
and regulate one's life according! 

If our minds are good, what wrong can 
we see in any religion ? 


Therefore no religion can ever be bad. That is why the great scientist, Einstein, declared that 
religion without science is lame and science without religion is blind, thereby stressing the need 
for a judicious combination of science and religion to serve the needs of humanity. 


All religions emphasise human values 


Religion is of immense help in fostering the integral development of the human personality. It 
underlines the unity in diversity. True religion teaches the harmony and unity of all religions. 
The essence as well as the goal of all religions is the attainment of the purity of mind and heart. 
Every religion has its own precepts and principles. But no religion preaches hatred, untruth or 
unrighteousness. "Speak the truth, practice righteousness"--enjoin the Upanishads. Similar sacred 
injunctions are to be found in all the other religions too. 


Thus all religions emphasise the human values and serve as beacons for the proper progress and 
development of mankind. They all facilitate the manifestation of the divinity inherent in man. 
But the present-day men in general, and the youth in particular, have forgotten our age-old 
culture and sacred values and are bidding good-bye to God, having been enticed by the modem 
science and technology. 


However, with the passage of time, scientists themselves are veering round to the view that the 
universe is being guided and governed by some divine power. The innumerable stars and planets 
in the universe are whirling at tremendous speeds. If they are to deviate even slightly from their 
orbits or their speeds, it would result in an universal holocaust. Who has ordained them to adhere 
to their speeds and orbits? 


Contrast between scientists and Creator 


Today's scientists are creating artificial satellites which are orbiting around the earth. But these 
satellites are crashing down or catching fire in a few days or months, whereas the planets in 
God's creation are orbiting regularly since time immemorial, without any crashing, or catching 
fire. Light travels at the rate of 1,86,000 miles per second. Even with such a tremendous speed, it 
takes lakhs of years for light to travel around the families or constellations of the sun and stars. 
In the Milky Way that is visible to us, there are innumerable stars unknown to us. The light from 
some of the stars has not yet reached the earth, despite the lapse of aeons since their creation. 
Even the scientists are in doldrums to understand fully such aspects of creation. What a contrast 
between the scientist who swells up with pride on account of discovering but a minute fraction of 
the mystery of creation, and the Creator (God) who is running the whole universe peacefully, 
silently, patiently and lovingly without any pomp or pride! 


Not this alone. The way this creation or Nature is functioning is amazing beyond words. For 
instance, the carbon dioxide exhaled by man is being taken up by the plants and the oxygen 
released by the plants is being inhaled by man. Who has made this mutually beneficial 
arrangement in Nature? Poet-saints like Purandaradas have sung the praise of the Lord Almighty 
in the following terms: "Who has watered, manured and grown the small shrubs and the gigantic 
trees in the crevices of the rocks in the mountains? Who has painted the beautiful peacock and its 
tail with such attractive colours? Who has designed the wonderful combination of a green body 
and a red beak for the parrot?" The scientist may explain away all such things as the "Law of 
Nature." But are these scientists able to transcend Nature or to dispense with the materials avail- 
able in Nature ? 


The so called "creation" by the scientists 


Whatever the scientists claim as their "creation" is only derived from a combination of the basic 
materials found in Nature. For example, the scientist produces water by combining hydrogen and 
oxygen. But then, which scientist has produced or created hydrogen and oxygen? These elements 
are produced by sunlight. In the same manner whatever the scientist may produce is based only 
on the permutation and combination of the already existing materials in Nature. This fact is 
conveniently ignored by most scientists. When one ponders over the mysteries or secrets of 
Nature, even a fool will have to admit the existence of a divine power behind all these wonderful 
phenomena. 


Let us consider another example. There are nearly 5.08 billion human beings in the world. But it 
is amazing that in such a huge population, no two persons look exactly alike. Which creator, 
except God, can do this extraordinarily wonderful feat! The goods manufactured by the modern 
creators are all alike because they come out of the same mould. What a striking contrast! The 
students should therefore, try to understand the mysteries of creation. 


Scientists upset the balance in Nature 


We are prone to take the creation for granted, thinking that it is but insentient Nature, thereby 
ignoring the Sentient Principle that regulates nature and imparts a proper balance among its 
various constituents. Scientists and technologists, in pursuit of selfish interests as well as of name 
and fame, utterly disregard the security and welfare of the society and the nation, by upsetting 
the balance in Nature, which results in various accidents, calamities, losses and misery to the 


public at large. For example, the oceans contain air needed by the earth for more than ten years. 
One lightning in the sky emits enough electricity required for the entire world for twenty years. 


By building gigantic dams and storing huge quantities of water in one place, the earth goes down 
in that area and consequently goes up in another area, like a see-saw. The indiscriminate 
exploitation of natural resources by the scientists and technologists such as various types of 
mines for extracting minerals, mica, coal, petrol and other oils results in imbalance and pollution 
of the five major elements, leading to catastrophes like earthquakes, and volcanoes, etc. 


The rapid and excessive proliferation of industries, facto-ties, automobiles, etc., with the 
attendant pollution of the atmosphere is responsible for the increasing incidence of diseases like 
eosinophilia, asthma, deafness, pneumonia and typhoid, etc. However, science per se is not bad; 
what is necessary is for man to put it to proper and judicious use. 


Students must have faith in God's existence 


Students of today have implicit faith and unquestioning belief in what the scientists say; but 
however much you may din into their ears, they have no faith in God. Dear students! First of all, 
you must have faith in God's existence. One simple reason for this is that in the dictionaries of all 
the languages, you find the word "God" among other words. Any dictionary contains only words 
which refer to things existing in the world such as birds, beasts and other living beings, as well as 
inanimate objects. Non existing things do not have a place in the dictionary. The very fact that 
the word "God" occurs in all dictionaries is enough to prove the existence of God. Even if you 
have not seen or experienced some of the things included in the dictionary, there are other people 
who have seen or experienced them. 


So, based on your limited experience you cannot deny the existence of anything mentioned in the 
dictionary. If you have not experienced God, there are other people who have experienced Him 
and that is why the word "God" finds a place in the dictionary. Some of you may argue that them 
are some words like "sky-flower," "rabbit-horn," for which the corresponding objects do not 
exist in the world. But you must know that they are not single words as such, but compound 
words coined by combining two different words. Each of the single words "Sky" and "flower" 
refer to existing things; similarly there are rabbits and horns. But there are no objects in the 
world corresponding to the artificially coined words, namely "sky-flower" and "rabbit-horn." 


Mysteries of God's creation 


One scientist wanted to know the meaning of the word Parama Hamsa (Supreme Swan) used in 
spiritual parlance. He was told that just as the swan separates milk from water by dipping its 
beak into a mixture of milk and water, the Parama Hamsa through his proper enquiry and the 
resulting wisdom separates the Aatma (Self) from Anaatma (Non-self). In turn, when the 
scientist was questioned as to who endowed the swan with the capacity to separate milk and 
water, the scientist replied that when the acid secreted by the beak of the swan comes into 
contact with the mixture of milk and water, the acid curdles the milk, thus separating it from 
water. But then the question arises as to who has placed this acid in the beak of the swan. Has 
any scientist done it? No, it is only God who has done this. Such, indeed, are the mysteries of 
God's creation! 


About fifty years back, scientists believed that them is no greater power than the atomic energy. 
They expressed the fear that if the atomic power is further split, it will lead to disaster. But now 
after exploring and experimenting during the last fifty years, the scientists have been able to 


discover that there are greater powers than the atomic power. Similarly, persons who presently 
have no experience of God may have such experience, say, after ten years. Divinity is all- 
pervading. You must firmly believe this. Without faith in God, human life would go in vain. 
Along with physical sciences you should also try to understand the spiritual science to some 
extent at least. 


Do not give room to unnecessary doubts 


Nowadays students give room to unnecessary doubts. One boy came to me and said, "Swami! 
Sankaracharya has declared that Brahman is real and the world is illusory. But Brahman who is 
said to be real is not to be seen anywhere, while we are vividly experiencing the so-called 
illusory world in our daily lives with all the attendant gains and losses, joys and sorrows--that too 
not for one or two years but over a period of several years. So, how can we believe that the world 
is illusory?" To this I replied, "My dear boy! Don't waste your time in-thinking about such 
questions. Why do you worry yourself about the reality or unreality of Brahman and the world? 
You leave that question to them (i.e. to Brahman and the world). First of all, find out the truth 
about yourself. You may think that you are real. But that alone is considered as real which does 
not undergo any change during all the three periods of time viz., past, present and future. In the 
light of this criterion, since your body undergoes change from moment to moment, and also since 
it is liable to perish altogether at any time, it is considered illusory. The same is the case with the 
rest of the world." 


The youth of today argue that they do not undergo any change, forgetting the fact that their body 
is subject to change from time to time--birth, childhood, adolescence, adulthood (manhood), old 
age and death. Thus, everything in this world undergoes change from time to time and that is the 
reason why the world is declared to be illusory. Sankaracharya did not say that the world is 
absolutely unreal. He called it illusory, because it is a mixture of reality and unreality, appearing 
at one time and disappearing at another time. However, students should understand that there is a 
substratum of reality underlying the illusory world. This can be illustrated by the silver plate 
which you see on My table. This plate can be converted into a cup tomorrow, or into a spoon the 
day after. But the substance behind these changing names or forms continues to be the 
changeless silver. Nevertheless the silver and the cup (or plate) cannot be separated from each 
other. Similarly, the changeless reality of Brahman is the substratum underlying the ever- 
changing, illusory world. 


"The doubter will perish" 


The students of today are victims of several doubts, because there is a dearth of capable teachers 
who can come down to the level of the students and explain things clearly to them. Let the 
students understand the significance of the slogans exhibited on the hind wall of this auditorium, 
viz. "Samshayaatma Vinashyathi" (The doubter will perish) and "Shradhaavaan Labhathe 
Jnaanam" (The one with faith gains wisdom). Both Nissamshayam (freedom from doubts), and 
Sraddha (faith and interest) are necessary for enlightenment, just as the positive and negative 
currents are needed for the fight to emerge. Hence it is necessary that freedom from doubts on 
the one hand and faith on the other, should constitute the two banks through which the river of 
your life should flow, so that it may ultimately merge in the ocean of Divine Grace. 


The woman saint, Meera said, "Braving all hardships, I dived deep into the ocean of the worldly 
life and at last got hold of the precious pearl in the name of Krishna. If I lose hold of this pearl, I 
may not get it again. Therefore, Oh Lord! You are my sole refuge." So also, you students may 


not get such a golden opportunity (as this Summer Course) once again. You should therefore, try 
to carefully garner the pearls of precious ideas that are now being made available to you, so that 
they may stand you in good stead throughout your life. 


Institute Auditorium, Brindavan, 26 May 1992 


18. Aham Brahmaasmi 


Students! You are neither sinners nor meritorious. You are not pleasure-seekers, nor are you 
yogis. You are neither Manthra nor Yantra nor Thanthra. You are not committed to action or to 
enjoyment. Who, then, are you? â€œSatchindananda swarupam Shivoham, Shivoham." You are 
ever the embodiments of auspiciousness. Sai Leela (who had spoken earlier) had reminded you 
of Sarvadevathaa swarupam (all deities appearing in one form). There are no such deities. The 
combined form of all human beings represents the unified form of all deities. The Vedas declare 
"Sahasra Seershaa Purushah Sahasraaksha Sahasrapaadh" (the Lord has a myriad heads, a 
myriad eyes and myriad feet). 


You are what you are, not somebody else. Whether it be a pauper or a millionaire, a pandit or an 
ignoramus, a child or an old man, a man or a woman, when they introduce themselves everyone 
uses the word, "I," "I," "I," (Nenu in Telugu). If birds and animals could speak, they would 
describe themselves as "I am a cat, I am a monkey, I am a dog," and so on. Thus "I" is found 
everywhere. The cosmos is based on the consciousness of "I." "I" is not only the basis, it is the 
very form of the cosmos. Wherefrom has this "I" originated? In fact, it has no origin. It is a 
principle which exists in all beings at all times. 


"I" is the embodiment of the Aatma 


If we examine the phenomenal world, we can see that terms like "you" and "he" and "we" came 
into existence only after the term "I." What is this "I"? Who is this "I"? It is the embodiment of 
the Aatma. Where does the Aatma dwell? It is all-pervading. The Shrutis have described this all- 
pervading Aatma as hridaya. Hrid + dhaya is hridaya. Dhaya means compassion. That which is 
the embodiment of compassion is hridaya. Therefore, the term "T" refers to that which is filled 
with compassion. 


If a student is asked "Who are you?" he may reply "I am Rangayya or Ramayya." If you ask him 
"When did you come?" he will reply, "I came on May 20 for the Summer course." What is it that 
has come? It is the body. It is in relation to the body that the student says that he came on the 
20th. Here the reply is based on identification of himself with the body. The next day the same 
student says, "My stomach is upset." When he says "My stomach," there is an obvious 
distinction between him and the stomach. When one refers to "my hand," "my head," "my belly," 
"my leg" and so on, obviously he is different from these organs. When one says "This is my 
towel," the towel is separate from the owner. 


The question naturally arises, "who are you?" This question has to be fully explored. One makes 
himself separate from all physical objects. The entire cosmos is thus made up of two elements, 
"This" and "I." "This" refers to what is seen (Drisyam)."J" is the seer. We use the terms, "This is 
a table." "This is an auditorium." We cannot refer to any object without first using the word 
"this." By the use of the term "this," the particular object that is referred to is made clear. 


There is no Seen without the Seer 


That which is seen is perceived only because there is a Seer. When there is no Seer, there is no 
Seen. People say that the eyes see. But on what basis do the eyes see? It is not the eyes that see. 
There is something more basic. For instance, when a bulb sheds light, it is not the bulb that 
illumines. It is the current that makes the bulb shed light. Likewise all the objects in the world 
that are present are perceptible and made manifest by the perceiver. 


Thus the principle of "I" is all-pervasive. People may call themselves by different names. But the 
one thing that is common to all of them is the concept of "I." The very first word in the universe 
was "I." Aham ("I") is the first name of the Lord "Aham Brahmaasmi." Aham comes first and 
Brahma comes afterwards. This means that Aham is the name of the Lord. For everyone, 
therefore, the term "I" is always present. 


Creation proclaims the will of the Divine. All beings in creation are images of the divine. The 
advent of man is for the purpose of proclaiming to the world the glory of the Creator. Man is the 
image of the Creator. The "I" indicates the oneness of man and the Creator. Hence, the nature of 
the "I" has to be explored. Physical desires become barriers to the discovery of the true nature of 
"I." Clouds which have been caused by the sun hide the sun from view. How, then, are we to see 
the sun? We know that the sun is there, but is not visible because it is covered by clouds. When 
the wind blows, the clouds are scattered and the sun is visible again. The fire in a burning piece 
of charcoal is not visible when it is covered by ashes. The reason is that the ashes, which, came 
out of the fire, have covered the fire. To see the fire, we have to remove the ashes. 


Shed Anaatma to enable the Aatma to shine 


Man today performs various spiritual exercises. These are of nine kinds: listening to the praise of 
God, singing the glories of God, remembering the name of the Lord, adoring the Lord's feet, 
service to the Lord, prostration, worshipping the idol of the Lord, cultivating friendship towards 
the Lord and complete surrender of the self to the Lord. People think that these nine forms of 
devotion are for the purpose of realising the Aatma. This is a mistake. These forms of worship 
are intended to shed the Anaatma (that which is not the Aatma). When the Anaatma is cast off, 
the Aatma shines of its own accord, just as the burning charcoal is perceived when the ashes are 
removed and the sun is perceived when the clouds move away. The Aatma is omnipresent. Only 
if it is confined to one place, will you have to search for it. But Aatma is present everywhere. 
When you want to experience it you have to get rid of the Anaatma that envelops it. 


What are Aatma and Anaatma? In reality there is no such thing as Anaatma. Anaatma is merely 
the inability to perceive the Aatma. For instance, here is a light that is burning. As long as the 
light is burning, you cannot have darkness. When you switch off the light, there is darkness. 
Wherefrom did this darkness come? It did not come from anywhere. The mere absence of light 
produced the darkness. When there is light darkness goes. So, darkness is simply the absence of 
light. As long as one does not experience the Aatma Bhaava, he will be immersed in the 
Anaatma. When the Aatma is experienced the Anaatma feeling disappears. 


The mind turns men away from the Aatma 


It is because one has lost the vision of the Aatma that he is caught up in the Anaatma Bhaava 
(vagaries of the mind). This is like depending on the light of the moon when the sun is not 
shining. Forgetting the effulgence of the Sun (the Aatma), man relies on the mind, which is like 
the moon that sheds the reflected light from the sun. All spiritual practices in which people are 
engaged today are related to the mind only. This is totally wrong. By blindly adhering to certain 
transitional practices people have fallen a prey to peacelessness. 


Spiritual exercises should not be performed mentally. The mind is like the thief who cannot be 
expected to catch a thief. The mind, instead of seeking the Aatma, interests itself in other things. 
It turns man away from the Aatma and involves him in illusory pleasures of the world. Hence, 


spiritual exercises based on the mind cannot lead man out of the darkness of ignorance. When 
the Aatma is experienced, the mind will cease to exist. 


When the mind is absent, there is no need for control of the mind, Once the Aatma is 
experienced, the mind control becomes superfluous. It is like the light of the moon fading in the 
presence of the sunlight. 


Hence, what men have to seek and acquire is Aatmaanandam (the bliss of the Aatma), not the 
pleasure of the mind, the body or the senses. All the latter forms of happiness are transient. 


The way to experience the Aatma 


If man enquires earnestly into the nature of "I," his enquiry will lead him to the experience of the 
Aatma. This may be illustrated by an episode from the Bhagavatha. It was one of the sports of 
Krishna to go stealthily into the houses of the Gopikas and upset pots containing milk and curds. 
The Gopikas, who were worded about Krishna's pranks, were keen to catch him red-handed. 
Krishna was an elusive thief. So, one Gopika suggested that the only way to catch Him was to 
pray to him. The Gopikas started praying to Krishna. "O Krishna, is it possible for us to get at 
you? You are subtler than the atom and vaster than the vastest thing in the world. You pervade 
every being in creation. How can we comprehend you?" As a result of the prayer, the Gopikas 
were shown the means of catching Him. Krishna poured out the milk from the pot, washed His 
feet in the milk and ran out of the house. The Gopikas followed Krishna's footprints and caught 
hold of Him. The symbolic significance of this episode is that the Divine can be experienced 
only when the devotee clings to the feet of the Lord. This is the teaching of the Bhagavatha. 


When the enquiry into the nature of "I" is pursued, it will be found that the "I" is the omnipresent 
entity present in every living being. This is the truth of the Vedic declaration: "Aham 
Brahmaasmi" (Iam the Supreme Self). Some people may ask whether it is enough to meditate on 
the declaration "Aham Brahmaasmi." This may be done, but when one meditates on the 
declaration "â€œAham Brahmaasmi," one has to start with the understanding of the "I"; then you will 
understand Brahman. 


Pray to God: "I am you and you are me" 


There is a prayer addressed to God in which God is described as mother, father, brother, friend 
and everything else. This is not the fight way to worship God. This kind of prayer binds man to 
worldly relationships. Instead of these multiple relationships, a simpler way of describing the 
relationship between man and God is to say: "I am you and you are me." 


The divinity inherent in man should be considered as one only, and not many. All the variety of 
names and forms one perceives are creations of the mind and are bound to pass away. When you 
and the Divine are one, where is the need for seeking the Divine? Only a fool goes in search of 
himself. Instead of resorting to all forms of meditation, it is simpler and easier to proceed on the 
single idea that you and the Divine are one. But this process of identification should not be an 
artificial exercise. It should come from the heart. In declaring "I am the Divine," you should 
express a genuine and deep experience. You should feel that the Divine is not separate from you. 
Instead of that if you merely repeat. "I am God, I am God," on the basis that Swami has told you 
so, you will be indulging in a foolish exercise. 


The Divine should be comprehended by earnest enquiry and a profound inner experience. It 
should, however be realised that as long as you live in this phenomenal world and have to 


perform worldly duties, it is not easy to express this oneness in the Divine. It has to be a gradual 
process by which the divinisation of life is achieved. 


Get rid of the identification with the body 


You have to realise that there are two elements in a human being. One is the Aatma and the other 
is Anaatma (one is the body and the other is the indweller in the body). One is the Kshetra (the 
field), the other is Kshetrajna (the Knower of the field). As in a grinder, one stone is firm and 
unmoving while the other is movable, it is only when both combine that you can achieve 
fulfilment. 


The body should be considered as an instrument. Only then gradually the identification with the 
body can be got rid of. Man is perpetually enhancing the attachments relating to the body. 
Because-of these attachments and infatuation, the ego principle gets inflated. As the ego sense 
grows, the spiritual aspiration becomes weaker. But there can be no decay of the Spirit. What 
happens is the fading out of the Spirit (the Aatma) from one's vision. This implies that a constant 
effort must be made to control the impulses of the body. 


The Divine is only one. The names given to God like Rama and Krishna are incidental. Birth is 
an incident, like giving a name to one that is born, Life itself is an interlude. But in this artificial 
interlude of life there is an eternal Aatmic principle. That should be made the basis of life. Only 
then the Reality can be understood. 


Whatever books you may read, whatever discourses you may listen to, all these are merely 
mental lumber without application in practice. What sweetness will you experience if you merely 
read the description of various sweet preparations? But when you eat them, you experience their 
sweetness immediately. There is a vast difference between the bliss that is directly experienced 
and the bliss which is intellectually comprehended by the study of books. Therefore, the first step 
is to begin practising what you learn. Your faith must be translated into action. 


Live the life of a human being 


Students! You may pass examinations by studying books. After that you may get a job in which 
them is no use for all that you have studied. You must see that there is a close link between what 
you have studied and the life which you lead. There must be harmony between the knowledge 
you acquire and your speech and actions. It is only when there is this threefold unity that you can 
live the life of a human being. 


Today this unity in thought, word and deed is rarely to be found among men. Students! You have 
to realise the supreme sacredness of human life. It is better to lead a brief but glorious life of a 
swan than live for long like a crow. Do not give way to the ever-changing promptings of the 
mind. Use your discrimination in deciding what you should do. You must examine whether what 
one wants to do is fight or wrong and you should be guided by your intellect. Never act on the 
impulses of the moment. 


You must recognise the divine that is present in all beings. The Upanishad declares; 
"Ishaavaasyam Idham Sarvam" (All this is pervaded by the divine). The divine is one, although 
described by different names. There is some basis for the differences in names. The same person 
may be described in different terms according to the functions he discharges. 


The idea of total surrender to God 


People tend to blame God for their troubles and say that even though they have surrendered to 
God their troubles have not ceased. This is misuse of the idea of surrender. If one has really 
surrendered to God, one should not be worried about what happens to him. The sense of 
separation between oneself and God should go. As long as the sense of separation exists, the 
divine cannot be realised. Brahman means that which is infinite. The divine, therefore, has to be 
experienced in all forms. 


In whatever form the divine is worshipped, the offering goes to the divine. In the deep sleep state 
one is not aware of the names or forms or position or anything else. It is also described as the 
state of Samadhi. In that state names and forms do not exist. There is no consciousness of 
differences. Them is no feeling of love or hatred. No likes and dislikes. Samadhi is not a state of 
unconsciousness. It is a transcendental state, in which all differences have ceased. This state is 
attained when the mind merges with the Aatma. 


Do not forget your inherent divinity 


Students! In the different forms and names, you are like different actors on the stage. As long as 
you have to play your part, you have to act according to the role assigned to you. But you should 
not forget your true Aatmic self. Whatever role you play, your Aatmic self remains unchanged. 
You should never forget your inherent divinity. 


Many parents today are responsible for allowing their children to go astray. Students should 
remember that even if the parents advise them against their pursuing the spiritual path, they are 
entitled to act against their parents advice. When a father comes between a son and his devotion 
to God, the son is free to disobey the father. In worldly matters the son may follow the father's 
advice. But with regard to relationship with the divine you must follow your own way. At the 
time of marriage, the bride and the bridegroom are enjoined to act together in matters relating to 
righteous conduct, material interests, and worldly desires---Dharmecha, Arthecha and 
Kaamecha. But with regard to Moksha, attainment of salvation, each must follow his or her path. 
This means that in the spiritual field you need not have to be afraid of anyone. 


When Meera was locked out of the Krishna Mandir by the Rana she was advised by Tulasidas 
that in the quest for God she was not bound to obey her husband's orders. In the case of 
Vibhishana, he chose to renounce his elder brother Ravana when Ravana was opposed to 
Vibhishana's devotion to Rama. Bharatha did not allow his mother's wishes to come in the way 
of his devotion and loyalty to Rama. The Emperor Bali disregarded the advice of his preceptor 
Sukracharya, when he came in the way of Bali carrying out his promise to the Lord. 


The lesson to be drawn from all these episodes is that God is above all others. Father, mother, 
brother, teacher and all others rank far below God. All such relations are temporary and transient. 
Only the relationship between man and God is permanent and unchanging. The faith in God must 
be firm and unwavering. 


You must acquire steadiness of mind. When a person has a vacillating mind, he is worse than a 
monkey. 


Brindavan, 27 May 1992 


Greed arises from attachment to the senses and catering to them. 
Put them in their proper place, they are windows for knowledge, 
not channels of contamination. 


Sathya Sai Baba 


19. Prajnaanam Brahma 


Not all the pleasures and luxuries of the world 
Will confer contentment on man; 

Without realisation of the Aatmic Principle 
He cannot experience peace and contentment. 


There are various kinds of Dharma (rules governing one's conduct) in the world. Brahmacharya 
(celibacy), Grihastha Dharma (the duties of the householder), Vaanaprastha Dharma 
(withdrawal from the world) and Sanyasa (complete renunciation) are known as the Ashrama 
Dharmas (the dharmas relating to different stages in a man's life). The Varna or caste dharmas 
relate to Brahmins, Kshathriya, Vaisyas and Sudras. Them are, moreover, dharmas relating to 
worldly life and spiritual life. In Bharath, man's life is thus regulated by dharmas. All these 
dharmas are related to the mind. Enquiry will show that these Dharmas are of minor importance. 


Them is one Dharma which is greater than all these. That is the Dharma concerning the 
awareness of the "J"--Prajna-Dharma. It is the Dharma which pervades equally the body, the 
mind, the will and the Antha Karana (Inner instrument). It has been defined as "Constant 
Integrated Awareness." It expresses itself as "I" and shines forth in its fullness. It manifests itself 
throughout the world. But man does not recognise its effulgence in spite of its presence within 
him. What is the mason? 


How to realise the "I" principle 


The sun shines in all his glory, but his light is not felt inside a house because of the walls around 
and the ceiling above. In relation to man, what are these walls and this roof? The Vedas have 
declared: "The body is a divine temple and the indwelling spirit is the eternal Jiva.â€ The body is 
like a temple. But, man has created the walls of Abhimaana and Mamakaara (attachment and 
possessiveness) around it and covered it with the ceiling of Ahamkaara (egoism). It is only when 
these walls and roof are removed that the divine "I" principle will be revealed in its true form as 
the effulgent Prajna. 


Out of his egoistic feeling, a man declares, "I did this." "I saw this." "I heard this." "I experienced 
this." It is true that it is the "I" that sees, hears and experiences. But when a man uses the "I" 
today, he identifies it with the body sense and not with an awareness of its Prajna nature. Hence 
them are two kinds of "I "One may be equated with the term "eye" and the other with the single 
letter "I." The "I" that corresponds to the "eye" is related to the body. The single letter "I" 
proclaims the power of the Prajna (Constant Integrated Awareness). 


Students! You must realise that when a man with the body-consciousness says, "I have seen," it 
is not the eyes that have seen. Nor is it the ears that have heard or the hands that have performed 
actions. Nor is it the mind that has experienced. Behind all these is the power of Prajna which 
enables man to have all experiences of seeing, etc. 


It is only when man gives up the ego sense relating to the body and realises the role of the 
Aatmic power of Prajna that he would be able to comprehend the principle of Divinity within 
him. 


Conscience always declares only the truth 


The basic human nature is related to Divinity and not to the body and sensory organs. In this 
human nature, how does one comprehend the meaning of "I"? This "I" shines as an entity that is 
pure, unsullied and unselfish. In modern parlance this is called "Conscience." Whatever action 
one does, the Conscience declares whether it is fight or wrong. Whatever one may say or do in 
worldly life, the Prajna Shakthi (the power of Conscience) proclaims what is true, what is 
permanent and what is unaffected by the past, the present or the furore. Here is an example. A 
thief stole valuable jewels from a house one night. The next morning the police arrested him on 
suspicion. To escape from the clutches of the police, the man uttered a number of falsehoods 
saying that he had never stirred out of his house and that he had not committed any theft. 
Although from a worldly point of view, he was uttering all these lies, his conscience was telling 
him that he had committed the theft and hidden the stolen articles somewhere and that he should 
not utter lies. This is the voice of the Prajna principle which is related to the Universal 
consciousness. 


The individual and the Divine are not separate 


To recognise this Prajna principle there is a certain kind of yoga (spiritual discipline). What is 
this yoga? Is it Kriya yoga, or Bhakthi yoga or Jnaana yoga or Karma yoga? There has been a 
great deal of misinterpretation of the term Yoga from very early times. It has been wrongly 
associated with some form of physical discipline. This is not the right meaning. Yoga means 
Ananda (Bliss). This is the correct meaning. When is this bliss experienced? When there is an 
awareness of the "I" principle, this bliss is secured. When life is enjoyed with the full awareness 
of the Prajna Shakthi, bliss is experienced as a result of this yoga. Yoga is the unity of the 
individual with the Divine. Yoga means an end to dualism. Yoga teaches that the Jiva (the 
individual Spirit) and the Brahman are not separate but one. This is the significance of the 
declaration in the Shruti "Ekam Sath: Vipraa bahudhaa vadhanthi" (The Truth is one: the wise 
call it by many names). This truth is beyond the categories of Time. 


So, the individual and the Divine are not separate. Some are of the view that they are like an 
object and its reflection. There is, however, a big difference between the reflection and the 
object. The Prajna principle explains the relationship between the object and the image. The 
Prajna Shakthi teaches that when a person sees his reflection in a trough of water, the reflection 
resembles him, but he is not the reflection. Students today are not taking to the spiritual path 
because there are not qualified teachers to tell them the spiritual truths in the proper manner. 


The truth taught by Prajna-principle 


The image is you, but you are not the image. The Prajna-principle explains this by the following 
example. For instance, if someone beats you, you are hit, but the image is not affected by the 
beating. This demonstrates the fact that you are affected by the beating. If you and the image 
were identical, the blow that hit you should affect the image equally. Therefore, it is clear you 
are not the same as your image. But the image identifies itself with you. For instance, if someone 
insults the image, you get angry. But if you are hit, the image does not suffer any blow. 


This is the truth taught by the Prajna-principle. Awareness of this Truth is more significant than 
all other truths (Dharmas). The essence of all truths is contained in the truth about the "I" as 
recognised by Prajna (the constant integrated awareness). Its value is equal to the total value of 
all other truths, which are only fractions of the whole, like 100 paise making up a rupee. 


The significance of Sri Krishna's statement in the Gita, â€œSarvadharmaan parithyajya maamekam 
Sharanam vraja," is that by giving up all petty dharmas (observances) and surrendering to the 
Lord you get the benefit of adhering to all the other dharmas. This is contained in the assurance: 
"Aham Thvaa sarvapaapebhyo mokshayishyaami maa suchah" (I shall liberate you from all sins, 
do not grieve). Do not attach any value to the minor dharmas. Understand the basic truth about 
the "I" (nenu)---the Prajna-principle---and derive the maximum benefit. 


Apart from Prajna, there are in man entities like the body, the mind, the intellect, the will and the 
ego. All these appear to be distinct and disparate. But essentially they are one. It is the functional 
differences of the mind which account for the different terms like intellect, will, etc. It is the 
same mind that assumes all the forms. Prajna (Constant Integrated Awareness) is present in all 
of them. 


Prajna is the common factor 


To understand the Prajna-principle, what has to be recognised is that Prajna is present in all the 
constituents of the body and the mind, but under different names and forms. Just as sugar is the 
common factor in a variety of sweets with different labels, Prajna is the common factor. This 
common factor is identified with the "I" (nenu). 


How does this happen? One declares: "This is my body." "My" is an expression of "I." Again, 
one declares: "This is my mind." Here, again, the "I" is affirmed. "This is my chitta" (will), 
"These are my sensory organs," "This is my Antha Karana (Inner motivator)." In all these 
statements, the "I" is repeatedly affirmed in the possessive case. ("naa" in Telugu, meaning 
"my"). But in Sanskrit, "naa" means "not." The declaration that "This is my (naa) body" also 
carries by implication the meaning "I am not the body." Similarly when one says, "This is my 
mind," he implicitly affirms that he is not the mind. It will be seen that even within such simple 
statements, deep meanings are implicit. The use of "my" in describing one's body or mind also 
means that he is different from the body and mind. 


The "I" principle is like a flowing river 


Here is an example. You have a block of ice. No one terms it as water. Nevertheless the ice block 
is full of water. Without water there can be no ice. This means that ice is one form of water and 
is entirely based on it. Likewise, for the body, the mind, etc., the basis is the Chith-Shakthi (the 
spiritual element) known as "I." It is the Prajna-Shakthi. 


To give another illustration. You go to the Ganga with ten tumblers and fill them with Ganga 
water. All the tumblers contain Ganga water, but the Ganga is different from them. The "I" 
principle is like the flowing river Ganga. This infinite "I" principle appears in a myriad objects in 
multifarious forms. All these objects have emanated from the infinite "I." They are fragments of 
the Infinite like the Ganga water in each tumbler. 


Similarly, in the body, the mind, the intellect, etc. the Prajna-Shakthi of (the integrated 
awareness) "I" is present. All these have emerged from the Infinite and are manifestations of it. 


Today, in the modern world, there is no attempt at expounding the unity that underlies the 
diversity. What is the reason for this? It is because many ancient sayings are interpreted in 
different ways. For instance, there is the saying: "Shareeram Aadhyam khalu. Dharma 
Saadhanam" (for the achievement of righteousness the body is primary). The meaning of this 
aphorism is that the body is given to you for the pursuit of Dharma. Another aphorism is: 


"Sarvam khalu idham Brahma" (Verily, all this is Brahman). The entire creation is pervaded by 
Brahman (the Universal Absolute). Then there is "Aham Brahmaasmi" (I am the Brahman). It 
means: "I am the embodiment of the Divine Consciousness." The Sastras make such 
pronouncements on one side. On the other, some unseemly s/okas are recited at the conclusion of 
traditional ritual worship in Brahmin houses. "Paapoham, Paapakarmaaham Paapaathma, 
Paapasambhavah" (I am sin itself, I am a committer of sin, I am a sinful soul, I am born out of 
sin). This is a prayer in which the worshipper attributes sin not only to himself but even to his 
forebears. You may well imagine how unseemly all this is. Such prayers were devised to induce 
in the pious a sense of guilt and make them atone for their "sins" by making offerings to the 
priestly class. 


The reason for loss of faith in the Divine 


When the Sastra declares that everything has originated from Brahman (the Absolute), when the 
Upanishads declare that the Lord is the indweller in all beings---"Eeshvaras 
sarvabhoothaanaam," how could the ideas of "birth in sin" and "I am a sinner" have any place? 
By arousing baseless fears in men, such sayings have served to undermine whatever little faith 
the people had in the Divine. This also accounts for the loss of faith among students today. 
Consequently, I introduced changes in this s/oka in Prashanthi Nilayam. The priest in our Mandir 
used to repeat the old sloka earlier. In the place of paapoham, the term Praapthoham was 
substituted. Praapthakarmaaham, Praaptasambhavam. The changes meant: "I am born as a pure 
being. My parents were pure persons. My spirit is holy. My actions are sacred." The old sloka 
(verse) was changed in this manner. 


Divine love is the panacea for curing "diseases" 


On the basis of what happens in the world, people talk about sin and merit, but inherently there is 
nothing of the kind. There are misdeeds no doubt, but these should not be characterised as sins. 
Wittingly or otherwise man is prone to commit wrongs. Man should not commit such wrongs, 
because actions arising out of attachment or aversion, anger or hatred are expressions of the 
animal nature. When a man is filled with lust or hatred, he is a prey to a grievous illness. Vices 
like envy, anger, ego and hatred are various kinds of diseases. These cannot be cured by ordinary 
medicines or by professional doctors, who can only deal with physical ailments. These maladies 
are related to the Antha Karana (the internal instrument of action). There is a divine panacea for 
curing these diseases. That is Divine Love. Once that Divine Love is got, one can experience the 
"I" (higher Self) present in the Prajna-principle. When the diseases go, health is ensured. 


Hence, the first requisite is to develop the Love principle as the supreme quality of a human 
being. But this Love should not be mixed up with the myriad forms of affection and attachment 
found in daily life. These may be called "love," but they are only different forms of Anuraaga 
(attachment). 


Students should understand the difference between Anuraaga (worldly love) and Prema (Divine 
Love). Worldly love knows only how to receive and not to give. Divine Love gives and forgives 
and does not receive. It does not expect any return. In worldly love, there is no spirit of sacrifice. 
The Shruti declares firmly that immortality can be attained only through sacrifice and by no 
other means. 


Preciousness of Aatma-Jnaana 


People indulge in what they call meditation in ekaantham (solitude). It is not seclusion in a room 
or a cave or a forest that constitutes solitude. It is the one-pointed contemplation of God that is 
true meditation. It means merging the mind in thoughts of the Divine exclusively. The mind is a 
prey to continuous fickleness. The only way to achieve concentration is to merge the mind in the 
Prajna-Thathwa, the integral awareness of the "I." The Prajna-principle is also described as 
Guhyam, that which is hidden or held in secret. It is infinitely precious. Prajnana is also termed 
Brahma-Jnaana or Adwaitha-Jnaana (knowledge of the Absolute). It is also called Aatma- 
Jnaana. This knowledge is so precious that it has to be carefully safeguarded. But when its 
preciousness is not realised, it is treated lightly. 


There was a shepherd who found a shining piece of stone in a river and not knowing its value, he 
tied it round the neck of his favourite lamb. A jeweller saw it and knowing its value as a diamond 
bought it from the shepherd for ten rupees. When he was gloating over the cheap price at which 
he had got the highly valuable diamond, the diamond broke into a thousand pieces and an 
ethereal voice told the jeweller: "I could excuse the shepherd for treating the diamond as an 
ordinary shining pebble, because he did not know its worth. But when you, who knew its value, 
got me for a low price, I could not bear the humiliation and my heart broke into pieces." Students 
are indifferent to spirituality because they do not know how precious it is. 


Students should first of all realise the supreme value of spirituality. To pursue the spiritual quest 
with real understanding is yoga. People refer to Raja yoga and associate it with Emperor Janaka. 
How did Janaka practice yoga? He reigned over the empire as a ruler. He led the life of a 
householder. He experienced the spirit of a thyaagi (renunciant). He merged his entire being in 
the Aatma. To merge the body, the mind, the intellect, the will and the ego in the awareness of 
Aham (the "I" or the Self) is Raja yoga. The goal of life should be to become a Raja Yogi. This is 
the means to get rid of all worries. 


How to get rid of worry and attachment 


Students! How do you get rid of worry? Worry arises out of Moha (attachment). To get rid of 
attachment for anything, you should turn your yearning towards something that is greater, more 
beautiful and satisfying than the one to which you are attached. There is an illustration for this 
from the Ramayana. When Bharatha and Satrughna returned to Ayodhya from their uncle's 
kingdom, they were stricken with grief on learning about the death of their father. They felt sad 
that they had been denied the chance to be beside their father at the moment of his passing. 
When they went to Kausalya to enquire about Rama and Lakshmana, and what their father's last 
words were, Kausalya broke into sobs and told them about the exile of Rama and how 
Lakshmana and Sita had gone with him into the forest to stay there for fourteen years. When 
Bharatha heard this, his love for Rama overwhelmed his grief over the death of his father, and 
his greater love for Rama made him even bitter with regard to his father as the cause of Rama's 
exile. The grief over the death of the father yielded place to the sadness over separation from his 
beloved brother. 


Develop noble sentiments and sublime ideas 


A greater grief submerges a smaller grief. A nobler feeling eliminates an unworthy thought. 
Hence, to get rid of petty and mean thoughts, one has to cultivate noble sentiments and sublime 
ideas. 


Man's entire life is a procession of worries from birth to death. To get over these worries, at least 
from now on turn your minds towards God, because love of God is the panacea for all worries. 
Develop love of God. This is my sole message to all of you students. 


Students! Dedicate all your thoughts towards the single object of realising the Divinity in you. 
"Prajnaanam Brahma," declares the Upanishad. The integral awareness which is your real Self 
is the Universal Consciousness. Ruminate over this truth. Then you will realise your oneness 
with the Divine. 


Brindavan, 28 May 1992 


First, tend your parents with love and reverence and gratitude. 


Second, Sathyam vadha, Dharmam chara... speak the truth and act 
virtuously. 


Third, whenever you have a few moments to spare, repeat the 
name of the Lord, with the form in your mind. 


Fourth, never indulge in talking ill of others or try to discover 
faults in others. Finally, do not cause pain to others, in any form. 


Sathya Sai Baba 


20. The Message Of The Vedas 


Of what woe is a life lived without chanting the Lord's name ? 
What happiness is there in reigning over the realm of the Devas ? 
What is the benefit from possessing all worldly riches? 

Without Bhakthi can one be free from bondage ? 


Although in the human, there are animal, demonic, human and divine possibilities, ignoring the 
human potential, pursuing animal tendencies is a great misfortune for man. 


There are some who identify themselves with the body. They do not realise that this body is 
transient and may pass away any moment like a water bubble. Death overtakes the man who 
identifies himself with his body. The body is made up of the five elements (ether, air, fire, water 
and earth). It is bound to perish. The Indweller is permanent, has no birth or death and is, indeed, 
the Divine itself. By treating the impermanent body as himself, man is wasting his life. 


Five types of human beings 


There are other misguided persons, the second category, who identify themselves with their 
minds and waste theft lives. They are harried continually by thoughts and fancies. Brooding over 
the past and speculating about the future, these persons ignore the present and land themselves in 
confusion. 


The third category of persons apotheosise the Buddhi (intellect), identify themselves with it, 
make use of its powers and embark on various plans. By glorifying the discriminating powers of 
the intellect in this manner, these persons fail to recognise their true (divine) nature. Thereby, 
man is wasting the divine potentiality of the Buddhi. Life is wasted in endless enquiries and 
experiments. However long one may conduct enquiries and researches, the intellect cannot help 
one to realise the Divine. 


The fourth category of persons rely on the power of the Antha Karana (the Inner instrument of 
thinking). Regarding the phenomenal world as separate from themselves, these persons seek to 
realise the Divine by taking to the spiritual path. 


The man belonging to the fifth category declares: "I am everything. There is nothing in the world 
apart from me." He believes that the world itself is unreal. He is one who comprehends the 
Prajna-principle relating to the "I." The Prajna is constant integrated awareness). 


If one seeks to integrate the body, the mind, the intellect and the Antha Karana to realise the 
transcendental goal, he has to go beyond the mind, the Buddhi and the Antha Karana and 
transcend the states of waking, dream and deep sleep. Only then can he comprehend the "I" 
principle of Prajna. The body, the mind, the intellect and the Antha Karana are related to the 
Prakruthi (phenomena of Nature). They are all functional variants of the mind. Divinity cannot 
be comprehended through the mind. Efforts should be made to bring the mind under control. 


Four great Mahaavaakyas 


In this context, the Vedas have proclaimed four great Mahaavaakyas (aphorisms). One is 
"Prajnaanam Brahma." What is this Prajnaanam? It is Chaithanyam (consciousness or 
awareness). This consciousness pervades everything in creation, man, demon or deity, birds and 


beasts. This all-pervading consciousness has been regarded as the Brahman (Absolute Divinity). 
Brahman refers to that which is pervasive. It transcends the body and the mind and is beyond the 
three states of waking, dreaming and deep sleep. 


Because this all-pervasive Brahman is identical with the Aham---the universal "I" principle--the 
Vedas gave the second aphorism, "Aham Brahmaasmi" (I am the Brahman). This emphasised the 
oneness of the "I" and Brahman. 


Therefore, Brahman (Divinity), Chaithanyam (Consciousness) and pervasiveness are not entities 
with different names and forms. They are identical. But Brahman has different organs and limbs. 
For instance, there is the human body. It has a single name---body. But within the body, you 
have hands, eyes, ears, etc. In the same manner, the Brahman principle is associated with the 
Prajna principle, has the attributes of pervasiveness and Paripuurnathvam (wholeness), and 
Consciousness. All these are its limbs. Divinity is the integral form of all these constituents. 


Hence, the declaration Prajnaanam Brahma means "Brahman is Consciousness." Where is this 
consciousness? It is everywhere. There is no place without consciousness. On this basis, the 
Vedas proclaimed that the Divine is omnipresent, omnipotent and omniscient. 


No difference between Aham and Brahma 


In the second great Mahaavaakya "Aham Brahmaasmi," there are three words: Aham, Brahma, 
Asmi. Aham signifies Paripuurnathvam (wholeness). It is not subject to change on account of 
time, place or circumstances. Aham has another meaning, namely Saakshi (Witness). This means 
that the Divine is a witness to everything--in the past, the present and the future. But he remains 
unaffected by any of these. Brahma refers to the principle that is the basis for aakaasa (ether) 
and other Pancha Bhutas (five basic elements). There is no difference between Aham and 
Brahma. They are interdependent and inseparable. The Aham principle also has the attribute of 
pervasiveness. Aham is present in the five elements also. Asmi unifies the Aham and Brahma. 
They are not separate but one and the same. This is the meaning of Aham Brahmaasmi. 


The third pronouncement is "Thath Thoyam Asi." Thath is that which has remained unchanged 
before and after creation. It has no name or form. That is why it is called Thath (That). The 
Shuddha-Sathwa (the pure goodness principle) is called Thath. It is changeless. Hence it is called 
"Being," that which is ever unchanging and transcends the categories of time and space. 


The common bond between Formless and Form 


The second term, 7hwam, refers to that which has name and form. It has body, mind, intellect 
and Antha Karana. It belongs to the phenomenal world. There is a common bond between the 
Formless and the Object with Form. In all the objects with forms the Prajna, the awareness of 
"I" principle is present. Consequently, Thwam also acquires the attribute of Thath. 


This is illustrated by an example. A sculptor produced an idol of Krishna out of a block of stone 
hewn from a rock. While chiselling the stone for sculpting the idol, he threw away the unwanted 
stones. He was concerned only with making the idol. After the idol was completed, it was 
installed in a temple. The idol was the object of daily worship in the temple. After the removal of 
the idol, the other stone chips remained on the hill. These nameless and misshapen chips of 
stones proclaimed: "We are the same as That (the idol of Krishna). Once we were together in 
one rock. But because the other stone was given a name and form, we have become different 
from it. But the Divinity present in all of us is one and the same." 


Likewise, it is from the Shuddha Thathwa--Thath--- that the body, mind, etc. have emanated. By 
separation from the Sathwik element, the body and others have been rendered useless. In what 
way are they useless? So far as ordinary worldly life is concerned, all these--- body, mind, etc.-- 
are essential. For performing any sadhana, the body is a prerequisite. To think about anything, 
you require the mind. To enquire into any matter, you have to utilise the Buddhi (intellect). So, 
for leading a worldly life, the body, mind and intellect are primary instruments. However, they 
are only instruments, but the agency that puts them to work is different. That is Thath which, 
residing in the body, the mind, the intellect and the Antha Karana, makes them discharge their 
respective duties. There is, however, no difference separating them from each other. 


Principle of oneness implied by "Thath Thwam Asi" 


To take another example. There is the vast fathomless ocean. Innumerable waves arise from the 
ocean. The waves appear to be different from each other, but are not really different. They are 
expressions of the same water of the ocean. Only their forms appear to vary. From the waves 
arise foam. The foam is inseparable from the waves. The foam cannot separate itself from the 
waves and the waves cannot separate themselves for the sea-water. The ocean is present both in 
the waves and the foam. The unity of these three is called Kootastha by Vedantha. Kootastha 
refers to the Thath that is present in all things (that differ in name and form). This principle of 
oneness is proclaimed by Vedantha in the pronouncement, "Thath Thwam Asi." 


The fourth declaration is: "Ayam Aatma Brahma." Ayam means that which is self-luminous and 
self-created. It is unmanifested--Paroksha. Its form is self-chosen. Next to it is the term Aatma. 
The Aatma is present in all beings in the form of Chaithanya (Consciousness). Such 
Consciousness, which is present in all beings, has been called Sathyvam. The reason for this 
appellation is that this Aatma is Nithya (ever-present). Moreover, it is called Sathyam because, as 
pointed out in the Thaitthireeya Upanishad, the Aatma is the basis for all good thoughts and 
good actions. 


The Eight Divine Majestic Powers 


Thus, the truth underlying all the four Vedantic pronouncements is the same. It is the principle of 
Aham ("I") as expressed by Prajna (constant integrated awareness). Aham ("I") is the Divine 
swara (sound) in all beings. All other sounds have emerged from Aham. That is the reason why 
the term Shabdhabrahman came to be used. 


Where is this Shabdhabrahman? The answer comes from the term, Charaacharamayee (the one 
that is present in the moving and the non-moving). How does this Charaacharamayee exist? As 
Jyothirmayee (Infinite effulgence). How does the word Jyothirmayee issue from the mouth of 
man? As Vaangmayee (in the form of Vaak or speech). Even after a man dies, his words survive 
in the form of electrical waves in the ether. Broadcasts from Delhi can be heard simultaneously 
in distant places. The sounds are carried by radio waves to all places. 


Because of the power of Vaangmayee, we can experience the bliss indicated by the attribute, 
Nithyaanandamayee (Ever-blissful). The blissful nature is the characteristic of one who is 
Paraathparamayee. Para is usually regarded as referring to a heavenly abode like Vaikunta. But 
it refers to that which permeates everything and is present as a witness. It is also called, 
Maayaamayee. It is the power which makes one believe the unreal as real and the real as unreal. 
This illusion-producing power is called Maaya. A student, for instance, mistakes a rope for a 
serpent in the semi-darkness of twilight. Immediately he experiences fear. After bringing a torch, 


he finds that it was not a snake but a rope. His fear disappears. Only the rope existed before he 
brought the torch. There was no snake in the beginning or later. The snake was a creation of his 
mind on account of ignorance caused by darkness. 


Today the darkness of ignorance has to be dispelled. Ignorance is due to Aviveka (lack of 
discriminating power). Aviveka is due to Bhraanthi (imaginary apprehension). These imaginary 
fears are caused by attachment and anger. The latter are the result of Karma, which is a 
consequence of Janma (birth). 


Ignorance is the source of fears 


There is, thus, a close relationship between ignorance and birth. Human birth is the result of 
Karma (past actions). Actions result in attachments and aversions, which produce imaginary 
fears. The ultimate source of these fears is ignorance, which has neither birth nor death. There is 
no specific cause for ignorance. Forgetting his divine nature, man is caught up in the meshes of 
Maaya (delusion) and the fears caused by it. How to get rid of Maaya? The answer is: 
recognition of Srimayee. What is this Srimayee? It is the one that shines effulgently always, 
being wide awake and fully aware. Inauspiciousness is alien to it. It is ever auspicious. That is 
Sath. That is Prajna. That is "I" (nenu). 


Divinity has the above-mentioned eight attributes--forms of wealth. It is necessary to unify them 
by getting rid of the body-mind consciousness. Then the oneness of the Divine becomes evident. 


Today men's efforts are governed by selfish desires, narrow feelings and mundane objectives. As 
a result the meaning of divinity eludes man. 


The supreme sadhana that has to be practised by man today is to concentrate all his senses on 
God. This may not appear easy, but with strength of will it is quite possible. It is easier to give up 
things than hold on to them. Those who declare that Samsaara (family life) is keeping them in 
bondage are misusing the language. It is they who are binding themselves to families and 
possessions. 


Man should develop faith in God. Only then would he be able to experience lasting happiness. 
Brindavan, 2 9 May 1992 


Change your vision, and the worm will appear accordingly. Let the 
eye be charged with the Divine, it will see all as God. 


Sathya Sai Baba 


21. Power Of Divine Love 


Love is the form of the Divine. 

Love alone can merge in love. 

When one is filled with Divine love 

He can experience oneness with the Divine. 
Happiness arises from pure love 

Which is also the source of 


Truth, Righteousness, Peace and Forbearance. 


Students! embodiments of Divine Love! The ancient renown of Bharathiya culture is tainted 
today by the proliferation of three evil tendencies: indulgence in self-praise, scandalising others 
and hypocrisy. What is the reason for this? It is the pursuit of mundane pleasure by man, 
forgetting the glory of pure love. 


There is no one in Bharath who does not know the word Prema. The entire cosmos is steeped in 
it. Prema is incomparable and indescribable. The sage Narada declared "Anirvachaneeyam 
Prema" (Love transcends speech). 


The difference between Prema and Anuraaga 


At the human level, this love assumes many forms. The word love is used in common parlance in 
the context of the relations between mother and child, husband and wife, master and servant, the 
preceptor and the pupil. But this is not true love. It cannot be termed Prema (love). It is only 
Anuraaga (attachment). Prema can be applied only to the total love towards the Divine. It is 
utterly selfless. It has not come from the world nor has it fallen from the sky. It is Sahaja 
swaroopam (sui generis). 


Today man has forgotten this sacred and enduring love. There is nothing equal to love in this 
world. Even nectar is insipid in comparison with the sweetness of love. This love makes even the 
Divine dance in ecstasy, as well as the devotee. It expresses itself in dance. Such a love can find 
no place in the heart of self-seeking persons. It will dwell only in the hearts of the pure, the 
unselfish and the godly. 


The scriptures have compared this love to a precious diamond. Where is this gem to be found? 
When even ordinary diamonds are preserved with great care in a strong safe, how much more 
safely should the precious diamond of love be preserved? Who is entitled to offer this diamond 
to others? Only the person who is filled with love and who sustains himself by love always. Only 
the Divine is qualified to offer such love. Only the Divine, who is the embodiment of love, 
knows the value of love. 


Hence, the greater your love for the Divine, the greater is the bliss you experience. Your bliss 
declines in the measure of the diminution in your love. The extent of your love determines the 
magnitude of your bliss. 


The love which men today show towards God is filled with selfishness. The love is for the 
purpose of securing some desires. But love is not a commercial commodity to be got in 
exchange. It is offered spontaneously. 


Pure Love is the royal road to reach God 


There are many ways of realising God. Among them are: the Shanthi Marga (Path of Peace); the 
Sakhya Marga (Path of Friendship); Anuraaga Marga (the Path of attachment); Vaatsalya 
Marga (the Path of Affectionate Love); Madhura Marga (Path of Sweetness). In all these five 
paths, there is some element of serf-interest. But in the Prema Marga (path of Pure Love), there 
is no trace of self-interest. Hence, all other paths merge in the path of Love. Pure Love is 
therefore the royal road. 


We should consider that this Love is present in all. It is the form of the Divine. Because the 
Divine is present in all, whomever you love, you are loving the Divine. Forgetting this sublime 
and all-encompassing conception of Love, men today have lost themselves in narrow alleys. 


To promote among men love between humanity and God, the Divine descends on earth from 
time to time. For what purpose is the advent? To promote the Love Principle is His primary 


purpose. 


Failing to understand the true meaning of this Love Principle, man is undermining his life. 
Everyone should realise that Love is present equally in all beings. But this love assumes many 
different forms when it is exhibited in different relationships in worldly life. The love between 
husband and wife is termed Moha (infatuation). The love between a mother and child is called 
Vaathsalya (maternal love). The love between kith and kin is called Anuraaga (attachment). The 
love towards God is termed Bhakthi (devotion). 


Thus, love is one, but is expressed in many ways. Experiences are varied, but the goal is one. To 
carry on this life in this phenomenal world, love has assumed these manifold forms. The forms of 
love keep changing according to one's relationships. 


But Pure Love is unchanging. Such Pure Love is limited today by man's self-interest. 
How man's love changes from time to time 


Immediately after birth as an infant he clings to the mother's bosom and considers it as paradise. 
As he grows, he gets interested in education and forgets the mother. In his boyhood, one 
experiences this love in sport and games, in studies and recreation. After completing his 
education, he enters on family life and immerses himself in sensual pleasures. Later, he gets 
interested in earning wealth and loses interest in wife and children. Later on he loses interest 
even in wealth and turns his thoughts towards God. Thus, man exhibits his love for different 
objects at different stages in his life. (Swami sang a song describing how man's love changes 
from time to time and how he wastes his life at the end without developing love for God). 


Students! Love is not something which enters your lives midway. It is the Aatmic Principle 
which is always with you at all times. You should not allow this love to change from moment to 
moment. You must transmute all your thoughts into expressions of love. To regard whatever 
actions you perform as an offering to God is the best form of sadhana. Whatever good deeds or 
spiritual acts you may perform, if they are not suffused with love they are worthless. 


Love is like a mariner's compass 


Love is like a mariner's compass, which always points to the north. Love should direct you 
Godward in every action that you do. There is no greater path or goal than this. Scholarship or 
ritual worship will not serve to transform your spirituality. Fill your hearts with love of God. 
Then the nation will enjoy peace. Your view of the world depends on the colour of the glasses 
you wear. When your vision is filled with love, the whole creation will appear as Brahma mayam 
(filled with Divinity). This is what the youth of today needs most. 


This love is not related to the body. It is based on the heart. It is present equally in all. There may 
be varied bodily relationships but the kinship based on the Aatma is one and the same. "Ekovasee 
sarvabhoothaa-antharaatma" (The One dwells in all beings). It is like the current that is common 
to all bulbs of varying power. 


There should be no trace of selfishness in love. Unfortunately today men's hearts have become 
barren without love. Hence, there is no compassion in them. Men today behave in a more creel 
manner than wild animals in the jungle. There is hatred between man and man. Maternal love has 
become rare and fraternal feelings between brothers are absent. The love among the Pandava 
brothers and that among Rama and his brothers are supreme examples of fraternal love. 


Dharmaraja's one-pointed devotion to Krishna 


The Pandavas overcame all their trials and tribulations by their faith in God. The eldest of the 
Pandavas, Dharmaraja, had his mind always centred on Krishna. He was known for his one- 
pointed, simple-minded devotion to Krishna. He always thought of Krishna even while 
experiencing all kinds of difficulties in exile. Even when his children, the Upapandavas were 
killed by Asvathaama, he did not give way to grief because of his faith in Krishna. When he 
reigned as a mighty emperor, he did not feel elated and he was not overwhelmed by grievous 
ordeals. For the Pandavas, the Lord came first, the world next and their own interests last. First 
God, then the world, last "I." 


The Kauravas had a different order of priorities. First "I," then the world and God last, with the 
result that they lost everything. Because the Pandavas kept God in the forefront, they were 
ultimately successful in their endeavours. If you want to succeed in life, you have to develop 
love of God as the most potent weapon. It was love which enabled the ancient sages to live in 
harmony with wild animals in the forest. Such is the power of love. But students today are not 
recognising the power of this pure love. Instead, they are immersed in impure desires and mining 
their precious lives. 


The Gopikas exemplified the highest and purest form of love for God. (Swami sang a song 
which the Gopikas addressed to Krishna, praying to Him to fill their parched hearts with 
nectarine showers of His love). 


Love of God is greater than nectar. It is called Paraa Bhakthi, Devotion to the Lord. It transcends 
the four Purushaarthas (goals of fife). 


Man may love the body, the mind, the Buddhi or the Antha Karana (the Inner Instruments). Love 
for the body ends with the death of the body. Love for the mind results in bondage because of the 
aberrations of the mind. Love for the intellect results in endless speculation and enquiry. Love 
for the Antha Karana promotes the ego feeling. It encourages dualism (separating man from 
God). Only the one who realises his oneness with the Aatma can experience infinite bliss----the 
bliss that is eternal. 


Investigate the nature of the "I" 


Everyone should undertake an enquiry into the ultimate goal of life. For instance, we find that 
ghee is the ultimate product derived from milk after it goes through the processes of conversion 
to curds and butter. This process of enquiry is known as Mimaamsa. You have to investigate the 
nature of the "I," which claims ownership of the body, the mind, the senses and other things 
("My body," "my mind" and so on). If you are not the body, the mind, etc., who are you? Does 
anyone pursue this line of enquiry? 


Man is called Maanava. This Sanskrit term has two meanings. One is, man is a being who. lives 
free from ignorance. The other meaning is that he is not a new being, but has had a long past, in 
many previous lives. When such meanings are recognised in terms of Vedantic parlance, the 
greatness of human birth becomes evident. It fills one with joy. 


Students! The world today is simmering with discord and violence. Peace and security are 
absent. Fear stalks the land everywhere. To get rid of fear, you have to acquire Abhayathvam 
(fearlessness). How is it to be got? When you reduce desires and attachments. 


Students! Develop morality and good conduct. Lead exemplary lives and serve the nation. The 
sole purpose of education is to develop humility and discipline. Respect your parents and have 
love for God. This is true education. 


Brindavan, 30 May 1992 


Your work as Seva Dal members and as volunteer helpers must 
correct your vision, clarify your eyes, enable them to see God in 
everyone. Then, that awareness will transmute every word, thought 
and deed of yours into a benediction. 


Sathya Sai Baba 


22. God Alone Is The Sadhguru 


Brahmaanandam Parama Sukhadham Kevalam Jnaanamurthim 
Dhvandhvaatheetham Gagana Sadhrisham Tathvam asyaadilakshyam 
Ekam Nithyam Vimalam Achalam Sarvadhee Saakshibhutham 
Bhavaatheetham Thrigunarahitham Sadhgurum Tham Namaami 


Embodiments of Divine Love! It is not easy to understand the divine principle. The ego of "I" 
and the attachment of "Mine" are responsible for all difficulties. Man attains divinity very easily 
the moment he gives up ego and attachment. Aatma is omnipresent. Aatma is infinite. Aatma is 
the One without a second. But, it appears as many because of the diversity of forms. Spirituality 
is that which recognises the One that subsumes all diversities as the Aatma. 


Unfortunately, today there are many intellectuals who divide the One into the many. But there 
are very few who see the One in the many. Here is an example. We have built a mansion. In this 
mansion we have one room for bath, one for cooking, another for dining and yet another for 
living. What is it responsible for this division? It is walls in between. If you remove the walls, 
the mansion becomes one again. Because of the walls in between, there are different rooms with 
different names and forms. Similarly, the mansion of Aatma is only one. Since we have created 
in this mansion of Aatma, different rooms of the body, senses, mind, intellect, will and ego, the 
diversity appears. 


The underlying Guru principle of Bliss 


Since this divisive tendency is on the increase among mankind today there is great need for the 
Guru. Who is a true Guru? What is the truth underlying the Guru principle? Is he the one that 
teaches worldly education? Is the one who explores the properties of matter, a Guru? Is the one 
who describes in detail Natural Sciences, a Guru? No, they are only teachers. A true Guru is the 
embodiment of Brahmaananda (transcendental bliss). Who is this Brahmaananda? Where does 
he exist? When we enquire on these lines, we find that there is nothing comparable to it in the 
universe. All the joys of the world are immanent in Brahmaananda (transcendental divine bliss). 


The true measure of Brahmaananda 


What kind of joy does a man experience when he is happy, healthy and contented? What is the 
type of joy that man derives out of wealth, properties, pleasures and fortune? This is called 
Manushyaananda (human joy). Hundred times more than Manushyaananda is Indhrananda; 
hundred times, more than Indhrananda is Dhevendhrananda; hundred times more than 
Dhevendhrananda is Dhevaananda; hundred times more than Dhevaananda is Brihaspathi 
Ananda; hundred times more than Brihaspathi Ananda is Prajaapathi Ananda; hundred times 
more than Prajaapathi Ananda is Brahmaananda. This is the true measure of Brahmaananda. 
Such an expression as Brahmaananda (transcendental divine bliss) which is beyond all human 
imagination is used in common parlance to mean worldly joy. People say, "My daughter's 
marriage was performed with Brahmaananda!" or "My son is in foreign country with Brahma- 
ananda!" or "My son has secured good results in the examination with Brahmaananda!" But, is 
Brahmaananda such an easy and cheap thing to be attained? Is it worldly or material? No. Not at 
all. This Brahmaananda transcends the material, moral, religious and spiritual aspects of life. 


The true Guru is one who experiences the supreme bliss of Brahmaananda. Who is he? None 
except God has the competence to experience such bliss. All the joys are inherent in this bliss. 


The next aspect of Guru is Paramasukhadham (highest happiness). This happiness is higher than 
all the happiness in the world. This is not worldly happiness, which has a beginning and an end 
and is ever-changing; it comes and goes. But Paramasukhadham neither comes nor goes. 
Mundane pleasures are just water bubbles. They may burst any moment. The happiness with 
changes is not true happiness. All the pleasures enjoyed by man in this world change with time 
and place. A true Guru is one who enjoys and confers changeless supreme happiness. 


The third aspect of the Guru is Kevalam (the ultimate). What is Kevalam? It means that which 
transcends time and space. All the things in the world are bound by time and space. But He is 
beyond space and time and there is nothing higher than Him. That is why He is called Kevalam. 
He is none other than God. 


The vision of oneness is true wisdom 


He is Jnaanamurthi (embodiment of wisdom). What is Jnaana or true wisdom? Is it material or 
worldly knowledge? Is it the knowledge of chemistry? Is it science? No, all this knowledge is 
related to materials in the world. But true Jnaanam is the basis for all types of knowledge and is 
beyond them. It is infinite, unmanifest and remains ever as the One, "Adwaitha Darshanam 
Jnaanam" (true wisdom is the vision of Oneness). All this is one and there is no second object in 
the world. Even if there is a second object, it is nothing but the reflection, reaction and resound 
of the first One. Real wisdom is the vision of one's own true nature. Knowing oneself is true 
wisdom. Where does the man who seeks to know himself go? With which Guru does he take 
shelter? Is a person who asks others, "Where am I" a wise one? No, he is ignorant. None would 
search for oneself in the external world. But, today's men are such ignorant ones. One who 
knows himself is the wise one. He is none other than God. God is the very embodiment of 
wisdom. He is the very form of truth and infinite. Sath yam Jnaanam Anantham Brahma 
(Brahma is Truth, Wisdom and infinite). 


The next is Dhvandhvaatheetham or the One who transcends the pairs of opposites. What is this 
principle? It transcends heat and cold, happiness and sorrow, gain and loss or praise and blame. 
This principle can only be God and none else has this power--He is the true Guru. 


God is more omnipresent than space 


Gagana Sadhrisham is the next aspect. Where is Gagana or sky? It is all-pervading. â€œAkaasham 
Gaganam Shoonyam." Really, it cannot be seen. We look upward and say it is the sky. But, it is 
not the sky, which is just a combination of clouds. Sky is the one that provides space for them. 
This sky (space) exists everywhere. Is it possible to show it? Yes, it is possible. It is there when 
you snap your fingers or clap your hands. It is there when Swami speaks. What is the nature of 
this Akaasha (space)? Sound is its nature. Wherever there is sound, there is the space. Even 
inhalation and exhalation are sounds. Therefore, where is the place without space? There is no 
such place at all. Space is present everywhere. One who is more Omnipresent than space is God 
Himself. Therefore, such a God is the true Guru. 


Thathvamasyaadhi lakshyam is the next aspect. What is Thathvam? There are four great 
pronouncements. "Prajnaanam Brahma"---this is the essence of Rig Veda; "Aham Brahmaasmi" 
is the essence of Yajur Veda; Thath Thwam Asi" is the essence of Sama Veda; "Ayam Aatma 


Brahma" is the essence of Atharvana Veda. All those four great declarations point to One 
Divinity. Though they state and explain differently, their goal is One Divinity. 


The first pronouncement is "Prajnanam Brahma." What is Prajna? We call an intelligent person 
as a Prajnaashaali. Is Prajna merely intelligence or cleverness? No. Where is this Prajna? This 
Prajna is present in the body, senses, the mind, intellect, inner will and ego and all over. This 
Prajna is present in all the living and the non-living alike. It is called Constant Integrated 
Awareness. What is Awareness? Awareness is nothing To know what? Is it fractional 
knowledge? No, it is complete knowledge. It is the knowledge of the principle that is immanent 
in the living and the non-living alike. Actually, Prajna and Brahman are synonymous. Some 
scholars interpret that Prajna is Brahman. But, they are not two different things. What is 
Brahman? Brahman is the all-pervasive One. It is the Brihath principle. The universe itself is the 
Brihath or mighty principle. Brahman is immanent in the whole cosmos. To put it in simple 
terms, Brahman means pervasiveness. It is all-pervading. The true Guru is the one with these 
attributes. 


Aham as witness is the very form of Aatma 


The second pronouncement is "â€œAham Brahmaasmi." People think that Aham is "I." No. It has 
another meaning also. It is witness. He is witness to everything. He is the Aatma. Aham is the 
very form of Aatma. The Awareness or Consciousness which is present everywhere is installed 
as Aatma in man. Aatma, Consciousness and Brahma are not different. What is this? (Bhagavan 
showed-the handkerchief in his hand). This is cloth. If you remove the idea of cloth, you see 
thread and if your remove the idea of thread, you see cotton. The cloth, thread and cotton are one 
and the same. Similarly the same principle takes upon the names of Aatma, Brahman or Aham at 
different times and situations. Therefore, the statement of "Aham Brahmaasmi" means that the 
witness Aatma or "I" in me is Brahman Himself. 


The third declaration is "Thath Thwam Asi." This is the essence of Sama Veda. Thath means 
"That" and Thwam means "This," Asi means "one and the same." When "I" and "you" stand 
apart, "I" am different from "you." But when "I" and "you" get together, the difference is lost and 
they together become "We." The two become one. The one with the Upaadhi (body) is Thwam 
and the one without the Upaadhi is Thath. One is Jiva (the individual) and the other is Deva 
(God). Sama Veda explains clearly that Jiva and Deva are one and the same. 


Three in one 


"Ayam Aatma Brahma." You should enquire into this statement clearly. There are three words-- 
Ayam, Aatma and Brahma. But, they are one and the same. This statement depicts the oneness of 
the three persons--"The one you think you are." "The one others think you are" and "The one you 
really are!" i.e. the body, the mind and the Aatma. You act with the body, think with the mind 
and you witness both as the Aatman. In the wakeful state you are the Vishva, you are Thaijasa in 
the dream state and in the deep sleep state you are Prajna. Who is the Prajna? "Prajnaanam 
Brahma." Prajnaanam is the Aatma. 


The real Guru is the very embodiment of the Divine principle, which is the inner meaning of 
these four great pronouncements. He is the one who has experienced and enjoyed the essence of 
these declarations and takes upon Himself a Form to teach the same. 


A true Guru recognises the nature of God 


Ekam: Brahman is the One without a second. It is only One. It is the One that exists before birth, 
after death and during one's lifetime. It does not change. God is the only one. All other things are 
diverse manifestations. A Guru is one who has recognised that the many exist in the One. Take 
for example, a banyan seed. It is one. Within this small seed exists the huge tree with branches 
and sub-branches with flowers and fruit. Roots are different, the branches are different, flowers 
and fruits are different. But, all of them come from the one seed. The tree is one but one person 
may look at the branches, another at the leaf, another at the flower and yet another at the fruit. 
The Guru is this Ekam (the One). Who is it? It is God Himself. 


Nithyam: The One who never changes under any circumstances. The sun and the moon move and 
change, but He does not change. When someone is born he is a child, at 10 years he becomes a 
boy, at 30 a man and at 75 a grandfather. Thus man changes with time. But, He remains the same 
in birth and death. In fact, He has neither birth nor death, neither beginning nor end. He is God 
Himself: He is the Guru. 


Vimalam is the next attribute. He is the One without any type of impurity. He is pure, unsullied 
and sacred. He is not tainted by anything worldly. Whatever is put into fire is burnt into ashes. 
The things thrown into fire may be pure or impure. Fire remains ever-pure. You may burn the 
body, wood, iron or gold in fire: but the fire is not tainted. He is pure and sacred. Who is He? He 
is God. 


Achalam: All things change and move. The earth rotates around its axis at a speed of 1016 miles 
an hour. Not only does the earth revolve around itself, it moves around the sun at a speed of 
66,000 miles. But, we cannot see its movement. We think we are moving and the earth is still. 
No. The earth is moving. The moon and the sun and the planets are also moving. On a cinema 
screen sixteen pictures of the film move in one second but the screen is steady. Similarly, He is 
steady and motionless. He need not move anywhere, because He is here, there and everywhere. 


The eternal witness 


Sarvaadhee Saakhshibhutham: He is the witness of everything. A drama is being enacted on the 
stage. The king is speaking majestically, the minister is explaining something and the servant is 
standing with a stick in his hand. But, the light on the stage is not affected by their conversation. 
It remains ever the same. Harischandra is grieved. Chandramathi is lamenting. Rohitasya is 
fallen dead by a serpent bite. But, nothing affects the stage-light. All the changes are for the 
actors on the stage. But the light is not affected by them. It remains as a mere witness. The Guru 
is such an Eternal Witness. 


Bhaavaatheetham: He transcends mental comprehension and verbal explanation. None can 
explain His nature. He is beyond all feelings and thoughts. He is the true Guru. 


Thrigunarahitham: The three qualities of Sathwa, Rajas and Thamas are the characteristics of 
Nature. Wherever these qualities exist, happiness and sorrow follow. When these three are 
absent, there is neither happiness nor sorrow. Who is beyond these qualities? He is God. He is 
the true Guru. 


Guru and the cosmos 
Who is a Guru? 


Gurur Brahma Gurur Vishnu 

Gurur Dhevo Maheswarah 

Guruh Sakshath Para Brahma Thasmaih 
Sri Gurave Namaha. 


Guru is Brahman. He is the Creator. He Himself is the creation and He is the One that exists in 
the creation. The universe is filled with Brahman. It becomes clear that the One who Himself has 
become the universe is the Guru. 


Guru is Vishnu. Who is Vishnu? Is He the one with conch, discus, mace and lotus in His hands? 
No. Vishnu is one who has the quality of pervasiveness. He is the Doer and also what is done. 
The universe is the action, God is the Doer. God is the consciousness behind the cause and 
effect. The whole universe is the form of Vishnu. This Vishnu is the Guru. 


Who is a Guru? Is one who teaches a "manthra"â€ a Guru? No. 
Gukaaro Gunaatheetham, Rukaaro Ruupavarjithah 
Gukaaro Andhakaarascha Rukaaro Thannivaaranah. 


"Gu" stands for Gunaatheetha (one who transcends the three Gunas) while "ru" stands for 
Ruupavarjitha (one who is formless). Also "Gu" means the darkness of ignorance. What can 
dispel the darkness? Only light can do it. Therefore Guru is one who dispels the darkness of 
ignorance. Guru is not the one who gives a Manthra or teaches you Vedantha. Those whom we 
call Gurus in the common parlance are not real Gurus! You may call them teachers. Those who 
practice and teach the same to others are called Acharyas. Acharya is one who demonstrates 
through practice. Today we have neither Acharyas nor Gurus. Today the so-called Gurus 
whisper a Manthra in the ear and stretch their hands for money. 


A Guru is God Himself 


Guru is Maheswara. Who is Maheswara? He is the one who rules all beings in the Universe. He 
commands and ordains everything in the universe in the right manner. Sunrise and Sunset go on 
according to His command. Seasons, rain, the day and night are His commands. Easwara is one 
that makes everything follow its discipline without any lapse. Guru is not one who merely 
teaches. A Guru is omnipotent, omniscient and omnipresent, He is God himself. 


Guru is Brahma, Vishnu and Easwara. Some people may say that Vishnu and Easwara do not go 
together. But it is ignorance to think so. It is only the narrow-mindedness of these devotees. 
Some call themselves Vaishnavites (the worshippers of Vishnu) and some others namely 
Shaivites (worshippers of Shiva or Easwara). But Vishnu and Shiva are one and same. 


Vishnu holds in the four hands the Conch, the Discuss, the Mace and the Lotus. The Conch is the 
symbol of sound, the Discuss of time, the Mace of power and the Lotus of the heart. He is the 
master of sound, time, power and the hearts of all beings. Similarly Shiva holds in the hands 
Damaru (the drum), and Thrishuula (trident). Here Damaru stands for sound and Thrishuula for 
a three-pronged time. He is the master of time and sound. Thus both are the same, only names 
and forms are different. 


Only narrow minds create differences 


Here is an example in the context of Indian traditions. Both Vaishnavites and Shaivites visit 
Tirupathi. There is only one God there. Shaivites call Him Venkateswara and Vaishnavites call 
Him Venkataramana. There may be difference in their feelings but God is one. They create 
differences in order to satisfy their petty minds. 


Another example. Shiva is called Pashupathi, the Lord of pashu or beings. The individual with 
mind-principle are beings. Vishnu is called Gopala, the Lord of Cows or beings. Actually both 
mean the same. Only narrow minds create differences. Narrow minded people can never attain 
higher states whatever practices they undertake for any length of time. We should recognise the 
unity in diversity. This is true spirituality. You are yourself God. As long as you do not know 
this truth you are Jiva (individual); once you know, you are Deva (God). 


The power of faith and surrender 


Today you have heard Anil Kumar speaking with joy about the devotion and the experiences of 
devotees in Japan, Thailand and Hong Kong. Some people think these people from far off places 
have such intense devotion, sense of surrender and many experiences, but how is it that being so 
near to Swami for so long we do not experience these? Swami does not shower any extra 
compassion on them. God responds according to one's faith. Their faith is responsible for 
everything. 


Of course, there are fight and wrong things both here and there. But because of the great 
distance, they develop more intense devotion and sense of surrender. Intense feelings remain 
secure under all circumstances. When the devotion is not intense, it becomes fickle. Here is an 
example. Them are huge trees on the roadside. These trees remain green in spite of famine and 
draught. On the other side there is the paddy crop nearby. You have to water it every day. Even if 
you do not water it one day, it will dry up. Foolish ones may think, "Paddy crop dries up if it 
does not get water for a day. How is it the trees remain green even in a long period of draught?" 
What is the reason for this? The roots of the tree have gone deep down to the water level, 
whereas the roots of the paddy crop remain on the surface. 


We do not have steady and strong faith. Faith is our breath. We listen to Swami's discourses 
every day, but we do not derive any benefit. Them are some who hear only once but remain 
strong forever. Anil Kumar has delivered discourses all over India. His discourses are highly 
attractive and colourful. But his monkey mind is full of jumps and bumps. Sometimes, he doubts 
these things which he himself says. In order to remove his doubts I sent him to Tokyo. He went 
and saw for himself their devotion and sense of surrender. He has understood that their faith is 
responsible for everything. All the difficulties begin when one's faith wavered. 


Prahlada loved Hari (God) and his father Hiranya Kashyapa hated Hari. The father went on 
arguing and denying the existence of God, whereas the son went on establishing His existence. 
Who protected Prahlada when he was thrown down the mountain? His faith protected him and 
not Vishnu. His faith took the form of Vishnu. 


Divinity in all forms--the Shirdi episode 


Once in Shirdi, Thahtya's wife prayed to Baba to visit their home and partake of food there. Baba 
accepted her request and promised to visit their home. She prepared everything for Baba's visit 
and kept everything ready. But Baba did not come at the appointed hour. She served food in the 


plate and went to Baba's photograph and said, "Baba why are you putting me to shame? More 
than my humiliation, you will be called a liar if you do not come. Why do you utter a lie? You 
should keep up your word!" 


Meanwhile, a dog came into the house and started eating the food in the plate served for Baba. 
When she turned round to see what was happening, she found the dog. She got angry and beat 
the dog with a stick and sent it out. She was very sad that food served for God was eaten up by a 
dog. Next day she went to Baba and pleaded with him, "Baba! Should you not keep your word? 
Why should you utter falsehood?" Baba got angry and shouted at her. "Saitan! What is the need 
for me to utter falsehood?" In Shirdi, Baba used the word "Saitan !" often, now Swami uses the 
word "Dunnapotu" (he buffalo in Telugu). Baba continued angrily, "There is no need for me to 
utter any lie even if it is to satisfy you. My form is Truth, but you are not able to recognise it 
because of your narrow thinking. You assume that Sai Baba is only this body measuring five and 
a half feet. All forms are Mine! You do not have such broad mindedness. You are narrow- 
minded. The dog was none other than Myself." 


God can come in any Form. All Forms are His 


Divinity is that which identifies itself with all the forms. It is a narrow-minded feeling to adduce 
Divinity to be in one physical frame and have all our acts of devotion on such an assumption. 
God can come in any form. All forms are His. Swami tells something to some boy; He may tell 
something to Anil Kumar. He may send the message through anybody. One may die of serpent 
bite, another by being struck by a lightning and yet another by slipping and falling. People might 
think, "Why should he die in this way? Why did not God protect him?" But serpents and 
lightning were sent by God Himself. They are none but the messengers of God. 


We have built the Super Speciality Hospital here. Why did we start it? Many people suffer from 
many diseases. It is difficult to expect everyone to develop divine feelings of devotion and 
surrender. Some people have faith in medicines, some in operations and some others in doctors. 
Whether it is a veranda or a choultry, it is enough if one sleeps. Similarly, here our purpose is 
that people should get rid of their ailments, given good health and live happily. Further, many 
medical experts like Dr. Venugopal and his team from Delhi, and the team from Hyderabad are 
performing the operations with great devotion and dedication. What is the reason for all these 
people to come here and carry on the operations? Apart from their faith and devotion, they have 
the good aspiration to give joy to one and all. They do all this keeping Swami in view. 


Faith is the cause of fearlessness 


Earlier, a heart operation was a very frightening thing and people would shudder at the prospect 
of this operation. They would be afraid of the consequences. The patients would cry and make 
their kith and kin cry. But in Prashanthi Nilayam today, a heart operation has become an easy 
thing like removing the thorn from one's foot. None has any fear. That is fearlessness! 


Even little children come to our Hospital with a smile on their faces. When Swami went to the 
Hospital a little child in the cot who was operated, saluted Him with a broad smile on her face. 
Neither her parents nor relatives were there but she was full of joy. What is the cause? It is 
because of the environment. Their faith is mainly responsible for this. All the things are going on 
very joyfully. Everyone thinks it is God's work. There is no trace of ego in those who work here. 


We may get fresh vegetable from the market. We prepare good sambar with dhal, tamarind, 
chillies and salt. But the sambar is spoilt. Is it the mistake of the salt or dhal or tamarind? No, the 


vessel is not tinned. The operation may be done spending lakhs of rupees. If there is no love and 
devotion in the work, it is like cooking sambar in an untinned vessel. Faith is most important for 
success or failure. It is faith or lack of faith which is responsible. Without this faith if you get 
into argumentation in the name of devotion, it is only the effect of ego and ostentation. 


God is the only Guru 


Embodiments of Divine Love! If you want to understand divinity, you should have the firm faith 
that divinity is everywhere. There is no place or object without divinity. Guru Pournima means 
full moon without any defect or lacuna. Moon is nothing but mind. When the mind is completely 
perfect, it sheds light. Gum Pournima is not performed by circumambulation and offerings to the 
Guru. What is the real offering? It is the offering of one's love. To know that God exists every- 
where is circumambulation. If you understand these terms, every day is Guru Pournima. There is 
only one Guru, that is God and there is no other Guru. Contemplate on that Guru. 


Poornachandra Auditorium, Guru Pournima Day, 14 Jul 1992 


Drop the delusion that you have become old or diseased, or that 
you have become weak and debilitated. Some people count the 
years and grieve over advancing age and shudder like cowards 
afraid of Death. But remember, elation is Heaven, despondency is 
hell. Have always some work to do and do it so well that you get 
Joy. 

Sathya Sai Baba 


23. Training Of Nurses Of Sai Mahaa Vaidhyaalaya 


Embodiments of Divine Love! Bharath is not lacking in experienced doctors and specialists in 
every field. Many of them have gone abroad, acquired the latest knowledge in medicine and 
surgery and established a reputation for themselves. Indeed, very few people possess the amount 
of fortitude and determination which Bharathiyas are capable of. Our doctors take a good deal of 
trouble for the care of the patients. Even in foreign countries, a very large number of Indians are 
rendering medical service. There is a very well-known saying in Andhra Pradesh--"The jewels 
are ours; the display is yours." Much of the medical service abroad is rendered by Indian doctors. 
But, others get much of the credit. 


Likewise, in India also, there are any number of highly capable doctors. But people do not value 
what is very near to them. They are attracted by what is distant. Those who are near to Swami all 
the twenty-four hours do not recognise His value so much. The value is realised only when one is 
away from Swami. For instance, there is a lighthouse. The light is visible afar but not to those 
under it. 


Why doctors leave our country 


Similarly there are among Bharathiyas many dedicated and capable persons. We do not lack 
exceptionally able persons. Despite the fact that we have so many able and competent persons, 
there arc few who give them encouragement and recognition. It is for this reason that a large 
number of doctors, nurses and other paramedical personnel go abroad. They are not given 
adequate opportunities here. Nor is that all. They arc not given the positions and authority 
commensurate with their abilities. Even the status that is appropriate to them is not accorded. 
Juniors arc promoted as seniors and seniors arc demoted as juniors. Because of this treatment 
many prefer to go abroad. 


Why should we allow such able and competent men to leave our country? Realising that we 
should make use of their services here itself, Swami has inspired many highly eminent doctors to 
serve in our hospital. Although Dr. Venugopal appears diminutive in size, very few people can 
understand the magnitude of his skills and capabilities. Here is another doctor, a short person, 
Babadas. Both of them work ceaselessly day and night untiringly. 


When we have such highly capable and dedicated doctors, Swami willed that there should be a 
sufficient number of trained nursing personnel and therefore training facilities for nursing 
personnel will be established. It is easy for doctors to perform operations. The real difficulty is in 
taking care of the patients after the operations. It is easy to slice vegetables. But, to prepare a 
tasty dish out of that is very difficult. This task of "cooking" is done by the nurses. If there is no 
good nursing, even the operation may be a failure. 


Need for nurses with pure hearts 


Therefore in order to train a good hard band of nursing personnel, training facilities are being 
provided. All those who are pure-hearted and filled with a spirit of service, may approach Dr. 
Safaya for undergoing training to serve in the hospital. They need not incur any expense. The 
entire training is free. Elsewhere, if people want to undergo such training, they have to pay all 
kinds of fees. Here nothing will be. charged. Everything will be provided free. Only, we want 
persons with pure hearts to join the course. 


Today we have quite a large number of people working in our hospital. But, there is more work 
to be done because of the ever-growing number of patients seeking relief. Hence, we need many 
more nursing personnel. We are asking for nurses not for Swami's sake but for the sake of the 
nation. There is a Sanskrit saying: "Jananee janmabhoomischa swargaadapi gareeyasi" (The 
mother and the Motherland are greater than Heaven itself). Hence, such sacred activities must be 
spread all over the country. It is not easy to make available such facilities for people in remote 
and isolated villages. Because in this village this magnificent hospital has been established, it has 
been possible to provide relief to a very large number of poor villagers. 


Many are not aware of the genesis of this Institution. What counts is only action and not 
advertisement. When a heart operation is performed, the patient has generally to stay in the 
hospital for at least a month. It is no exaggeration to state, with reference to our hospital, that 
within a day after the operation, the patient starts eating on his bed the very next morning. On the 
third day, he starts moving about. On the fifth day, the sutures are removed. On the seventh day, 
the patients are discharged fully recovered. 


Health is the greatest blessing for everyone 


Our students are aware of the case of Prof. Radhaswami. He is here in the audience. He was not 
aware at all that he was suffering from heart trouble. It is a mystery how he was carrying on his 
duties. But the moment he was examined it was found that an immediate heart operation was 
necessary. A complicated operation had to be carded out. Today he is very much fit for this work 
and extremely happy. Health is the greatest blessing for anyone. If a person is in good health, he 
can accomplish anything. There are now a very large number of people enjoying good health 
after undergoing an operation in the hospital. What is happening in the hospital is not for today 
or tomorrow. It is an example to the whole world. 


People should not suffer from ailments of any kind. Regard this hospital as yours. It is not mine. 
This exists for your sake. Anyone is free to come to the hospital and seek relief and lead an ideal 
life thereafter. This is my benediction on all of you. 


Poornachandra Auditorium, after delivering Guru Pournima message, 14 Jul 1992 


It is no use indulging in arguments and disputations. He who 
clamours aloud has not grasped the truth, believe Me. Silence is 
the only language of the realised 


Practise moderation in speech. That will help you in many ways. It 
will develop Prema, for most misunderstandings and factions arise 
out of carelessly spoken words. When the foot slips, the wound can 
be healed; but when the tongue slips, the wound it causes in the 
heart of another will fester for life. 


Sathya Sai Baba 


24. â€˜Bright future for Bharathâ€™: Baba 


Embodiments of Divine Love! Love is the form of the Brahman (Supreme). Love permeates 
Brahman. God can be attained only when love is merged with love. There is nothing greater than 
Love in the Cosmos. Love is sweeter than nectar. It is because men have forgotten this love that 
they have become a prey to all kinds of ills and lost peace of mind. Because men have lost the 
love of God and fear of sin they have become veritable demons. 


There are two kinds of love--worldly love and the love of the Divine--according to the scriptures. 
The love of the Divine is called Bhakthi (Devotion) or Prapatthi. Man lost Divine love because 
of complete involvement in worldly things and ephemeral desires. Man needs both worldly love 
and spiritual love. Devotion is turning the mind Godward. Faith is essential for devotion. 
Without faith man can never realise his true nature. Faith, however, has to be suffused with 
Love. Such love can make the Divine and the devotee dance in ecstasy oblivious to everything 
else. The nation is plunged in myriad troubles because it has forgotten the supreme principle of 
Love. 


Our President, Dr. Shankar Dayal Sharma, referred to Swami Vivekananda's message: "Faith in 
yourselves, Faith in the country and Faith in God--this is the secret of greatness." 


Dear students! Today the educational system does not promote the spirit of patriotism. Education 
is pursued to achieve individual aspirations. It is because patriotism is absent that we have 
differences between individuals and groups. It is essential to promote love of the country among 
students. Just as you say that this is my body, you must say this is my nation. 


The three H's that have to be developed 


The President compared Science and Technology to the head of the human body. But it is not 
enough to have only the head. Spirituality constitutes the heart of the body and that has to be 
developed equally. Science and Technology is the head, Spirituality is the heart and Dharma is 
the hand. Hence man must develop the 3 H's----head, heart and hand. People refer to EHV 
(Education in Human Values). It is the cultivation of three H's that is most important; this is 
called Thrikarana Shuddhi (purity in thought, word and deed) in the scriptures and when you 
have the triple purity you acquire Divine Love. Dear students!Today all of you should cultivate 
the love of the nation. The larger the number of persons you love the greater is the joy you 
experience. Develop the conviction that the Divine is equally present in all beings. It is not 
enough to utter the Upanishadic saying that the Divine is present everywhere and dwells in every 
being. Your actions must be based on a recognition of the truth of these sayings. 


Many of those who read the Ramayana are not really practising the message contained in it. 
Rama is praised for acting according to the behest of his father. But how many obey the 
injunctions of their parents today? Of what use is it in reading the Ramayana without practising 
any of the lessons contained in it? Practise is very essential to realise the fruits of such study. 
Students should realise that time is infinitely precious. God is the embodiment of time. Even a 
single moment should not be wasted. 


Obtain peace by rendering service to society 


The President referred to the importance of Seva (service). More than wealth, rendering Seva is 
vital. A great devotee in the Bhagavatham prayed to God as follows: "I do not seek any 
kingdom. I do not seek any heaven nor do I seek freedom from rebirth. But I desire only the 


opportunity to relieve the sufferings of fellow human beings." The Divine cannot be experienced 
by Yaga and Yajna (sacrifices), nor by indulging in charity and other good deeds. Only when you 
engage yourselves in service to society, eschewing egoism, you can really get peace. The 
Upanishadic message of harmony and co-operation is relevant to all mankind. The differences of 
caste and community are utterly irrelevant to the practice of these truths. All the basic elements 
in the Cosmos do not have differences of caste and community. All human beings benefit equally 
from air, fire, water, earth and sky. All differences arise because of man's self-interest. 


The truths proclaimed in the Upanishads----Sathya and Dharma (Truth and Righteousness)-- 
have to be practised by everyone irrespective of caste or community. The practice of good 
conduct is the natural duty of man. You should realise that the happiness of the individuals is 
dependent on the welfare of the society as a whole. The transformation of the individual is a 
prerequisite for the transformation of the world. Together with changes in the political, social 
and economic spheres, we need transformation in the mental and spiritual spheres. Without such 
transformation all other changes are of no use. Therefore, make your actions pure. Only then can 
the human rise to the level of the Divine. 


The President's career a lesson for the students 


Students! You must realise the process by which our President, Dr. Shankar Dayal Sharma, rose 
to such an eminent position. In the early years he pursued education diligently. He completed his 
studies in the University and acquired refinement of a deep culture. He became an M.L.A, and a 
Member of Parliament in due course. Starting as a minister at the state level, he became a 
minister at the Centre. Then he became a Governor. He then rose to the position of the Vice- 
president, and from Vice-president he became the President. You can see that he rose step by 
step and had no setback. Other persons have had ups and downs in their careers. 


In the case of Dr. Shankar Dayal Sharma, his refined culture, his faith and his sacred ideals have 
served to carry him to the most eminent position. He considered reverence for the mother and 
love of the motherland as greater than heaven itself. He adhered to the ideals of devotion to the 
mother and service to the motherland. His mother is alive today. He begins his day's activities 
after offering prostrations to his aged venerable mother. The status he has now achieved is due to 
these qualities. In the election for President he sought no one's help. He has full faith in God. He 
believed that God would give him whatever he should get and left everything to the will of the 
Divine. Honours come unsought to the pure-minded. (Swami here recited a song in which the 
mind is asked not to seek any favour but to leave everything to the Divine Will. Did not the 
Divine shower His grace on Sabari and Jatayu without their seeking any favour?). 


Good men at the helm will yield good results 


As is the seed so is the fruit. Likewise, with good men at the helm of the nation, it will 
experience good results. All of you should pray for such fruit. You are the future builders of the 
nations. The welfare of the country is dependent on the students. You must therefore strive to 
follow the lead of such good men at the helm and lend your support to them for the progress of 
the nation. Through unity, you have purity; and through purity, Divinity is realised. You all 
should be united. Union is strength. But alas! There is no unity today. It is the duty of the 
students to promote unity by all possible means. It is not enough if you maintain unity within the 
Institute. You must go out into the word and promote unity. 


This year is also notable for another significant fact. The first President of India was Babu 
Rajendra Prasad. He entered the Rashtrapathi Bhavan wearing the Gandhi cap, symbol of the 
nation's struggle for freedom. After so many years, Dr. Shankar Dayal Sharma made the entry 
into the Rashtrapathi Bhavan wearing the Gandhi cap. With such a President and Prime Minister 
we can look forward to a better future for the country with peace and prosperity. 


The President referred to the advent of the Divine as Avatar whenever there is decline of 
Dharma----"Dharmasya Glanir Bhavathi." How is the victory of Dharma achieved? The answer 
is given by Sanjaya in the Gita. Where the Divine and the pure-minded (like Arjuna) come 
together, there is bound to be the victory of Righteousness. Purity leads to unity and unity leads 
to Divinity. 


Combine the mundane with the Divine 


From the point of view of the students the message given by the President of India today is 
supremely important. Whatever aspirations and ideals he had as a student, he has presented them 
to you today. He has therefore set an example. The true role of a Aachaarya (preceptor) is to 
practice what he teaches. This is the meaning of the term Aachaara. 


Students! Bharath is entering a sacred and glorious period. Many sacred developments are bound 
to happen. The nation's prosperity and glory will grow. 


Man has to pursue both the Preyo Maarg (worldly path) as well as the Shreyo Maarg (Spiritual 
path). Man should combine the mundane with the Divine. Students should learn to combine these 
two paths. Develop faith in God. Without faith in God life is useless. Everything depends on 
faith in the Divine. The Divine is the basis of all that happens. Therefore, develop faith in the 
Omnipotent Divine. Anything in the world can be accomplished with faith in God. 


Discourse at Poornachandra Auditorium, on the occasion of President's visit to Prashanthi 
Nilayam, 28 Jul 1992 


Every act done with the consciousness of the body is bound to be 
egoistic. Selfless Seva can never be accomplished, while being 
immersed in the body-consciousness. However, consciousness of 
Deva instead of Dheha, of God instead of the body, will bring forth 
the splendour of Prema. With that as inspiration and guide, man 
can achieve much good, without ever knowing or proclaiming that 
he is selfless in outlook. For him, it is all God's will, His Leela, His 
work, 


Sathya Sai Baba 


25. Krishna--Prema Avatar 


Prema (Love) 1s like a most precious diamond. It will not remain even for a single moment with 
selfish persons. It will not stay for even half a moment with egoistic persons. It will not remain at 
all with ostentatious persons. Love is alien to persons who are selfish, conceited or ostentatious. 


Where, then, is this love to be found? This precious diamond can only be got in the Kingdom of 
Love, in the Street of Love, in the Shop of Love. It can be obtained only through a loving heart. 
It may be asked, "Is not the whole world permeated with Love? Why, then, is not Love readily 
available?" The love with which the world is considered to be filled is not real love. Prema 
cannot be associated with the body, the senses, the mind and the intellect. Anything associated 
with these is only Anuraaga (attachment). The Aatmic (spiritual) life alone is a Love-filled life. 
Therefore, people must lead a spiritual life, not a life subject to the body, the mind, the senses 
and the intellect. A life related to the body, the senses the mind and the intellect can never be free 
from selfishness, conceit and ostentation. 


To experience real Prema there is no need to practice any kind of meditation, worship or rituals. 
That is because in the practice of all these them is an element of selfishness. Prema can only be 
obtained by complete absorption in spirituality. It was for this reason that Sri Krishna declared in 
the Gita: "Sarva Dharmam Parithyajya" (transcending all rules). Likewise, Jesus also declared: 
"I am the Path." Buddha, conveying the same meaning, declared, "Sarvam Sharanam 
Gachchaami" (I am surrendering everything). This means that the essence of all religions, the 
root of all scriptures, the goal of all virtues, is Sarvaathmika Bhaavam (the experience of 
spiritual unity). The Gopikas exemplified such a spirit of surrender and oneness. 


Restrain selfishness and self-interest 


It may be asked whether in this mundane world it is possible to develop such a spirit of complete 
surrender. It may not be possible for all to be free completely from selfishness, self-interest and 
self-conceit. But them should be a limit to all of them. Nothing great can be achieved without 
restraint "Na Shreyo Niyamam vinaa." When the normal temperature of the body is exceeded, the 
fever is a sign of illness. Likewise, there is a limit to selfishness. When this limit is exceeded it 
becomes a disease. Ahamkaara (egoism) is a disease. Ostentation is a disease. Excessive 
Swaprayojanam (self-interest) is a disease. All these diseases have been described as Bhavaroga 
(the disease of worldliness). These are the diseases which are prevalent in the world today. 


When the Divine is present in everyone it is not fitting that one should fail to recognise this. One 
may have the faith that God resides within him, but this is not sufficient. It is not a gmat thing to 
feel that God resides within you. You have to see yourself in God. That is the true Prema 
Thathwa (principle of Love). As long as you do not see yourself in the Divine, you remain 
selfish and self-centred. 


Experience of Ananda 


Man aspires for Ananda (bliss) in the world. Vedantha defines Divine Ananda as Yoga. Yoga is 
usually considered as some form of breathing or physical exercise. This is not the true meaning 
of Yoga. Yoga means Ananda or Bliss. Wherefrom can this bliss be got? Only from the One who 
is the embodiment of bliss. It cannot be got from possessions of any kind or from position or 
power. Bliss can only be got from God, who is the embodiment of Bliss. 


How is this bliss to be got? Srikanth (a student who had spoken earlier) referred to the single- 
minded devotion of the Gopikas and Radha. The Gopikas have been misunderstood and 
misrepresented by commentators. Gopikas symbolise thoughts. Radha symbolises the 
combination of all thoughts in the mind. So, thoughts and the mind should merge in Krishna, 
represented by Prajna (in a human being). That is the significance of the Vedantic declaration, 
"Prajnaanam Brahma." This Prajnaanam pervades every part of the human body, the mind and 
the intellect. It is constant integrated awareness. All our thoughts, desires and aspirations should 
be merged in this Prajna. 


When this Prajna (constant integrated awareness) is present in all beings as the Divine (as 
Brahman), what is the need, it may be asked, for the descent of Avatars? There are reasons for 
the advent of Avatars. Them are two kinds of perceptions viz. Prathvaksham and Paroksham 
(direct and indirect). There are also two kinds of potencies: internal and external. For example, 
there is fire within a piece of firewood. It is only when the fire latent in it is brought out that it 
can be used for cooking. Likewise, everybody is like a piece of firewood. The Aatmic principle is 
latent within it. To make it manifest, some form of love has to be practised. Just as you have to 
strike a matchbox to produce fire, Love has to merge in Love to experience the Divine. 


Difference between divine love and human love 


You may consider that t. he love within you and that the love represented by God are the same. 
But there is this difference. God's love is totally selfless. It is absolutely pure. It is eternal. It is 
flawless. Human love is self-centred and tainted. Such a love cannot merge with God's love. It is 
only when one is free from egoism, pride, hatred and envy that God will abide in you. Without 
Thyaaga (renunciation) if a person is immersed in worldly pleasures and leads a mundane life, 
all his devotion is only artificial and a kind of self-deception. Such devotion will not lead him to 
God. 


Today the world is full of such persons. People claim that they are loving God. I have not seen a 
single person who really loves God. Everyone loves God for his own sake and not for the sake of 
God. This is pure selfishness. Man seeks all things in the world for his own reasons. Even God is 
sought for such a reason. God cannot be got so easily. The heart has only a single seat. There is 
room in it for only one person. If you install worldly desires on that chair, how can you expect 
God to sit on it? God will enter that seat only if you empty it of all other things. 


Selfless devotion of the Gopikas 


Today, in the name of Prema, men are playing a game of musical chairs with their hearts. The 
chair of the heart is being used for occupation by different persons at different times. The 
Gopikas, however, dedicated their hearts to one person alone. All their thoughts were centred on 
Krishna. All their senses were dedicated to the Divine. They spoke only about God. Their 
thoughts were centred on God. They listened only to the Divine words. Their hands were 
engaged in Divine work. All their limbs and senses were dedicated to the Divine. They did not 
consider anything as their own. Krishna was their all. 


Here is an episode from the life of Krishna to demonstrate the total devotion of the Gopikas to 
the Lord. Once Krishna feigned that he was suffering from a headache for which the cure was the 
application, to His head, of the dust from the feet of a devotee. Sage Narada sought to collect the 
dust from Sathyabhama, Rukmini and others, whom he regarded as great devotees of the Lord. 
But all of them declined to give the dust from their feet because they considered it sinful to offer 


their dust to be placed on the Lord's head. Ultimately Narada went to the Gopikas, who did not 
have the slightest hesitation to offer the dust from their feet if only it would give immediate relief 
to the Lord, regardless of the consequences to themselves. 


The Gopikas did not consider whether it was right or wrong for them to offer the dust of their 
feet. They were only concerned with giving relief to their Lord by any means. They declared, 
"Our entire life is dedicated to Krishna. His joy is ours." This was the spirit of oneness with 
which they offered the dust of theft feet. And that very moment Krishna was rid of His ailment. 
By the time Narada reached Krishna, the Lord was found wreathed in smiles. Krishna told the 
sage, "You are boasting that you are devotees of the Lord. But none of you has the utterly 
selfless devotion of the Gopikas." 


How to obtain Divine Love 


Today there are many who claim to be devotees of the Lord and close to the Lord. But few can 
be described as real devotees of God. In each one there is some element of selfishness in his or 
her devotion. As long as there is an element of selfishness and egoism, the Lord will take no 
notice of such devotees. The love of the Divine is all the time present. But like the cloud that 
hides the sun from a person, the selfishness and ego of the devotee comes between God's love 
and the devotee. 


To proceed from the human condition to the Divine in man, the only means is the Prema 
Thathwa (Love Principle). All other means are of no avail. From the Mahabharatha take the 
example of the fate of Karna and the destiny of Arjuna which indicates the difference between 
one who does not have Divine grace and another who has the benefit of Divine grace. While 
Karna, who was associated with the wicked Kauravas, met with a tragic end, Arjuna, who was a 
firm devotee of the Lord, was blessed with victory. All Indian scriptures and Puranas 
demonstrate the power of the Lord's grace to transform the human to the state of the Divine. 


Although people have been taking birth after birth because of their attachment to worldly 
pleasures, they have not been able to get rid of their involvement with worldly concerns. Hence 
they are unable to experience the bliss of oneness with the Divine. All the bad thoughts and bad 
actions which they have experienced in previous lives continue to prevent them from 
experiencing the Divine. It is only when one gets rid of these impure thoughts that he can 
experience Divine feelings. 


Cultivate love in its purest form 


The Prema Thathwa (Love Principle) is the essence of Krishna Thathwa (Krishna Principle). It 
is associated with the Divine. Worldly love cannot be equated with Divine Love (Prema). The 
term Prema is used in ordinary parlance to describe what is really worldly attachment. People are 
attached more to names and forms than to the inner spirit of things. To get over this false 
attachment to external forms and names, it is essential to cultivate love in its purest form. There 
is no greater path to the Divine than this love. To manifest this love, the first requisite is to get 
rid of selfishness and self-interest. 


Dear students, dear devotees! It is not so easy to experience the Divine. You may imagine that 
you have comprehended the Divine. But this is a delusion. You are immersed in the affairs of the 
phenomenal world. This cannot lead you to the Eternal Reality. Only those who are dedicated to 


the realisation of the Eternal can attain it. This is illustrated by the Gopikas: total dedication of 
their lives to Krishna. They sought the complete mergence of themselves in the Divine. 


Surrender completely to the Lord 


People today are totally immersed in worldly concerns and do not devote any attention to the 
spiritual quest. It is true, involvement in worldly affairs cannot be given up totally. But all such 
actions can be sanctified by performing them in a spirit of dedication to the Divine. The 
Bhagavatha demonstrates how this kind of dedicated life can be led by a devotee. It is not 
enough if you claim to be a devotee of the Lord. The Lord must recognise you as a devotee. Only 
then does one's devotion acquire value. Arjuna, for a long time, felt proud about his closeness to 
Krishna and about his devotion to Him. It was only towards the end he realised that he had to 
abide by the words of Krishna and completely surrender to the Lord. He then declared "Karishye 
Vachanam Thava" (I shall carry out your words). 


No one should feel that it is beyond his capacity to surrender himself completely to the Lord. If 
there is firm determination, this can be accomplished. It is only through earnest endeavour that 
Divine wisdom can be got---"Shraddhaavaan Labhathe Jnaanam." 


Today the world is afflicted with the epidemic of Ahamkaara (egoism). There is really no basis 
for this kind of self-conceit. It is born of ignorance. It has to be totally eradicated. If everyone 
realises that the body has been given for the pursuit of righteousness and acts on that basis, he 
will be able to realise the Divine. 


Avatars come to propagate Divine Love 


Embodiments of Divine Love! Experience the Love Principle. Thereby you will rid the world of 
hatred. Once hatred goes the world will be free from violence and strife. For all the cruelty and 
violence that we find in the world today, the root cause is selfishness. This has to be eradicated. 
Cultivating the Love Principle and manifesting love in all your thoughts and actions, you will 
experience the bliss of Love. When one is filled with Love of the Divine, all pains and troubles 
will be forgotten. It is to propagate this principle of Divine Love that the advent of Avatars takes 
place from time to time. 


Although the Divine dwells in every person, this fact remains latent like oil in the thil seed. To 
manifest the Divine within you, you have to go through certain trials and ordeals. Love of the 
Divine should grow as a result of such experiences of adversity. Just as gold improves in 
brilliance the more it is heated in the crucible, your devotion has to go through a constant 
purificatory process. Today all thoughts and actions are polluted in one way or another. All one's 
words or looks or thoughts are polluted. Young people should realise that they have to lead ideal 
lives. Only then will they be true to the message of the Ramayana and other Indian epics. Every 
student should aim at becoming an ideal example to the world. For this purpose they should 
cultivate good company; the company of persons filled with Divine Love. Unlike in previous 
Yugas people today pretend to be what they are not. They have to get rid of their animal instincts 
and progress from the human to the Divine. 


Poornachandra Auditorium, 21 Aug 1992 


Everyone has ultimately to base his life on some one truth; that 
truth is God. No life can be lived in complete defiance of truth. 


Sathya Sai Baba 


26. Work Together for The Nation's Progress 


Embodiments of the Divine Atma! Bharathiya culture is preeminent and unexcelled. It bears 
testimony to the eternal verifies which are unaffected by time, place or circumstance. Sanathana 
Dharma is the inner core of this culture. The obverse of Sanathana Dharma is the doctrine of 
Karma (the Law of Cause and Effect). No one can fully comprehend how Karma operates. Its 
operations over time, place or people defy definition. The doctrine of Karma rules over the 
whole world. 


The Vedas are the primary scriptures of Bharathiyas. The Vedas have three Kaandas (divisions). 
The first part deals with Karma-Yoga (the Yoga of action and reaction). The Upanishads came 
into existence to indicate the path of Jnaana (Higher Knowledge). The Upanishads also have 
three divisions one of which deals with Karma- Yoga. 


It is necessary to find out why the doctrine of Karma (action) has been given primary place both 
in the Vedas and the Upanishads. The entire gamut of human life--birth, growth and death---is 
governed by Karma. All the joys and sorrows man experiences, all his sins and merits, all the 
praise and blame he gets, flow from his actions. Man is thus bound by the operation of Karma. 
Not realising the relationship between cause and effect, man indulges in actions which give 
pleasure for the moment. When he reaps the consequences of his bad actions, he is immersed in 
misery. 


Consequences are implicit in the action itself 


Hence, before undertaking any action man has to follow the Upanishadic advice and offer his 
salutations to the Lord of Karma. He should pray that he should be endowed with the strength 
and competence to perform good deeds which will produce good results. 


The consequences of every action are implicit in the action itself. For instance, there is a small 
seed. Its entire capacity to grow into a big tree is latent within it. The seed contains within it the 
potentiality of growing into a tree with branches, flowers and fruits. There is an interval between 
the planting of a seed in the ground and its growing into a full fledged tree. Wherefrom has this 
tree come? Krishna has declared in the Gita, "Beejam Maam Sarva Bhuthaanaam" (I am the seed 
of all living beings). 


All that you see in the world is the result of Karma. Everything has a beginning and an end. 
Pleasure and pain have a beginning and an end. They are inseparable. 


Man has to realise the preciousness of human birth. It is highly unfortunate that people born in 
Bharath do not realise the greatness of Bharathiya culture. Understanding the operation of Karma 
is one of the essential aspects of Indian culture. Karma is not something remote. It is related to 
one's actions. Sin is not associated with some distant land. It is related to the actions which one 
does. Bhakthi (Devotion) and Jnaana (Wisdom) are based on Karma (Action). Wisdom is the 
fruit of action. 


Why Bharath is a Karma-Bhoomi 


Bharathiyas had recognised how Karma operated. Nowhere else has the secret of the Law of 
Cause and Effect been explored as thoroughly as in Bharath. That is the mason why Bharath was 
called Karma-Bhoomi (the land of Karma). Having taken birth in such a sacred, sublime and 


great country, it is a pity Bharathiyas today are not aware of the truth about Samskaaras (Right 
Actions). 


People are making no effort to understand the place of Right Actions in life. They should be 
aware of the essence of Indian culture. Everything that happens is the result of some action. 
Everything in creation is based upon action. Whether one believes in it or not, Karma is the 
cause of creation. Here is an example. You feel hungry. The hunger is appeased after you take 
food. But them is a chain of events like putting the food in the mouth, masticating it, sending it to 
the stomach, digesting it and distributing it to all parts of the body. Hunger is relieved only after 
all these processes. Taking food is Karma, relieving of hunger is the fruit of the action. But 
between the action and the fruit, a number of events take place. These events may be immediate 
or spread over many years, or lifetimes. But the fruits of Karma are bound to be realised 
sometime or other. Therefore all actions have to be done in the right way. People should engage 
themselves in noble deeds and serve as an ideal example to the nation. 


Human qualities to be cultivated 


Fraternal feelings, ethical conduct and the sense of fellowship are the qualities which elevate 
human nature. People do not strive to cultivate these qualities. People should realise that bad 
thoughts in the mind affect every part of the human body, just as a small stone cast on a pond 
generates ripples which cover the entire pond. Similarly good thoughts affect the entire body. 
Good thoughts lead to good actions, good speech, good hearing and seeing good things. When 
the thoughts are bad, the consequent actions are equally bad. 


The ancient history of India is full of the actions and teachings of sages who exemplified, in their 
fives, great ideals. But today, while we have considerable talk about ideals, they are not reflected 
in practical living. 


The truth of the Law of Action and Reaction can be verified from a simple experience. If you 
stand before a mirror and offer a Namaskar, the image returns the Namaskar. If you assume a 
threatening posture before the mirror, the image reflects it back in the same manner. Reflection, 
reaction and resound are three aspects of how Karma operates. 


For all the troubles and chaos in the world today it is our own actions that are responsible. There 
is no meaning in blaming others. Each person suffers from the consequences of his own actions. 
How can anyone escape the consequences of his actions? If this fact is realised, men will not find 
fault with others, or blame others for their troubles. 


Inherent divinity in everyone is the same 


People must, therefore, engage themselves in noble actions and strive for unity with all their 
fellow beings. Intellectuals today are more busy promoting divisions rather than in fostering 
unity. There are very few good men who seek to promote unity in diversity. The oneness of all 
mankind has to be realised. Names and forms are many, but the inherent divinity in everyone is 
the same. You see a variety of bulbs in this hall. They are different from each other. But it is the 
same current that flows in all of them. The same analogy applies to human beings. They may 
vary from each other in several respects, but the divine spark in all of them is one and the same. 
The Divine is common to all. There is no separate God for each country or each religion. God is 
one. 


The people must realise the importance of unity for promoting the welfare and progress of the 
country. Selfishness is the cause of disunity. Only when Swaartha (selfishness) is given up will 
people realise the Parartha (Supreme). 


It is essential to cultivate the spirit of Thyaaga (sacrifice). People do not realise all that can be 
achieved by sacrifice. When every action is done in a spirit of dedication to others, it becomes a 
form of sacrifice and a source of joy. When egoism is shed in the performance of actions and the 
desire for fruits is renounced, then sacrifice itself becomes a source of pleasure. This magnificent 
auditorium is the result of the combined efforts of many persons, engineers, workers, electricians 
and many others. It is the outcome of their labour. 


Every product is the result of action. Hence, the nature of action should be properly understood. 
What seems enjoyable at one time has consequences which are saddening later on. At the time of 
birth, a child cries Koham (Who am I). This cry should not last through life. Before death one 
should be able to say, Soham (I am He). Man must experience the divine in him. This is the goal 
of life. 


The nation belongs to all 


Bharath is a sacred and glorious country. It is our good fortune to be born in this land. You 
should realise the truth of the saying, "As you sow, so shall you reap." Hence all your actions 
should be pure and noble and such as would promote the well-being of the nation and give you 
joy. 

Good or bad fortune in life comes in its own time. It is not easy, however, for everyone to leave 
things to the will of the Divine. Men are prevented from adopting such an attitude because they 
magnify other people's faults and forget their own defects. People should get rid of such an 
attitude. If one cannot be helpful to others, at least he should not do any harm to others. 


The nation belongs to all. This truth should not be forgotten. People must stand up for truth. 
There is nothing greater than truth. Truth knows no barriers of caste or community. It is the same 
for all. Many people are undermining the reputation of Bharath by their actions. This amounts to 
treason to the nation. One who is not proud of his motherland and its reputation is worse than a 
corpse. All must protect the honour of the nation. They should be united. This is the message of 
the Vedas, "Let us all live and strive together in harmony." If only this spirit prevails among 
Bharathiyas, the nation will shine in all its glory. It is because people have forgotten the 
greatness of Bharath that our country is suffering from many troubles and difficulties. If people 
act together in concert, there is nothing they cannot achieve in Bharath. Determination and unity 
are essential. 


Three concepts and ideals you should cherish 


Bharathiyas should give no room for differences of caste, religion or language. They should 
recognise the unity of the human family. Remember: "Caste of Humanity, Religion of Love, 
Language of the Heart." If you base your actions on these three concepts, the country can make 
any amount of progress. Cherish these ideals in your hearts and discharge your duties. 


Bharath is faced with many grave problems and people are worried about what may happen, on 
seeing reports in the Press. There is no danger for Bharath, because what are happening are only 
the birth-pangs of changes to come. The changes will be for the good. 


There must be, however, a transformation in the minds of the people. There is no use in changes 
in external forms. Qualities must change. There must be a change in the way of thinking. Only 
then the change will be to the lasting good of the country. Envy and egoism are animal qualities. 
The qualities which every human being should have are peace, compassion, forbearance, love 
and sacrifice. These are the qualities that should be developed in all people, not vices like hatred, 
greed, envy, pride and others. Cultivate the feeling of love. Get rid of old prejudices and 
differences. Foster divine feelings. Only then the nation can make all-around progress. 


Embodiments of Divine Love! You must regard the construction of this magnificent mansion as 
a symbol of universal good--Vishva kalyaanam. Vishva kalyaanam means the well-being of all. 
There should be unity of hearts so that anything that is desirable can be accomplished. People 
should co-operate with each other. From today resolve to give up selfishness and achieve unity 
among yourselves to serve the nation. 


Before I conclude I call upon all of you to regard yourselves as the children of one mother. 
Develop genuine fraternal feelings and eschew separatist tendencies. Concentrate on the well 
being of society as a whole. 


Forget all your differences and come together to uphold the reputation of the nation. Bharath, 
which was once known for its moral and spiritual greatness, has been going down in moral 
stature. Every effort should be made to raise the reputation of the country. Consider today's 
function as an auspicious beginning for transformation of the nation. I bless you all. 


The inauguration of Vishva Kalyaana Mandapam, Secunderabad, 29Aug 1992 


27. Significance Of Vinayaka Worship 


The stream of man's life is marked by different stages. In each stage man falls a prey to vices like 
egoism, jealousy and falsehood instead of cultivating truth, righteousness and humility. A life, 
which should be holy and pure, is turned into poison. What should be a meaningful and divinised 
human existence is converted into a worthless and evil life. The first stage in human life is that of 
boyhood. At this stage he leads an innocent fife, without being aware of the Preyo or Sreyo 
Marga (worldly or the sacred path). But as he advances in age, he takes to the worldly path 
rather than to the sublime path. Endowed with the vigour of youth and in full possession of his 
mental and other powers, he forgets his basic human qualities and leads a worldly life devoid of 
any meaning. He loses the power of discrimination between good and bad and forgets what is 
high and what is low. He forgets even his essential human nature. He is unaware of the Divine. 
He descends to the level of the animal. At the end, he ceases to be human. 


The necessity to have Sathsangam 


Plunging into the river of Desire, tossed by the waves of Delusion, getting immersed in the 
waters of Family life, and submerged by peacelessness and strife, man is swallowed by the whale 
of Discontentment. To turn human life from this mundane existence towards the Divine it is 
essential to have association with Sath--Sathsangam. The term Sath refers to that which is not 
subject to change over time. It is the Truth which remains the same regardless of time, place or 
circumstance. Man should associate himself with this Truth. Merging one's consciousness with 
this Truth he should experience the bliss of such association. Sathsangam (association with truth) 
means experiencing Sath-chith-ananda (Truth-Awareness-Bliss). 


The Sathsangam has three facets as indicated in the Manu Dharma Shastra--"Bhadram 
pashyanthu, Bhadram srun-vanthu, Bhadram kurvanthu" (See only what is good, hear what is 
good and do what is good). Unfortunately, in the stage of manhood, these qualities are absent in 
man. At this stage, he may appear to have devotion but it is neither sincere nor constant. 
Spirituality is viewed more as a formal observance than an inner experience. 


What really constitutes spirituality? Do bhajans constitute spirituality? Or repeating the words 
"Sai Ram" or making pilgrimages to Shrines? All these are signs of human weakness. True 
spirituality consists in the elimination of all animal instincts in man and manifesting the Divine 
light within him. This is the true meaning of spirituality. 


Today, man practices meditation and performs japa, but along with them the animal qualities are 
also allowed to grow. As long as these qualities remain, the observance of religious practices is 
worthless. All such spiritual practices amount to practising deception on the Divine itself. 
Therefore, true Sadhana (spiritual practice) means getting rid of all of one's animal qualities such 
as cruelty, wickedness, etc. Two qualities make a man alien to God: Asuuya and Ahamkaara 
(envy and egoism). Envy and Egoism are two pests which destroy the tree of life. They deprive 
man of his essential human nature. With these bad qualities, people get divorced from the 
company of the good. 


Significance of the Ganesha festival 


The essential purpose of the Vinayaka Chathurthi festival is to teach a person to avoid the 
company of bad people and cultivate the company of the good. What does the term Ganapathi 
signify? "Ga" means Buddhi (intellect). "Na" means Vijnaana (Wisdom). "Ganapathi" means 


one who is the Lord of the intellect and of wisdom. He is also the Lord of all Ganas (spiritual 
entities). Ganas also symbolise the senses. Ganapathi is thus the Lord of the senses. "Vigatho 
Nayakah Ithi Vinayakah" (Vinayaka is one who is without a Master above him). 


All festivals of Bharathiyas are full of transcendental significance and are not related to worldly 
phenomena. The first thing which is done on a festival day is to hang a festoon of green leaves 
on the front doors of the house. A festoon of green leaves is a sign of auspiciousness. By having 
such a festoon, the householder indicates that he seeks auspicious happenings. This custom has 
also scientific significance. The green leaves hung at the door serve to absorb the Carbon dioxide 
exhaled by people and they release Oxygen which is inhaled by them. Thus scientifically the 
green leaves serve a vital purpose. 


Importance of inner and outer purity 


On a festival day every person in the house takes an oil bath early in the morning. Personal 
cleanliness is conducive to good health. Moreover, as the Divine dwells both inside and outside 
the body, external purity is also important. To achieve inner purity one has to get rid of all bad 
qualities and cultivate good qualities. The significance of wearing new clothes on festival days is 
to replace the dirty linen in the mind by good thoughts. The heart is called Vastra, which is the 
term used for cloth. Hence, inner purity has to be achieved by purifying the heart. The wearing of 
new clothes is intended to serve as a prelude to purifying the heart within. Thus the different 
festival practices have an inner significance, apart from the external observances. 


In connection with the Ganesha festival, Prasadam (food offering) is dedicated to the deity in the 
form of Kudumulu and Undrallu. What are the kinds of edibles that should be offered to the 
deity? The preparations should not involve the use of oil or fire. They have to be cooked by the 
use of steam. Using rice flour and some pulses and fthil, one kind of offering is made for 
Ganesha. In this preparation no oil or fire is used. The significance of this offering is: During the 
month of Bhaadhrapadha, the farmers bring home the harvest of thil seeds. Thil seeds have 
medicinal properties for curing lung and eye diseases. When the thi/ seeds and pulses are cooked 
by steam, the preparation becomes easily digestible. In offering such food to the deity two 
purposes are served. The offerings are tasty and wholesome (giving pleasure and promoting good 
health). These were the reasons for the observance of various festivals by our ancients. 


It is only when a man is pure that the intelligence blossoms. It is only with the blossoming of 
intelligence that Siddhi (the spiritual goal) is attained. Vinayaka presides over Buddhi and Siddhi 
(the intellect and spiritual realisation). Siddhi signifies the realisation of Wisdom. The scriptures 
say that Siddhi and Buddhi are the consorts of Vinayaka and Kshema and Ananda are his two 
sons. Siddhi and Buddhi symbolise the powers of attraction of Ganapathi. 


First correct your own faults 


The Ganapathi festival is an occasion for people to purify their minds. People generally tend to 
see in others the faults which they themselves have. Thereby they try to cover up their own 
defects by attributing the same defects to others. This is a bad quality. A man can improve only 
by recognising his faults and not by seeing the same faults in others. You must see what is good 
in others and look at your own defects. Only such a person can improve. Man does violence to 
his human nature by ignoring his defects and magnifying the faults in others. This trait is widely 
prevalent among students today. Students should aim at achieving harmony in thought, word and 
deed. 


Harmony in the Lord's family 


Men today are too much immersed in selfish pursuits. Animals and birds display less selfishness 
than man. The purpose of festivals like Ganesha Chathurthi is to remind men of their inherent 
divinity and awakening in them the sense of oneness of all mankind. 


Easwara's family consists of Shiva, Parvathi, Ganapathi and Subrahmanya. When you consider 
the vehicles of the four, you find that by nature they are antagonistic to each other. Shiva's 
vehicle is Nandi (the Bull). Parvathi's vehicle is the lion. By nature the bull and the lion are 
inimical towards each other. On Easwara's head there is Ganga. In His forehead He has fire. 
There is natural antagonism between water (in the Ganga) and fire in the Lord's forehead. 
Ganapathi has the elephant's face and His vehicle is a rat. There is a natural antagonism between 
Parvathi's lion and Ganapathi's elephant-head. Likewise there is natural enmity between the 
serpent around Easwara's neck and Ganapathi's vehicle, the rat. There is also enmity between 
Shiva's serpent and Subrahmanya's peacock. In spite of the natural enmity of these different 
vehicles of Easwara's family, there is no discord at all among them. Perfect harmony prevails 
among the members of the family and their different vehicles. This harmony and unity is an 
example to the world. 


Unity is essential for achieving good things. There should be no unity for evil purposes. Whether 
a person achieves eminence or goes down depends on the kind of people with whom he 
associates. However, students should not associate with fair-weather friends. The only true friend 
is God. All others are friends only for their own selfish purposes. God is always with you, in you 
and around you. He will not give you up in any circumstance. But if your heart is polluted, God 
will leave you. There is no room in a polluted heart for God. 


The inner significance of the elephant head 


Vinayaka has the head of an elephant. What is its significance? No human being has an 
elephant's head. It is against the order of nature. How then did Vinayaka acquire an elephant's 
head? This has an inner significance. Vinayaka is known for His supreme intelligence. The 
elephant is also known for its high intelligence (Gajathelivi). The elephant will not trust anybody 
except its master. Because Vinayaka is endowed with exceptional intelligence, His elephant face 
is symbolic of supreme intelligence. 


Those of you who are staying in the hostel notice cars going up and down the road. On the other 
side of the hostel is Sai Gita (Bhagavan's elephant). Sai Gita takes no notice of the innumerable 
cars going on the road. But, without any notice, it smells, as it were, the passing of Swami's car 
and immediately comes out with a roar to greet Swami. That is the devotion of Sai Gita to its 
Lord. The faith of the elephant is as strong as its intelligence. His love for the master is equally 
strong. It is steadfast love. These qualities of devotion, faith and intelligence are associated with 
the elephant. Whoever has these qualities can be regarded as endowed with the head of an 
elephant. 


Students who may be inclined to entertain doubts regarding the reasons for Ganesha having the 
head of an elephant, should understand the inner meaning of this appearance, apart from what is 
seen on the surface. 


Sacred ritual reduced to ludicrous practices 


Unfortunately, people attach more importance to external forms than to the inner meanings of 
these festivals. As a result, meaningful festivals are often reduced to superstitious practices. And 


often sacred rituals are reduced to ludicrous observances. In olden days there was a practice of 
confining the cat in the house in a basket during the performance of the Sathyanarayana Vratha 
so that the cat would not go after the various offerings kept for the deity. The cat was maintained 
in olden days when there was the fear of rats eating up the grains stored in the house. Even 
though there are no rats any longer in houses today and there is no need to keep a cat, the 
practice of confining a cat in a basket is being observed as a part of the religious ceremony. This 
is how a practice, which was relevant in the past, is observed though it serves no purpose. 


Students! You should realise that for every action there is a consequence. The results of each 
action depend on the nature of the action, just as the nature of the tree depends on the seed which 
is sowed. The consequences of one's actions are inescapable and it was for this reason that the 
Emperor Manu laid down that all should observe Dharma. The consequences of actions may 
appear sooner or later but they are bound to occur. Students like to worship Ganapathi. They 
pray to Ganesha to confer on them Buddhi (intelligence) and Siddhi (the capacity to realise their 
aspirations). 


In the name Ganapathi, "Ga" stands for Guna (virtue) and "Na" for Vijnaana (wisdom). When 
Ga and Na are joined we have the combination of Vijnaana (worldly wisdom) and Prajnaana 
(Spiritual wisdom). It is out of the combination of Vijnaana and Prajnaana that Sujnaana 
(Supreme knowledge) emerges. Sujnaana is the distinguishing mark of a true man. Ajnaana is 
the sign of ignorance. Ganapathi is the Lord of 


Vijnaana and Prajnaana (worldly knowledge and spiritual wisdom). Therefore, when a devotee 
prays to Ganesha, he asks for the conferment of Vijnaana, Prajnaana and Sujnaana. 


Education today lacks all the three types of knowledge Vijnaana, Prajnaana and Sujnaana). You 
have only bookish knowledge and superficial knowledge. They are of temporary value, perhaps 
no farther than the examinations! If the value of education is to last all through life, students have 
to cultivate faith in God. They should realise that when they constantly think of God and perform 
all actions with Divine feelings, they will experience the full blossoming of their human 
qualities. Consider every action as dedicated to God. You cannot avoid actions. You must 
transform work into worship. You have to perform work in this spirit. You cannot substitute 
prayer for work. You have to combine both work and worship. 


Prashanthi Mandir, 31 Aug 1992 


28. The Avatar As Liberator 


Nishkriyvo Nithyo Nirvikalpo Niranjanah 
Nirvikaaro Niraakaaro Nithyamukthosmi Nirmalah. 


(Actionless, ever abiding, free from delusions, ever blissful, 
unchanging, formless, ever liberated and untainted am 1). 


God transcends the Gunas (attributes). He is without cause. He is without form and is 
unchanging. He is beyond all thoughts and fancies. He is eternal, pure, omniscient and infinite. 
The cosmos is the embodiment of the Divine. There is nothing, not even an atom, in the world 
without the Divine. 


Embodiments of love! Inside us and outside and all around there is air. But it cannot be seen, nor 
can it be grasped by the hand. Can you deny the existence of air for this reason? How can one 
exist if there is no air? To deny the existence of air is to deny one's own existence. 


God is all-pervading. He is omnipresent. He transcends time, space and circumstances. 
According to one's level of understanding of the Divine, God exists at that level. The mind is the 
means, of comprehending everything in the world. In the world, which is a projection of the 
mind, the Lord exists as Chittaswarupa (Universal Consciousness). 


It is foolish to deny the existence of the Divine 


All the animate and inanimate objects in the world are Vishnuswarupa (manifestations of the 
Divine). It is foolish to look at the cosmos and deny the principle that pervades the cosmos. 
Equally is it not foolish to look at the universe, which is the embodiment of the Divine, and deny 
the existence of the Divine? That is the reason why the scripture declared: â€œâ€œPashyannapi na 
pashyathi Mudho" (The foolish one, even though he beholds the Lord of the cosmos, does not 
recognise Him). 


What is the reason for this failure? Man is looking at the cosmos as a physical phenomenon---- 
Vishvabhaavamu. He does not look at it from the point of view of divinity. It is only when the 
attitude changes that the Eternal will also be seen differently. The external world is a reflection, a 
resound and reaction of the inner feelings. The outer world has been described as a reflection of 
the inner being. What is felt within appears as a phenomenon outside. Therefore, it is only when 
every man renounces the worldly point of view and adopts a divine point of view that he can 
comprehend divinity in the cosmos. 


For man to acquire peace, he has to cultivate Thyaaga (sacrifice) and get rid of the sense of 
dualism. The highest wisdom consists in seeing the One alone---"Adwaitha Darsanam Jnaanam" 
The shedding of all attachment is Thyaaga. The Gita declares that supreme peace is obtained 
only through Thyaaga. 


Mental transformation of sages Vyasa and Shuka 


Once Shuka, the son of Sage Vyasa, renouncing all attachments, left his home. Unable to endure 
his departure. Vyasa followed Shuka. Vyasa appealed to him: "Dear son, you should not leave 
your home." Shuka told him: "You are not a father nor am I a son. Both of us are embodiments 
of Bliss. 


Because of the forms which we bear, you consider yourself as the father.and me as the son. The 
world consists of forms. You cannot comprehend the Divine without giving up attachment to 
forms. You cannot be the Seer without giving up the seen. You are carried away by your 
attachment to the external world." 


As soon as he heard this, Vyasa experienced a mental transformation and started considering 
himself as an embodiment of bliss. 


It is asked: "Is it possible to sacrifice (worldly things)?" The answer is: "It is not impossible if 
you make a determined effort." Unfortunately, man today is unable to give up addiction to even 
the most trivial things. Many are unable to give up cigarettes or bidis, tea or coffee. If one cannot 
give up such acquired tastes, how is he going to give up qualities like raaga and dwesha 
(attachment and hatred)? 


Man is, in essence, the embodiment of puurnaprema (complete love). But this love is constantly 
changing because of attachment to forms. When he is born, he depends on the mother and is 
deeply attached to her. As he grows, giving up attachment to the mother, he develops attachment 
to friends in the outside world. He regards his friends as his life itself. As the years pass, he gets 
married. Deeming his wife as the breath of his life, he gives up his friends. As children are born, 
he wearies of his wife. He gets more attached to the children and interests himself in their 
education. After some time differences arise between the children and the father. At that stage 
the father attaches great value to wealth. This becomes the source of discord between father and 
sons. The affection which started with love of the mother ends in love of wealth. And then, he 
becomes a prey to greed. 


Emperor Janaka's practice of Raja Yoga 


It is evident from this that changes in the objects of one's affection bring about changes which 
cause grief. This kind of love is not proper love. Love which arises at one moment and fades the 
next moment is not love at all. True love shines like a pure divine flame in the heart of the man 
whose soul has no birth and death. True love is not subject to growth and decay. Whatever grows 
or declines is related to the ego. True love should be regarded as an effulgent flame. 


Once, Emperor Janaka approached the Sage Yajnavalkya and asked him: "Oh Sage! Please let 
me know the facts about my previous life." The Sage replied: "What is past is past. There is no 
use in recalling it. You have completed a journey along a road. Do not bother about the road that 
has been traversed. It does not redound to your glory." Although the sage used many arguments 
to dissuade Janaka from persisting in his request, Janaka was insistent on knowing about his 
previous birth. Yajnavalkya then resorted to his divine insight and told the Emperor: "Janaka, 
your wife in the present birth was your mother in your previous life." On hearing this, Janaka 
was shocked. He reflected: "What a wicked person have I been to treat my former mother as my 
wife! I must give up such a wicked life." From that moment he began to treat his queen as his 
mother, and giving up all attachments to worldly things, began to pursue spiritual wisdom. (The 
spiritual discipline he practised is known as Raja Yoga). 


When, while performing one's duties, one cherishes divine aspirations and contemplates on God, 
leading a purposeful life, it is called Raja Yoga. This kind of devotion to duty, while pursuing 
one's spiritual Sadhana, was exemplified by Emperor Janaka, who attained liberation in this way. 
Every person has to discharge his duties in this spirit. Then, duty is God. 


Sisupala's mergence with Krishna 


Once a great assemblage of kings and sages had gathered at a yajna performed by Yudhistira. In 
that assemblage Sisupala and Dantavakra levelled abuses at Krishna recklessly. They rebuked 
Dharmaraja (Yudhistira) for giving precedence to Krishna by offering him Agrathaambuula (the 
first honours symbolised by the offer of betel leaves) at the assembly. They asked: "Are there not 
more eminent and worthy preceptors in this assembly than Krishna? There are, in this assembly, 
yogis, rishis and eminent ascetics. There are Acharyas (preceptors) like Dronacharya, 
Krupacharya and others. Bhishmacharya is pre-eminent among them. When such preceptors are 
present, why give the place of honour to Krishna?" Sisupala referred sneeringly to the boyhood 
pranks of Krishna to suggest that he was unworthy of such high honours. 


Dharmaraja could not bear listening to the abuses of Sisupala. His mind was racked with 
anguish. At that moment Krishna took the plate on which the offerings had been made to him 
and hurled it at Sisupala's throat. Krishna did not wield his Sudarsana Chakra (discus). He only 
threw the plate at Sisupala. That plate severed Sisupala's head. Dharmaraja was happy. The very 
next moment, the blood coming out of Sisupala's body flowed towards Krishna's feet while a 
flame from Sisupala's body merged in Sri Krishna. 


Who attains lasting liberation and bliss? 


Dharmaraja was even more astonished at this phenomenon. Dharmaraja wondered, "Should the 
soul of a wicked person like Sisupala get merged in the Divine? Should his blood touch the 
Lord's feet?" Dharmaraja's mind was filled with such doubts. Unable to contain himself, he went 
to the sage Narada and sought from him an explanation of the inner significance of what had 
happened. Narada said, "Praise and blame, abuse and appreciation are all related to the body and 
not to the Aatma. You imagine that Krishna is merely the physical form in which you see Him. 
Because of this misconception, you interpret praise and blame in worldly terms. But the Divine 
is not confined to the body. He is eternally pure. He is ever pure and omniscient and 
omnipresent. For such a Lord, both abuse and praise have no meaning. However, in the world 
many persons secure Moksha (liberation) by abusing the Lord, many others achieve salvation by 
adoring God. Others achieve liberation by friendship with the Divine. Some achieve the same 
through Love. But wicked persons achieve liberation more easily than those who love the 
Divine. The wicked person achieves merger in the divine very quickly. The devotee goes through 
many trials and tribulations before attaining liberation. What is the difference between the two 
types of merger? The devotee who merges in the Divine after experiencing many trials and 
difficulties, attains lasting liberation. It is a blissful experience. The wicked person attains 
momentary merger. It is not an experience of bliss." 


This means that all persons may attain merger with the divine. But the devotee who surrenders 
himself to the Lord attains everlasting merger. 


The inner secret of the spiritual process 


The manner in which the Aatmic Principle operates has to be properly understood. It appears as 
if many bad, sinful and unrighteous persons in the world secure liberation while many good 
devotees appear to be suffering from many difficulties and troubles. These things, however, 
should not be viewed purely from the external point of view. The inner secret of the spiritual 
process should be understood. It was to give such an inner spiritual experience to Emperor Bali 
that the Lord assumed the form of Vamana and came to him. 


Bali was the grandson of Prahlada, who was the son of Hiranya Kashyapa. No one mentions the 
name of Bali's father Virochana, who was a wicked asura. While Prahlada's father, Hiranya 
Kashyapa was a hater of Hari, Bali worshipped Hari. Bali was ruling over his realm righteously. 
He loved his subjects as his own children. The land enjoyed plenty and peace. 


"As is the king so are the subjects" is an old saying. The ancients always prayed for righteous 
rulers. Emperor Manu laid down three prescriptions. They are "Bhadhram Pashyanthu" (See 
what is good), "Bhadram Shrunvanthu" (Listen to what is good), "Bhadram Kurvanthu" (Do 
what is good). These are the life-breath of Dharma (righteous conduct). It is not enough for us 
merely to say "See good." These injunctions have to be observed. If these are not observed, 
righteousness will cease to exist. Emperor Bali practised these three precepts and inspired his 
people to observe them. 


One returns to the place from which he came 


On one occasion Prahlada's father, Hiranya Kashyapa, went to his mother to console her on the 
death of Hiranyaksha (Hiranya Kashyapa's elder brother). The mother was wailing over the 
corpse of her son. Hiranya Kashyapa told his mother: "Mother, this whole world is transient. 
Every being is a traveller in this world of Karma and after completing one's pilgrimage, one 
returns to the place from which he came. Such being the case, why do you grieve? Moreover, my 
elder brother, who hated Hari, was slain by Him. That is his good fortune. He did not die at the 
hands of some ordinary person. The Creator became his destroyer. The one who created him also 
punished him. How fortunate was my brother! I am praying for a similar end for myself." On 
hearing these words, the mother was happy and declared, "Be it so." 


Hiranya Kashyapa was killed by Hari and thereby his wish was fulfilled. This episode indicates 
how God is realised even through hatred and abuse of the Divine. 


Emperor Bali's gift to Vamana 


Vamana sought from Emperor Bali three footsteps of land. What is the reason for the Lord 
appearing as a dwarf before Bali? When the Lord could measure the earth and the heavens with 
two steps (after Bali had made the offering that Vamana wanted), why did He appear at first as a 
dwarf?. This shows that however mighty a person may be, when he appears as a supplicant he 
gets diminished in stature. When one stretches his palm for an offering he becomes small. The 
giver of gifts acquires a high stature. Bali realised the greatness of his status as a giver. He 
rejoiced over his good fortune. When Bali agreed to make the gift which Vamana sought, 
Sukracharya intervened to tell the Emperor: "Don't give Him what He asks. He is not a mere 
Brahmin lad. He is Lord Vishnu Himself." Bali replied: "Oh Guru, I esteem no one higher than 
God. I will rather give up the preceptor than renounce God." 


There are any number of people in the world who are willing to make gifts of wealth, education 
and many other things, but there are few who offer themselves as a gift. Considering the gift 
which he was making to Vamana as a total offering of himself, Bali made the gift. Bali declared: 
"I am offering my wealth, my family and everything else and surrendering myself totally to you. 
O Lord' Save me." Bali offered his all to the Lord. 


After the Lord had used two footsteps to measure the earth and the firmament, Bali prayed to the 
Lord to place his foot upon his head for the third footstep. What is the inner meaning of this 
action? As the Lord had measured the entire earth with one footstep it meant that the place 
occupied by Bali was also covered by the first step. What separate claim could he make 


regarding his head? The inner significance of this should be understood. By measuring the earth 
the Lord has covered the earthly realm. By His second step He had covered the heavenly realm. 
By placing his foot on the head of Bali, the Lord covered Manoraajyam (the realm of the mind). 
This indicates that the Lord accepted and received from Bali the kingdom of his mind. 


Vamana confers liberating glory to Bali 


The mind is at the root of this phenomenal world. The mind is the cause of both bondage and 
liberation for men. It is only when one is free from the trammels of the mind that he obtains true 
Moksha (liberation). Vamana conferred liberation on Bali by freeing him from his bondage to the 
mind. It should be realised that Vamana did not come to Bali just to seek a gift. He came to Bali 
to liberate him. He came to Bali as a protector. He sought to make Bali an ideal example to the 
world. For what reason? Bali was the very embodiment of righteousness. He was a just ruler. In 
looking after the welfare of his subjects, he was exemplary. He excelled also in his generosity 
and his adoration of the Divine. He was steadfast in his faith. The advent of Vamana was 
intended to glorify Bali and make him an ideal example to the world. 


Inner significance of Onam festival 


Emperor Bali made one request to Vamana. "O Lord, my virtues are not very important. The 
devotion of my people is of great importance. I could be a great ruler because of the good 
qualities of my subjects. It is only when the goodness of the subjects and righteousness of the 
ruler are both present that there is real fulfilment. Lord Narayana, it is not enough if you give 
salvation to me alone. My subjects are responsible for making me what I am. You must bless my 
people also." Bali appealed to the Lord to permit him to visit his people once a year. Bali prayed 
that in the month of Shravana, when the Moon is in the constellation of Shravana and on a 
Saturday he should be allowed to appear among his subjects. Unfortunately, this year, the 
Shravana month is over. Only the Shravana constellation is present today. Vamana granted Bali's 
prayer. The Kerala people observe this day as a festival day in the belief that on this day Bali 
visits their homes and blesses them. 


There is, however, another significance for the Onam festival. Onam means wearing new 
clothes. But is it enough to wear new clothes? The word Vastra not only means cloth but also 
means the heart. Therefore, the significance of wearing new clothes is that one should make the 
heart new by getting rid of all bad thoughts and feelings. 


Today in Kerala every home is cleaned and a festoon of green leaves is hung over the front door 
and the trunks of plantain trees are put up in front of each house. The significance of this 
observance is that both the external dwelling and the internal heart should be kept clean and 
pure, because God dwells both inside and outside of everything in the world. The real purpose of 
our festivals is that they should be an occasion for purifying our heart and getting rid of 
selfishness. There is also a scientific significance of having festoons of green leaves at the 
entrance of houses and the use of cow-dung for cleaning the floors inside and outside houses. 
The sweet preparations made from bananas by Keralites on festive occasions has special dietetic 
properties, besides being tasty. 


Give up worldly feelings and develop devotion 


The offering of sweets to the Lord on festive occasions has a spiritual significance. The Lord is 
the very embodiment of Madhuram (sweetness). Krishna took birth in Mathura itself. The inner 


purpose of partaking sweets on festive days is to cultivate sweet thoughts and feelings. Bad 
thoughts and bad feelings should be given no room. 


Although Emperor Bali was of Rakshasa (demonic) lineage, he exemplified great virtues and 
sought to promote among his people noble feelings and Godly qualities. Though born in a family 
of Rakshasas, he was a devotee of God. What matters is not the lineage or caste of a person. 
What matters is the way one feels and thinks. Everything is transformed by the nature of one's 
thoughts. 


Therefore, everyone should give up wordly feelings and develop devotion to God. This is the 
means to the realisation of oneness with the Divine. One should not make a distinction between 
the phenomenal world and the Divine. The cosmos is permeated by the Divine, and there is 
nothing in the world apart from the Divine. But, because of attachment to the body and out of 
egoistic feelings, men react to praise or blame as affecting them. They ought to be indifferent to 
them. If one abuses loudly, it will be lost in the air. If the abuse is uttered in a low voice, it 
remains with him. Why should one be concerned about accusations or get agitated over them? 
Because them are few who express this point of view, people today are making themselves 
victims of praise or blame. 


The Lord cares only for the purity of heart 


People are lost in the observance of external rituals. The Lord is not concerned with formal 
observances. The Lord cares only for the purity of the heart. The saint Thiruthondar expresses 
this feeling in one of his hymns. He exclaimed: "O Rama, I am worshipping you with a pure 
heart." Purity of heart is essential. Without such purity all forms of worship and all pious acts are 
of no avail. True spirituality consists in getting rid of the demonic and animal qualities in one 
and cultivating godly qualities. 


Today people are filled with anger and hatred. When men utter the word "peace" three times, it 
signifies the desire for peace of body, peace of mind and peace of the Aatma. Men should aspire 
for this triple peace. People go on building rest houses. But they do not build "peace houses." 
Peace of mind is most important. It can be got only by renunciation. Egoism and possessiveness 
have to be utterly eradicated. 


Emperor Bali was a supreme example of one who had completely given up the ego and 
attachment. It is not enough to offer worship to Bali or praise him. People must practice the 
qualifies which Bali represented. People must develop Bali's spirit of generosity. They must be 
prepared to offer themselves totally to God as Emperor Bali did. Many people go on reciting the 
name of Rama, but how many follow his example either in the matter of obeying their parents: 
commands or cherishing love for their brothers? The real devotee of Rama should develop 
Rama's qualities. A devotee of Krishna should at least follow one or two precepts of Krishna. 
The birthdays of great men are celebrated mainly by feasting and not by following their example. 
This is not the way to observe their birthdays. You must give birth to the qualities of the great 
men within you when you celebrate their birthdays. 


Keralites' adherence to their old traditions 


Embodiments of the Divine Aatma! From ancient times the people of Kerala have been adhering, 
by and large, to their old traditions. It used to be said that Kerala is a communist area and 
atheism is rampant there. The truth is that Kerala is a theistic state. Other things are only part of 
the game of politics. At heart the people of Kerala are filled with devotion. Nambudiripad was a 


communist leader and was for some time Chief Minister of Kerala. But he translated the 
Upanishads. The spiritual urge is present in all Keralites. Political changes may come and go, but 
the inner feelings remain unchanged. The Kerala people are fortunate in having been blessed 
with the advent of three Avatars in their country. I desire that you should develop your 
devotional tendencies and sanctify your lives. The people of Kerala are especially devoted to the 
worship of Krishna. It is Krishna as a child that is worshipped in Guruvayur. I desire that they 
should experience the bliss of the worship of Krishna and share it with all others in the world. 


Poornachandra Auditorium, Onam Day, 9 Sep 1992 


29. Three Cardinal Vices 


Dear Students! In order to foster one's individual personality, everyone has to acquire knowledge 
of ethics and morality. Personality is not an ordinary term. It expresses the essential quality of a 
human being. For the Sanskrit word Vyakthithvam the equivalent term in English is personality. 
Personality is acquired only on the basis of adherence to moral principles. The term neethi in 
Sanskrit is associated with manners and good conduct. When a man exercises discrimination in 
daily activity, then he is said to observe morality. A life without morality is utterly useless. The 
prestige of any community depends upon its morals. If morality is absent, the community comes 
to grief. Whether it is a nation, a society, or an individual, when they conduct themselves 
contrary to morality, the civilisation which they might have fostered for a long time will come to 
ruin. One may have plenty of wealth, position, authority and much else, but all these are 
meretricious; morality alone enhances the worth of a human being. 


Kings and emperors in Bharath from quite ancient times based their lives on morality and 
acquired honour and glory. It is on account of them that Bharath was called a Divine land, a land 
of Karma (right Action), a land of Yoga, and a land of Thyaaga (sacrifice). The name and fame 
of Emperor Ashoka have survived for millennia because he practised in his day-to-day life the 
great virtues. Akbar, among Mogul emperors, has been esteemed as a great ruler because of his 
conduct as an emperor. 


Destroy selfishness totally 


Only a moral life can be called sacred. Man is a sacred being. But when he indulges in 
selfishness, his sacred, divine life is undermined. The sacred Aatma is fundamental for every 
human being. This is also called Anthar-aatma. God as the Indweller guides and directs human 
life as Anthar-aatma, the inner-conscience of every human being. 


In human life today selfishness and self-interest have assumed prodigious proportions. Whatever 
he does, whatever he sees, whatever he studies, man makes it subserve selfish interests. Human 
life has become a plaything in the hands of selfishness. 


Only when selfishness is totally destroyed in the human heart, will man develop a broad- 
mindedness that will promote unity and sacredness among mankind. When this selfishness grows 
continually, it takes the form of Kaama (lust), Krodha (hatred) and Lobha (greed). These three 
vices are demonic in nature. When these three demonic vices grow in them, human beings lose 
faith in God. Besides losing faith in God, they also develop enmity towards God. Worldly desires 
increase. The Divine quality declines. 


Hatred and enmity towards God ruins oneself 


You can find proofs of this in the Ramayana, the Bhagavatha and the Mahabharatha. The story 
of Ramayana shows how one who began his career with lust, developed hatred and enmity 
towards God and mined himself. Ravana was a great scholar. He had mastered sixty-four types 
of vidya (knowledge). He was the first one who invented an aeroplane called Pushpaka Vimaana. 
He had mastered the language of animals, birds and insects. There was nothing wanting by way 
of knowledge in Ravana. In terms of wealth and prosperity his kingdom excelled heaven itself. 
He did a lot of penance to acquire mastery over the physical world. In spite of all these, he had 
faith only in the phenomenal world and not in the Divine. He did not choose to enquire who was 
behind all creation. 


The universe is the property of the Creator. Rama was verily the Over-Soul itself. Sita was 
Rama's Shakthi. She was the daughter of Mother Earth. She was the embodiment of Nature. 
Ravana developed enmity towards Rama and wanted to abduct Sita. What was the result of all 
this? Hating God and going after Nature, how did he end? At the end of it all, not only himself, 
but his kingdom and his entire brood were destroyed. In spite of all his knowledge and powers, 
he ruined himself because of his moral lapses. He did not recognise the divinity within him. 


What is the lesson to be learnt from Ravana's fate? It is this: However much of worldly 
knowledge you may have, you should seek Aatma Vidya (knowledge of the Aatma). Your parents 
or relations may be distant from you. But God is not distant from you. God is always with you, 
behind you and around you and He will protect you. Giving up the Divine, which is so close to 
you, and going after worldly happiness, is fraught with danger. Ravana made all efforts to satisfy 
his own desire, became an enemy of God and was ultimately destroyed. 


Lesson from the Bhagavatha 


Next, you have the Bhagavatha. The Bhagavatha teaches the lesson that anger destroys people. 
In the Bhagavatha, Hiranya Kashyapa looked upon God as his enemy. He deemed himself the 
supreme Lord. He felt that there was no power greater than himself. Hiranya Kashyapa was a 
great scientist. He plumbed the depths of the ocean. He had control over the five elements. 


Despite all these accomplishments he developed enmity towards God. He subjected his son, 
Prahlada, to innumerable ordeals because he was a devotee of Narayana. He tried to drown 
Prahlada in the ocean and hurl him from the top of a mountain. He got Prahlada bitten by snakes. 
But Prahlada survived all the ordeals. Prahlada was always chanting the name of Lord Narayana, 
whom Hiranya Kashyapa hated. Anger causes destruction of wisdom. And when wisdom is lost, 
everything is lost--honour, wealth, position and life itself. Scientific knowledge without wisdom 
is of no use. Along with science there should be discrimination. 


The Ramayana teaches how a person suffers on account of evil desires. The Bhagavatha teaches 
lessons as to how a person suffers on account of anger and hatred. All their knowledge and 
powers could not save Ravana or Hiranya Kashyapa. It is only God who can give protection. 
Developing enmity towards God, Ravana and Hiranya Kashyapa courted disaster. 


Greed goeth before a fall 


Duryodhana signifies one who has wicked thoughts. His minister was Dussasana. Dussasana 
means one who promulgates bad laws. A combination of these two led to the growth of greed. 
On account of their /obha (greed) the Kauravas were totally destroyed. 


On one occasion Krishna said, "Arjuna means a person whose heart is pure, immaculately." 
Krishna told Arjuna (on the battlefield), "Arjuna! Get up, get up Dhananjaya. Destiny is all 
powerful. Justice always wins. Selfishness will end in ruin. This is the nature of Yuga Dharma. 
Know the truth (of what is to come). Dhritharashtra may be the father of a hundred children. But, 
there will not be even one to perform the last rites for him. That is how fate works." Krishna thus 
revealed to Arjuna the fate of the Kauravas in the beginning itself. Dhritharashtra had a hundred 
sons. Of what use were they? At the end not even one son remained to perform his obsequies. 
The reason was greed. The Kauravas were not prepared to give to the Pandavas their rightful 
share. Duryodhana wanted to keep everything to himself, including what belonged to others. 
This kind of selfishness is called Lobha (greed). 


In the Ramayana, because of Kaama (desire) Ravana was destroyed. In the Bhagavatha, Hiranya 
Kashyapa, despite his prodigious knowledge and power, was destroyed on account of his anger 
against God. 


The fate of those who hated God 


Ravana, Hiranya Kashyapa and Duryodhana hated God and were utterly destroyed. The basic 
difference between the Kauravas and the Pandavas was in their attitude towards God. The 
Pandavas had full faith in God. They thought God was their all. The Kauravas were indifferent to 
God. All they wanted was only the kingdom. 


Before the Kurukshetra war, Arjuna went to Krishna to seek His help and Duryodhana also went 
to Krishna. Krishna saw both of them coming. He closed his eyes and acted as if He was 
sleeping. He wanted to teach the world the difference between the two. When he was awakened 
he found Arjuna sitting at his feet. Duryodhana was full of ego. He thought: "I am a king. How 
can I sit at the feet of Krishna?" He took his seat behind the head of Krishna. On opening His 
eyes, Krishna saw Arjuna, who was sitting at his feet. Krishna asked, "Brother-in-law, why have 
you come?" Duryodhana was filled with jealousy. He reflected, "As soon as He got up, Krishna 
is talking to Arjuna and not to me." He did not realise that it was only natural for Krishna to see 
Arjuna first because he was sitting at Krishna's feet. Arjuna got up and offered Namaskar. 


Krishna knew that Duryodhana was sitting behind. He asked Arjuna, "What do you want?" 
Duryodhana came closer and said, "Krishna I have also come." Krishna said, "So both of you 
have come. I have two things to offer. On one side I am alone. On the other side there is my 
entire army. Do you want my army and kingdom or Myself?" Being apprehensive that Arjuna 
might ask for the Army, Duryodhana came forward and said, "Krishna, I want your army." He 
said, "Duryodhana, I give you my army, you can go." Arjuna told Krishna, "Swami, I do not 
want anything except you. I will be happy if I have you alone." 


Right from the beginning the Pandavas believed in "God first, the world next and finally the I." 
The belief of the Kauravas was: "I first, the world next and God last." So, for them God was last. 


Those who are close to God gets His grace 


In order to prevent a war between the Kauravas and Pandavas, Krishna played the role of an 
envoy. Duryodhana felt that the Pandavas were successful because of the support of Krishna and 
hatched a number of plans to get hold of Krishna and do away with him when he came to 
Hastinapura. Vidura was aware of these plans. Krishna entered the Assembly of the Kauravas 
along with Vidura. The blind king Dhritharashtra addressed Krishna and said: "The Pandavas 
and the Kauravas are cousins. When they are children of two brothers, you should have the same 
attitude towards them. Why are you prejudiced against the Kauravas? Why do you love the 
Pandavas?" Krishna replied: "Dhritharashtra! You are not merely suffering from physical 
blindness, mentally also you are blind. I shower my grace on those who take refuge in Me. The 
one who is close to a fire gets both warmth and light. The Pandavas have been close to the fire. 
They are getting the wisdom and the grace in the form of light and fire. The Kauravas are staying 
far from the fire." 


Here fire refers to Jnanaagni, the fire of wisdom. The Pandavas were near and dear to Krishna. 
To whom can you compare them? In our body the head is very important. Next the shoulder, the 
stomach, and the legs. The body consists of these four parts, but it is useless without the heart. 
Krishna told Dhritharashtra: "Oh blind king, I am giving the analogy of a body with reference to 


the Pandavas. In this body, Dharmaraja may be compared to the head, Arjuna to the shoulders, 
Bheema to the stomach and Nakula and Sahadeva to the legs.. In it, Krishna is the heart. Without 
Krishna, there are no Pandavas. Without the Pandavas them is no Krishna. That is the kind of 
mutual relationship between them. They are mutually interdependent." 


Justice will prevail where there is God 


Krishna made this declaration in the open court, so dear were the Pandavas to the Lord. As them 
was protection for the Pandavas from Krishna, though they had lost the kingdom and everything 
else, Krishna was able to get back the kingdom and everything else and confer joy on them. 
Success comes to those who have the protection of God. When Dhritharashtra asked Sanjaya 
who would win the war, Sanjaya answered: "Where there is Krishna, the Yogeswara, and Partha 
with bow and arrow, there justice will prevail and there will be victory. This is my firm 
conviction." 


The Pandavas firmly believed in Dharma and God. The Kauravas went and prostrated at the feet 
of their mother, Gandhari, before the start of the war. She had blindfolded her eyes and was not 
able to see them. She caressed Duryodhana and blessed him. She observed: "Yatho Dharmah 
thatho jayah." (Where there is Dharma, there is victory). But they had no righteousness on their 
side. Even their mother blessed them in that manner. Their wickedness was responsible for this. 
They went to their preceptor Dronacharya, and offered Namaskar. Dronacharya declared: 
"Where them is Dharma, them is Krishna: where there is Krishna, there is victory." Thus both 
mother and their preceptor blessed in these terms. Neither the mother nor the preceptor blessed 
them with success. The Kauravas relied on their wealth and the power of their arms. But, them is 
need for God's grace. Along with God's grace, them could be wealth, position, power and 
knowledge. 


Earn blessings of parents and God's grace 


Dear students! Pursue your studies. But, together with education, earn the blessings of your 
parents. In addition, earn the grace of God. Despite all his knowledge, authority, power and 
prowess, what happened to a warrior like Karna? He lacked God's grace. 


Earn God's grace. That is true spiritual education. Along with spiritual education, you may 
pursue worldly education. A basic requirement for all this is good character. Morality alone helps 
one in a number of ways. If your conduct is not good, society will not respect you. As long as 
one is in power, society may respect one. Once power goes, the man will be an object of 
derision. You may not have any power, but morality will confer honour and respect. 


Epics to show the power of the Divine 


To recognise the power of the Divine, here is an illustration from the Ramayana: Rama and 
Lakshmana went to protect the yaga performed by the sage Viswamithra. There were demons 
who wanted to undo the yaga performed by Viswamithra. Mareecha was one of them. He was 
the son of the ogress Thatak1. 


As soon as Rama espied Mareecha, with one arrow he despatched him far away. Mareecha 
recognised then the power of Rama. He firmly believed that Rama had the power of Divinity. 
From that moment he gave up his demonic quality. When he was in this state Ravana came to 
him to seek his help for kidnapping Sita. Ravana said, "I want to kidnap Sita. Rama and 
Lakshmana are there. Become a gold deer and divert their attention." Folding his palms, 
Mareecha told Ravana: "Oh King of Demons! You are having so much confidence in your 


physical power. Rama is not an ordinary man. I have experienced his prowess. You have lost 
your senses. Do not embark on this enterprise. You can never achieve victory over Rama." 


In a number of ways Mareecha sought to advise Ravana. There is a saying: "When destruction is 
impending, one's intelligence will be perverted." Ravana was in a rage. He said: "Mareecha will 
you obey my command or shall I sever your head?" Mareecha thought within himself: "When I 
become a golden deer Rama may kill me. If I go against Ravana, he will kill me. Death is certain 
either way. Instead of meeting with death at the hands of Ravana, it is better I die at the hands of 
Rama." Mareecha did not like to be killed by the wicked King Ravana. That is why Mareecha 
took the form of the golden deer. 


Dear Students! the Ramayana, the Mahabharatha and the Bhagavatha teach the lesson that 
desire, anger and greed cause destruction. Fix your faith on God and not on the things of the 
world. When you have faith in God, your discrimination will be perfect. You will be guided by 
your conscience, which will always lead you properly. In Vedantic parlance, this conscience is 
called Chith. God is .Sath-chith-ananda. Sath means Being, Chith means Awareness. Where the 
two are combined them is bliss. That is the meaning of BABA- Being + Awareness + Bliss - 
Aatma. 


Dear students! You are all aspirants of Bliss. You should enjoy bliss. You have to combine Sath 
and Chith to realise Ananda. Without Sath (purity), there can be no divinity. Without divinity 
them is no bliss. Always think of God. 


Sri Sathya Sai Institute Hostel, Prashanthi Nilayam, 
17 Sep 1992 


Man has become artificial, crooked, twisted out of his normal 
shape. He has left behind the simple natural ways and made his 
mind a lumber-room for ideas, worries, anxieties and terrors. He 
can live on very much less, with much greater joy for himself and 
others. If only he remembers that he is a treasure chest with the 
Divine spark in it, he will be more loving and more useful. 


Sathya Sai Baba 


30. Inner Significance Of Navarathri Festival 


Navarathri means nine nights. Darkness is associated with night. What is this darkness? It is the 
darkness of ignorance. The purpose of the Navarathri celebration is to enable man to get rid of 
nine types of darkness which have taken hold of him. When a reference is made to Devi, it 
signifies the unified form of Dhurga, Lakshmi and Saraswathi. The three together represent 
Shakthi. Shakthi is the energy that accounts for all the phenomena of Prakruthi (Nature). Nature 
is energy and the controller of that energy is the Lord. 


Prakruthi (Nature) is made up of the three qualities, Sathwa, Rajas and Thamas. Saraswathi 
represents the Sathya Guna. Lakshmi represents the Rajo Guna and Parvathi represents the 
Thamo Guna. As Prakruthi (Nature) is made up of these three qualities (Sathwa, Rajas and 
Thamas), to get control over Nature, man has been offering worship to Dhurga, Lakshmi and 
Saraswathi. These are not goddesses but deified symbols of the three qualities. 


The role of Nature in the creative process 


To acquire the grace of the Lord, man has to offer worship at the outset to Prakruthi. On the one 
hand you need human effort and on the other you have to acquire the grace of the Divine. 
Prakruthi (Nature) and Paramaatma (the Omni-Self) are like the negative and positive poles in 
electricity. However powerful the Lord may be (as the positive pole), there can be no creation 
without Prakruthi (representing the negative pole). The basis for creation is Prakruthi. For 
instance, however good the seeds you may have with you, without planting them in the ground 
you cannot reap the fruit. The role of Nature in the creative process is similar. 


When man forgets God and desires to enjoy the benefits of Nature, he becomes ultimately a 
demon like Ravana who brought about his own destruction. To secure the grace of the Lord, one 
has to have purity of the heart, purity in speech and purity in action. This triple purity is 
described in Vedantic parlance as Tripurasundari. Lakshmi, who is the embodiment of all 
prosperity, is represented by the heart. The mouth represents Saraswathi. Kriyaa Shuddhi (Purity 
in action) is represented by Dhurga. The observance of the Navarathri celebration is to get rid of 
the darkness in which man is enveloped, by cultivating the triple purity of thought, word and 
deed. 


The human body emerged from Nature. Nature has two forms: Aparaa Prakruthi and Paraa 
Prakruthi. Aparaa Prakruthi includes Ashta Aishwaryas (eight forms of wealth), and Kaama, 
Krodha, Moha, Lobha, Mada, Maatsarya and the three mental faculties in man: Manas, Chitta 
and Ahamkaara. Paraa Prakruthi (the higher Nature) represents the consciousness in man. 
Without the Praana (life force) and Chaithanyam (consciousness) man is only a corpse. True 
humanness consists in controlling the five elements which make up the Aparaa Prakruthi (lower 
Nature) and merge in the higher Nature represented by the life force and Chaithanyam 
(consciousness). 


Maintain steadiness of mind during worship 


The Navarathri has been divided into three parts the first three days being dedicated to the 
worship of Dhurga, the next three days to the worship of Lakshmi and the last three days to the 
worship of Saraswathi. All Hindu festivals have a sacred purpose. Unfortunately, nowadays the 
festivals are observed only with external rituals without understanding their inner meaning. In 


the performance of all forms of worship there should be steadiness of mind and body. Only then 
concentration can be achieved. Today men are unable to maintain steadiness of body and mind. 


(At this stage Swami referred to the advent of Shirdi Sai and described incidents from his early 
life. This part of Swami's discourse is published separately in the next chapter. Towards the end 
of His discourse, Swami again reverted to an exposition of the inner significance of the Dashara 
festival). 


The basic significance of Devi Navarathri is the adoration of Prakruthi (Nature). Devi refers to 
Bhudevi (Mother Earth). All the vital requirements of man can be found in the earth. Those who 
travel to the moon have to carry with them the oxygen, water and food they need from the earth. 
None of these can be found on the moon. 


Adoration of Nature 


Students! The progress of modern technology, by polluting the atmosphere with Carbon dioxide 
smoke, is causing a threat to life on earth. This smoke has already created a hole in the ozone 
ring above the earth which has been serving as a protecting cover against harmful radiation from 
the sun. If the ozone layer is destroyed, the effect of the sun's rays may be disastrous. All nations 
are now worried about this threat. All that needs to be done to avert this danger is to reduce the 
pollution of the atmosphere caused by automobiles and industrial effluents. The uncontrolled 
development of industries has to be checked. Development should be in the common interest, to 
promote the welfare of all. 


The Navarathri celebration is an occasion for revering Nature and considering how natural 
resources can be used properly in the best interests of mankind. Resources like water, air, power 
and minerals should be used properly and not misused or wasted. Economy in the use of every 
natural resource is vital. Pollution of the air has many evil consequences. The inner significance 
of observances like Nagarasankirtan and bhajans is to fill the atmosphere with sacred vibrations 
and holy thoughts. 


The power of Manthra 


Today we know how radio and television broadcasts are transmitted to all parts of the world by 
radio waves. Is it unbelievable that Krishna was able similarly to appear in the homes of Gopikas 
simultaneously? If a Yantra (machine) could achieve such a result, how much more power 
should be attributed to Manthra? The power of the divine name and form is all pervading. The 
electromagnetic waves in the atmosphere can preserve sounds and forms for all time. 


When Swami was recently in Hyderabad, His activities there were seen on the TV in various 
parts of the country. If a mechanical contrivance could achieve this, is it incredible that much 
more could be done by the divine power of manthras? What is needed is the power to tune in to 
the Spirit just as appropriate tuning is needed to receive a radio or TV broadcast. Regard your 
heart as a radio receiver. Your concentration is the tuning device. You will experience the Divine 
when you tune your heart properly. This calls for firm, unwavering concentration. 


The inauguration of the Navarathri celebrations means that you should use this occasion for 
offering worship to Nature and resolving to make sacred use of all natural resources. 


Prashanthi Mandir, 27 Sep 1992 


The mere removal of hate from the heart will not ensure Ananda. 
Love too should be cultivated. That is to say, uproot hate and plant 
love. If the absence of hate ensures Bhakthi, hill and anthill, tree 
and twig, mud and mountain--what do these hate ? They have no 
dislikes. But for this reason, do we ascribe Bhakthi to them at all? 
We do not, for that would be absurd. The Bhaktha must first be 
free from hate and full of Love. 


Hate breeds fear, hate is the seedbed of anxiety, scandal and 
falsehood. It drains your mind of peace. You may have light 
without oil, fire without smoke, breeze without a bearer fanning 
you, a chilliness in the air of your room in the sizzling heat of 
summer--but, unless you are at peace with yourselves and with 
those around you, your pulse will be quick and your blood will be 
racing in rage and rancor. Love alone can alleviate anxiety and 
allay fear. 


Sathya Sai Baba 


31. The Shirdi Sai Saga 


All festivals have been designed to teach men how to lead a godly life while carrying on worldly 
activities. It was to teach this truth to mankind that Avatars and saints made their advent on earth 
from time to time. 


This day (the first day of Navarathri) has another special significance. Shirdi Sai Baba was born 
on September 27, 1838. He was born in a poor Brahmin family in the village of Pathri in 
Aurangaabaadh District. For various reasons the parents left the child. A fakir found him. As he 
was a foundling, the fakir had no natural affection for him. After some years the boy was handed 
over to one Gopaal Rao Dheshmukh, who was also called Venkusa by the people on account of 
his scholarship and wisdom. The boy grew up in Venkusa's home for some time. However, he 
was not inclined to stay there for long. In 1854 he went to Shirdi. At Shirdi, Mhalaspathi saw 
him entering the local temple. Looking at his appearance as a Muslim, Mhalaspathi turned him 
out of the temple. The boy went back and sat under a neem tree. He was sixteen years old at that 
time. No one knew then what his name was. If anyone asked for his name, he would give no 
answer. He would sometimes retort saying, "Why do you want to know my name?" Because of 
this, nobody could find out his name. 


Baba the healer 


Some villagers from nearby places used to visit him under the tree and get relief for their 
ailments. He would take out some leaves, crush them and give them to the ailing person as a 
medicine. In this manner he cured many persons of their illnesses. News of the healing powers 
spread to all the surrounding villages. As a result a large number of persons used to come to him, 
receive the crushed leaves from him and get cured of their ailments. 


Suddenly, one morning he disappeared. A futile search was made in the nearby areas to trace 
him. Later, in 1858, he came to Shirdi again after three years. There was a village called Dhoop 
in Aurangaabaadh. One Chandhubhai Patel, belonging to a middle class family, lived in Dhoop. 
As no other form of transport was available in those days, people used to go on horseback. 


Chandhubhai went on his horse to Aurangaabaadh on some urgent business. When he had 
finished his business there at the end of three days, he found that the horse was missing. 
Disappointed over the missing horse, Chandhubhai was returning to Dhoop passing through 
dense forests on the way. 


Chandhubhai's first encounter with Baba 


At one place, he saw a fakir sitting under a tree in a forest. The fakir appeared to be lost in his 
own thoughts. Suddenly, the fakir hailed Chandhubhai with the words. "Hey, Patel! Come here." 
The fakir liked to smoke Chilim (hookah). As there was no water nearby, the fakir hit the ground 
with a stick and water gushed forth from the place. He hit again another place with a stick and 
there was a fire. Using the water and the fire, he started smoking his hookah and offered it to 
Chandhubhai also. Chandhubhai declined the offer. 


The fakir asked Chandhubhai, "What is worrying you, Patel"? Patel asked, "How did you know I 
am Patel?" "I know everything," replied the fakir. "You are worried about your horse. You are 
keeping your eyes on the top of your head! You must lower them to trace the horse. Your horse 
is grazing under the tree there." He had made the search for the horse in the same place with 
some workers but could not find it. Now he saw it under a tree close to him. Chandhubhai was 


astonished that the fakir had produced water and fire out of the earth and had located his missing 
horse. He appealed to the fakir: "Swami! You have rendered great help to me. Please come with 
me and share my hospitality." "All fight, let us go," he said. 


About this time, the marriage of Chandhubhai's niece, who was residing in Shirdi, was settled. 
Chandhubhai had to go to Shirdi for the wedding. He requested the fakir to come along with him. 
They went in cans to Shirdi. Mhalaspathi saw the fakir getting down from a cart and went to him 
and said: "Aayiye, Baba! Aayiye Sai!" (Come, Baba! Come Sai!) The name "Sai" was given by 
Mhalaspathi. Till then, no one had conferred a name on him. 


Sometime later, Baba was involved in a criminal case. He had to give evidence in a case which 
related to the theft of some valuables from a rich man's house by a gang of thieves. The police 
caught the thieves and questioned them about the stolen articles. The thieves said that the 
valuables had been given to them by a fakir. 


Searching for the fakir, they came to Baba. They asked him, "Fakir did you give these articles to 
them?" "Yes," he said. "Wherefrom did you get them?" was the next question. Baba replied: 
"They have come from the same place from which all things come." "Who gave them to you?" "I 
gave them to myself." 


The emergence of the name "Sai Baba" 


Baba gave such intriguing answers, which the police could not understand. "I am the giver of 
everything. How can anyone get anything without my sanction?" declared Baba. Feeling that it 
was futile to question him further, the police prepared a report. Baba received a summons from 
the magistrate to give evidence in the case. Chandhubhai Patel did not want Baba to go to the 
Magistrate and so arranged for Baba being examined on commission (in Shirdi itself). During the 
examination on commission, Baba was asked: "What is your father's name?" He replied, "Baba." 
(Baba means "father" and the reply meant that the father's name was "father"). 


Q. "What is your religion?" 

A. "The religion of God." 

Q. "Wherefrom did you come?" 
A. "I have come from the Aatma." 
Q. "What is your caste?" 

A. "The caste of the Divine." 


Baba answered all the questions in this manner. Earlier he had been hailed as "Sai." In his 
examination, he had given his father's name as Baba. By the combination of these two names, he 
was therefore called "Sai Baba." No one knew when and where Sai Baba was born and who gave 
him that name. 


Baba as incarnation of Datthaathreya 


Later, many persons began to have doubts about his transcendental powers. One day, the birth 
anniversary of Datthaathreya was to be celebrated (in the month of Maargasheersha on Panchami 
day). Several devotees had assembled in Shirdi. Among them was a wealthy man, a great scholar 
called Kaijack. He is not to be confused with "hijack"! His name was Balwanth Kaijack. As he 
was approaching the masjid, Baba took a stick and waved it at the devotees, asking them to get 


away. He even beat some of them, shouting, "Saithan! Saithan!" No one could understand why 
Baba was behaving like this. "I am suffering labour pains. Get away, all of you!" he shouted. In 
those days, Baba not only used to shout at people, but also wield the stick on them on occasions. 
He used even to throw the stick at fleeing persons. Everyone used to be afraid of him. They all 
fled from the place. 


Some time later, he called all of them to come. "Balwanth Kaijack, come !" he said. When 
Balwanth came, Baba went inside the masjid. Balwanth went in and found that Baba was not 
there. He found a three-headed baby on the floor. Baba had declared that he was suffering from 
labour pains and there was a baby there. The three-headed child appeared to represent 
Datthaathreya. It was a small baby with a number of hands. Balwanth recognised the child as 
Datthaathreya and called other devotees to come inside. They went in and on seeing the child 
closed their eyes. At that instant Baba reappeared there. From that time onwards, people started 
looking upon Baba as the incarnation of Datthaathreya. 


Baba's lesson to Muslims 


A controversy arose among the local people as to whether Baba was a Muslim or a Hindu. At 
one time he used to say: "Allah Malik! Allah Malik!" At other times, he would say 
"Datthaathreya Malik"! Whenever he shouted "Allah Malik!" Muslims used to come to him in 
the masjid. His appearance was very much like that of a Muslim. Hence, many Muslims used to 
come to him. Hindus also used to come and offer incense to him. The Muslims did not approve 
of what the Hindus were doing. The Hindus did not like the way Muslims revered Baba. 
Consequently, bitterness developed between the two communities. 


One day, Mhalaspathi was sitting near Baba and doing some service to him. Mhalaspathi was the 
priest in the Khandoba temple. The Muslims, who were opposed to the presence of a Hindu 
priest near Baba, came with sticks and beat up Mhalaspathi. At every stroke, Mhalaspathi cried 
out: "Baba!" "Baba!" Each time he shouted the name of Baba, the blow was borne by Baba. 
Mhalaspathi fell to the ground. Baba came out. 


Muslims had great reverence for Baba. Baba roared at the Muslim crowd; "Saithan! On the one 
side you worship me and on the other you beat me. Is this your devotion?" Baba was bleeding all 
over the body. The Muslims saw it and asked Baba who had beaten him. "Did you not beat me? 
Did you not beat me?" said Baba pointing to several men in the crowd. They said: "We did not 
come near you at all. We only beat Mhalaspathi." "Who is in Mhalaspathi? I am in him," 
declared Baba. "He has surrendered to me and hence all his troubles are mine." 


Baba teaches a lesson to all 


On hearing this, the Muslims fell at Baba's feet and craved his forgiveness. Baba then summoned 
the Hindus and Muslims and told them: "Dear Children, you are all the progeny of one mother." 
Thereby Baba demonstrated the Fatherhood of God and the Brotherhood of Man. He wanted all 
differences of caste and creed to be eschewed. What mattered for mankind was the heart. 


One who is only concerned about his matham (creed) will never discover the Divine (Madhava). 
You must seek the Divine within you. Baba pointed out that all caste and creed distinctions 
related only to the body. Therefore, you should seek the Supreme in your inner consciousness. 
Baba, who came to Shirdi with Chandhubhai Patel in 1858, did not leave the place unill his 
passing in 1918. Baba lived for eighty years. 


How Hemanth Panth wrote the life of Baba 


One day, a pandit came to Baba and said that his biography should be written. His name was 
Hemanth Panth. He is the author of "Sai Sath Charitha." He entreated Baba to disclose facts 
about the place of his birth, his parentage, his name and his early life. He could not get any 
information. Baba did not reveal anything to anyone. But on one occasion, when he was alone 
with Mhalaspathi, Baba disclosed his date of birth to him. Mhalaspathi was no scholar. He had 
learnt only a few manthras to conduct the puja in the temple. He noted down the date of birth on 
a piece of paper. This came into the hands of Hemanth Panth. With this, he began to write the 
life of Baba. 


No one knows the real truth about Baba. The world knows some facts about his life after his 
sixteenth year. He was born on September 27, 1838, and attained Samadhi on Vijayadasami day 
in 1918. During his lifetime he taught many sacred things to the people and performed many 
remarkable deeds. He was worshipped by many devotees. Daada, Naana, Shaama, Abdul Baba, 
Mhalaspathi, Chandharkar and Dhas Ganu were always with him. Abdul Baba was active till re- 
cently. He was a fervent devotee of Baba. In his view it did not matter to what religion one 
belonged. All were one in their devotion to God. 


Kaaka Dixith was a Judge whose son stayed in Brindavan (Whitefield) for twenty years. The 
latter's wife is now in Brindavan. Kaaka Dixit maintained a diary in which many facts about 
Baba have been recorded including his statement about when he would pass away. 


Acquire spiritual bliss through Thyaaga 


No one can make any affirmations about the nature of the Divine. One's relationship with the 
Divine is spiritual--Aatma to Aatma. In this Kali or the evil age, however, many become a prey 
to doubts because of their preoccupation with the physical form. This is because of their being 
immersed in worldly attitudes derived from their perception of the physical elements. The 
phenomenal Prakruthi (world) is replete with sensory experiences. The spiritual life is based on 
Thyaaga (detachment). Enduring bliss is experienced only when there is sacrifice or detachment. 


Man today is not prepared for sacrifice. On the contrary, his desires are insatiable and he is 
losing all human qualities. The mind is polluted and truth has become a rarity. At every step, 
man is indulging in wrong doing. Noble thoughts have taken flight. Envy and hatred are rampant. 
Men should learn to follow the dictates of their heart and act according to the promptings of their 
conscience. This conscience is related to the universal consciousness. 


Prashanthi Nilayam, first day of Navarathri, 2 7 Sep 1992 


Love alone can overcome obstacles, however many and mighty. 
There is no strength more effective than purity, no bliss more 
satisfying than Love, no joy more restoring than Bhakthi, no 
triumph more praiseworthy than surrender. 


Sathya Sai Baba 


32. See The One In The Many 


Embodiments of the Divine Aatma! For all living beings on earth, the earth is the basis of life. 
The Life Force for the earth is water. Out of water come sasyam (food grains). Food grains 
sustain Purusha (man). Speech is the highest expression of man. Ritham (the Cosmic order) is 
based on Vaak (the Divine word). Ritham is cognised in Riks (Vedic hymns). The beauty of Riks 
is found in Saama (one of the four Vedas). Omkaara (the primal sound Pranava) is the essence 
of Saama. 


Human existence arises from the Divine, is sustained by the Divine and finally merges in the 
Divine. Omkaara has three constituents. Akaara, Ukaara and Makaara (the three syllables--A, 
U, M). Akaara represents the vital principle Praana Thathwa. Ukaara represents the Mind. 
Makaara represents the body. Omkaara is thus the unified expression of the Aatma, the mind 
and the Body. 


The cosmos emerged from Akaara. It is the Praana (Life-Force). The Mind principle came from 
Ukaara. The Body emerged from Makaara. The Aatma, the Mind and the Body, which emanated 
from the three syllables "A," "U" and "M," permeate the sun, the firmament and the entire 
universe. Omkaara is the essential basis for the entire creation. 


The three forms of Omkaara principle 


The Omkaara principle has three forms: Naadha, Bindu and Kalaa. Naadha is the sound that 
comes from the life-breath. This means that Omkaara is associated with the sound coming from 
the life-breath. The five kinds of life breath--Praana, Samaana. Udaana and Vyaana--are 
expressions of the Life-Principle. These five represent the Pancha Bhutas (five basic elements). 


Bindu is the unified form of the Aatma, the Mind and the Body. Kalaa is the reflected image of 
the Paramaatma (OmniSelf) through the Buddhi (intellect). The triple principle Naadha, Bindu, 
Kalaa--permeate the entire universe. 


What is the purpose served by these three? All three are forms of Maaya (deceptive 
appearances). Even the sounds, "A," "U" and "M," are deluding. Praana, Mind and Body are 
also forms of Maaya (delusion). Hence, the ancient sages declared: "Tasmai namah." Salutations 
to the One that transcends all forms. The yogis prayed to the One who is beyond Naadha, Bindu 
and Kalaa (Naadabindukalaatheetha). 


The cosmos, thus, is made up. of Naadha, Bindu and Kalaa. How is man to recognise this fact? 
The sages declared that Sathsanga is essential for this purpose. Sathsanga is commonly 
understood as referring to good company. This is not the proper meaning. Sath refers to that 
which is permanent, pure and unchanging. It is unaffected by time. Sathsanga means association 
with Sath in this sense. 


Sath refers therefore to the Cosmic Consciousness which is present in all beings. The 
consciousness present in an individual cannot be called Sath. Sath applied to that collective 
Cosmic Consciousness which is present in all beings. Sathsanga means the cultivation of 
association with this Cosmic Consciousness by the individual. Most people consider that coming 
together with other individuals for the purpose of prayer and other devotional acts is Sathsanga. 
This is not so. Sathsanga represents the striving by man to establish union with the all-pervading, 
omnipotent, Universal Consciousness. 


The inner meaning of Moha 


There is, however, an impediment in the way of achieving this, known as Moha. Moha does not 
refer to attachment to wealth, property or children. Man can get rid of Moha only when he 
understands its inner meaning. Moha is derived from the words Maa meaning "finite," and Ooha, 
meaning, "imagining that which does not exist." Moha means, "finite conception of the unreal as 
real." This is divorced from any concept of divinity. Moha is totally related to the Praakritham 
(phenomenal world). It is associated with Kaama or desire. Kaama signifies transient pleasure 
based on worldly desires. Lasting happiness can only be got from Divine feelings related to the 
Chaithanya (Cosmic Consciousness). This consciousness itself is based on the transcendental 
Sath-chith-ananda. Sath is that which is eternal--the Being that is permanent. Chith signifies 
Paripoorna Jnaana (total awareness or knowledge). Chith is total awareness of what Sath 
represents. Both these transcend the phenomenal world. But these transcendental entities are 
present in the phenomenal objects. How are the two to be distinguished from each other? The 
transcendental element in the phenomenal world must be recognised as reflected images, like the 
reflections of the sun in a pot of water. The body is like a vessel in which the Divine is present as 
reflection--like the reflection of the sun, which is permanent, in a vessel which is impermanent. 
The Divine is present inside and outside everything in the Cosmos. In the body, that may be 
compared to a vessel, the reflection of the Life principle, or the Aatma, can be seen in the mind, 
which corresponds to water in the vessel. While the body and the mind are finite, the Aatma is 
Infinite. 


All the prayers, japas, Yagas and Yajnas performed by men today are confined to the 
achievement of temporary pleasures and rewards. They are related to a life which is itself im- 
permanent. The mind and the phenomenal world are equally impermanent. 


How to recognise unity in diversity? 


The Universe is called prapancha--a manifestation of the Pancha Bhutas--the five basic 
elements, ether, air, fire, water and earth. As these elements are impermanent and subject to 
change, all human life is related to impermanent objects and pleasures. How is one to achieve 
that which is lasting within the framework of the impermanent? This should be done by breaking 
down the separation between the permanent and the impermanent and recognising the permanent 
in the imperma-nent---the One in the many, unity in diversity. 


How is one to recognise unity in diversity? We see the manifoldness of bodies, with a 
multiplicity of names, forms, speech and feelings. But in all of them there are the five elements 
common to all. But these are gross elements. Besides these, there is the spiritual element, 
Chinmaya (Consciousness). The Vedantins described the body as a doll of clay. Because of its 
predominant earthy nature, the body by itself is unable to raise itself to a higher level of 
existence. For this purpose, it needs the power of Manthra or Yantra. An aeroplane is Yantra (a 
machine) which is able to lift man far above the earth. 


Development of Life-principle in man 


The predominant earth element in man is constantly pulling him downwards. To lift himself 
above the mundane level man has to reduce the earthy element in him and increase the other four 
elements, air, fire, water and ether. The fire element that has to be increased is the Jnaana-Agni-- 
the Fire of Wisdom. Similarly, man has to reduce the Apaana Vaayu in him and increase the 
Samaana Vaayu. This is the development of the Life-principle in man. 


What is the purpose of the Navarathri celebrations? It is to acquire mastery over the forces of 
Nature and use it for obtaining mental satisfaction. Contentment in the mind is not easily 
secured. As soon as one desire is satisfied, another crops up. There is no limit to Kaama 
(desires). Even the aspiration for Moksha (liberation from mundane existence) is a desire. As 
long as desires remain, man is bound to the mundane existence. 


Prema is love of God 


Moksha means the disappearance of Moha (attachment). Liberation signifies freedom from 
fleeting pleasures. What is it that man should aspire for? There is a Divinity that is permanent 
and unchanging. That is known as Prema (Divine Love). This Prema is not related to the 
physical. Men experience this love in its worldly form as affection or attachment. All love in 
human relationships today is not Prema but Anuraaga (attachment). It is inherently of a passing 
nature--interludes in the human journey. All attachment arises at one stage---between mother and 
son, husband and wife, and so on--and drops away at another stage. As against these transient 
attachments, the love of God (Prema) is something totally different. God is eternal--existing 
before man's birth and continuing after his death. The Divine is without a beginning or an end. 
True love means the Love of God. When a man and woman wed, we call it "marriage." But when 
the Jivaatma (the individual Self) unites with the Paramaatma (the Omni-Self), it is called 
merger. 


During the Dashara festival, the three Goddesses Dhurga, Lakshmi and Saraswathi--are 
worshipped according to certain traditional practices. The tenth day of the festival is celebrated 
as the Day of Victory. The celebration has its roots deep in the ancient history of Bharath. In the 
Dwapara Yuga, when the Pandavas had to spend one year incognito, they hid all their asthras 
(weapons), on the advice of Krishna, in a Jammi tree which is thick in foliage and whose 
branches are filled with latent fire. Vijayadasami was the day on which they retrieved the 
weapons from the tree and used them to win victory over the Kauravas. 


Earlier, in the Thretha Yuga, Sri Rama's coronation, after his victorious return to Ayodhya from 
Lanka, was performed on Vijayadasami day. 


Dhurga represents the prodigious Prakruthi Shakthi (power of Nature). As against this power of 
Nature is the Paraa Shakthi (the power of the Spirit). When spiritual power is predominant, the 
power of Nature is kept under control. When spiritual power is weak, the power of Nature 
becomes predominant. This is illustrated by the example of smoke and fire. When smoke is 
predominant, the fire is suppressed. When the fire is blazing, the smoke vanishes. Hence, to 
enhance the power of the Spirit and limit the power of Nature, man has to cultivate Vairaagya 
(detachment). To the extent the power of Nature is under control, to that extent spiritual power 
grows. 


The need to develop Will power 


Ichcha-Shakthi (the potency of Will) arises from thoughts. This Ichcha-Shakthi is the source of 
several other potencies like intellectual power, the discriminating capacity and others. To 
develop this Ichcha-Shakthi (Will power), one has to worship Devi. This calls for the cultivation 
of thyaaga (renunciation or detachment). For instance, if one has a desire for various drinks, he 
can bring the desires under control by giving up, to begin with, the desire for some of them. 
Thereby the Ichcha-Shakthi (Will power) is developed and in due course it becomes easier to 


give up other desires. In Vedantic parlance this is described as Vairaagya (renouncing all 
attachments). 


Vairaagya is not abandonment of hearth and home and retiring to a forest. It means developing 
Godly thoughts and reducing worldly feelings. It is when this balanced development takes place 
that one acquires Prakruthi-Shakthi (control over the power of Nature). When these powers are 
got, the mental power in a person increases. 


Dhurga represents the Prakruthi-Shakthi and Lakshmi represents the Thought power--Sankalpa- 
Shakthi. Vaak-Shakthi, the power of speech, is represented by Saraswathi. It is to acquire these 
three powers that the various forms of worship are performed during the Navarathri festival. But 
prayers alone are not enough. Prayers issue from the lips. They should emanate from the heart. 
The Hridaya (heart) symbolises the Ksheerasagara (Ocean of Milk). Lakshmi emerged from the 
ocean of Milk. When Lakshmi emerges, purity of speech follows. Whatever you speak conforms 
to truth. 


The concepts of Sathya and Ritha 


Them are two concepts: Sathya (truth) and Ritha (conduct based on unity of thought, word and 
deed). The triple purity of mind, speech and body is Ritha. To adhere to Ritha and speak and act 
accordingly is Truth. What is uttered with this triple purity is alone Truth, not other words. The 
ancients have declared that adherence to the truth is Dharma (Righteousness). There is no higher 
Dharma than Truth---Sathyaannaasthi paro Dharmah. Without the firm foundation of Truth, the 
mansion of Dharma cannot stand. 


A life built upon sankalpa (desires) cannot last. The mansion of desires must be converted into a 
Mansion of Divine Will (Jchcha-Bhavanam). When the Ichcha-Shakthi (Will Power) is 
converted into Kriya-Shakthi (power of action), it results in Jnaana-Shakthi (the power of 
Wisdom). It is through this Divine Wisdom that spiritual liberation Kaivalyam is secured. 


Divine potencies of the three Goddesses 


The Navarathri festival should not be observed as a festival for worshipping the consorts of 
Vishnu, Shiva and Brahma. These Goddesses symbolise Divine potencies. All these potencies 
are derived from Vishnu. The entire cosmos is a manifestation of the myriad forms of Vishnu. 
People must recognise this oneness underlying the different forms. All beings breathe the same 
air as their life-breath. Likewise all the five basic clements arc common to all. These clements 
are the stuff of Nature. But in the Para Thathwa (the Supreme Principle, the Divine), these do 
not exist. The elements are mortal. The Divine is immortal. To proceed from the mortal to the 
immortal the easiest means is the cultivation of Prema (Divine Love). 


The heart is like a sky wherein the clouds in the form of thoughts hide the Buddhi (the intellect) 
and the Mind representing the sun and the moon. Vairaagya is the means to get rid of thoughts 
and the desires arising from them. The Devi Puja performed during Navarathri is intended to get 
rid of worldly attachments and divert the mind towards God. 


There are four different qualities in man: humanness, the animal nature, the demonic nature and 
the Divine nature. When man follows the dictates of the body, he is a prey to his animal nature. 
When he is subject to the vagaries of the mind, he becomes demonic. When he is following the 
Aatma, he is manifesting his Divinity. When he is governed by all three--the body, the mind and 
the Aatma--he is human. 


The way to enter the spiritual path 


When Ravana fell a victim to the promptings of the mind, his demonic nature predominated over 
his other good qualities as a worshipper of Shiva and a master of many sciences. Whenever a 
desire arises in the mind, one should exercise the power of discrimination and decide whether it 
is good or bad. This is the way to enter on the spiritual path. 


Each person has to decide for himself in which of these four states he is placed. The Aatmic 
principle is fundamental and everyone should strive to fortify the heart for spiritual ends. This 
heart is not the physical heart. It is the abode of the Spirit and is located in the spinal column 
between the ninth and twelfth vertebrae. It shines like lightning in the core of a dark cloud. This 
is called Sushumna. 


Sushumna refers to the state in which all the sensory organs are subdued and the mind and 
desires are under control. It is not the state of deep sleep, as is interpreted by some. The terms 
used by the Vedantins (spiritual philosophers) should be understood in their deeper sense. This is 
a difficult exercise. The easier path is to love God with a pure and unwavering mind. Tukaram 
confessed that he was unacquainted with the techniques of meditation or the rules for performing 
sacrifices. "Oh Rama! The only method I know to attain you is to love you with a pure heart! Let 
me have your grace for cherishing this love," he declared. 


The Ozone layer above the earth faces great danger owing to atmospheric pollution and intensive 
afforestation is essential for controlling this pollution and safeguarding the Ozone layer. 


Seek the kingdom of the Spirit within 


The Navarathri festival was celebrated by kings in olden days for propitiating Nature before 
embarking on wars of conquest. The Navarathri festival has another significance also. It is 
intended to secure victory over the Navagrahas (nine planets). Saint Thyagaraja, however, 
declared that if only he has Rama's Anugraha (grace), the Navagrahas would be utterly 
powerless. 


Men today should not seek the earthly victories sought by the ancient rulers. They should seek 
the sovereignty of the Aatmasaamraajyam (Kingdom of the Spirit) within them. This calls for 
control over the senses and the eschewing of bad qualities like anger, greed and jealousy. This 
sadhana must begin from now itself when you are young. Do not put it off for your old age. 


The students are well behaved while they are here. But they should carry their good conduct 
wherever they may be. Only then will they serve to reform the world. Just as people of all faiths 
live in harmony here, you should live in harmony with people of other faiths in whatever country 
you may live. You will be serving your Motherland well only when you set the example to the 
world. 


Prashanthi Mandir, 4 Oct 1992 


You have Shanthi. The subtle effect of manthras or mystic formulae 
mentioned in the Vedas cannot be seen or heard by the senses! 
They have to be experienced in and through the inner 
consciousness, the Antha Karana. 


It is foolish to try to shape the world. Shape yourself as the 
embodiment of Peace, Love and Reverence. Then you will see all 
as Love, Compassion and Humility. 


Sathya Sai Baba 


33. Let Your Buddhi Shine 


Sukham aathyanthikam Buddhi graahyam atheendhrivam. The Gita declares that everlasting 
bliss can be secured by the Buddhi (intellect) by transcending the senses. Sukham (happiness) 
cannot be derived through the senses. Sensory pleasures are deceptive and transient. True 
happiness is permanent and real. Man can realise this only through the Buddhi. The intellect is 
characterised by earnestness and steadiness. 


All the pleasures enjoyed by man in ordinary life are related to the senses. Vishayasukham 
(sensuous pleasure) is verily visha (poisonous) and not Amrithasukham (eternal). These pleasures 
result in bondage for man and do not elevate him. All the pleasures man enjoys are based on the 
senses and have no relation to the intellect. 


Man should seek the bliss that is real and lasting and this can be got through the Buddhi. The 
Thaitthireeya Upanishad has expounded the nature of the Buddhi in detail. Comparing Buddhi to 
a bird, the Upanishad has described its head as Sraddha (earnestness). The two wings of the bird 
are Sathya and Ritha. Yoga is its tail. The body is Mahath-Thathwa. The five constituents-- 
Sraddha, Sathya, Ritha, Yoga and Mahath Thathwa--are parts of Buddhi. 


Among these Sraddha comes first. Man cannot accomplish any undertaking without Sraddha 
(earnest endeavour). All daily actions like eating and walking are prompted by Sraddha. 
"Shraddhaavaan labhathe Jnaanam," says the Gita (The higher wisdom is obtained by the 
eammest seeker). Nor is that all. The Gita has declared that Sraddha as well as Buddhi are forms 
of the Lord. Buddhi, therefore, should not be regarded as an ordinary appendage of man. It is 
associated with Sraddha, Sathyam (Truth), Ritham (the Cosmic order), Yoga and Mahath (the 
Supreme Principle). To treat an attribute that is related to these five significant entities as an 
ordinary quality in man is the result of viewing it from a mundane perspective. 


Supremacy of Buddhi over mental cleverness 


Buddhi should not be equated with Medhaa Shakthi (mental agility or cleverness). The 
superiority of Buddhi over Medhaa Shakthi was proclaimed by King Vikramaditya at an 
assembly of scholars whom he had gathered for discussing this issue. Without Buddhi, with its 
five important associates, all mental faculties are useless like a fruit without juice, a tree without 
fruit, a temple without a lamp, or a counterfeit coin. Most intellectuals today, not realising the 
supremacy of the Buddhi and relying only on their intelligence, are ignoring their inherent 
divinity. Buddhi is the divine element in man, which is shining effulgently always. The Gita 
declares: The Buddhi transcends the senses (Atheendriyam). It is related to the Divine. What 
passes for the intellect today is divorced from the Divine and is not Buddhi in its real sense. This 
intellect is limited in its capacity and is motivated by Self-interest. Hence the Buddhi's power of 
discrimination is used by man for selfish purposes. All actions are based on swartha (self- 
interest) and not on Paraartha (higher values). Actions which are free from self-interest lead to 
Thaarakam (liberation). Actions based on self-interest lead to Maarakam (mortality). The 
difference between these two should be properly understood. All actions based on the Aatma- 
bhaava (the Aatmic feeling) lead to liberation. All worldly actions are Maaraka (self-destroying). 


The object of reciting manthras 


In olden days, many persons who were observing transitional practices, used to recite some 
manthras before taking food. "Annam Brahma" (The food is Brahman). â€œRasam Vishnu" (The 


sweet drink is Vishnu). "Bhoktho Devo Maheswarah" (The partaker is the Lord Maheswara). 
Reciting these manthras, they would start eating. The object of this prayer was: "May the food 
that we consume be converted to the vital fluid that circulates in every part of the body and 
endows the body with all powers. Confer on our mind the capacity to make right use of these 
powers. Purify our speech in conformity with the nature of the mind." 


The physical part of the food that we consume serves the needs of the gross body. The subtle 
element in it goes to the mind. The subtler element enters into Vaak (speech). The Buddhi is thus 
related to the functioning of the body, the organs and the mind. These three are represented by 
Brahma, Vishnu and Maheswara. The Praana (life-principle) is related to Brahma. The mind is 
related to Vishnu and vaak (speech) is related to Shiva. These three faculties should not be 
wasted. They should be utilised properly. The power of speech should be used for speaking the 
truth. The mind should be directed towards sacred paths. The body given to man should be used 
for achieving righteousness. Sareeram-aadyam khalu dharmasaadhanam. (The body is the 
primary requisite for realising Dharma). Thus, the mind, speech and body are manifestations of 
Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva. 


Sathya and Ritha are vital in a man's life 


If people today indulge in meaningless and impure activities, it means that they are wasting their 
Divine gifts. Before undertaking any action, one should utter the prayer: "May my actions be 
holy. May my speech be helpful to others and not cause any pain to them. May all my thoughts 
be sacred, godly and purposeful." The rulers and people in ancient days used to sanctify their 
lives by such prayerful actions. 


Two things are vital in a man's life: Sathya (Truth) and Ritha (Unity in thought, word and deed). 
In most people today, this triple unity is absent. One reason for this is that people have allowed 
their intellect to be polluted, as in the case of a lamp in which the chimney is covered by soot 
from the flame inside and dust from outside. The light from the lamp will be effulgent if the soot 
inside and the dust outside are removed. In the case of the Buddhi (intellect), the soot comes 
from Ahamkaara (ego) and the dust from Mamakaara (mine-ness). These two reduce the 
effulgence of the intellect. They have to be removed to make the Buddhi shed its light fully. 


The role of Ahamkaara and Mamakaara 


To explain how Ahamkaara (egoism) and Mamakaara (Mine-ness) affect even those who claim 
to be renunciants, there is an episode from the life of Aadhi Sankaracharya in which 
Ubhayabhaarathi, the wife of the great scholar, Mandana Mishra, acted as a judge in the debate 
between Sankaracharya and Mishra. In the first debate Ubhayabhaarathi declared Sankaracharya 
to be the winner and Mandana Mishra took Sanyasa (renunciant stage). Thereupon, 
Ubhayabhaarathi challenged Sankaracharya to vanquish her in a debate as she was one half of 
her husband. She also took to Sanyasa after losing in the debate. 


One day Ubhayabhaarathi saw a Sadhu (mendicant) using his drinking vessel as a pillow while 
resting on the ground and meditating. She remarked to her disciples: "Look at this Sadhu! He 
claims he has renounced everything, but in his attachment for his drinking vessel he is taking 
care of it by keeping it under his head lest someone should take it. Is this renunciation?" On 
heating her words, the Sadhu threw away the vessel. While Ubhayabhaarathi and her disciples 
were returning from the Ganges, Ubhayabhaarathi noticed what the Sadhu had done and 
remarked: "I thought the sanyasi had only one defect--attachment. I find he has another: Anger 


arising out of ego, Ahamkaara. He threw away the vessel enraged by my words. Both attachment 
and anger are enemies of thapas." On hearing these words, the Sadhu fell at her feet and declared 
that she was her preceptor. 


The purpose of worshipping Devi 


Every man who aspires for experiencing the Divine, should strive to remove the blemishes 
affecting the Buddhi by getting rid of egoism and attachment. When the ego goes, attachment 
also can be given up easily. 


The ego affects in various ways. It induces people in various professions to resort to pomp and 
ostentation for impressing their clients. Egoism is a demonic quality. Devi has been described as 
a destroyer of demons. Worshipping of Devi is for the purpose of destroying the demonic 
qualities in each person. 


During the Mahabharatha war, Arjuna got dispirited on the ninth day when he saw Krishna 
bleeding all over, as he shielded Arjuna from the rain of arrows showered by Bhishma. Krishna 
jumped down from the chariot and advanced towards Bhishma, declaring that He would himself 
slay Bhishma. Bhishma was so much charmed by the beauty of the Lord that he declared: "If Sri 
Krishna is coming to kill me, let the same Krishna be my saviour." Devotees nowadays would 
act differently. If they lost their faith in one deity, they would seek favours from another. But, in 
fact, there is only one God. Irrespective of names and forms, God is one only. 


Dhurga represents Prakruthi-maatha (Mother Nature). To overcome the demonic qualities 
arising out of the influence of Nature, the power of Nature has to be invoked. This is the meaning 
of the worship of Dhurga. Nature is the protector as well as the chastiser. Lakshmi represents the 
protecting aspect of Nature. When Dhurga has destroyed the demonic qualities, Lakshmi purifies 
the mind. Then there is purity in speech, represented by Saraswathi. The worship of Dhurga, 
Lakshmi and Saraswathi is thus undertaken to get rid of the impurities in the mind and purify 
one's thoughts, words and deeds. 


Prakruthi (Nature) is the embodiment of the Divine. Man perceives Nature and experiences 
Nature, but is unable to recognise the Divinity in Nature. To see the external manifestations of 
the Divine and yet fail to recognise the Divine is a sign of stupidity. 


Man sees Nature in the form of the Universe, which is Virata-Swaroopa (Cosmic form of 
Vishnu). Has the Lord any particular form or abode? No. He is everywhere. He is you and you 
are He. The day you recognise this, you will comprehend God. If you want to see the Divine in 
you, you have to use your Buddhi, just as you need a mirror to see your own eyes, which are able 
to see everything else in the world. It is folly to seek the Divine elsewhere. God is nearer to you 
than your own mother. With purity of heart, you can experience the Divine within through your 
intellect. Love is the means to have this experience, for Love is God. 


Prashanthi Mandir, 5 Oct 1992 


34. How Devotees Are Tested and Found Wanting 


In my previous body (as Shirdi Sai Baba) everyone was taught through actions. For example, 
Dhamu and Naana were rendering service to the Lord (Shirdi Baba). Baba collected a few copper 
coins and was playing with them by tossing them from one hand to another and also testing them 
in various ways. He appeared to examine them individually. He did not exchange a word with 
Dhamu and Naana. He went on playing with the coins for half an hour in this manner. 


Curious to know what Baba was doing, Naana asked him why He was scrutinising the same 
coins, again and again. Baba replied, "Beta (Dear Son), it is true I am repeating the same action 
again and again, repeating the same words. Look at that mango tree in front of you. It is in full 
bloom. The leaves are hardly visible. If all the flowers in the tree were to become fruits, will the 
branches be able to bear the weight? But it does not happen that way. Most of the flowers are 
swept away by the wind. Many others drop of their own accord. Only some of them become 
fruits. Of these some are eaten by squirrels, birds or monkeys. In this way ninety percent of the 
flowers do not result in fruits. Only ten percent remain in the tree. Is it not so?" They agreed, that 
it was so. 


"No one comes for My sake"'---Shirdi Baba 


Baba continued, "In the same manner thousands of devotees are coming to me. Are they all 
ripening into good devotees? Many drop away in the middle. Some come for getting their desires 
fulfilled. Some seek wealth. Many are coming either for study or in connection with jobs or 
marriage or other personal desires of their own. In each of them there is some defect or other. No 
one comes for My sake. I have a precious thing to offer in my coffers. But no one seeks it. It is 
for this reason that I am examining them (coins). Among these coins there are some which are 
worn out, some which are debased and some which are twisted and worthless." 


"Just as I am examining the defects in these coins, I am also looking for the defects among the 
devotees who come to Me. I am trying to find out what defects are there in these people and 
whether, with those defects, they can really comprehend My Truth. They want Me, but all their 
desires are related to mundane objects. How can they attain Me with this attitude? 


How can you reach your destination if you get into a wrong train going in some other direction? 
They want Me, but they don't make efforts for realising Me. Among the many who come to Me, 
it is only one in a thousand who really makes the effort to realise Me. 


"The minds of the so called devotees are turned in the wrong directions. If their desires are 
fulfilled, they praise Me. But, once a desire is not realised they go to the extent of even reviling 
Me. Even while they are attempting to understand Me, they harbour doubts from head to foot. 
Some even leave Me when their worldly desires are not fulfilled. These are not sincere devotees 
at all. They are in fact the worst sinners. How can they reach Me?" said Baba. 


Experience of Baba's devotees 


At one time a wealthy man came with a lot of money to Shirdi Baba with the object of gaining 
Brahma Jnaana (Supreme Wisdom). He boasted about his wealth. Baba asked him: "How long 
will you be here?" He replied that he had come by a taxi fixing to and fro charges and had to 
return in a day or two. Baba said: "When you have greed for wealth, how can you realise God? It 
is not a goal that can be accomplished in a fixed time. Get away." Baba noticed that he was still 
sitting and became furious. He chased him out, wielding a stick. 


To one who sought His grace with purity of heart and selfless devotion, Baba conferred His 
grace abundantly. Mathaji Krishna Priya was one such devotee. Living in Nagpur, she used to 
worship Krishna and considered Baba also as another form of Krishna. She frequently visited 
Shirdi to seek Baba's blessings with genuine devotion. Once she went to Simla. She was offering 
worship with unstinted devotion to Krishna considering Him as Baba. 


She came to know that Baba had left his mortal coil at 2.30 p.m. on Vijayadasami day in 1918. 
Immediately after this Ekaadasi followed. Baba had told his close devotee, Kaakaji, in the year 
1916, that Dhadha would be shedding his mortal coil in 1918. Kaakaji thought that Baba was 
mentioning only about Dhadha Sahib, another devotee, and never thought the reference was to 
Baba himself. 


The last days of Shirdi Baba 


On September 28, 1918, Baba developed high temperature. Two days earlier he had collected 
food by seeking alms in some houses. He took that food and at noon, He expressed His wish to 
his devotees that he should be taken from the choultry to Bootywada. He hoped to have a quiet 
time there. In that ward, a Muraleedhar temple had been built by a devotee by name Booty. He 
wanted Baba to install the idol of Krishna in the temple. But Baba was putting off the installation 
on one pretext or other. Booty did not want to install the idol without the blessings of Baba. Until 
his end Baba did not say anything about installation of the idol. He directed Booty and Kaakaji to 
go and take their lunch. Feeling that Baba was better, they went out. Baba had nine rupee coins 
under His pillow. He took them out and gave them to Lakshmibai. Then Baba summoned 
Shyaam to come near Him. Shyaam sat close to Baba. Baba reclined on Shyaam's shoulders and 
passed away. 


Baba reappears in Simla after passing away 


Krishna Priya came to know of this and felt very sad the whole day. The next day she closed all 
the doors and windows in her house because of the severe cold in Simla. While she was resting 
in the house, a tall and well-built monk arrived at the next door and enquired about Mathaji's 
house. He made enquiry not because He did not know where Mathaji lived, but only to make 
others know that he was physically present in Simla. The neighbour sent a servant with an 
umbrella as it was snowing, to show the stranger Mathaji's house. He knocked at the door. 


Mathaji opened the door and could not believe the evidence of her eyes. She wondered how 
Baba, who had passed away the previous day, could come to Simla. She asked: "How did you 
manage to come so soon? It takes at least three days to come from Shirdi to Simla." 


Baba said: "Beti (dear daughter), I am everywhere. You have worshipped Me in the form of 
Krishna. Is this all that you know about Me? I am feeling the cold. First get Me hot tea." She 
prepared tea and offered it to Baba. After taking the tea, Baba said that He was hungry after His 
long journey. Krishna Priya brought Him chapathis and brinjal curry which Baba used to like 
very much. After taking the food Baba washed His hands and wiped them in a towel. He then 
told her: The purpose for which I came is over and I am going away." 


In those days nobody dared to exchange words with Baba. If anybody opposed or said anything 
to the contrary, Baba would wield the stick against them. He never brooked any contradiction. 
Hence Krishna Priya could not tell Him anything. He gave her a jasmine garland. 


Krishna Priya watched Him as he went out walking through the bazaar. In Simla, on the 
roadside, there are usually deep valleys. As Baba was walking along, some workmen were 


engaged in some road work. Noticing that Baba had fallen down from the road, they ran to 
rescue Him. But they could find nobody there. Baba had just disappeared. 


Before taking leave of Krishna Priya, Baba whispered in her ears: "See me in 1926." She did not 
know where to see Him, how to see Him. When I went to Simla about fifteen years ago Krishna 
Priya came to see Me. She was shivering on account of age and the cold weather. She asked: 
"Baba, have you forgotten the promise that you made to Me long ago?" I told her: "It is you who 
have forgotten, not I. I never forget what I promised." 


These are some of the aspects of the Shirdi manifestation. When Shirdi Sai sought to impart 
wisdom, it was not through discourses. Everything was taught by stern methods. It was because 
of the conditions prevailing in those days. 


Baba takes on child's illness 


Once, Dhaadha's wife brought her child to Baba with the intention of staying for some time in 
Shirdi. She got her husband's reluctant approval for the visit. At that time plague was rampant in 
Shirdi. On the second day of her arrival the child developed fever and boils all over the body. 
The mother felt sorry that she had not acted on her husband's advice and lamented who would 
protect her child from the affliction. She immediately rushed to Baba and cried aloud: "Baba! 
Baba!" Baba asked her why she had come. "Is your child having fever? Are them boils on his 
body? Not only the child but I am also having boils. You look at them." So saying, he lifted his 
Kafni (coveting garment) and showed the boil on his body. Mhalaspathi, who was standing near, 
exclaimed: "Swami! What large boils are these?" He touched Baba's body and found that he was 
having high fever. The temperature might be as high as 105Â° or 106Â° F. The mother cried: "Oh 
Baba! Has the disease affected not only my son, but you also? Who will protect you?" She was 
in deep distress. Baba said: "Is there any other to protect the one who is the protector of all?" The 
mother immediately begged for Baba's forgiveness. A short while thereafter, Baba's fever came 
down. 


The mother returned home feeling happy. She saw that the fever and the boils had vanished from 
the child. She exclaimed: "Baba! Did you take on my child's illness?" 


Total faith that people had in Baba 


In this manner, Shirdi Baba used to demonstrate His powers as and when the occasion arose. 
What was the reason for this? It was solely due to Paripoorna Viswaasam (total faith) which 
people had in Baba. The devotees followed implicitly whatever Baba directed them to do. 


It is not so these days. Whenever anything is said by Swami ten questions are raised. Besides the 
questions, they are racked by doubts from head to foot. This is traceable to the influence of 
modem education. This system is undermining faith in human values. Whatever help a man may 
receive, he is utterly ungrateful. He forgets all the good done to him and remembers only the 
harm done to him. Consequently, the demonic nature has grown in human beings. 


In the old days, human beings retained at least human qualities. Today, men have only the 
human form but behave like animals. All their impulses are selfish. When their desires are 
fulfilled, they come smiling and uttering: "Baba! Baba!" If their desires are not fulfilled they 
have a different attitude. In such beastly beings, how can devotion to Baba exist? Only when 
men shed their animal natures, can they become human. 


Baba leaves His physical body 


This is the anniversary of the day when (Shirdi) Baba gave up his mortal body. The facts relating 
to his passing need to be understood. On September 28, 1918, Baba developed fever. For 
seventeen days thereafter he was quite well. On October 15, Baba was not to be found anywhere. 
Naana, Kaaka, Dhaas and Lakshman Rao made a search for him all over the place. There was a 
small well nearby and they went to see whether he had fallen there. When they returned to Baba's 
abode, they found him standing near the door. Baba told them: "Where are you searching for 
Me? I am in one place and you search for Me elsewhere. I am in all pure hearts. You are 
searching for Me in all polluted places. How can you find Me?" He then sat down. 


Baba left his body only on October 15. He developed high temperature on September 28. He was 
keeping well for the next 17 days. 


After Baba left his body, several controversies arose. Mohammedans came there and claimed 
that the body belonged to them. The Hindus claimed that the body belonged to them. Baba used 
to declare from time to time, "Allah Malik! Allah Malik." On account of this, Mohammedans 
claimed that Baba was a Muslim. At other times, Baba used to say: "Rama Malik! Krishna 
Malik!" For this reason the Hindus claimed he was a Hindhu. Because of these rival claims, the 
body was kept for thirty-six hours as no decision could be arrived at regarding the manner of 
disposal, of the body. 


How the last rites of Shirdi Baba were conducted 


To prevent clashes between the Hindus and the Muslims, the Collector, the Police 
Superintendent and other officials arrived there. They asked all the residents of Shirdi to 
assemble there. They decided to take the vote of the people to find out how the majority of the 
local population wanted the last rites to be done for Baba. Everybody favoured the Hindu way of 
disposal of the body. When this decision was arrived at, a pit was being dug in the Booty 
Mandir. Some persons opposed the digging. The dispute went on and ultimately the Collector 
and the Police arranged for the Samadhi to be consecrated in the Muraleedhar temple. That 
temple is the present Samadhi Shrine of Baba. 


At this time a remarkable incident occurred in Simla. The garland given to Mathaji Krishna Priya 
was placed on the idol of Krishna by her in the presence of all in her residence. Many wondered 
why she was garlanding the Krishna idol when she was a devotee of Sai Baba and there was a 
picture of Baba there. Bhajans were going on at that time. The garland placed on the Krishna 
figure dropped on the picture of Baba. The garland placed on the picture moved to the figure of 
Krishna. Everyone in Simla rejoiced in the discovery that Krishna and Sai Baba were one. 


When all the people came there the next morning, they found that the garland given by Baba was 
no longer on the figure of Krishna. That garland was found on the Samadhi of Baba in the Booty 
Mandhir. 


Miracles and the messages of Shirdi Baba 


Why did Baba manifest such miracles? In those days there were bitter differences between 
Hindus and Muslims. With a view to ending such communal differences, Baba wanted to show, 
through his miracles, the truth that Baba is the Supreme master of all beings. He has no 
differences of caste or community. His religion is common to people of all faiths. It is good for 
everyone. It is observed by all godly persons. This is the creed for all mankind. 


Spiritual wisdom is not something received from others. It has to blossom from within. Each one 
has to develop the faith by his own efforts. Those lacking such faith make themselves remote 
from God. Their own past actions account for such lack of faith. 


Many spend years here (in Prashanthi Nilayam). But for some reason or other, they go away. 
This is due to the effect of their karma. No man can escape the consequences of his actions. 


Whether one is a scholar or an ascetic, 
Whether one is in a forest or a temple 
Can anyone avoid the 

Consequences of his karma ? 


Many who claim to be great devotees, fall away sometime or other. The truth is that they were 
not true devotees even earlier. It is all a make-believe. Whatever devotion existed will not go 
away; nor will devotion come where it was absent. This means that devotion was absent from the 
outset. Those who used to proclaim their devotion by saying, "Swami is everything for us," 
really had no devotion at all. It was all a show. No true devotee will ever leave Swami. The one 
who leaves is never a real devotee. In this context, it must be realised that the true nature of 
devotion cannot be comprehended by anyone. 


Can one remember the name of God in his last moments, 
When the messengers of Death are waiting 
And all one's relations are weeping, 
If he has not been devoted to God all his life ? 
God is moved by unwavering and firm devotion 


Only when there is dedicated devotion from early in life can it remain steady and unchanging. 
The devotion of selfish and self-centred persons will be vacillating. Those with total love for 
God will never change. That is unwavering devotion. Where there is such yearning for God, the 
heart melts. God is moved by such firm devotion. That is the kind of devotion everyone should 
cherish. 


During festivals like Navarathri, devotees should develop such divine feelings and strive to 
secure a direct vision of God in their hearts. God is in and around us. But no effort is made to 
experience this. People are immersed in dualism, separating God from themselves. Through love, 
this sense of separation can be ended. Love is the binding force between the Jivaatma (the 
individual) and the Paramaatma (the Omni-Self). It is this feeling of Paripuurna Prema (total 
love) that has to be cultivated today. 


God has no use for indolent persons 


Embodiments of Divine Love! Do not give room for the doubts which arise on account of the 
food you consume, the company you keep or the environment in which you live. Meet the doubts 
with courage and faith. 


Don't pray to Baba for changing your mind. It is your duty to change your mind. If you expect 
Baba to do everything, what is it you are doing? God has no use for such indolent persons. You 
must do your sadhana and go ahead. God's help will come when you do your part. Do your duty 
and leave the results to God. Praying to God to do this or that is a sign of weakness. 


If you have full faith in God, your mind is bound to change. Baba's role is not to change your 
minds, but to redeem you from the consequences of your actions. Everyone should realise and 
act up to this truth. To start with, get rid of the blemishes in you, strengthen your devotion and 
make it firm and unshakeable. That is Purusha prayathna (the effort which everyone should 
make). Then you will earn Daivaanugraha (God's grace). 


Entering on this path of truth, traversing the road of Jnaana (spiritual wisdom), merge yourself 
in the Divine. 


In the course of discourse when a reference to Shirdi Sai manifestation was made, Vijayadasami 
Day, Prashanthi Nilayam, 6 Oct 1992, 


The way in which the Avatar has to be used for one's liberation 
and uplift is: watch His every step, observe His actions and 
activities, follow the guiding principles of which His life is an 
elaboration. Mark His love, His compassion, His wisdom, try to 
bring them into your own life. 


Sathya Sai Baba 


35. Spiritual Basis Of Dashara Festival 


The Lord created everything from Truth and everything is permeated by Truth. Realise that them 
is nothing in the world that is not based on Truth and everything is composed of Suddha Sarva 
(the divine essence). Man has forgotten this fact. 


Man has emerged from the Divine (Madhava). Forgetting this truth is the Maaya (delusion) from 
which man suffers. A true human being cannot suffer from this delusion. 


Embodiments of Divine Love! Humanness is inextricably linked to divinity and is not separate 
from it. The same Aatma resides in all beings. 


There are various limbs and organs in the body such as hands, legs, eyes, nose, mouth, ear, etc. 
All of them are integral parts of the body. There is an intimate connection between these 
different limbs and the Shareeri (Indweller) in the body. The Jivaatma is the Indweller. The 
limbs constitute the body. The relationship between the Indweller and the body is integral. All 
limbs belong to the individual. Hence the Indweller will not hate any limb. The Shareeri 
(Indweller) will not feel happy if any limb suffers because all limbs belong to him and their 
experiences are also his. 


Likewise, Vishnu pervades the cosmos as His body. All things in the cosmos are limbs of the 
body of Vishnu. Hence no one should have any aversion to anything in the universe. You should 
not hate anyone, because the same Divine is present in you and in everything in the universe. 


The cosmos has three forms: the gross, the subtle and the causal. The physical universe 
represents the gross form. The subtle form is the mind and subtler than the mind is the Aatma. 


The five Kosas or inner coverings 


A human being has five sheaths. These five sheaths have been grouped into three. The gross 
sheath is the Annamaya Kosa. The three Kosas, Praanamaya (vital breath), Manomaya (the 
mental sheath) and the Vijnanamaya (the intellectual sheath) together constitute the subtle 
sheath. The causal sheath is the Anandamaya Kosa (the Bliss sheath). Even the last sheath does 
not represent total bliss, because there is a higher entity above the Anandamaya Kosa. This is 
known as Mahakaarana or supracausal entity. This is the Aatmic principle. 


Because every individual has these three bodies, he is called Tripurasundari. Every human being 
has these Thripuras (three cities). The three puras are the body, the mind and the heart. Since the 
Prakruthi element, which is feminine in nature, is present in greater measure in the body, it is 
termed as Sundari (a beautiful damsel). 


Spiritual truth of Navarathri 


During the Navarathri festival Tripurasundari is worshipped. Unfortunately, from ancient times 
people have been observing only the external forms of worship without understanding the inner 
significance of these festivals. The entire cosmos is a temple. The Lord pervades the cosmos. 
Prakruthi (Nature) teaches the spiritual truth about Navarathri. Realise the love of Sai through 
spiritual practice. The Lord has to be realised through sadhana. Sadhana does not mean adoring 
God in a particular place or in a particular form. It means thinking of God in all that you do 
wherever you may be. It may be asked whether this is possible. The answer is that it is possible 
by dedicating every action to God. 


During Navarathri there is a form of worship called Angaarpana Puja. In this form of worship, 
all the limbs of the body are offered to the Divine in a spirit of surrender Sharanaagathi. 
Surrender means offering everything to the Divine and giving up the idea of separation between 
oneself and the Divine. There can be no true surrender if them is a sense of separation. There 
must be the conviction that it is the same Divine who dwells in all beings--Eko Vasee 
Sarvabhutha-antharaathma. 


The true meaning of Angaarpana Puja 


In the performance of Angaarpana Puja, there is a form of self-deception. When a devotee says, 
"Nethram Samarpayaami" (I offer my eyes to the Lord) and offers only a flower to the Lord, he 
is indulging in a kind of deception. The proper thing would be to say that he is offering a flower. 
Actually manthras like "Nethram Samarpayaami" are intended to indicate that one is using his 
eyes only to see God. The real significance of the Manthra is that you think of the divine in 
whatever you see or do. 


Therefore, the true meaning of the Angaarpana Puja is to declare that you offer all your limbs in 
the service of the Lord. This means that whatever work you do should be done as an offering to 
God. Nowadays selfishness is rampant among devotees and they love God not for God's sake but 
only to get their selfish desires fulfilled. As long as selfishness prevails, the Divine cannot be 
understood. 


The Navarathri festival should be used as an occasion to examine one's own nature whether it is 
human, animal or demonic, and strive to transform the animal nature to the human and divinise 
the human nature. Wisdom cannot be acquired from outside. It has to be got through inward 
Sadhana. 


In the course of Discourse on Vijayadasami day, Prashanthi Nilayam, 6 Oct 1992 


Vyaamohas is the dust that settles upon the glass of the chimney of 
the lantern and dims the light. The attachment to sensual objects 
and to the pleasure they give is the soot that sticks to the inside of 
the chimney; that too dims the light. Clean the chimney by 
Naamasmarana every day and the flame will shine for you and 
others. 


Sathya Sai Baba 


36. Purify The Heart To Realise God 


Though, at the time of birth, man has no good or bad qualities, changes occur in his nature due to 
the food he consumes, and the influence of associates around him. One develops ego and 
attachment based on the company he keeps. As a person gets educated, he or she develops pride 
and entertains vainglorious thoughts about one's superiority over others. This conceit pollutes the 
heart. 


When dirty water gets mixed with milk, the milk has to be boiled to make it pure. Likewise man 
has to undertake various types of Sadhana to purge his heart of impurities. Exercises such as 
meditation, Yajna or thapas can only provide mental satisfaction. It is only when the heart is 
melted in the heat of Divine love that one can succeed in getting rid of bad qualities and make 
the heart shine in its pristine effulgence. Just as. the sun's rays can bum a heap of cotton if the 
rays are concentrated by passing through a lens, the rays of the intellect will destroy one's bad 
qualities only when they are passed through the lens of Divine love. 


The growth of demonic nature in man 


Although man has come from Madhava (God), he is enveloped in a Bhrama (delusion) which 
obscures the Brahma (Divinity) within him. So long as one is in the grip of this delusion one 
cannot understand God. Because of this delusion one gets attached to the body and develops 
limitless desires. This leads to the growth of the Asura (demonic) nature in him. 


In the word "Nara" meaning man, "na" means "no" and "ra" means "destruction." So, the term 
"nara" describes man as one without destruction (that is, one who is eternal). When the letter 
"ka" is added to "nara" it becomes "Naraka," hell, which is the opposite of heaven. When one 
descends to the demonic level, he forgets divinity and follows the path to hell. The Divine is 
realised by pursuing the spiritual path (the Aatmic path). 


According to the Puranic story, Narakaasura is said to have been destroyed on this day of 
Deepavali (Naraka Chathurdhasi). Narakaasura was a demon filled with attachment to bodily 
pleasures. He was full of bad qualities like lust, anger and greed. He was a terror to women and 
perpetrated many evil deeds, inviting his own destruction at the hands of a woman, 
Sathyabhama, the consort of Sri Krishna. 


It is worthy of note that the Lord gave this opportunity to Sathyabhama only after subjecting her 
to a cleansing process to rid her of her pride and jealousy as revealed in the Tulabhaaram 
episode, where Sathyabhama was advised by Narada to make a gift of Krishna to him and win 
him back by offering an equivalent weight of gold and jewellery. When Sathyabhama offered all 
the valuables she possessed, it had no effect. Ultimately a Tulasi leaf offered by Rukmini with a 
prayer to Krishna tilted the balance. Thereby Sathyabhama was cured of her pride and jealousy. 


Apart from this Puranic version, there is a cosmic explanation for the observance of Deepavali. 
Naraka was a planet moving in orbit with the moon around the earth. Once it appeared to be 
heading towards the earth. People prayed to Lord Krishna to avert the impending catastrophe. 
The Lord had to take action to destroy this planet and save the world from disaster. From that 
day, Deepavali was being observed as a joyous day of deliverance from evil. 


Deepavali eve, Prashanthi Mandir, 24 Oct 1992 


Among men, each one is himself the cause of his fortune, good or 
bad. He is himself the builder, the architect. Fate, destiny, 
predetermination, the Will of God--every one of these explanations 
is toppled by the principle of Karma. God and man can be 
reconciled and affiliated only on the basis of this Sutra or 
principal of Karma. When man realises that God has no share in 
causing his suffering and that he is himself the sole cause, that no 
blame attaches to any other person, that he is the initiator as well 
as the beneficiary--the cause and the effect of his acts, that he is 
free to shape his future, then he approaches God with a firmer step 
and a clearer mind 


Sathya Sai Baba 


37. Recovery Of Moral Values 


Dhaivaadheenam Jagathsarvam 
Sathyaadheenam thu Dhaivatam 
Sathyam Uthamaadheenam 

Uthamo paramo dhevatha. 

(The Cosmos is controlled by the Divine. 
The Divine is governed by truth. 

Truth is subject to the high-souled. 

The high-souled are supremely Divine). 


Students! Educationists! Patrons of Education! The entire Cosmos is under the control of the 
Divine. But the Divine is bound by truth. Truth is under the control of high-souled persons. 
These persons are the embodiments of the Divine in the world. 


The universe is infinite and marvellous. Unable to comprehend the nature of Creation, man is a 
prey to divisive forces. Creation proclaims the Will of the Divine. It is known as Prakruthi 
(Nature). Every man, who is a child of Nature, should have Divine nature. Man is born in the 
world to proclaim the Will of the Divine. Man is a part of Creation. He is bound by all the 
material objects in the world. His awareness is based on his perception of the world. Man has to 
order his life for the purpose of furthering the creative process. 


Abuse of nature's resources by men 


Unfortunately today, as a consequence of scientific and technological progress, humanness has 
declined and man considers the world as only intended for his enjoyment. As a result, the powers 
of Nature are being used in a manner which poses a great threat to the world. The world has not 
been created for mere enjoyment. Abusing the resources of Nature and forgetting his own basic 
human nature, man is going against the purpose of Creation. Many natural catastrophes are 
entirely due to man's behaviour. Earthquake, volcanic eruptions, wars, floods and famines and 
other calamities are the result of grave disorders in Nature. These disorders are traceable to man's 
conduct. Man has not recognised the integral relationship between humanity and the world of 
Nature. 


In the human body, all organs like eyes, ears, mouth, etc., are integrally related to each other. 
Just as these organs are important for man, man is equally important for society as a limb of the 
social organism. Man is a part of the human community. Mankind is a part of nature. Nature is a 
limb of God. Man has not recognised these inter-relationships. 


Man is a kind of stage-director of what goes on in Nature. Forgetting his responsibilities, man 
fights for rights. If a deep enquiry is made, it will be realised that man has no rights at all in this 
world. He has only duties and no rights. It is foolish to fight for fights without discharging one's 
duties. All the chaos and conflicts in the world are due to men forgetting their duties. If everyone 
discharges his duty, the world will be peaceful and prosperous. 


When the master performs his duties, the employees will work well. When the parents discharge 
their duties, the children will realise their responsibilities. When the children do their duties by 


the parents, the latter will be honoured. Likewise, when teachers discharge their duties, the 
students will conduct themselves well. When the students perform their duties well, the 
authorities will secure due respect. 


Today men are forgetting their obligations. The Cosmos is an integral organism of interrelated 
parts. When each one performs his duty, the benefits are available to all. Man is enti-fled only to 
perform his duties and not to the fruits thereof. 


Need for ideal persons 


Students! Today the educational world is immersed in multifarious problems which are baffling 
the authorities concerned. The educational system is contributing to the collapse of human values 
in society. Educational institutions, which ought to give a lead in promoting the nation's all- 
round welfare, are leading the country astray. Human values like sacrifice, integrity, fairness and 
morality have almost disappeared. Reverence and respect for elders are totally absent. What we 
need today is not a new system of education, nor a new social order, nor even a new religion. 
There is a good deal of speculation about how to bring about a new social order. All these are 
exercises in futility. What we need today are Uttama-purushulu (noble and high-minded men and 
women). The nation will be prosperous only when there are such persons with noble minds and 
hearts. Such persons will emerge in society only when there is purity of mind and morality in 
society. Only a society with a moral foundation can foster such noble persons. 


Spirituality is the means for redemption 


Morality and integrity are based upon spiritual consciousness. Spirituality alone will take man to 
the sacred path leading to his destiny. Spirituality alone can elevate man and raise him to higher 
levels. It is the means to real national progress and prosperity. World peace can be secured only 
through spirituality. It is the means for the redemption of mankind. 


Forgetting spirituality, man is leading an artificial life based on worldly pleasures. Education 
should be used for promoting the nation's welfare. Knowledge gained through education should 
be used selflessly for promoting the welfare of humanity. 


Truth is the ornament for the mouth. Charity is the adornment for the hand. Education is the 
ornament for the ear. Apart from these ornaments, what does anyone need? A man with these 
ornaments can reach great heights. He alone is a full man. 


Mere knowledge by itself is of no avail. Ravana had studied as many branches of knowledge as 
Rama. Educationally both were equals. But Valmiki described Ravana as muurkha, a self-willed 
fool. Rama was hailed as a perfect man. Wherein lies the difference between the two? Rama 
utilised all the knowledge he had gained for noble purposes and the welfare of all. He had 
mastery over the senses. He gave up his rulership. He was pledged to the upholding of truth. 
Dedicating his knowledge to the cause of truth, to set an example of ideal life to mankind, he 
dedicated his life to the welfare of the country. Rama exemplified human perfection by his sac- 
rifice, his adherence to truth and his spotless character. On the other hand, Ravana utilised all his 
knowledge for enjoying sensuous pleasures. He became a slave of his senses and brought rain 
upon himself and his country. 


Whatever knowledge one may acquire, one should use it for the well-being of all--"Sarvahithe 
rathaah." Only then he can be deemed Jnaana-sampannah (rich in wisdom). Such a wise person 
will be endowed with all good qualities. It is for these noble purposes that the ancient system of 
education was devised. 


Bharathiya education in ancient days 


All that students learn today is unrelated to the Bharathiya system of education. A system which 
enslaves the mind and promotes the office-hunting mentality can have no relation to Bharathiya 
education. It was a system which sought to combat injustice and corruption and promote truth 
and righteousness. It was not designed to make a student acquire a degree at great expense and 
then go about with a begging bowl in search of jobs. It aimed at promoting self-reliance and 
encouraging one to take up social service in a spirit of dedication. Bharathiya education was 
based on the twin mottoes: "Sathyam vadha; Dharmam chara" (Speak the truth, practice 
righteousness). 


Love is the spiritual discipline governing human life. Truth is one's life-breath. Bharath produced 
any number of men in the past who were dedicated to these two ideals. Bharathiya education 
made the human personality shine effulgently like a multifaceted diamond. 


Bharath: then and now 


Bharath is like a myriad-petalled lotus. The variety of creeds and communities, languages and 
customs, manners and traditions to be found in Bharath cannot be found in any other country. 
With its many languages, customs and cultures, Bharath is a magnificent garden blooming with 
flowers of many hues. Bharathiyas today are oblivious to the greatness of their country. People 
of many faiths lived in harmony as members of one family in ancient times. The harmony has 
now been lost. The love-principle has become extinct. People are unable even to recognise what 
is truth. 


Students should enshrine in their hearts the greatness of Bharath. Their lives should not be 
offered as a sacrifice to self-ishness and self-interest. Give up selfishness completely. Only then 
will you have acquired education that is Divine and-holy. 


In the olden days, after the students had-completed their education, the Gurus (teachers) used to 
offer them words of advice before they embarked on Grihastha ashrama (the life of 
householders). It was a kind of convocation. The advice the preceptors gave them was: "Serve 
the world. First of all, revere your father and mother. Develop love for the nation." What kind of 
patriotism do students have who, after completing their studies here, go abroad for work? Live in 
society and earn the esteem of your fellow men. These are the essential lessons to be learnt by 
students. 


The gospel of service 


Today you took the Institute pledge as to how you will conduct yourselves after you go out into 
the world. You have pledged yourselves to lead ideal lives. This pledge should pervade every 
corpuscle of your. blood. You will be guilty of treason to yourselves if you fail to live up to the 
pledge. 


Students! From now onwards you should engage yourselves in service to society and cherish 
Indian culture. Do not aspire for positions. Practise at least a fraction of what you have learnt. 
Action alone counts. Only through practical experience is wisdom gained. Money is not 
everything. Acquiring good qualities is vital. Education without character is utterly worthless. 


Go to the villages and serve the poor and the downtrodden. The essence of education is service to 
one's fellowmen. There is no greater occupation than service to society. Become leaders through 
service. Only when you lead such exemplary lives can you be deemed truly educated. 


Whatever may be the situation in other universities, the students from the Sathya Sai Institute 
should behave in an exemplary and ideal manner. Foster moral, spiritual and social values. 
Dedicate your lives to the upholding of morality. Officials without morality can never serve 
society properly. They can never protect the greatness of Bharath. 


Dear students! Uphold the ideals of education. Cultivate the love of God and inspire in everyone 
devotion to God. Live in God! Make others live in God! 


Benedictory discourse to the XI Convocation, Vidhyaagiri Stadium, 22 Nov 1992 


I did not insist that a person should have faith in God, I refuse to 
call any person a Nasthika, an atheist. Beings exist as a result of 
his will, in accordance with his plan; so no one is beyond His 
Grace. Besides, everyone has love towards some one thing or 
other, and that love is a spark of the Divine. One has to pay heed 
to truth and speak the Truth to someone in order to make life worth 
living. Now, that moment is God's Moment and at that moment 
when he utters the truth, or loves, or serves or bends, he is a theist. 


Sathya Sai Baba 


38. Revere The Mother: Serve The Motherland 


By being borne by Kausalya 

Rama fulfilled His divine role; 
Brought up by the noble 

exemplar of womanhood, Sita, 
The twins, Lava and Kusha, 

achieved glory; 
The loving care of Jijibai 

made Shivaji a heroic warrior. 
Fostered with love by Puthlibai 

Gandhi became a Mahatma. 
The first letter of the Spiritual 

alphabet is "Aatma" (Mother). 
Is there anything greater 

in the world than the 
Spirit that protects all 

living beings all the time ? 

Embodiments of Divine Aatma! There is nothing sweeter than maternal love. 


Forbearance lends beauty to man. Truth and integrity constitute the hard penance for man. The 
Divinity inherent in man is not recognised by him. Failing to realise that neethi (morality) is 
greater than one's Jaathi (community) and that Guna: (virtue) is greater than one's Ku/am (caste), 
man is laying waste his life. 


The ancient sages regarded human life as something sweet. Man's primary duty is to preserve the 
sacred sweetness of this life. This can be accomplished only through sacrifice. and not 
selfishness. To lose the sweet nature of life is to forfeit man's humanness. 


Maternal love is Divine 


The Divine sweetness in human life is derived from Maathru bhaavamu (maternal love). For the 
protection and rearing of her children, the mother is prepared to make every sacrifice. It is this 
spirit of sacrifice that makes motherhood infinitely precious. The Upanishads have declared that 
there is no other means than Thyaaga (sacrifice) to achieve immortality. 


There is no diviner or purer feeling than maternal love. Today people make no effort to cherish 
this feeling. Sri Rama declared: "The mother and the Motherland are greater than heaven itself." 


God is formless and attributeless. The unmanifested Divine is worshipped in various forms. God 
is not easily accessible to everyone. Nevertheless God is worshipped with faith in various ways 
and joy is derived therefrom. 


Among the sacred aphorisms cherished by Bharathiyas, the foremost are: "Maathru dhevo 
Bhava! Pithru dhevo Bhava!" (Adore the mother as God. Adore the father as God). The mother 
is the foremost deity for man as the visible embodiment of the Divine who can be directly 
experienced. Every son is aware of the mother's affection, care and concern. He knows how to 
please the mother and keep her happy. 


No one knows how the unmanifested Divine showers His grace or displays His displeasure, what 
He desires or disapproves. One can lead a sacred life by adoring the mother, instead of 
worshipping the unmanifested Divine. The Chaithanyam (Aatmic Consciousness) that is present 
in the Divine is also present in living beings. 


Macrocosm in microcosm 


If this is the case, a doubt may arise. What is the need for giving a unique place to God? When 
you look at an array of electric bulbs, they may all look alike. But there are differences in 
wattage amongst them according to the filament in them. The wattage may vary from 40 to 5000 
watts. Likewise, in all human beings the five elements, the five organs of action and the five 
organs of perception, and other organs are common. But in their thoughts and fancies there are 
differences. The sacred and remarkable Divine potency in each of them is also different. It is 
because this Divine potency is present in God in infinite measure that the uniqueness of God is 
recognised. It has been said: "Yatha pinde, thatha Brahmaade" (What is in the microcosm is in 
the macrocosm). Brahmaanda, the macrocosm is regarded as Viraata Swarupa (the Cosmic 
form) and the microcosm is regarded as the atomic nucleus. This is a wrong view. What is 
present in the atom, is present in the Cosmos. There is no difference between the two. A small 
seed carries within it the potential of becoming a big tree. The Cosmic Form is not a mere 
aggregation of various objects. It does not signify the one in the many. The Cosmic Form means 
that which contains within itself everything. 


Illumine your lives by the sunshine of Vairaagya 


You cannot see the vast tree contained in the tiny seed. Likewise, the atomic principle contains 
the macrocosm in microcosm. Equally, the divinity present in God (the macrocosm) is present in 
man in a subtle form like the fire in a match stick. You cannot get fire out of a damp match stick. 
Man is filled with the fire of Divine wisdom and sacredness. But it is not perceptible in spite of 
spiritual exercises, severe penance and many good deeds. The reason is the fact that the mind is 
dampened by Ahamkaara and Mamakaara (egoistic and acquisitive tendencies). It is only when 
this dampness is removed by the sunshine of Vairaagya (detachment) that an illumined life 
becomes possible. 


Man today is well informed about myriad things. But he is ignorant of his own true nature. Of 
what avail is all knowledge if one cannot get rid of his bad qualities and realise his true nature? 
All accomplishments and possessions are of no use to man. Only a godly life can redeem him. 


A nation's prosperity does not come down from the sky or sprout from the earth. It is based on 
man's actions. Man's conduct has to be purified. Men today have forgotten the greatness of the 
mother and the duties of the son. How can man expect to get the bliss for which he aspires if he 
fails to discharge his duties, forgets his humanness, turns his face away from God, and goes after 
worldly pleasures? 


Rama's deep devotion to His parents 


At his father's behest, Rama accompanied the sage Viswamithra, protected his Yaga and reached 
Mithila with the Sage. After Rama had handled the bow of Shiva, Emperor Janaka, according to 
his earlier declaration, wanted to offer in marriage his daughter Sita to Rama. But Rama was not 
willing to go through the marriage without the approval of his parents. Viswamithra tried to 
persuade Rama in many ways, but Rama deemed the sanction of his parents more essential than 
obeying the words of the preceptor. Rama did not venture even to look at Sita until his parents 
arrived and agreed to the alliance. 


Bharath today has forgotten this divine message of Rama, revealing his deep devotion to his 
mother and father. To carry out the injunctions of his father, Rama went into exile and spent 
fourteen years in the forest. He deemed adherence to Truth as the highest penance. When Rama 
was in the forest, Bharatha, accompanied by Vasishtha and others, went to him to persuade him 
to return to the Kingdom. Rama told Vasishtha: "Guruji, life is not more precious than respect 
for truth. I have entered the forest to comply with my father's command, If I go back to the 
Kingdom, I will be betraying my father's pledge. I would sooner give up my life than give up my 
adherence to truth." 


The story of Rama has been teaching to the world the supreme greatness of a life based on truth, 
sacrifice, integrity and morality. 


Krishna's lesson to Gaandhaari 


That man is to be pitied who has not earned the grace of his mother, who has not enjoyed the 
loving looks of his mother and who has not tried to please her. This is illustrated by an episode 
from the Mahabharatha. After all the Kauravas had been slain in battle, Krishna went to their 
blind old father, Dhritharashtra, and his wife Gaandhaari to console them. Unable to restrain her 
bitterness and grief, Gaandhaari blamed Krishna in harsh terms. Krishna told her: "Gaandhaari! 
You are making a grievous mistake. From the time of their birth, did you look at any of your 
children? If the Kauravas did not benefit from your own sight, how can they be seen by me?" 
This means one who has not received the loving look of his mother does not deserve the gracious 
look of the Divine. In Bharath today, this Dharmic principle has been erased. Immersed in selfish 
concerns, people are forgetting the Divine and giving up all principles of morality and justice. 
Looking at the state of things in Bharath today, it is clear that the nation has gone down in moral 
stature a great deal. 


Embodiments of Love! Recognise the truth that morality is the primary requisite of human 
society. You have to perform your duties and discharge your obligations. You must be united 
and take part in social service. Union is strength. It promotes the welfare of all. If one does not 
strive for unity and progress, how can he serve society? Even small ants acting in union can 
destroy a serpent. Today unity is being undermined in the country. There are differences in every 
home. Institutions without unity ultimately collapse. A divided nation faces destruction. Hence, 
for the welfare of the nation, all must live in unity. Distinctions of high and low should be given 
up. The nation's welfare alone must be kept in mind. 


You are well aware of the divisions in every political party. These divisions are breaking the 
parties into fragments. If this fragmentation goes on, how can the nation progress? The 
individual who is concerned about the welfare of the nation should eschew self-interest, cultivate 


the spirit of unity and work for the progress of the nation. This should be the first motto of the 
country. 


Uphold the culture of Bharath as a true citizen 


Those who claim to be citizens of Bharath are oblivious to the honour and prestige of the nation. 
The man who is not proud of this motherland and his mother tongue is worse than a corpse. If 
you proclaim yourself a citizen of Bharath, you should uphold the culture of Bharath. You 
should conduct yourself according to Bharathiya culture. 


If unity is lost, what can anyone accomplish? If there are three persons in a house, there can be 
peace in the house only if the three live in harmony. In every individual, there are three entities 
in the body that is his dwelling: the Manas (mind), the Vaak (tongue) and Kaayam (the organs of 
actions). It is only when these three entities function harmoniously that the individual can have 
peace. When there is discord between them, how can peace be got? 


No room for lazy persons in Bharath 


Manifest the divinity that is in you. Only then you can be a true vyakthi (individual). Practise 
sadhana for this purpose. Jettison your worldly attachments. Develop love so that you may get 
rid of divisive feelings in you. 


It is extremely unfortunate that men should waste their human lives, which are so precious and 
sacred. Life is short and men should make good use of their divine potentialities without wasting 
time. Two hands have been given to man for feeding himself and rendering service. There is no 
room for lazy persons in Bharath. One who does not work has no right to eat. Work, work and 
work! That is your duty. Consider what is appropriate in a particular situation and act 
accordingly. 


Few try to understand the ways of the Divine. They are beyond the comprehension of the 
intellectuals. God is omnipotent. This is beyond doubt. The lamp shines because of the Divine. 
The power of the wind which can blow out the lamp also comes from God. It is ridiculous to 
expose a lamp to a strong wind and pray to God not to allow the light to go out. The powers of 
the Divine are to be rightly understood and used in the appropriate way. 


Once a devotee asked Swami why He should not convert all sea water into petrol because of the 
steep rise in the price of petrol. The devotee had read a report of Bhagavan's conversion of water 
into petrol on one occasion. Swami told him. "You are no doubt intelligent, but your intelligence 
is not functioning properly. If the seas around India are converted to petrol, what will happen if a 
witless person like you, walking on the beach, throws a burning cigarette in the sea. There will 
be a holocaust. Have you thought about this possibility? Have you any concern for the welfare of 
the country? It is stupid to make suggestions of this kind." 


There are many such scatter-brained persons in the world. They are posing as highly intelligent 
persons. They come forward to criticise God. No one has the fight or the competence to criticise 
God. God can do anything by an act of will. All actions performed selflessly are godly. 


God is present in all beings. Everything in the Cosmos is a form of the Divine. The Divine power 
sustains everybody at all times. Hence every man is an embodiment of God. Once you have that 
faith, you will not be inclined to follow the wrong path. 


Who is Sai? 


Everyone should strive to recognise the divinity that is present in all. This effort has to be made 
by everyone. Human birth has been given for this purpose. It cannot be left to God. 


There are many who do not understand the Sai principle. Who is this Sai? Why are certain things 
happening in this manner? These questions are asked. 


I am not a sanyasi (renunciant). I am not a yogi. I am not a bhogi (pleasure-seeker). I am not a 
thyaagi (one who sacrifices). Iam I. This "I" is the first name given to the Aatma. A renunciant is 
bound by certain restrictions. The pleasure-seeker is bound in other ways. I have no limitations. 
Mine is boundless bliss. My name is "I." It is not a name given after one's birth. To understand 
Me, everyone has to realise that the "I" is present in everyone. The "I" is used by everyone in 
every context, whether he is a millionaire or a pauper. This "I" is Brahman---"Aham 
Brahmaasmi." Everyone uses the "I" from dawn to dusk without understanding its meaning. 


Offer every action of daily life to God 


Students! As future citizens of the nation you have to conduct yourselves in an exemplary 
manner. Remember that there is no special merit in so-called spiritual exercises. Every action in 
daily life calls for Dhyana (concentration) and has to be sanctified by performing it as an 
offering to God. A farmer tilling his field should feel at the same time that he is tilling the field 
of his heart. While sowing seeds, he should sow the seeds of good qualities in his heart. While 
watering the field, he should think he is watering the field of his heart with love. In this way, 
everyone can pursue the spiritual path without the aid of rosary or betaking himself to the forest. 


Today, the foremost need is the promotion of unity. Irrespective of physical and ideological 
differences, the Aatma principle is common to all. 


It has to be recognised that individuals are integrally related to Society like the different organs 
in a body. Humanity itself is a limb of Nature and Prakruthi (nature) is a limb. of God (the 
Omni-Self). If this integral relationship is understood, where is the ground for hatred? No one 
should consider himself as insignificant or unimportant. Everyone, small or big, is a vital part of 
the whole and is essential for its proper functioning like all the parts in a rocket. Any small 
defective part may cause the rocket to explode. Likewise, in this vast Cosmos every being has a 
significant role to play to ensure its smooth functioning. 


We celebrate many festivals in connection with birthdays or other occasions. It is not the 
festivities that are important, not the dresses, not the speeches. Feelings are what are important. 
Without purity of thought, purity of wisdom cannot be got. Seek to purify your minds. 


Cultivate selfless love towards all and engage yourselves in social service. I have often declared: 
"Graama Seva is Rama Seva" (service to the villagers is service to Rama). 


Enshrine Rama in your heart 


It is a mistake to think only of constructing a temple for Rama. In this vast land of Bharath of 
what use is it to raise a temple for Rama in any particular place? Everyone's heart should be 
converted into a temple for Rama. The land of Bharath should be cherished as the Ramarajya 
(Kingdom of Rama). What does Ramarajya mean? It does not refer to any particular state. Unity 
in thought, word and deed constitutes Ramarajya. Today, there is no unity, no purity, no 
awareness of Divinity. People are wallowing in the mire of "community." This is not the primary 


duty of man. When there is discord between thought, word and deed, humanness is undermined. 
Unity has to be promoted to foster humanness. 


Bharathiya culture belongs to all mankind. Time, place and conditions of life may vary. But the 
basic principles governing human conduct are the same. If people want to proceed to a higher 
state, the first requisite is improvement in one's conduct. When the foundation under your feet is 
shaky, how can you expect to build up the mansion of life? Your conduct is the foundation, Your 
actions are the means. Develop faith. Without faith life is a waste. Man today believes in 
everything except God. This is his misfortune. 


God is omnipresent. The man who has no faith in God has no faith in himself. Develop self- 
confidence, which is the basis for any nation's progress. On that foundation of faith erect the 
walls of Ananda (Bliss). Then place the ceiling of Vairaagya (detachment) on them. Live under 
the roof of thyaaga (sacrifice). This is the way to Self-realisation. Chant the name of the Lord to 
secure mental peace and purify the heart. You can then lead a Godly life. 


Vidhyaagiri Stadium, Bhagavan's Birthday, 23 Nov 1992 


39. Unity Based On Divinity 


Embodiments of Divine Love! In the world today all those who are held in high esteem as great 
personages have earned their good name only by their character and conduct. To accomplish 
anything one wants, one should have firm determination. Those with fickle minds cannot achieve 
anything. 


All religions and scriptures agree that going to the aid of fellow-beings in times of need and 
saving them from distressing situations is the greatest virtue of a person. Every human being has 
equal rights in the world. All belong to one family. To enjoy peace of mind, it is essential to 
practice forbearance and equanimity. There are persons good and bad, rich and poor, educated 
and uneducated in every country of the world. Though born in the same family and breathing the 
same air, some persons are narrow minded and have crooked ideas and indulge in selfish deeds, 
while others are good and selfless. 


"Suhrudham Sarva bhuuthaanaam," "Ekaathma Sarvabhuutha antharaatma" are well known 
aphorisms from the scriptures. To be friendly towards all beings is the duty of everyone, since 
the same A atma is there in all beings. Comprehending this truth, it is the duty of everyone born 
as a human being to do good to others on the basis of love. 


There is no need to search for God anywhere, since God resides in every being. The body is, 
therefore, to be considered as the temple of God. Today man is breeding bad thoughts in the 
mind, thereby polluting the heart which is the seat of the Divine. 


Four kinds of potentialities of human beings 


In every human being, there are four kinds of potentialities, namely, animal, demonic, human 
and Divine. 


The one with the divine quality will be a Brahma-Nishtha or one engaged in the contemplation 
of the Aatma within and will enjoy Aatmic bliss and sanctify every moment of his life by doing 
good deeds. He realises that the same Aatma is them in all beings as the Antharaatma (Inner 
Self) and leads a blissful life, discarding selfish thoughts. He is a Brahma Jnaani or Aatma 
Jnaani, a realised soul, who is aware of the truth that revering others is revering the Lord and 
hurting others is hurting the Lord. Such persons radiate divinity though they are in a human 
body. 


The "human" type of persons follow the path of Truth and Righteousness--Sathya Dharma paro 
marthyah. They are engaged in activities in strict accordance with Sathya and Dharma (Truth 
and Righteousness), using their sense of discrimination in the fight manner. They discharge their 
responsibilities without craving for position, power, pelf or fame. Such a person lives in harmony 
with his fellow beings and discharges his duties with firm belief in the three precepts: fear of sin, 
love of God and morality in society. 


The next type is the demonic person. Such a person does not care for the code of conduct for 
human beings, indulges in the shameless pursuit of sensual pleasures, is filled with ego and 
pride, and does not hesitate to hurt others for selfish purposes. He goes on nonchalantly 
committing sinful deeds. Egoism is his life breath and attachment is his backbone. Such a selfish 
person is termed as demonic. 


One who lacks wisdom is like an animal 


"JInaana Viheenah Pashubhih Samaanaha" (The man lacking wisdom is like an animal). A 
person who is steeped in ignorance is considered to be no better than an animal. Such a person's 
life is centred only on sense gratification. His thoughts never go beyond the senses because of his 
ignorance of the divinity within him. He deems the transient earthly pleasures as heavenly bliss 
and lives in delusion devoid of discrimination. 


Every man must make an effort to rise to humanness, shedding his animal and demonic qualities, 
and then strive to realise his divine nature. Nowadays, we find that men are going down in the 
reverse direction, from the human to the demonic and animal states. 


The message of Jesus Christ 


On December 25th, when Jesus was born, three kings. came to his birthplace. These three gave 
expression to three different views about the new-born babe. One of them, looking at the infant, 
said: "This child looks like one who will be a lover of God." A second king said: "God will love 
this child." The third king declared: "Verily, this child is God Himself." The first one viewed the 
child from the physical point of view. The second saw the child from the mental viewpoint. The 
third saw from the Aatmic (spiritual) point of view. 


The three declarations indicate how one can progress from the human to the divine level. What is 
needed is the destruction of the animal and demonic qualities in man. Man today worships 
inanimate idols and images, but makes no attempt to love his fellow human beings in flesh and 
blood. This was the first message of Jesus. Though one sees his neighbours day after day, he 
does not choose to love them. How can one believe that such a person can love an invisible God? 
If a man cannot love a fellow human being who is visible before his eyes, how can he love what 
is not visible to him? This is not possible. Only a man who loves living beings around him can 
love the invisible Divine. Love must start with love for beings that have form. It must be 
extended to all beings. This is the primary stage in spirituality. 


Spirituality does not mean preoccupation with meditation, worship, etc. It involves total 
extinction of the animal and demonic qualifies in man and the manifestation of his inherent di- 
vinity. When the attachments and hatreds in which man is enveloped are removed, the inherent 
divinity in man, the Sath-chith-ananda in him will manifest Itself. 


There is no need to search for the omnipresent Divine in any specific place. When you are 
yourself divine, why search for the Divine elsewhere? It is a mark of ignorance. 


How Jesus Christ's message was accepted 


Jesus performed many miraculous deeds, relieved the sufferings of many in distress, preached 
sublime truths to the people, and ultimately sacrificed his life. For over a hundred years after his 
martyrdom, Christ's message did not have any impact. Four centuries later, Christianity was 
accepted by Roman emperors. Even after many centuries humanity is yet to realise the inherent 
divinity of man. 


Man is searching for a reason for every belief or action. Should you seek a reason for sanctifying 
the time spent by you on any action? When you are engaged in unselfish activity for the common 
good of society and discharging your duties with dedication, you are sanctifying your life. 


There are four basic elements in every action. They are Kaarana, Karma, Kaala and 
Karthavyam. Kaarana is the reason, Karma is the action, Kaala is the time and Karthavyam is 


the duty that has been discharged. We can cite an example for this. Supposing you want to go to 
Madras to see your relatives; you go to the bus-stand in the morning, sit in the bus, travel for 
eight hours and reach Madras in the evening. Now,-seeing your relatives is Kaarana (cause). 
Sitting in the bus and travelling is karma (action). Spending eight hours is Kaala (time factor) 
and seeing your relatives in Madras and getting satisfaction therefrom is Karthavyam (goal). 


If you do the same things in your dream, there is no time factor. The cause and action factors are 
also absent. As soon as you wake up, you find that you are only in the bed and discover that your 
seeing your relatives in Madras was unreal. All the four factors are absent in the dream state. 
Only where all the four are present will it be real. 


The purpose in view is termed Lakshyam. You are born as a human being for doing your Karma 
(duty). Life is given to you only to recognise Divinity and the body is the instrument for 
achieving this Kaarana (purpose). When you have spent your life, you have done the karma 
(action) in the duration of your /ife--kaala. You should have the satisfaction of having achieved 
the karthavyam (goal). 


Christ preached only this truth and taught the people that the body should be used for service to 
society. This is the teaching of Vedanta. Vedanta declares that the body is intended only to do 
actions in the world in a selfless way. 


The genesis of the Christmas tree 


Jesus was crucified on a Friday and He rose from the tomb on a Sunday. That is why Sunday is 
taken as the day of worship and service in churches. Catholics gave importance to Virgin Mary, 
the mother of Christ, while Protestants gave importance to the birth of Christ. Catholics celebrate 
Christmas by worshipping Mary on the evening of 24th and Protestants celebrate the birth of 
Christ on the 25th. There is a custom of putting up a Christmas tree on this day and worshipping 
it. The genesis of this custom can be traced to Germany. A preacher by name Jensen from 
England once visited Germany. When he was travelling in Germany on his mission, he noticed 
some Germans attempting to offer a child's life as sacrifice to propitiate God who, they believed, 
lived in an oak tree. The priest was worried and questioned them why they were offering an 
innocent child as sacrifice to a tree. As they asserted that God lived in the tree, he took an axe 
and cut the tree. To his surprise, he was shaken by an inexplicable vibration from head to foot. 
He noticed the form of a child between the two portions of the tree that was cut by him. 


System of worshipping Divinity in many forms 


This incident teaches the truth that God lives not only in human beings but also in plants and 
trees. From that time onwards people started putting up a Christmas tree and worshipping it on 
this Christmas day. The system of worshipping Divinity in many forms including plants and 
stones, which originated in Bharath, has been prevalent for a long time in other countries also. 


There are sanyasis even among Christians. The men are called monks and the women are called 
nuns. There is no difference in this regard among the various religions. In all religions the goal is 
one. Christianity propagated this oneness of God. But nowadays the pure, permanent Aatmic 
principle is forgotten in the preoccupation with worldly pursuits. (Bhagavan then described how 
the practice of having grandfather Christmas wearing a red robe and distributing gifts to children 
on Christmas day came into existence. Swami related the story of Nicholas, who began this 
practice when he became head of a church). 


Heart is the seat of Truth 


In all religions, birthdays of great personalities are celebrated but the ideals for which they lived 
are not remembered and followed. If you do not care to follows their teachings the celebrations 
lose their meaning and become artificial observances. It is not doing justice to the good people 
whose birthdays are being celebrated. Christ taught people to love all beings and serve all with 
compassion. It is only by practising these ideals that one can truly celebrate His birthday. The 
Divinity within should be reflected in every action. The seat of Truth is in your heart. Worship 
means loving others with your full heart. You must live in love and lead a life of selfless service 
based on love. This is the only fight way of celebrating the birth of Christ. 


God, in fact, has no birth and no death. No change is there in God, who is changeless and 
permanent. The Aatma within is but a reflection of God and it is the same in all beings as an 
eternal witness. Birth and death pertain only to the body. It is not correct to worship the body. 
Through Saakaara (the transient body) man has to merge in Niraakaara (the ultimate Supreme 
Reality). 


Embodiments of the Divine Aatma! Christmas is celebrated in innumerable places all over the 
world. Nowhere in the world is it done in the way it is celebrated here in Prashanthi Nilayam. 
People elsewhere may attend some church service and revel in drinking and dining parties. But, 
here, people from many countries in the world, speaking many languages, following different 
faiths and cultures, assemble together unitedly, start the day with singing God's name and glory 
regardless of their differences, join in spending the day in carrying the message of Universal 
love. This is Unity in diversity and true Adwaitha in action. Every minute we are experiencing 
this. Whenever one makes Namaskaram to elders, what is its significance? It signifies the 
bringing together of the five senses of perception and the five senses of action into one, thus 
unifying the different senses. In namaskaram you have "na" and "maskaram"; "na" means "no", 
which indicates that your ego is given up, and you have no body consciousness. The unity of all 
the sense organs will wipe out the Ahamkaara. This will lead to purity and purity will lead to 
divinity. This unity can be seen only in Prashanthi Nilayam. 


Nowadays politicians and preachers talk of unity and purity but in practice it is not followed by 
the preachers themselves. It is only in Prashanthi Nilayam that this unity and purity are 
pervading naturally without any effort from anyone. All are living here like brothers and sisters 
of the same family. 


The power of love in Prashanthi Nilayam 


There are a number of foreigners here,, who are very affluent and command princely comforts in 
their places, who have to put up with an austere life. They live in sheds in a spirit of fellowship 
and camaraderie though bereft of even the minimum comforts. They could not enjoy their life in 
their big mansions as much as they enjoy their stay here in such uncomfortable conditions. The 
reason is the Divine Love in them. If there is no such love in you, you cannot live here in such 
uncomfortable conditions even for a minute. 


Embodiments of Divine Love! Devotees who have come from far off countries! You are putting 
up with the life here in spite of the lack of amenities to which you are normally accustomed back 
home and are feeling happy. This is indeed a big Sadhana and can be termed even as Thapas or 
penance. 


The foreigners, in spite of their discomforts and difficulties, radiate joy through their smiling 
faces. This is because of their love for Swami. They are spending a lot of money to come here 
and undergo the rigours of the disciplined life here most willingly and yet are always happy. But 
in spite of all comforts, the people of our own country who gather here do not present a cheerful 
countenance. 


Embodiments of Love! One who is having constant remembrance of God, with love and 
devotion, will ever be happy whether he is in a village or a city, flying in the sky or in a forest, 
because God dances in his heart and confers delight. 


Because of the lack of unity, this nation is experiencing a lot of difficulties and turmoil. 
Promotion of unity is essential for peace in the nation and the word. There is no use in simply 
greeting others with words coming from the lips; greetings should come from the heart with 
sincerity and love. 


Poornachandra Auditorium, Christmas day, 25 Dec 1992 


The grace of God cannot be won through the gymnastics of reason, 
the contortions of yoga or denials of asceticism. Love alone can 
win it, love that needs no requital, love that knows no bargaining, 
love that is paid gladly as tribute to all living. Love that is 
unwavering. 


Sathya Sai Baba 


