1. The triple purity 


Devotion alone bestows the supreme good; 


Devotion alone is the destroyer of the disease of the cycle of birth 
and death; 


Devotion alone is the means of recognizing Divinity; 
Devotion alone is the means of Liberation. 


EMBODIMENTS of Love! Only through devotion does man attain the supreme Truth. Through 
devotion alone does man get release from the disease of birth and death. Through devotion man 
seeks to realise God. Through devotion alone he achieves Liberation. 


Esteeming Bhakthi (devotion) as the supreme end and the highest goal of life, Bhaaratheeyas 
have been pursuing the path of devotion from ancient times. 


The term Bhakthi (devotion) has been interpreted in many ways. The word Bhakthi is derived 
from the root 'Bhaj.' "Bhaja Sevaayaam," declared Shankara. "Service is devotion," according to 
Shankaraachaarya. Whom do you serve? What is the form of service? Service to God is true 
form of service. 


Viveka Chudaamani (of Shankaraachaarya) expounded the meaning of Bhakthi in a different 
way. "Svasvaruupa dharshanam Bhakthi" (The recognition of one's own true Self is Bhakthi). 


Naaradha, who was a great exponent of devotion, declared: "Bhaja Paramabhakthih." Naaradha 
defined Bhakthi as the ceaseless flow of devotion arising from dwelling on the Lord's name. 


He also declared that one who is filled with Paramabhakthi (supreme devotion) is in a state of 
intoxication, forgetful of the body, totally immersed in the love of the Divine. This means that 
true devotion consists in obliviousness of the body and total absorption in the love of God. 


Raadha and Bhakthi 


Raamaanuja who is the exponent of the Visishtaadhvaitha philosophy, derived the meaning of 
Bhakthi from the name of Raadha and interpreted it as the continuous flow of love for God. The 
word 'Raadha' contains four syllables: Ra, aa, dh, and aa. If you read the word starting from Ra, 
you have Raadha. Starting from aa, you get the word Aadhaara. Starting from Dh you get the 
word, Dhaaraa. Starting form the second: aa, you get the word Aaraadha. Aadhaara means 
"basis." Dhaaraa means "continuous flow." Aaraadha means "worship." Thus Raadha signified 
for Raamaanuja the continuous stream of worship of the Divine. 


Vallabhaaehaarya gave a different interpretation of devotion. He made a distinction between the 
continuous flow of devotion and devotion falling in drops. When a devotee's heart is completely 
filled with the love of God, he ceaselessly chants the name of God. This state of mind of the 
devotee was described thus, "Sarvadhaa Sarvakaaleshu Sarvathra Harichinthanam" (ceaselessly 
thinking of God at all times and at all places). 


True devotion is to regard God as friend 


Maadhvaachaarya described true devotion as regarding God as the only unfailing friend. All 
others may be friends for some time and turn inimical later. Thus all worldly friends may turn 


into enemies some time or other. God is the only true friend. Maadhvaachaarya defined true 
devotion as the manifestation of the love for God, considering Him as the greatest friend. 


The Vedhas have proclaimed a truth transcending all these interpretations. The Vedhas 
repeatedly harked upon two words: Nithyam and Svagatha. Nithyam is that which remains 
unchanged through all times. This has also been described as Truth which remains the same in 
all the 'three’ categories of time past, present and future. Svaagatha refers to that illuminating 
power, which remaining alone spreads its effulgence all around. 


This is illustrated by the sun, who is one entity that is unchanging and spreads his light all round. 
The permanence of the sun indicates the attribute of Nithva and the dispersal of his light 
indicates the quality of Svaagatha. Both the qualities are rooted in a single entity. The smrithi 
referred to this characteristic as Svaruupa-Svabhaava (the combination of form and quality). 


The sun has two qualities: One is shedding light; the other is transmitting heat. Likewise, the 
Aathma has two qualities. One is: Prabhaava (effulgence). The other is spreading the light all 
around. You have the example of a lamp in your home. The lamp is one, but its light illumines 
the whole house. 


Likewise, the Aathma (Spirit) is one only in its form. It is eternal and unchanging. The Smrithi 
described it as: Sathyam, Jnaanam, Anantham Brahma (The Supreme Self is truth, wisdom and 
infinite). It is the nature of the Self to spread Jnaana (spiritual wisdom) everywhere. 


The Smrithi declared that the Self has the form of Anu (the atom). The implication of this is that 
there is nothing in the universe without atoms. All material objects are made up of atoms. The 
scripture declared that God is omnipresent as Anusvaruupa. God is present also as the 
macrocosm. 


Dharmee and Dharma 


The Anusvaruupa (micro-essence) of God is termed Dharmee. In this form, Dharmee is present 
in all objects in creation, but none of them is present in Dharmee. All objects in the universe 
appear as different from each other, but the Divine principle in all of them is one and the same. 
That Divine principle, which manifests the oneness underlying all objects, is called Dharmee. 
This means that Dharmee is what unifies all apparently manifold objects. Dharma demonstrates 
the diversity in the forms of objects. The underlying principle which reveals the oneness of all 
these objects is Dharmee. This Dharmee is described by the Vedha as Muulaadhaara 
padhaartham---the thing that is at the root of all things. This primal basic substance is the basis 
for everything else. Today the significance of this Dharmee is being forgotten. It is also forgotten 
that this Dharmee is all-pervading. 


As the all-pervading Dharmee (divinity) is present in all objects as the subtle atom, man is 
regarded as Dharma-Svaruupa, the embodiment of Dharma (righteousness). What for has man 
been given a body? What for does he exist? The scriptures say: "Shareeram aadhyam khalu 
dharma saadhanam" (the body verily is primary tool for realising righteousness). The body has 
been given to man to practise Dharma. 


Today men tend to forget the purpose for which they have come to existence. They ignore their 
duties. They go after meaningless fancies. Hence they are not able to understand their true 
nature. 


Role of festivals 


In order to make people understand their real divine nature, festivals were designed. Today is 
Vaikuntha Ekaadashi. What is Vaikuntha? The Lord's abode is described in various ways as 
Vaikuntha Kailaasa, Svarga etc. All these are fanciful names. 


What is the abode of God? The Lord told Naaradha: "I reside wherever my devotees sing my 
glories." The Lord dwells in the hearts of devotees. This is His main address. All other places are 
"branch offices." Any message addressed to the Divine Indweller in the heart is bound to reach 
God. Vaikuntha as the abode of God means a place which is changeless. Many things may 
change in a man, but his heart is changeless. What is meant by Ekaadhashi? This should not be 
regarded as some special place or time. The form of Ekaadhasha Rudhra is made up of the five 
organs of perception, the five organs of action and the mind. Rudhra is a resident of the human 
body, which is full of numerous potencies. Men today are forgetful of these potencies and the 
Divinity. that dwells in the heart. 


New year days come and go. Of what use are they? Samvathsara (the year) is one of the names 
of the Lord. Every moment is new. Why wait for a whole year to make the change in yourselves? 
As long as you are caught up in worldly celebrations of New year, Vaikuntha Ekaadashi and the 
like, God will elude you. You can realise God only when you forget the phenomenal world and 
the body-consciousness. 


The three active agencies in man 


Turn the love that arises in you towards God. Dedicate your body to the Divine. This is the true 
mark of devotion. There are three constituents in man: the mind, the power of speech and the 
body. These three are called Thrikaranas---the three active agencies in man. It is when all three 
are used for sacred purposes, man becomes sanctified. 


Every human being needs to cultivate the spirit, irrespective of his beliefs. All need devotion. It 
is only spirituality that can purify the heart and mind of man. The second requirement is 
morality. Morality helps to purify Vaak (speech). The third is Dhaarmikam. All righteous deeds 
done by the body or hands sanctify a man. It is through spirituality, morality and righteousness 
that the three instruments get purified. 


Only the one who has achieved this triple purity can realise the Divine, If any of these 
instruments are impure, he cannot realise the Divine. 


To comprehend the Divine, man has to understand the subtle atomic principle that pervades the 
entire cosmos. The difficulty in comprehending the Divine was recognized by the Gopikas who 
declared: "How can we know you, oh Krishna! You are the subtlest among the subtle and vaster 
than the vastest among the 84 lakhs of species in the cosmos." 


The three ornaments to cherish 


With faith in the omnipresence of the Divine, man should engage himself in good deeds, cherish 
good thoughts and dedicate his life to good practices. His words should be words of truth. The 
ornaments he should cherish are truthfulness in speech, charity for the hands and listening to 
sacred lore for the ears. 


Develop faith in your divinity. Then you will redeem your life. Follow your conscience. Make 
your heart pure. 


You cannot realise the Divine by immersing yourself in worldly concerns. There are two kinds of 
knowledge: Dharmee-bhuutha Jnaana and Dharma-bhuutha Jnaana. Dharmee-bhuutha Jnaana 
is knowledge related to forms. Dharma-bhuutha Jnaana is related to names. There is no basic 
difference between the two kinds of knowledge. Name and form are interrelated. This truth has 
to be understood. The awareness that shines within all beings is the form and nature of the 
Divine. This oneness of form and name has to be properly understood. Every such concept has 
an external and an inner meaning. You have to grasp the inner meaning. For instance, the mike 
here rests on the table. The table is the base. The table stands on the earth. The earth is the base 
and the table is supported by the earth. The base is called Aadhaara and the object supported by 
the base is called Aadheya. Today people tend to forget the Aadhaara and think only of the 
Aadheya. 


Anything can be accomplished with Divine support 


Embodiments of Love! The New Year comes regularly year after year. But do you have any new 
thoughts? You do not shed your old, mistaken ideas. They should be given up, yielding place to 
new, sacred and sublime thoughts. Of what use is it to celebrate new year days if you do not 
change your old ways of thinking and behaving? Make proper use of time which is both precious 
and sacred. Do not indulge in useless gossip. Develop good qualities like compassion, love and 
sympathy. Act as your own monitor and correct yourself by self-punishment. By a simple 
method you can control your wandering mind or your anger. Moreover, place your reliance on 
God. 


With the power of the Divine to sustain you there is nothing you cannot accomplish. Karna and 
Raavana are examples of powerful men who were destroyed because they did not have the power 
of the Divine behind them. The Paandavas were saved because of their faith in the Divine and 
their unity. Happenings in the world show how some families have prospered because of unity 
and how others have suffered because of divisions within the family. 


Today the nation needs unity above everything else. It is through faith in God that unity can be 
promoted. Look at the diversity of people in this hall, the different creeds they profess, the 
different nationalities to which they belong. All are united in their common allegiance to Svaami. 
By this single feeling of faith in the Divine, unity can be achieved. It is the absence of this faith 
that is the cause of division. 


All of you are embodiments of the Divine. All of you are embodiments of love and peace. You 
are the Divine in human form. Develop that conviction. Immerse yourselves in Divine love. 
Offer that love to the Divine. Thereby you will have love for all. It is only when you develop this 
love principle you will be realising the meaning of festivals like these. Stand up for your belief in 
God, even as you stand up for your father or mother. 


Render service to society, without which you cannot exist. Your welfare is bound with that of 
society. Develop the feeling of oneness with all, loving all as members of one Divine family. 


Discourse in Sai Kulwant Mandap on 1-1-1996. 


If you take one step towards Me, I take hundred steps towards you. 
Baba 


2. Learning a lesson from a child 


The farmer has no fear of going without food; 

One who chants the Lord's name has no fear of worries; 
The silent man has no fear of discord; 

The careful man has no fear of danger. 


EMBODIMENTS of Love! The hard-working farmer has no fear of starvation. The one who 
chants the name of God has no fear of worldly worries. The man of few words will be free from 
enmity. Through excessive talk man falls a prey to quarrels. Everyone should cultivate 
moderation in speech. Restraint in speech is conducive to friendly feelings. The one who is 
careful in his behaviour, doing all actions after due deliberation, will have no fear of danger. 


All these precepts are related to education. True education consists in knowing how to lead a 
peaceful life. This means that in embarking on one's educational career, one should aspire for 
world peace. The reason is, he is a part of the world community. His well-being is intimately 
bound up with the well-being of the world. He should give up all narrow feelings. Students have 
also got to acquire unity and fellowship. 


All these qualities cannot be taught by teachers. For every individual, Nature is the best teacher. 
Nature is teaching all lessons to man all the time. 


The supreme virtue in a man 


What lends beauty to sports and games is the spirit of unity with which the participants play in 
them, eschewing feelings of envy and hatred. The supreme virtue in a man is to forget his 
individual differences with others and move with them in a spirit of equality and harmony. 


Today people derive only physical fitness and strength from taking part in sports and games. But 
man is not the body alone. Fulfillment in life is not attained by physical health and strength 
alone. Even when the stomach is full, 'the mind must get satisfaction. Hence, efforts should be 
made to promote mental health also. Only when both the mind and the body are hale and well 
can one experience happiness. However, young people today are concerned only about physical 
appearance and fitness. 


Man is endowed by Divine grace with physical, mental and spiritual potencies of many kinds. 
Unfortunately young people tend to misuse these powers and come to grief. They do not 
recognise the magnitude of their internal powers. The mind is the source of all powers. Only 
when the mind is subdued can man realise the Divine. 


Use and abuse of energies present in man 


For achieving anything, strong determination is necessary. Young people in particular should 
take note of the powers in them. It is comparable to a kind of electrical energy. This energy 
enables them to see things through the eye (which is like a bulb). You must ensure that your 
vision is pure, sacred and pleasing. Do not taint or pollute your sight by looking at undesirable 
objects. Do not look at anything with bad thoughts. The eyes are spoilt by misuse. 


Then you have circulating in the entire body a magnetic energy. Although this energy is present 
throughout the body, its presence is conspicuous in the hand. Hence the hands should be 
employed for good purposes. They should not be used for doing harm to others or hurting them. 


Moreover, there are in the body rays emitting light. The electrical energy in the body serves to 
transmit these rays throughout the body like radio waves. People do not use these energies for 
right purposes. The ears listen to gossip, slander and evil talk. The result is that the power of 
hearing gets polluted. 


Then, you have the power of speech. This power finds expression in sound waves. This power 
has to be used with great care. The words one utters should be examined to see that they do not 
excite, irritate or anger others. Bad words come back to the speaker with double strength. Hence 
one's speech should be soft and sweet. 


The major weakness of young people is the tendency to misuse their boundless potencies. This 
degrades them as human beings. 


Young people, failing to exercise control over their actions, tend to become unruly and 
ungovernable. You may be great scholars or intellectual giants. There are many Nobel Laureates. 
How many remember them? But the great benefactors of mankind, the men of noble qualities, 
are cherished by all mankind. For instance, there is the example of a noble soul from Calcutta. 
Calcutta produced many great intellectuals. After a time they are not remembered at all. But if 
today Raamakrishna Paramahamsa, an illiterate person, is enshrined in the hearts of millions all 
over the world, is education responsible for it? Likewise, if many noble persons are enshrined in 
the hearts of people, what is the reason? They have earned their good name by their faith in God, 
their character, magnanimity and. spirit of sacrifice. God has been the prime factor in their lives. 


A child's faith in God 


The other day you witnessed in the sports festival a young child dancing as Krishna on the hood 
of a serpent. Owing to the firing of some crackers, the cloth on a platform where the child was 
dancing caught fire. As the flames rose, the police, the students and others rushed to the spot 
with buckets of water to put out the fire. There was great commotion. But the child Krishna went 
on with his-dance, totally indifferent to what was happening all around. His entire concentration 
was on the role he was playing. The child went on with the dance with his concentration on 
Svaami. His eyes were centred on Svaami. When one's look is centred on the Lord, nothing 
untoward can happen. All around the child, the decorations had been prepared with paper. 
Behind the decorations five hundred children were seated. What disaster might have happened if 
the fire had spread towards them? But, even a mountain of danger will melt away like lee if one's 
thoughts are centred on God. This means that together with concern for worldly things, there 
should be devotion to God. Together with education Samskaara (refinement of character) is 
essential. 


What is meant by Samskaara? "Samyak Krithi ithi Samskaara" (Refinement of action is culture). 
The true implication of the benediction, "Lokaas-Samasthaas-Sukhino-Bhavanthu" is not 
properly understood. "All should be happy." This is the assurance of the Divine. 


Valmeeki, Vyaasa and Pothana 


How did a highwayman like Rathnaakara become the immortal author of the great epic 
Raamaayana? By continuous chanting of the name of the lord, as taught to him by the 
Saptharishis (seven great sages), his face acquired a new effulgence and he could become the 
sage Valmeeki, who is immortalized as the author of the Raamaayana. He composed his work to 
please the Lord. He did everything in a spirit of dedication to the Lord. 


Take the case of Sage Vyaasa. He was the author of eighteen puraanas (ancient spiritual epics). 
He wrote the Mahaabhaaratha and many other great works. But it was only when he was filled 
with divine fervour and wrote the Bhaagavatham that he became enshrined in the hearts of the 
people. Valmeeki and Vyaasa have become immortal through their devotion. 


We have Pothana, the author of the Thelugu Bhaagavatham. He began writing his Bhagavatham 
with an invocation in which he declared: "What is being composed is Bhaagavatham. The one 
who inspires the writer is Raamachandhra. What is written by me will be redemptive. I shall 
write, as there is no greater story to tell." Pothana began composing his magnum opus with the 
feeling that everything he was doing was by the will of Shri Raama. So, when you think of 
Bhaagavatham, you are reminded of Pothana. By his great work he has installed himself in the 
hearts of the devout. 


Mind should be directed towards God 


Students should not end with mastery of books. The hearts should be filled with right knowledge. 
The students should see that the darkness which envelops the mind is dispelled. This was the 
prayer which the gopikas requested Uddhava to convey to Krishna: "Oh Krishna! Dispel the 
darkness in our-hearts and fill them with your effulgence. Pour your love on the parched fields of 
our hearts so that devotion may sprout from them." 


The gopikas and gopalas prayed to Krishna that they could not live apart form Him that therefore 
they should be endowed with forms related to whatever forms He took so that they could stay 
with Him. Separation from God is the cause of men's wallowing in sensuous pleasures. The mind 
is the cause of man's pleasure and pain. It should be directed towards God to secure freedom 
from pleasure and pain. 


God will not give up devotees 


People today speak about God having forgotten man. This is not true. God can never give up the 
devotee. It is the devotee who gives up God. God can never forget the devotee. It is the devotee 
who forgets God. God is never away from you. Only the devotee is away from God. You think 
that God is moving away from you. Not at all. You forget God and declare that God has 
forgotten you. Your own feelings are reflected in your utterances. What is the result of 
education? You find that in any conference, the members criticize one another in unspeakable 
terms. The critics are invariably petty-minded persons. Many leaders today indulge in mutual 
mud slinging, which is totally unbecoming. Indulging in abuse of others is a grievous sin. 
Develop your own good qualities and share them with others. That is the right way. Try to 
correct yourself rather than to criticize others. 


Most young people today indulge in slander, instead of cultivating qualities like devotion to God, 
service to society and sympathy for fellow-beings. They should realise that they have to lead 
exemplary lives and serve their fellowmen. Every individual should dedicate himself to social 
service. 


The spirit of sportsmanship which you display in sports and games should be displayed in other 
fields also. The determination displayed in sports should also be shown in the game of life. 


You young people have to learn many things. First and foremost, get rid of Ahamkaara 
(arrogance). Earn a good name as a scholar, a man of character, endowed with a spirit of 
sacrifice. Realise that if you please God, you can please the whole world. You saw the film about 
the saint Ghora Khumbhar. In his total absorption in God, he forgot the presence of his son and 


unwittingly caused the child's death. When he realised what had happened, he did not mourn the 
death of the child. He declared that God took away what God had given him. Such was his total 
faith in God. 


While pursuing your studies remember that you have also to strive for the well-being of the 
world Loka hitherathah. 


Service should justify the salaries 


Make use of your education for public welfare. You have no doubt to take up a job for earning a 
living. See that the work you do justifies the emoluments you get. It is treason to the nation to 
receive thousands by way of salary and do hardly a few hundred rupees worth of work. Today 
such disloyal employees are, increasing in numbers all over the world. High salaries and poor 
turnout are the rule today. This accounts for the deplorable condition of Bhaarath today. The 
public debt is growing alarmingly. Who is responsible? If public servants rendered service 
according to the salaries they received the country would not be in such a bad plight. 


Discharge your duties according to your conscience. Our students should live up to this ideal. 
There is nothing wrong in receiving a high salary provided you do the work to deserve it. Now 
young people are concerned only about the pay packets and not the work they have to do in the 
service of society to deserve the pay. Think more about what you owe to society than what you 
can get from it. It is sheer selfishness to be concerned only about your earnings. The Vedha has 
declared that immortality can be attained only through sacrifice. 


"Students are my only property" 


Students! Boys and girls! Wherever you may go, wherever you may live, serve the elders at 
home, serve the society and bring a good name to the institutions which have educated you. 
Observe discipline all. through your life. Do your duty. 


It is not easy to bring back the glorious days of the past. You young people cannot be aware of 
the times when a bag of rice could be got for four rupees, when people could go about without 
any fear of attack and houses could be left unlocked. Today fear stalks the country. No one is 
safe. For all these evils the insatiable craving for money is responsible. The evil began in a sway 
in the Dhvaapara Yuga. Today it has reached frightful limits. The craving for wealth has led to 
many other evils like jealousy and pride. 


The money that comes from the people should be given back to them in one way or other. This is 
Bhagavaan's will. People say that Sai Baba is spending crores of rupees on the drinking water, 
project. There is not a single rupee of Sai Baba in all this. What has been received from the 
people is being given back to them. I do not own anything. I have only one property, my most 
valuable property. My students are my only property. It is enough for me if my students conduct 
themselves well. 


I bless you all that you should carry on your lives in the same spirit in which you have 
distinguished yourselves in games and sports. Win prizes in the game of life, carry out the 
injunctions of God and stand forth as ideal citizens. Never forget the supremacy of love as the 
ruling principle in life. 


Discourse in the Puurnachandhra Auditorium on 14-1-1996, after distribution of prizes to 
winners in sports and games. 


It is enough if Prema is cultivated, the. Prema that knows no 
distinction between oneself and another, because all are but limbs 
of One corpus of God Almighty. Through Love alone can the 
Embodiment of Love be gained. Here, no scholarship is needed; in 
fact, scholarship will be an impediment, for it caters to egoism and 
it breeds doubts and the desire for disputation and laurel of victory 
over others preening themselves as learned. 


Baba 


3. Triple transformation : Sankraanthi's call 


The sun appeared cool and serene; 

The day started getting shorter; 

The chill wind blew fiercely; 

The fields were filled with golden harvest. 
The farmers rejoiced in singing at night 
With the moon shining bright, 

The buds of flowers blossomed 

Like garlands of pearls 

On the banks of rivers; 

Farmers were bringing home 

The newly harvested grain, 

Hailing the advent of 

The Joyous festival of Sankraanthi. 


EMBODIMENTS of Love! Bhaaratheeya festivals are full of inner significance, imparting bliss, 
and not ostentatious shows. Every festival has a unique significance of its own. 


The sun moves into a house of the zodiac every month. In a year he goes round the twelve 
houses of the zodiac. Of these, the main houses are four. The first is Makara Sankramana (the 
zodiacal sign of Capricorn). The second is Karkaataka (Cancer). The third is Thula (Libra). The 
fourth is Mesha (Aries). Of these four, the most important is Makara (Capricorn). The entry of 
the sun into Capricorn has physical, ethical, social and moral significance. 


The northward journey of the sun 


From today the sun starts on his northward journey. What does the north signify? It is considered 
the direction leading to Moksha (Liberation). The sun is said to move towards Himaachala. 
Himaachala is made up of two words: Hima + Achala. 'Hima' means that which is white as 
snow. ‘Achala' is that which is firm and unshakable. What is the place to which this description 
applies? It is the region of the heart. In a heart that is pure and steady, the sun of Buddhi (the 
intellect) enters. There is no need to undertake a journey in the external world. The Uttharaayana 
(or the Northward Journey) means turning the intellect inward., towards the heart. The bliss that 
is experienced within alone is true bliss for man. All other external and sensory pleasures are 
ephemeral. Only the Aathmik principle is pure, permanent and infinite. This has been termed the 
abode of Moksha (Liberation). The journey to Moksha is called the quest for liberation. 


Sankramana is the time when the inward journey towards a pure and unsullied heart is made. Just 
as the sun embarks on his northward journey, Sankraanthi is the day on which the intellect 
should be turned towards the Aathma for Self-realisation. 


The Vedha has declared the Uttharaayana as a sacred period. The great warrior Bheeshma, lying 
on a bed of arrows, waited for 56 days for the advent of Uttharaayana to end his life. The 
puraanas have stated that whoever passes away in Uttharaayana will attain liberation. 


Inner meaning of festivals 


In the movement of the sun from house to house in the Zodiac, the entry into Capricorn is most 
important. Capricorn is a sign of peace and contentment. According to the Gregorian calender, 
Sankraanthi begins on January 13 or 14. This confers a kind of mental and physical peace. 


In this period, farmers and others labouring on the soil enjoy a period of rest. The farmers are at 
ease enjoying the fruits of their labours. Their granaries are filled with grains of all kinds. 
Farmers have no other period of rest. During this month, farmers enjoy peace of mind and body. 


Few people understand the true significance of festivals like Sankraanthi. Man cannot secure 
enduring bliss through physical pleasures. He has to discover that the source of this bliss is 
within himself. Sankraanthi enables man to make this discovery, like a man who carrying his 
spectacles on his forehead searches for it everywhere and discovers to his joy that it has been 
with him all along. 


The Divine is not anywhere else. It is enshrined in one's heart. Hence, the man who seeks the 
Divine within his heart redeems himself. He then attains liberation. All external spiritual 
exercises are of temporary value. They should be internalized to experience lasting bliss. All 
mental exercises also leave the heart unaffected. In the nine paths of devotion, beginning with 
listening to sacred things and ending with Aathma-nivedhanam (total surrender of the self), the 
last is the most important. After Aathmanivedhanam there is no need for any other effort. 


The feelings promoted by Sankraanthi 


Sankraanthi gives the call for this total surrender. Subba Rao (in his speech prior to Svaami's 
discourse) said that Sankraanthi is a kind of family festival. Yes. This is so. But the whole world 
is one family Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam. The festival relates to the entire world. It is not confined 
to one's kith and kin. Sankraanthi is related to the entire mankind. Whether people realise it or 
not, Sankraanthi promotes in one and all a feeling of happiness. 


Sankraanthi promotes mental transformation. It illumines the minds of people. It induces the 
unfoldment of inner feelings. It beings about the manifestation of the invisible Aathma within 
everyone. Sankraanthi is pregnant with such immense significance. It influences not only the 
mind but also the powers of nature. Nature is a projection of the mind. “Manomoolam idham 
Jagath" (The world is rooted in the mind). When the mind is turned towards the heart and the 
heart is filled with the Divine, the mind will cease to be a source of trouble. The mind is the 
master of the senses. When the senses are controlled the mind is under control. Only the master 
of the mind can attain Maadhava (the Divine). 


Young people should realise that the root cause of all their bad thoughts and bad actions is the 
food they consume. The nature of the food determines the state of the mind. Food does not mean 
merely what is eaten, but includes all that is received through the senses and stored in the mind. 
The mind, as Subba Rao said, has the power of attraction. It attracts impressions of all kinds 
from the external world. What do we find in every home today?" 


Harm done by Television 


There is a television set. T.V. sets are installed in every room in the houses of the rich. From the 
moment television made its appearance, the mind of man has been polluted. 


Before the advent of T.V., men's minds were not so much polluted. Acts of violence were not so 
rampant previously. Today T.V. is installed in every hut. People watch the T.V. even while 
taking food. The result is that all the foul things seen on the T.V. are being consumed by the 
viewer. Concentration on the T.V. affects one's view of the world. The scenes, thoughts and 
actions displayed on the T.V. set fill the minds of the viewers. Unknowingly, agitations and ill- 
feelings enter their minds. In due course they take root and grow in the minds. 


Hence while taking food, you should not discuss dreadful incidents. No room should be given to 
subjects which excite the mind. Silence should prevail during eating. Even sound waves enter 
into us and affect our minds. Hence people should avoid T.V. while taking food. 


There is now what is called "Star TV." It is doing great harm to human life. The temporary 
satisfaction given by it is followed by lasting damage. It is like a sword coated with honey. As 
you lick the honey, the sword will cut your tongue. 


Not Bhaarath alone, but the whole world is suffering from the consequences of T.V. The world is 
racked by disorder, discord and frustration. 


Fill your life with holy thoughts 


Men today are plagued by a whole battery of troubles from birth to death. How can they hope for 
happiness amidst this sea of troubles? 


They have to change their vision, their thoughts, their words and their conduct. This is the 
meaning of Sankramana. Unless you purify yourself, what can any.-number of Sankraanthis 
mean to you? You tasted sweet prasaadham this morning. After some time, its taste is gone. It is 
not sweet food that is important. You must fill your life with holy thoughts. That is the purpose 
of sacred festivals. 


Young people ask why they should not enjoy freedom as the fish, birds and animals do. They 
should understand that each of these creatures are enjoying freedom in accordance with their 
own sphere of life. Similarly man should enjoy freedom related to his human condition. You 
cannot call yourself a human being and lead the life of an animal. Enjoy the freedom of a human 
being. To be free like an animal is to become an animal yourself. What is the freedom a man can 
enjoy? Man is governed by certain restraints. He has to adhere to truth. He has to follow 
righteousness. He has to cultivate love. He has to live in peace. He has to observe non-violence. 
Sticking to these five values, man can exercise his freedom. These five values are associated 
with the five elements which make up the cosmos. These five elements may be used in different 
ways, but they are the basic substances constituting the universe. Beyond these five, there is only 
one sixth element, that is, the Anthahkarana, the Inner Motivator, which is identical with the 
Aathmik principle. 


To exercise freedom in its true sense, man has to respect the five basic values. It is in that 
freedom he will find true bliss. 


Imitation has become a deadly disease 


In exercising freedom you should not merely imitate others. Imitation has become a deadly 
disease among modern youth, in matters of dress or other behaviour. They should consult their 
conscience in all matters rather than copy others. Films and TV have totally demoralized the 
people. People have become completely oblivious to Divinity within them. 


People today have lost the quality of forbearance. The sages in the past allowed even anthills to 
grow over them while they were immersed in penance. Today people cannot tolerate the slightest 
disturbance by a fly or a mosquito. Young people should cultivate forbearance and tolerance. 
Without peace of mind there can be no happiness. Peace can be got only through sacred 
thoughts. 


Youth today have lost confidence in themselves. They are affected by criticism levelled against 
them. They should see that if the criticism is justified, they should correct themselves. If it is not 
justified, they should ignore it. Taking myself as an example, I may tell you if somebody 
somewhere says, "Sai Baba has a mop of hair," I accept it, as it is true. If someone were to say to 
my face, "Sai Baba is bald," I will ignore it, as it is not true. Why should I bother to quarrel with 
him? If you are criticized for a fault that is not in you, you can ignore it even if the whole world 
joins in the criticism. 


When we pronounce "Shaanthi, Shaanthi, Shaanthihi," three times, it is prayer for peace of 
body, mind and the spirit. Though people have been mouthing this prayer for thirty years, they 
have not found peace, because they have not enshrined peace in their hearts. They must learn to 
speak sweetly and softly. 


Students must pledge to rid the world of its ills 


Students! Apart from educational programmes, do not look at T.V. at all, especially while taking 
food. Concentrate on the work on hand, whether it be eating or anything else. 


You are observing many things in the world today. You must see how you can make use of your 
knowledge to make the world better. Students-boys and girls---must pledge themselves to rid the 
world of its ills. Earning incomes is not a great thing. To ensure peace and prosperity in the 
world is the highest achievement. You have to strive for peace in the nation, starting with peace 
in the home. 


Above all, unity is important. Young people should promote unity and serve the nation. They 
should be a power for peace wherever they go. Educated young men should be examples of 
discipline and good behaviour. Revere parents and elders, love the Motherland and uphold its 
greatness. 


Sankraanthi should be hailed as the harbinger of unity and peace. This was the immemorial 
message of the Vedhas. "Let us live together in harmony and strive together." 


Discourse in the Sai Kulwant Mandap on 15-1-1996, Sankraanthi Day. 


God draws the Individual towards Himself; it is the nature of birth 
to have this affinity, for they are the same. They are like the iron 
and the magnet. But if the iron is rusty and covered with layers of 
dirt, the magnet is unable to attract. Remove the impediment, that 
is all you have to do. Shine forth in your real nature and the Lord 
will draw you into His Bosom. Trials and tribulations are the 
means by which this cleansing is done. That is why Kunthi prayed 
to Krishna, "Give us always grief, so that we may never forget 
Thee." 


Baba 


4. Spiritual basis of human values 


BORN as human beings, growing as human beings, men have forgotten the value of human 
existence. Developing religious differences, fostering demonic tendencies, they are destroying 
peace. What is the state of human life today? The foremost thing that should exist is respect for 
human values. However great an intellectual may be, however great one may be as a scholar or a 
man of learning, one has also to acquire humanness. With out humanness, scholarships and 
intellectual eminence are of no value. 


It is only when men cultivate humanness that society will shine with radiance and the nation and 
the world will progress. Humanness can be promoted only through spirituality and not by any 
other means. 


Just as a seed can sprout only when it is planted in the soil and watered, human values can grow 
only in a spiritual soil. If a man wants to cultivate human values he has to apply the manure of 
spirituality to his heart, water it with love so that human values will grow. Human society needs 
essentially fellow-feeling and unity. When these two are present, humanness will flourish. 


The five principles of Yama (sense control) 


Wherefrom are human values to be derived and how are they to be developed? Human values are 
born along with human birth. They exist in union. Unfortunately, man today separates himself 
from human values and yet wants to live as a human being. To recover human values, man has to 
take the spiritual path. 


In spiritual saadhana, there are eight Yogik disciplines to be observed: Yama, Niyama, Aasana, 
Pranaayaama, Prathyaahaara, Dhyaana, Dhaarana and Samaadhi (sense restraint, observing 
rules, seating posture, breath-control, withdrawal of senses from objects, meditation and Super 
Conscious state). Of these, the first is Yama It is enough if this single discipline is observed. All 
human values are comprised in it. Humanness is embedded in it. Yama includes the Pancha 
Praanas (five-breaths), Pancha Bhuuthas (five elements), Pancha Koshas (five sheaths), Pancha 
Thathvas (five basic principles), and Pancha Ruupas (five forms). The five forms are the form of 
Gaayathri. The five basic principles are: Ahimsa, Sathya, Brahmacharya, Astheya and 
Aparigraha (Non-violence, Truth, Celibacy, non-stealing and non-possessive qualities). These 
five constitute Yama. The first is Ahimsa. Buddha attached the great importance to Ahimsa. He 
considered it the foremost Dharma (duty). "Ahimsa Paramo Dharmah," declared Buddha. 


Wider meaning of Ahimsa 


What does Ahimsa signify? It is not merely refraining from causing harm or injury to others. It 
implies also refraining from causing harm to himself. One who harms himself cannot avoid 
harming others? Whoever desires to observe Ahimsa must see that he does not do violence to 
himself. How is this to be ensured? By constantly examining whether his conduct is right or 
wrong. For instance, in the matter of speech, he must examine whether his words are causing 
pain to others or not. He must see that his looks are not tainted by evil intentions or thoughts. He 
should not listen to evil talk. All these cause harm to the individual. 


Hence, everyone should see that he gives no room for bad looks, bad hearing, bad speech, bad 
thoughts and bad actions. How do you determine what is bad? By consulting your conscience. 
Whenever you act against the dictates of your conscience, bad results follow. The conscience is 
the form of the Divine within everyone. Whatever you do, the conscience tells you whether it is 


right or wrong. However, to ascertain the directive of the conscience you have to wait for some 
time. You should not be in a hurry. When you want to say something, you must consider for a 
moment whether it would be proper Or not and then speak. When you want to listen to 
something, you must examine whether it is good or bad to listen and then decide what is proper. 


You should be careful not only with regard to how you react to the five elements, but also with 
regard to your food. Excessive eating does violence to the body. Moderation in food is conducive 
to happiness. Ahimsa (non-violence) is thus what confers happiness on you. That which hurts 
you is himsa (violence). Nor is that all. Even in drinking water, you should observe restraints. 
Likewise, one's entire life should be governed by the principle of non-violence. Many germs die 
when one takes a bath or walks or does any other action. Even in the process of breathing many 
germs die. Violence is present in all these activities. Therefore, to avoid the consequences of 
such involuntary violence to living creatures, one is advised to dedicate all actions to the Divine. 
But there is no meaning in dedicating to the Divine conscious acts of violence. The conscience 
will not approve of such conduct. In Vedhaanthik parlance, the conscience is called chith. It is 
also called Awareness. Awareness is total understanding. This total understanding is within the 
capacity of every human being. Everyone must strive to express this awareness. Thus, Ahimsa is 
the primary duty of man. 


Adherence to truth 


The second duty is Sathya (Truth). Truth is not merely telling the facts about what you see or 
hear or know. These are temporal truths. In its full sense truth can be applied only to what comes 
out of your heart in its pure and unsullied form as the voice of conscience. This Sathya (truth) is 
also called Ritham. It is true for all time--past, present and the future. It is not affected by 
changes in time or place. It is unchanging and cannot be suppressed. Truth is its own proof. It is 
the form of the Divine as declared in the Vedhik saying: Sathyam, Jnaanam, Anantham Brahma 
(Thath, the highest Wisdom and Infinite--that is the Absolute Self). Truth is thus the second 
human value. 


The third is Astheyam (non-stealing). Astheyam means not stealing the properties of others. 
Property should not be confined to physical objects like a book. When you need anything, there 
is nothing wrong in your taking it with the permission of the owner. To take or use any object 
without such permission amounts to stealing. Even to criticize someone in a way that harms him 
also amounts to theft (of his good name). It is common among students to borrow a friend's 
camera and use it. When the camera is damaged, the responsibility for getting it repaired is that 
of the user. In this manner, you can understand how the concept of stealing applies to even trivial 
incidents in daily life. This is the third duty. 


The true meaning of Brahmacharya 


The next duty is Brahmacharya. Brahmacharya is interpreted in many ways. One meaning is 
remaining unmarried. This is not the correct meaning. The true meaning of the term is "Moving 
in Brahman." Brahmacharya means ceaseless contemplation of God. Charya means moving or 
treading. Brahmacharya means "moving in Brahman." Mere bachelorhood is not Brahmacharya. 
A married man is called Girhastha (house-holder). There is Brahmacharya even in a house- 
holder's life. This consists in his leading the conjugal life with the wife alone--Ardhaangi. If a 
married man leads a promiscuous life he is not observing Brahmacharya. Even in thoughts and 
looks. one should observe continence. Brahmacharya acquired its importance because of its strict 
observance by our ancient sages. 


Unconsciously or otherwise men tend to waste their energies. All these are lapses from 
Brahmacharya. Sense control is vital in practising continence. It is easier to conquer Indhra (the 
Lord of gods) than to subdue the Jndhriyas (senses). Control of senses is an important human 
value. It is because these vital disciplines were observed by the sages and others since ancient 
times, they continue to be cherished to this day. Bhaarath has passed through innumerable 
vicissitudes in its long history, including foreign invasion. Nevertheless, by and large, the people 
have managed to foster the human values. 


Subtle implications of Aparigraha 


The fifth discipline is Aparigraha. This means not accepting things from others. You have every 
right to receive gifts or other things from your parents. You are the product of your parents and 
hence you can accept from them whatever they give. Aparigraha has certain subtle implications. 
For instance, it is not proper to accept gifts even from one's uncles or in-laws or even from one's 
brothers. When any gifts are received from these relatives you have to requite them by equivalent 
presents. Today the Aparigraha role is blatantly violated. 


For instance, boys when they get married after their education, receive dowries at the time of 
marriage. This is very wrong. It even amounts to a sin. A girl who has been brought up well is 
offered to a young man in marriage. That itself is a great gift. Why should one ask for money 
along with the bride? The parents of the girl may give her whatever they choose. But the 
bridegroom should not expect or accept anything. 


This is the attitude one should have towards gifts from others. It is because many of these 
immemorial injunctions have been given the go-by that today Bhaarath is experiencing various 
troubles. 


No limits to gifts from God 


Gifts can be accepted from parents, the preceptor and God. These are the. exceptions to the rule 
of Aparigraha. From these four, you can receive anything. But even from the parents you should 
not seek to get anything by compulsion or litigations. What is offered by the parents with love 
should be received with love. There are limits to what you can receive from the parents. But 
there is no limit to what you can receive from God. You can accept anything from God because 
He is the Lord of everything. He can free you from sin and redeem you from the consequences. 
God encompasses all relationships and hence one should identify one's self with God. "You and I 
are one." Attributing relationships like mother and father to God sets binding limits to the 
association between God and man. In the vast ocean of Sath-Chith-Aanandha (Being- 
Awareness-Bliss), the myriad human beings, with different names and forms, are like waves. But 
as the waves are made up of the same water as the ocean, all human beings are sparks of the 
Divine. 


Sath-Chith-Aanandha are present in every human being. People out of their ignorance go in 
quest of Sath-Chith-Aanandha elsewhere. Ajnaana (Ignorance) is the cause of Aviveka 
(stupidity). Stupidity is the cause of Ahamkaara (egoism). Egoism gives rise to attachment. 
Attachment leads to hatred. Hatred gives rise to Karma (action). Karma is the cause of birth. The 
original cause of the chain of processes leading to birth is ignorance. 


What is ignorance? It is the state of bhinnathvam (divisiveness). To regard "That" as different 
from you is ignorance. To differentiate God from yourself is ignorance. All are fragments of the 
Divine, sparks from the same flame. When the sparks are near the fire, they retain their heat and 


light. But when they are away, they turn into charcoal. Likewise, when one is near God, Sath- 
Chith-Aanandha will be in him. When he is remote from God, he will lose the attributes of the 
Divine. He will be immersed in ignorance. It is not mastery of books and scholarship which 
makes a person a Jnaani (a knower of the Supreme Truth). "Advaitha dharshanam Jnaanam" 
(To perceive the One without a second is Knowledge). 


"Happiness is union with God" 


It is only when you manifest the bliss that is in your Sath-Chith-Aanandha--that you can call 
yourself Vyakthi, the manifested individual. The term Vyakthi cannot be applied to all and 
sundry. He alone can be called Vyakthi who manifests the invisible divinity within him. 


What is meant by Sath-Chith-Aanandha? Sath is "Being", that which is eternal and unchanging. 
Sugar has the quality of sweetness, which remains in whatever form it may be used. For purposes 
of analogy, sugar may be described as Sath. Chith may be compared to water. It has the quality 
of mobility. When sugar and water are mixed, you have neither sugar nor water as such, but a 
new product, syrup. When Sath and Chith come together, you have Aanandha (Divine Bliss). 
People imagine that this bliss is to be found in jobs, marriage, property or progeny. That is not 
the case. You hope for happiness in one thing after another: education, jobs, marriage, children 
and so on. But happiness eludes you. The only enduring happiness is got by oneness with the 
Divine. 


The answer to the question, "Where is happiness?" is "Happiness is union with God." Students 
tend to forget this, in the pursuit of worldly pleasures. It is only through the ripeness of 
experience that this realisation can come. For instance, you see a barren field in the summer. 
After a night's rain, you find grass coming up. Wherefrom did it come? It is from the field. What 
was present in the form of seeds in the earth came up as grass after the rain. Likewise the bliss 
within you will sprout when you water your parched heart with the rain of divine love. 


Do not underrate the powers in the atmosphere 


Scientists today have made many astonishing discoveries. But they lack peace. They have failed 
to understand the Vedhaantik truth about their true nature. Hence they are unable to experience 
the bliss of the Spirit that is in them. People should not underrate the powers present in the 
atmosphere. For instance, it is filled with radio waves coming from different broadcasting 
centres. But the waves maintain their individual wave length and do not collide with the others. 
This electrical energy is divine. It is one of the secrets of creation. The body is like a radio set. 
When you do not tune in properly by concentration you will not get the right station. 
Concentration is essential for every kind of activity in life. Students should realise how much can 
be gained by reducing one's desires. They may experiment in a small way with reducing the 
consumption of coffee. They will find that their memory power increases. As desires are 
reduced, their will power will grow. This [chchaa-shakthi (will power) is being undermined 
today. The result is their ability to act is also reduced. Consequently, even the Jnaana-shakthi 
(the power of wisdom), is also lost. 


Place your faith in God 


Students! Understand that there is no free will for individuals. They are constrained by various 
limitations. God alone has total free will. All others are bound in. one way or another. 


Whatever one's efforts, the ultimate outcome lies with Providence. Therefore, place your faith in 
God and do your duty, wherever you may be. Do not cause any harm to others. Observe 
continence, avoid covetousness and lead a good, righteous life. A bad habit, which may seem 
trivial in the beginning, may develop into a menace in later life. Correct such faults in the initial 
stages. Pursue spiritual exercises with the same enthusiasm you have for sports and studies. 


(Bhagavaan related at length the story of Ghora Kumbhar and his final mergence in the Lord of 
Pandharpur, Paanduranga. Bhagavaan pointed out how God's grace was needed for the Rishis to 
obtain a vision of the Divine, or get the opportunity to speak to God. The Rishis later took birth 
as monkeys to converse with God and again took birth as gopikas and gopaalas to have contact 
with God). 


The purpose of the Sai avathaar is different from that of Raama and Krishna because the forces 
of good and evil are now present in every human being and the process of transformation has to 
be effected in a context very different from the previous yugas. In the Kali Yuga, the process of 
transformation has been individualized. Everyone has to correct himself. "Child! You have to 
save yourself. I am present within you as a witness." This is the Lord's message. Hence, 
everyone should try to reform himself. You have to decide what is right and what is wrong and 
give up what is bad. 


The ways of God are inscrutable. You should not ascribe to God motives which are a reflection 
of your own feelings. Hence, self-enquiry is essential. Embark on the Divine path with sincerity. 
You will emerge as leaders in the world. 


I have high expectations regarding your future. Revere your parents, serve society and protect the 
nation. It is to produce such students that I am devoting three-fourths of my time to them. Carry 
out Svaami's injunctions. Earn a good name. Uphold the prestige of the Sai educational 
institutions. That is the gratitude you can show to Svaami. Do not think of the pens and other 
gifts you received. Remember only that Svaami gave you good sense. Develop both goodness 
and godliness. Beyond these two, there is nothing greater which education can do for you. 


Discourse in the Secondary School Hostel on 18-1-1996. 


5. Spiritual significance of Shivaraathri 


Moham hithvaa priyo bhavathi 
Krodham hithvaa na sochathi 
Kaamam hithvaa arthavaan bhavathi 
Lobham hithvaa sukhee bhavathi. 


EMBODIMENTS of Love! "Moham hithvaa privo bhavathi" (As long as one is proud, men will 
not like him). Only when he suppresses his pride will he be liked by one and all. "Krodham 
hithvaa na sochathi" (The man filled with anger will have no happiness). He will be immersed in 
misery. When he subdues his anger, he will be free from grief. “Kaamam hithvaa arthavaan 
bhavathi" (When a man has insatiable desires he will never fell contented). When he controls his 
desires, he will be truly rich. "Lobhamhithvaasukhee bhavathi" (A miserly person will never feel 
happy). When he gives up greed he w111 realise happiness. 


Embodiments of Love! Divinity is not easily perceived or realised. It is easy to talk about the 
Divine. It is easy to comment on the miracles and sports of the Divine. But to understand them in 
their fullness is very difficult. To look at something evil and shout about it like crows is not a 
good thing. It is better to sing like the cuckoo over something good. Tastes differ from person to 
person. One man's sweet is another man's poison. With such diverse tendencies, how can men 
recognise the Divine? 


The ancient sages of Bhaarath carried out many spiritual investigations and through the study of 
the scriptures proclaimed their experience of the Divine. The Upanishaths declared: "Raso vai 
saha." That is, the Divine is present in all things as their essence like sugar in sugarcane and 
butter in milk. God is present both in the good and the bad, in truth and untruth, in merit and sin. 
That being the case, how is one to determine what is false and what is unrighteous? The Geetha 
declares: "My Spirit is the indwelling spirit in all beings." The individual who realises this truth 
will experience samathvam (equal-mindedness). 


Duality in life cannot be escaped 


But, for people living in the mundane world and concerned with worldly affairs, right and wrong, 
truth and untruth and similar opposites are unavoidable. Hence, as long as one is involved in 
leading a worldly life one cannot escape from duality. One's peace and security have to be found 
in the context of pleasure and pain. One's joy is linked with suffering. Pleasure is an interval 
between two pains. Life is a combination of light and shadow. Without sorrow there can be no 
happiness. Only when you walk in the hot sun can you experience the pleasure of a shady place. 
In such a life, it is not possible to experience pleasure alone all the time. 


The cosmic process 


The entire cosmos is governed by three states: srishti, sthithi and layam (creation, sustenance and 
dissolutions). The truth of this is beyond dispute by anyone at any time. A Divine truth is 
conveyed by this concept. Srishti (creation) is the expression of the Eeshvara Sankalpa (Will of 
God). It is called Prakrithi (Nature). Every object in creation should have the characteristics of 
Nature. Man has come into existence to manifest the powers of Nature. The powers of Nature are 
not present in all in equal measure. The man who is conscious only of the physical has a 
perverted view of these powers. The spiritually-oriented person sees their benign nature. 


Prakrithi (Nature) and Chaithanya (Spirit) are one. But in accordance with their varied feelings 
and attitudes, things appear good or bad to Loka is one of the names applied to the world. Loka 
is that which has the power of aalochana (thought). In this assembly there are a large number of 
persons. They are all gathered in one place. But each lives in a world of his own. What is the 
reason? One will be thinking about an educational problem. Another will be thinking about a job. 
Yet another may be worried about his business. Another may be concerned about agriculture. 
Others may be thinking about some scientific problem. All these different realms of thought are 
all exercises of the mind. 


The trinity in man 


Thus the cosmic process shrishti (creation), sthithi (sustenance) and /ayam (dissolution) goes on 
in every human being. Srishti is the outcome of sankalpa (thought). Sthithi is protection of 
creation. Layam is the merger of creation in its source. Srishti, Sthithi and Layam are also 
identified with the three qualities--Sathva, Rajas and Thamas. Man is the embodiment of the 
three gunas. The three gunas represent the Trinity (Brahma, Vishnu, and Maheshvara). The 
Trinity represent the Thrilokas (three Worlds). The three worlds and the trinity are present in 
every human being. The three are to be regarded as one and worshipped as Shivam. What is 
Shivam? It is the embodiment of Auspiciousness. When man recognizes the unified form of the 
Trinity his humanness acquires auspiciousness. 


In a government there are different departments like education, finance, etc. Likewise in the 
spiritual field also there are different departments. They are: Srishti, Sthithi and Layam. Each 
department has a head. Each head has to govern his department on right lines.. There is an 
overlord presiding over all departments. He is like the Prime Minister in a cabinet. He is God. He 
is called Allah. By attributing different names and forms to God, Divinity is fragmented in 
various ways. The one Divine is responsible for the threefold cosmic process. This three aspects 
of God can be seen in the English word GOD. G represents Generation--Srishti. O represents 
Organizations------- Sthithi. D represents Dissolution--Layam. GOD represents the unity of the 
three aspects. 


There is a misunderstanding about these three. Layam is considered as destruction or dissolution. 
Its real meaning is mergence. O represents organization. It means protection. G stands for 
generation (creation). Brahma, Vishnu and Eeshvara are three potencies Immanent in man. To 
understand this it is essential to follow the spiritual path. Spirituality does not mean leading a 
lonely ascetic life. Spirituality means getting rid of attachment and hatred and looking upon the 
whole humanity as one. Every one should understand this inner meaning of spirituality. 


Shivaraathri is an auspicious night 


Man is endowed with infinite potencies. All that you experience by way of seeing, hearing and 
the like are reflections of the inner being. The significance of this experience has to be properly 
understood. For instance, today is Shivaraathri day. You experience the night every day. These 
are ordinary nights. They are nights of darkness. But Shivaraathri is an auspicious night. How is 
it auspicious? There are sixteen aspects for the mind. The moon is the presiding deity for the 
mind. Of the sixteen phases of the moon, today in the fourteenth day of Maargasheersha month, 
fifteen of the phases are absent. On this day it is possible to get full control of one's mental 
faculties. Hence it is considered an auspicious day. Auspiciousness consists in diverting the mind 
towards God. This calls for getting rid of the inherited animal tendencies in man. This is the 
occasion to recognise the omnipresence of the Divine in all beings and in all objects. It follows 


that whomsoever you adore or condemn, you are adoring or condemning God. You must follow 
the injunction: Help ever, hurt never. 


Every human being has sacred qualities, based on his Shivathvam (Divine essence). Hence man 
should realise his inherent divinity, though his body is made up of the five elements. Thereby 
humanness is transformed into divinity. The human birth is intended for the pursuit of Dharma. 
Dharma implies harmony in thought, word and deed. When every person realises his essential 
divine nature, the entire world will be transformed. The body and the mind are mere instruments. 
Man's reality is the Aathma (Self). Man should use the instruments given to him to perform his 
duties well and realise his oneness with God. 


Unity in diversity 


All the phenomena in Nature proclaim the glory of the Divine. Why foster religious differences? 
Let everyone carry out the dictates of the Divine, who governs the universe. (Svaami sang a 
poem in Thelugu to convey this message). Everything that happens is by the Will of God. 


The principle teaching of the Vedhas is that all men should strive together in harmony and share 
their joys together in amity. Through unity, humanity can achieve purity, leading to divinity. The 
three great enemies of man are lust, anger and greed. These have to be eliminated. The greatest 
quality in man is love. Love is God. Live in love. 


Bhaarath has been hailed as the teacher for all lands. It is the country which regarded God as one 
and recognized the unity that underlies all diversity. God is one, the goal is one and all life is 
one. This unity underlies all diversity. This basic Divine unity is missed in the perception of 
diversity. 


Use every opportunity to help others 


Embodiments of Love! At the present moment, in the prevailing situation, what is most essential 
is the cultivation of love. Losing love, mankind has lost its humanness. Love is the supreme 
human value. Truth, righteousness, peace and non-violence are other human values. Knowing 
these values, men are foolishly leading valueless lives. What a pity that men in human form do 
not behave like human, beings. Rivers, trees and cows teach the lesson of living for the benefit of 
others. Man should also share the divinity in him with others. Men today are steeped in 
selfishness. 


Whoever remembers the names of scholars and scientists? But millions adore the names of 
realised souls like Raamakrishna Paramahamsa, Thukaaraam, Kabeer and Raamdhaas. Bear in 
mind four dicta to be observed: "Run away from bad company. Welcome association with good 
people. Do meritorious acts continually. Remember what is transient and what is permanent." Be 
with God, think with God, see with God and dedicate all actions to God. Consider all as 
members of one Divine family. Regard yourself as a trustee and use your wealth and talents for 
the good of others. Use every opportunity, to help others. Be compassionate at all times. Students 
in particular should always be ready to go to the help of people in distress. 


God today is in search of good men. Every one should strive to be sincere in thought, word and 
deed. Then you need not go in search of God. God will discover you. 


You have to develop fraternal feelings towards everyone. Here is an example from the 
Raamaayana. Once the four brothers as young lads were playing a game with a ball. After the 
game Raama ran to Kausalya and rested on her lap. He was full of joy. When Kausalya asked 


him why he was feeling so happy, Raama said that Bharatha had won in the game that day and 
that made him so happy. Kausalya remarked that an elder brother rejoicing in the success of his 
younger brother is a great example for brotherly love. Shortly thereafter Bharatha came to 
Kausalya with a sad look. Kausalya asked him why he was feeling sad when he had won in the 
game. Bharatha said: "When I was about to lose the game, Raama managed to lose the game and 
made me the winner. I am feeling unhappy because of the defeat of my elder brother. Is it not sad 
that on my account my elder brother should lose the game?" 


What an example of fraternal love! The elder brother should rejoice in the success of the 
younger, even by losing the game himself. This is the lesson taught by the Raamaayana. In those 
days the four brothers were in a supreme state of fraternal love. Today brothers go to the 
Supreme Court for settling their disputes! This is not proper. Brothers should be united and live 
in amity. The ideal of fraternal unity upheld in the Raamaayana should inspire the people today. 
Students! Strive for the welfare of society as a whole. Experience God through love. 


Discourse in Puurnachandhra Auditorium on 1 7-2-1996. 


6. Cherish the glorious heritage of Bhaarath 


Sarve Bhavanthu Sukhinah; 

Sarve santhu Niraamayaah; 
Sarve Bhadhraani Pashyanthu; 
Maa Kaschid-Dhuhkhino bhaveth. 


EMBODIMENTS of love! The dictum of Bhaaratheeya Culture is that all people should enjoy 
happiness and prosperity. Bhaarath is the birth-place of spirituality and the qualities of charity 
and righteousness. It is known for its devotion to peace and security. The adherence to truth 
practises in Bhaarath could not be found in any other country. This land gave birth to the 
immortal Seven Sages. It is the birth-place of the first among poets, Valmeeki, (author of the 
epic Raamaayana), and the Sage Vyaasa, who codified the Vedhas. 


Bhaarath is the land where Raama established the reign of Righteousness. Bhaarath is the sacred 
land where Krishna preached the Geetha. This is the land sanctified by the advent of Buddha. It 
has the glory of witnessing the many incarnations of the Lord. 


Unfortunately Bhaaratheeyas are not recognizing the sacred greatness of their country. Bhaarath 
was the land where at one time there was no one who did not practise dhaana (charity) or 
Dharma (virtue). These two qualities constituted the main wealth of the nation. Bhaaratheeyas 
used to utter a prayer before embarking on any act, however trivial. 


The young boys and girls of today are the inheritors of this sacred wealth. Bhaaratheeyas of 
today, both young and old, should strive to preserve this heritage. Since ancient times Bhaarath 
has been the leader of spirituality and holding forth the message of peace and prosperity to the 
rest of the world. Then and now the Bhaaratheeya ideal has been: "Let all the people of all 
countries be happy." 


Fill your minds with thoughts of God 


Bhaaratheeyas today are letting slip this great, sacred and precious heritage. They are pursuing 
purely mundane and material gains. 


Bhaaratheeyas should realise that just as the body can be healthy only so long as the blood is 
pure, they can have real bliss, only as long as their minds are filled with thoughts of God. Bliss is 
not something apart. As long as sublime thoughts, noble feelings fill their hearts, they will 
experience bliss. Every thought arises from the heart. When the heart is filled with love, every 
thought and feeling becomes loving. 


Hence, what Bhaaratheeyas should seek is love-filled hearts. Every act stemming from the heart 
should be filled with love. Every effort should be made to foster this ancient culture of Bhaarath. 


In the chanting of the Lord's name there is no specific regimen to be followed. It is not governed 
by differences of creed, caste and religion or by any age restriction. 


It is not associated with any particular language. It is like a boat that can be used by one and all. 
It is by the constant chanting of the Lord's name that Bhaarath has been protected through the 
ages. No other country can lay claim to the kind of spiritual wealth possessed by Bhaarath. 


Truth is God 


One of the earliest scientific investigators in the west declared that there is a base for all 
knowledge, all science and all wisdom. "This is the Supreme Truth. Bhaarath is the original 
home of this Truth." Truth is God. This Truth should never be forgotten. 


Investigators elsewhere enquired into the .source of all knowledge and wisdom and found that 
Bhaarath had found that Truth was the basis of all knowledge. Today people are not making such 
investigations. Crores of rupees are spent on trivial investigations and time and energy are 
wasted on them. 


Divinity cannot be discovered by .experiments. The different methods of devotion may not 
directly reveal God, but they show the path to God-realisation. For instance, the sourness in the 
neem fruit and the sweetness in the sugarcane indicate the presence of the Divine. The basis for 
all the varied phenomena in Nature--the twinkling of the stars, the revolutions of the planets, the 
fire from the sun--is the Divine. Nature proclaims the immanence of God. You look with awe at 
a mountain. You feel ecstatic at the torrent of a mighty river. The sight of a green forest lights 
you. All these are manifestations of the Divine mystery. All the beauties in Nature testify to the 
basic presence of the Divine in all things. 


True meaning of "Know thyself" 


What is the basis for man? It is the body. All the powers found outside are to be found in the 
human body. It was for this reason that the sages and the scriptures called upon man to discover 
his true nature. 


What does "Knowing one's self mean? A man's real self is not known by finding his lineage, or 
his profession, his nationality or scholarship. These are all attributes employed in ordinary 
parlance to identify a person. Al these are related to one's body. When a person declares that one 
is a Brahmin or a young man, or a woman, these terms relate to the body. 


"Know thyself does not mean knowing all about the body. What is to be known is the Shareeri 
(indwelling Spirit). It is not enough to know about the Kshethra (the body). You must know the 
Kshethrajna (the Knower of the Field, the body). Krishna declared in the Geetha: "Know that I 
am the abode--Kshethra and the Knower of the abode--Kshethrajna." Humanness consists in the 
unity of the two. The body is essential for knowing the nature of the indwelling Spirit. It is only 
when the Kshethra (the body) is used properly that the nature of the Kshethrajna (the Indwelling 
Knower) can be understood. 


How are the various divine potencies in man to be made known? What are the basic 
requirements for every person? A mind pure as butter, a heart cool and pleasing as the moon, 
speech sweet as honey---when these three qualities are developed, Divinity is experienced. When 
you examine the present state of things, you find the mind is polluted, the heart is filled with 
bitterness and the speech is marked by harshness. These are not the marks of true humanness. 
These are signs of a cruel nature. 


Hence, everyone should cultivate nectarine sweetness of speech, a moon like pleasing heart and. 
an unsullied butter-like mind. These are the characteristics of the Divinity latent in man. 


Man is a combination of yanthra, manthra and thanthra 


To realise this inherent divinity in man the royal path is spirituality. God can be realised by any 
path. The scriptures indicated the nine paths of devotion for God-realisation and showed that 
chanting the name of the Lord is the simplest. Whatever form of worship, penance or meditation 
one may adopt, the foundation is the Lord's name. The entire Rig Vedha is replete with the Lord's 
name. The Yajur Vedha is a compendium of manthras (sacred sound formulae). Saama Vedha is 
filled with melody. The human heart is combination of music, manthra and name (of the Lord). 
The ancients regarded the human being as a combination of yanthra, manthra and thanthra. 


The body is a yanthra (a machine). The life-breath is a manthra. The heart is thanthra. What is 
the manthra contained in the life-breath? It is "So-Ham". The manthra "So-Ham" (I am He) is 
chanted by each breathing. 'So' (He) is the sound that arises when air is breathed in. 'Aham...'(I 
am) is the sound that emanates when the air is breathed out. This sacred mantra is proclaimed by 
the heart with each breath. To pronounce this manthra the body is essential. If any minute part of 
the body is affected, the entire system will be affected, just as a defective bolt or nut can make a 
rocket functionless. 


All organs in the human body should be kept functioning properly. Only then it would be 
possible to rise from the human to the divine level. How is this to be accomplished? By 
dedicating every action to the Lord. When every action is done with the consciousness that it is 
done for the pleasure of the Lord, life gets divinised. There is no need for anyone to give up any 
of his duties or actions in daily life. All that is needed is to perform everyone of them in a spirit 
of dedication to the Lord. 


Devotion without faith is useless 


Embodiments of love! For anything that you want to accomplish, faith or self-confidence is vital. 
Faith is as basic for spiritual progress as breathing is essential for life. Today what we witness is 
devotion without faith. There is a familiar saying that a bull without a yoke, a horse without 
curbs, a car without brakes and mind without sense-control are. dangerous and useless. 


Chanting the Lord's name is essential for crossing the turbulent ocean of life. It is a boat that can 
carry you across the deeper ocean. In chanting the Lord's name, one should be tranquil, utterly 
selfless and pure at heart. Ostentation and egoism should be eschewed. 


One can follow any of the nine forms of devotion (from listening to total surrender) with purity 
of mind and in an unselfish spirit. In singing bhajans, there should be no spirit of competition 
and no cavilling of others. The entire concentration should be on the name and form in the 
present Kali Yuga the chanting of the Lord's name is the panacea. In Kritha was Dhyaana 
(meditation). In Thretha Yuga it was Yajna (ritual sacrifice). In Dhvaapara Yuga it was Archana 
(worship of icons). In the Kali Yuga, there is no other means needed for human redemption 
except the mere chanting of the name of Hari. 


The Lord's name can be chanted while you are travelling or before you go to sleep, or while you 
are doing any of your daily chores. This easy, sacred path has been laid down for people in the 
Kali Yuga. 


Spiritualize life 


Today you have every kind of amenity. You have hospitals, schools and other institutions to 
serve you. The only thing people lack is faith in God. What is the use of having everything else? 
Develop faith in God. 


It is the duty of students, boys and. girls, to foster ,the ancient culture that has come down to us 
as a precious heritage. You are the inheritors of this culture. You must enter every walk of life in 
the world and infuse spirituality in it. Young people are sacrificing their lives in meaningless 
conflicts. Humanness is at a low level. Demonic tendencies have reared their heads. Young 
people should counter these forces and uphold the culture and human values of Bhaarath. 


If you develop the sense of spiritual oneness of all mankind the conflicts of today will vanish. 
Discord has become ubiquitous. At the root of all this is the loss of faith in God. Get rid of 
jealousy and egoism. Then you will experience the Divine. 


Sarva ruupadharam Shaantham 

Sarva naamadharam Shivam 
Sath-chith-aanandha ruupam Adhvaitham 
Sathyam Shivam Sundharam. 


All forms of the Lord are peaceful. By whatever name the Divine is cherished in one's heart, that 
is Shivam--the one without a second, whose form is Being-Awareness-Bliss. When the 
changeless Sath combines with Chith (total awareness), you have Aanandha (bliss). It is like the 
union of sugar and water which produces syrup. 


The Geetha has declared that the one Divine is present in all beings as consciousness like the 
current that illumines a variety of bulbs. To be conscious of this oneness is the highest 
manifestation of love. 


Max Mueller's wish 


Embodiments of Love! You can have no idea of the greatness of Bhaarath as the land of wisdom, 
of yoga, of merit and noble deeds. Many foreigners desired to take birth and pass away in this 
sacred land. The great savant, Max Mueller, wished to be reborn in Bhaarath. He was such a 
great seeker that he was named 


‘Moksha Muula' (one who is rooted in liberation). He made a thorough study of the Vedhas. He 
regarded every clod of earth in Bhaarath as sacred. He regarded everything in Bhaarath as 
Divine. In Bhaarath unfortunately Bhaaratheeyas do not have the same feeling regarding their 
motherland. Foreigners are having this blissful experience and are undergoing a great 
transformation. 


The process of change is going on continuously everywhere. A seed grows into a tree, an egg 
becomes a chicken. But man is failing to grow into the Divine. Instead he is falling into the 
demonic state. 


Mankind should ascend to Divinity 


This is not proper. Mankind should go forward from the human to the Divine. Evolving from the 
animal, becoming human, mankind should ascend to Divinity. 


Embodiments of love! Whatever situation you may confront, never give room for religious 
differences. Whether it is Allah or Krishna or Jesus, God is one. The one Lord has a myriad 
names. The goal is one. Don't entertain the idea of "my religion" and "his religion." Consider 
ideas of creed and nationality. Foster the feeling of oneness of all mankind. This is what you 
should develop on the sacred occasion of Shivaraathri. 


Shivaraathri comes once a year. But the auspicious qualities in you are always there. Constant 
repetition of the Lord's name at all times and at all places is the message of Shivaraathri. I bless 
you all that you should realise God by devotion to God and by adherence to righteous thoughts 
and actions. 


Discourse in the Puurnachandhra Auditorium on the morning of 18-2-1996. 


7. Let everyone do his duty 


Anaadhi nidhanam Vishnum 
Sarvaloka Maheshvaram 
Lokaadhyaksham Sthuvannithyvam 
Sarvadhuhkhajitho bhaveth 


EMBODIMENTS of Love! Anaadhi nidhanam is a name attributed to God in relation to time. 
Sarvaloka Maheshvaram signifies that God is the illuminating overlord of all the worlds. 
Lokaadhyaksham Sthuvannithyam---He is the presiding ruler of the Cosmos. Who is He? He is 
the Sun. Time is marked by the Sun. Hence the Sun is the visible manifestation of God. He is the 
effulgence that is common to all nations, all creeds and all people. Hence Shankara hailed the 
Sun as "Anaadhi nidhanam Vishnum," the presiding deity for the Samvathsara (year) as the over- 
lord of Time. Samvathsara is the appellation given to the Kaalaathmaka (Time-spirit). Because 
the Lord is the very soul of Time, Shankara described Him as "Kaalaathmakaaya namah" 
(Prostrations to the One who is the Spirit of Time). 


Time is most precious in human life. More valuable than Time is Praana (life). Man aspires to 
achieve many things without concern for his life. However great his achievements are man is 
driven by the urge to achieve more. This discontent is itself a source of satisfaction for man. 


All are embodiments of the Divine 


Every man has a heart. Every heart is filled with compassion. However, how many choose to 
share this compassion with others? Sharing the compassion in one's heart with ten others has 
been characterised as Bhakthi (devotion). One who does not share his compassion with others 
cannot be called a human being. Today the human heart that should be full of compassion has 
become stone-hard. This is man's misfortune. What is the reason? It is because the heart is filled 
with the bitterness of differences of caste, creed and nationality that it has become stony. All 
human beings belong to one caste, one community, one nation. All are embodiments of the 
Divine. Krishna declared in the Geetha: "All beings in the world are a fragment of My Self." It is 
tragic that man should forget his divine essence and behave like a demon. 


What is the significance of the advent of the new year? It is not necessary to wait for twelve 
months for the new year to appear for one to do what he wants to do. The year is made up of 
seconds, minutes, hours, days and months. Every second is a new moment in one's life. Why 
then wait for a year? Every one should strive to render help to the people every second of his life 
and lead a noble and ideal existence. It is necessary for man to understand the truth underlying 
this dictum. The eye sees different persons in different relationship to a person the mother, the 
daughter, the daughter-in-law and so on. Although the eye that sees is the same, the persons seen 
are different and one's behaviour is to be in accord with the varying relationships. 


Distinction between the apparent and the real 


The distinction between the apparent and the real (the true) should be properly understood. For 
instance, it is apparent that the sun rises in the east and sets in the west. But the truth is, the sun is 
stationary and neither rises nor sets. It is the revolution of the earth round itself at a speed of 
1000 miles an hour that is the cause of the phenomena of day and night and the apparent rising 
and setting of the sun. 


The relevance of the distinction between truth, falsehood and apparent fact is not limited to 
natural phenomena alone. It is equally relevant in the spiritual sphere. The quest for truth in the 
spiritual field provides proofs for the existence of God. In every man, at every moment a divine 
effulgence is always shining. Man has not taken birth purely for a selfish purpose. He has to 
strive with others to lead an exemplary life. 


In the world today there is unrest everywhere. What is the cause of this unrest? The advent of the 
new year is viewed by people with apprehensions as to what is in store for the world, what 
disasters and calamities. There is continual change taking place in almost every sphere, but the 
mind of man alone has undergone no transformation, pleasure and pain are not the products of 
time. The year is not responsible for joy or sorrow. People's actions alone are responsible for the 
good and bad things they experience. The year does not bring any evil with it. Many people 
imagine that the new year may bring calamities. The year is part of repetitive phenomenon of 
day and night. Hence Time does not bring in its wake any good or ill. Only human actions 
account for these reactions. Good acts produce good results and bad actions have bad 
consequences. As you sow, so shall you reap. 


New year does not account for anything extraordinary 


Good and bad occur in succession in the usual course. A new year does not account for anything 
extraordinary. However, the Panchaangam (almanac) indicates some changes as a result of the 
movements of the planets and the configuration of the constellations. The Hindu almanac refers 
to five factors the day of the week, the thithi (phase of the moon), the relevant constellation, the 
auspiciousness or otherwise of the particular day and the Karanam (astrological divisions). The 
predictions in the almanac have no relation to what may happen to any particular person. The 
Siddhanthis (the almanac makers) give their own interpretations of the astrological 
configurations. 


Above everything, if one has firm faith in God, one can face the future with confidence. There is 
no room for doubts as to who is God and where He is to be found. God is Viraata-Svaruupa 
(Cosmic Form). The whole universe is the manifestation of God. What does God teach? The 
lessons are given through Prakrithi (Nature) which conveys lessons to mankind. The earth, for 
instance, is revolving round itself at a speed of 1000 miles an hour. This is going on without rest. 
This revolution of earth produces night and day. This enables man to have a time for work and 
time for rest. In addition, the earth is going round the sun at a speed of 66,000 miles an hour. 
This motion of the earth is responsible for the changes in seasons. The changes in seasons cause 
rainfall, enable the cultivation of crops and help people to live in comfort. 


The earth thus is a visible manifestation of God. The ancients hailed the earth as Bhuumaatha 
(Holy Mother Earth) for this reason. All the essential necessities of life come from the earth. The 
earth thus teaches man that he should do his duty even as the earth itself is performing its duties. 


Dedicated action is necessary to reap the fruits 


Man should be dedicated to action. Today he does not adhere to this principle. How, then, can he 
expect the fruits? Men must work. They must perform good deeds and realise good results. They 
must share the fruits of their labours with others. This is the foremost duty of man. If everyone 
does his-duty, there will be no room for conflict in the world. This is the lesson taught by the 
earth. 


Karthavyam (duty) is most important. The lawyer should do his duty. The doctor, the farmer, the 
administrator, the businessman, each should discharge his respective duty. If this is done, the 
world will have no problems. Everyone should aim at excellence in the performance of one's 
duties. Then the nation will be prosperous and happy. Today very few discharge their duties 
properly. Instead of doing their work, they interfere in other people's work. They fail to do their 
work and spoil that of others. 


The year is not responsible for the unrest in the world. Human actions alone are responsible. 
Every one should strive to work well and achieve good results. Every one has twenty-four hours 
at his disposal. If out of this, six hours are used up in sleep, six hours for one's own private 
concerns and six hours for one's job, still six hours remain. How does one spend them? One 
should utilize them for rendering social service. One must embark on divine activity. In the 
present state of the world, if people do not take to divine activity, the conditions will get worse. 


Mastery over one's mind is the index of greatness 


Today people have forgotten the spiritual, the moral and the ethical aspects of life. They are 
immersed in the worldly pursuits and in securing mundane benefits. There is no greatness in 
achieving these things. Once Shankaraachaarya asked his disciples what is the hall-mark of 
greatness. Each disciple gave his own answer. One disciple said that the man who won great 
victories in battle is a great man. Another disciple said that man who underwent many troubles 
and difficulties and amassed large wealth was great. Another said that a great man was one who 
accomplished by determined effort what he wanted to achieve. Planting one's flag over a territory 
or crossing a mighty ocean were mentioned as marks of greatness. Ultimately Shankara gave the 
answer that he alone is great who has mastery over his mind. All other achievements are of no 
avail. Every action is sanctified by making it an offering to-God. Shankaraachaarya declared that 
the one who is immersed in the contemplation of the Supreme Self, experiences the highest bliss, 
regardless of all other actions. (Svaami sang a stanza from the Bhaja Govindham hymn of 
Shankaraachaarya). Shankara exhorted the devotee to adore God in whatever situation he was 
placed, whether in a crowd, or while enjoying something or in any other state. This experience of 
the Divine is one's true wealth. 


Thus, it is essential to perform every action as an offering to God. The impulse for every action 
comes from the heart, whether the action is good or bad. The heart is the abode of Lord. Hence, 
every thought arising from the heart and every action from it should be regarded as an offering to 
the Divine. 


Give no room for differences 


Today, because men's actions are motivated by concern for one's family and possessions, society 
is riven by conflicts and differences. People talk about unity but there is no unity. For instance, 
there are different States in the Country. It is natural for people to have special regard for their 
respective’ States. Karnataka, Thamil Naadu, Aandhra Pradesh and so on. But they should all 
consider themselves children of one God. All States should be happy. If this broad vision is 
developed, there will be no room for inter-State differences. 


The name of the new year is "Dhaathru." This signifies the spirit of sacrifice. The scriptures have 
declared that sacrifice is the only means to attain immortality. People should develop the spirit of 
sacrifice. Thereby they will make the name of the new year meaningful. 


Compassion is the hall-mark of Bhakthi 


Giving up narrow idea and feelings, people should show compassion towards their fellow- 
beings. Compassion is the hall-mark of Bhakthi (devotion). No one can hope to please God 
without showing dhaya (compassion) towards his fellow-men. A loving heart is the temple of 
God. God cannot dwell in a heart without compassion. 


God is one. The goal is one. People have to change their outlook. They have to develop love 
towards all. There is nothing greater in the world than this Premadhrishti (feeling of universal 
love). There are many eminent scholars and intellectuals in the world today who are adept in 
seeing the diversity in the world. But why don't they try to see the unity that underlies this 
diversity? They alone are good who see the unity in the apparent diversity. But those who see 
only the diversity in the One are mere clever intellectuals. 


The uniqueness of every being is one of the marvels of creation. No two persons are entirely 
alike. There are differences even among twins. People differ in respect of talents. But it should 
be realised that all talents are derived from the Divine. 


How are we to recognise unity in diversity? Birth and death are common to all beings. Whether 
one is a millionaire or a pauper, both are brought forth from their mothers wombs. Hunger and 
thirst are common to all. The kind of food that is eaten may vary, but hunger is the same for all. 
Likewise thirst is common to all. These basic common experiences point to the unity that 
underlies the diversity. The Upanishaths have emphasized the spiritual oneness of all beings. The 
life force is one and the same, in all. The Aathma is the same in all. How, then, it may be asked, 
there are differences in the bodies? These differences are the results of differences in the 
thoughts, feelings and actions of the individuals concerned. The indwelling spirit is the same in 
everyone. 


Make every act holy 


By developing attachment to persons and possessions men created causes for their sorrow. By 
reducing their attachments and developing love for God, they can reduce their misery and 
increase their happiness. The more they love God, the more the bliss they will experience. Men 
are plunged in misery because they hanker after the physical instead of yearning for God. If men 
convert their desire for material objects into the desire for the Supreme they will enjoy immense 
happiness. All that is necessary is for them, to see the Divine in everything in the phenomenal 
world. That will be true devotion. And work will be turned into worship. Make every act holy. 


People need not be unduly worried about the portents of the new year. There are, however, 
indications that some big changes may occur in the political sphere. Internal conflicts may 
increase. There will be no shortage of food. There may be floods in some parts of the country 
and cyclones in some areas. By developing faith in God, some of these calamities may be averted 
or their ravages mitigated. Men have to realise that they are sparks of the Divine. They have to 
develop sacred thoughts and lead ideal lives. They 'must seek to promote the welfare of society. 


The power of prayer is incalculable 


Pray for the welfare of all. The power of prayer is incalculable. Every one gathered here should 
pray every day for the welfare and happiness of all people everywhere. This is true spirituality. 
To render service to others to the limit of your capacity is real spirituality. The body has been 
given to man for serving others. If one has a compassionate heart, is truthful in speech, and uses 
his body for serving others, he needs nothing else to redeem his life. 


Today the book, "Vision of India," written by Shri Shivraaj Patti, Speaker of the Lok Sabha, has 
been released. He has been coming to Svaami for many years. He knows Bhagavaan well and 
Bhagavaan knows him equally. He has a compassionate heart. He is calm and serene. All are 
aware of the kind of uproar and disorder that prevail in the Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha. 
Members have not hesitated even to shout at the Speaker. On such occasions as Chavan observed 
(in his speech earlier), it is natural to expect the blood-pressure of the Speaker to go up. But our 
Shivraj Patil spoke calmly to every member, giving suitable replies to everyone, and thereby 
winning the confidence of all sections of the House. He has earned the approbation of all parties. 
That good name is enough. Having been born, one should earn a good name. Good thoughts flow 
from his heart. In his book, he has related all his experiences, his aspirations and his hopes. His 
book covers all aspects of his life social, economic, spiritual and political. 


It is not enough to speak about one's ideals. One must live upto them. Today everyone must 
develop a compassionate heart and be truthful in speech. Truth is the means to realise God. God 
is the very embodiment of Truth. Where there is Truth there is God. 


Bhaarath in its ancient days of pristine glory achieved greatness by adhering to Sathya and 
Dharma. The Upanishaths have declared: "Speak the Truth. Follow Righteousness." Today in 
their life people must adhere to Truth. Whatever Dhaarmik acts you do should be done in a spirit 
of sacrifice. Charity is the best ornament for the hand, truth for throat and listening, to sacred 
things, for the ears. It is such sublime sentiments that constituted the priceless culture of 
Bhaarath. These eternal verities are being forgotten in the craze for ephemeral pleasures. 


Regard every moment as new 


Embodiments of love! The new year portends nothing to be feared by the common people. 
However, for those in high offices and for politicians there are indications of internecine 
conflicts of their own making. Those who discharge their duties in a spirit of dedication have 
nothing to fear. 


Regard every moment as new Live in the present. Have good thoughts and do good deeds. 
Cultivate good company. Act according to the dictates of your conscience. The secret of 
happiness lies within you, not outside. Pray for the welfare of all. The speakers here requested to 
bring about peace and bliss in the world. In fact, you are all embodiments of peace, bliss and 
Divine. Everyone of you should make efforts to develop inner peace individually. Then the 
whole world will be peaceful. Don't yield to any fear or anxiety. Develop love. Hatred breeds 
disaster. Shed feelings of hatred. With love, the country and world will prosper. 


Discourse in the Sai Ramesh Mandap, Brindhaavan, on 20-3-1996. 


God incarnates for the revival of Dharma (Righteousness) which 
includes morality, truth, virtue, love and a host of other qualities 
that uphold the communities of man as well as the individual. The 
other purposes usually given, such as serving the devoted, 
destroying the wicked, re-establishing the sacred tradition, these 
are all secondary. For, he who is righteous will be guarded from 
harm by righteousness itself, he who is unrighteous will fall into 
disaster through the evil that he perpetrates. The one task includes 
all else. 


Baba 


8. Let Raama live in your hearts 


Vedha-vedhye Pare Pumse 

Jaathe Dasharathaathmaje 

Vedhah Praachethas Aaseeth 
Saakshaath Raamaayanaathmanaa 


EMBODIMENTS of Love! When the Lord, the knower of the Vedhas, took birth as the son of 
Dhasharatha, Praachethas realised the Divine by writing the Raamaayana. 


The story of Raama is the story of one who was filled with the sweetness of compassion. This 
story is the royal road to human progress and an ideal life. 


The Raama-principle is a combination of the Divine in the human and the human in the Divine. 
The inspiring story of Raama presents the triple ethical code relating to the individual, the family 
and the society. If society is to progress properly the family should be happy, harmonious and 
united. For unity in the family, the individuals composing it must have a spirit of sacrifice. The 
Raama story exemplifies the ethical codes governing the individual, the family and society. 


The Raama story holds forth many ideals. Children today pay little heed to the words of parents. 
Parents also show no great concern for rearing ideal children. 


The preceptor does not command respect these days. The teachers show little affection for the 
students. Hatred and bitterness between people are growing. Today's friend becomes tomorrow's 
enemy. Kinship itself is robbed of its bonds of affection. Pollution has sullied every sphere of 
activity---business, education, agriculture, politics etc., and caused general degradation in 
society. In every sphere demeaning ideas and actions are rampant. 


In such a situation, the Raamaayana.provides the ideals and the examples for reforming society. 
Invoke the divine in pursuing aims 


The world is presided over by Naaraayana. Naaraayana is under the spell of His name. The name 
is under the control of the devotee. Hence every person should invoke the Divine in pursuing his 
aims. 


The world today is in a strange predicament. Every step taken by man is tainted by 
unrighteousness. Falsehood is ubiquitous. Men have lost the vision of great things. All desires 
arise from selfishness and are insatiable. Control of the senses has become rare. The truth, in 
short, is humanness has vanished. 


On the other, hand, another strange thing is also apparent. Large numbers of people gather to 
listen to spiritual discourses and speeches by learned in thousands, listen to the talks, enjoy them, 
but do not practise any of the teachings. The result is that, though there is an abundance of 
spiritual teaching, disorder and unrest prevail because few people practise what they learn. What 
crop can you grow on the dry bed of a lake? Though man has recognized the inherent divinity 
present in him, he does not live according to this belief. Precept without practice is valueless. 


Triple Dharma of individual, family and society 


Raama is the supreme example of one who observed in his life the triple Dharma relating to the 
individual, the family and society. When every person in the country observes this triple 
Dharma, there will be peace and prosperity in the nation. 


The sun illumines the world during the day. The moon sheds light during night. But Dharma 
(Righteousness) illumines all the three worlds at all times. A good son, it is said, becomes a 
beacon for the whole clan. Everyone should strive to become a Suputhra (good son). It is not 
enough to have sons. They should be good and worthy sons. Such a son was Raamachandhra. 


Even as a jasmine creeper fills an entire forest with its fragrance, a noble son glorifies not only 
his family but his entire clan. Essentially all human beings are Suputhras (good sons). But their 
behaviour turns them into bad men. 


The author of the Raamaayana is called Praachethas. How did he acquire this name? Praachethas 
is the name of the Rain-God Varuna. Rathnaakara was the original name of the poet. After he 
was initiated, he began meditating on the Lord's name and completely lost all body 
consciousness. An anthill grew over his body. His body was not visible from outside. At this 
stage Varuna caused a heavy downpour. That heavy rain washed away the anthill, revealing the 
sage. Because Praachethas was responsible for bringing forth the sage, he got the name 
Praachethas (the offspring of Praachethas). He also got the appellation Valmeeki because he had 
come out of "Valmeeka," an anthill. 


Praachethas became the sacred and immortal composer of the epic Raamaayana, which he gave 
to the world as a perennial source of inspiration to mankind. Any person today who can get rid 
from the mind, attachment and possessiveness enveloping him and who constantly meditates on 
God will become pure and sacred, like Valmeeki. 


The Divine and the human 


Every man is endowed with a mind. The mind is a mysterious thing. It can appear totally 
stationary and yet move faster than the speed of light. Whatever births a person may undergo and 
whatever changes in name and form may occur, the mind remains unchanged. It follows one 
from birth to birth. It is the mind's peculiar behaviour. In this context, how is one to manifest his 
humanness? Man must follow the example of the honey bee which sucks the sweet honey even 
from a bitter flower. Likewise one must seek the good even in what is apparently bad. There is 
something good in what is bad. 


Valmeeki declared that he saw the divine in the human form of Raama. Raama, who was 
Divinity itself, was seen as a human being. "Maadhava is human. Man is Maadhava." God 
cannot be experienced unless He appears in human form. Incarnation as a human being is 
essential for recognizing God. That is why it is said that "Dhaivam maanusha ruupena" (God 
appears in human form). 


Raama did not announce at any time that he was God. He declared that he was the son of 
Dhasharatha. In his speech, though there was humanness, there was also the illumination of 
Divinity. 

God is not apart from the universe. The entire cosmos is the very form of God. But man, deluded 
by his physical vesture, forgets his divinity. 


All are embodiments of the Divine 


Raama and Krishna .are regarded as Avathaars. This is not so. They are in their human form 
quite like other ordinary men. All of your are embodiments of the Divine. Recognise this fact 
and strengthen this feeling within you. The idea that God is different from you should be given 
up. You have to develop the feeling that God is not different from you. 


On the occasion of Raamanavami, people hail the advent of Raama and recall his various 
achievements. But everyone should remember that he is an image of Raama. "Ramayathi ithi 
Raamah" (One who attracts others is Raama). In every person there is this power of attraction. 
Because of this magnetic power man is able to enjoy the world. He develops many worldly 
desires. But he is never satisfied. He derives satisfaction from discontent. That is a sign of the 
divine power of attraction. There is no limit to this power. Everyone can experience the divinity 
within him. 


Difference between Raama and Raavana 


See the difference between Raama and Raavana. Both were equally eminent intellectually and 
were great scholars. Raavana was a great man. Raama was a good man. The difference between 
greatness and goodness should be understood. Raavana, out of egoism and uncontrolled desire, 
misused his knowledge and brought about his ruin. Raama used his knowledge for the benefit of 
the people and made them happy. Raavana did not digest his knowledge properly and suffered 
from the consequences of indigestion. The difference between Raama and Raavana was that 
between Dharma (Righteousness) and Adharma (unrighteousness). 


Raama and Raavana are present in each human being. When a person takes to unrighteous 
courses, he becomes a Raavana. When people pursue the path of truth and righteousness, they 
become Raamas. 


Precept and practice should go together like medicine and diet control Meditating on God one 
should engage oneself in godly activities. It is useless to study or listen to spiritual discourses 
without leading a spiritual life. Righteousness means living according to the dictates of one's 
conscience. Acting in violation of the conscience is wrong. To realise this there is no need to 
study books. 


The truths propounded in the Raamaayana are relevant to all mankind. Raama represents the 
exalted state of the human heart. Raama is the treasure-house of compassion. Where can you find 
such truth, compassion and grace? All thoughts arise from the heart and lead to actions. Hence 
for all thoughts, words and deeds, the heart is the source. What should be the condition of the 
heart? It should be full of Dhaya (compassion). Today Dhayyam (the devil) has installed itself in 
the heart. The devil in the heart accounts for all bad and for the absence of compassion. 


Everyone is responsible for his condition 


If men today suffer from restlessness and lack of peace, their own actions are responsible for this 
state. No Guru or any other person is to be blamed Nor can the changes in the years be blamed. 
The year is not responsible for your happiness or misery. You alone are responsible for your 
happiness or misery. You alone are responsible for your condition and your experiences. Make 
your thoughts pure. Realise that you are human and that there is the Divine in the human. 


Man has the option to pursue the Pravritthi Maarga (the path of external, worldly objects) or 
seek the bliss that is in Nivritthi Maarga (internal). Everyone is responsible for his condition. It 


has become a bad habit to blame others for one's plight. One should recognise one's defects. 
There is no greater sin than accusing others. One should see the Divine in others. When this 
attitude grows the nation will prosper. Men have immense potentialities for good or ill. By their 
good thoughts and good deeds men can transform the state of the nation. 


Despite all the myriad scientific and technological achievements of man, it should be realised 
that human life is impermanent. Death may overtake anyone at any time. Man has all the 
potencies in him. This truth should be realised by all. Man is the maker of his country or the 
cause of its ruin. Men promote the prosperity of their nation or bring about its degradation. When 
humanness is fostered the nation will be prosperous. 


Men have achieved many things in various fields, from atom bombs to space travel. They have 
acquired great destructive power. But it is not realised that by its very nature the physical body is 
impermanent. The truth should be recognized while the body lasts. You have to have a sacred 
life. 


Raama took birth ages ago. He adhered to Dharma Krishna came later. He propagated great 
truths. He led the Paandavas to victory. He taught the Geetha. Where are they now? What has 
happened to all the proud rulers of the past? How many have taken birth and passed away? Death 
is certain. But before the end comes, one should lead an exemplary life and serve the nation. 


Role of avathaars 


Everyone should realise that he is the embodiment of the Divine. We .may talk about the 
avathaars of Raama and Krishna. But your present avathaar is no less significant. All those 
avathaars came to tell mankind that all human beings are avathaars (incarnations of the Divine). 
Having taken birth as human beings men should conduct themselves as embodiments of the 
Divine (as beings in whom the Divine spirit resides). Recognizing your spiritual reality you 
should live always in the Aathma-thathva. 


Man who should progress upwards from day to day is going down the slope. This is not right 
learning. Every day you should make the ascent towards the Divine. "I am God. God is not 
different from me." This is the conviction with which men should live. 


“All are deities" 


Some people offer prayers saying, “Sarva-dhevathaa Svaruupaaya namah" (1 offer my 
salutations to the one who embodies the forms of all deities). How many deities are there? 
Unless there were many deities, the prayer would be meaningless. The implication of the prayer 
is: "All are deities." Our ancients used to refer to three crores of deities. What does it signify? At 
that time there were three crores of human beings in Bhaarath. They considered all of them as 
Divine beings. Today we have hundred crores in Bhaarath. Hence, there are hundred crores (one 
billion) of Divine beings in Bhaarath. If you take the population of the world, there are 570 
crores of people today (5700 million). All are divine beings. 


That divinity is within you. What is the source of the life-force in you? Men today create robots 
which operate like human beings. But there is no life in them. There is a world of difference 
between the man-made artificial robots and real live human beings. Today people are attracted 
by the artificial creations and are not aware of the immense potentialities latent in human beings. 
You have to respect the potency of the human. 


This was the lesson taught by Raama. He revered his parents. He carried out faithfully their 
injunctions. Without regard to the consequences, he carried out their commands with love. He 
had immense love for his brothers. They had unity and harmony amongst them. 


Love that existed between Raama and Bharatha 


After reaching the forest, Raama sent word through Sumanthra (who had driven the chariot) as 
follows: "My brother Bharatha would have returned to Ayodhya by now. Tell Bharatha that there 
should be complete unity in the family. He should love Kausalya and Sumithra in the same 
manner in which he would love his mother, Kaikeyi. He should not make any distinction 
between them However unable to bear the pangs of separation from Raama, Bharatha used harsh 
words against his mother. He did not spare even the family preceptor Vashishtha. Vashishtha 
approached Bharatha and told him: "Raama has left for the forest. You must get ready for the 
coronation. As soon as you are ready I shall fix the auspicious moment for the ceremony." 
Bharatha lost for a moment the sense of respect he should have for the word of the preceptor. 
Raama was the very life-breath of Bharatha. He spoke to Vashishtha in great anguish: "Am I to 
rule over a kingdom which banished Raama and plunged the whole of Ayodhya in grief?. Do not 
mention the name of the kingdom that sent my Raama to the forest. I have no use for such a 
kingdom tarnished by a grievous wrong." This was the kind of love that existed between the 
brothers. 


Once, when the brothers were children, Raama came to his mother Kausalya in great joy. 
Kausalya asked him what was the reason for his joy. Raama said: "I am immensely happy today 
because Bharatha won in the game we were playing." Raama rejoiced in the successes of his 
brothers. Meanwhile Bharatha came weeping to Kausalya. She asked him: "Bharatha! Why are 
you crying? Raama is so happy over your victory." Bharatha replied: "Mother! I am very sad 
because Raama deliberately chose to lose so that I may win." The elder brother rejoices over the 
younger brother's victor. The latter feels sad about his victory and the defeat of the elder brother. 
What mutual love prevailed among the brothers! Such was the pure and sacred unity that existed 
among the brothers at that time. 


Raama is within you 


Raama was always deeply concerned about the welfare of his subjects. He fostered unity among 
the people. This is the duty of every one at the individual level. Four qualities have to be 
developed by every individual: Equality, Integrity, Unity and Fraternity. The individual's 
personality blossoms when one has these four qualities. A family composed of individuals of this 
nature is an asset to the nation. 


It is not enough if people merely observe Raama's birthday and glorify the Raamaayana on one 
day in a year. Each one should develop Raama's qualities within himself. You should experience 
Raama's divinity within yourself, irrespective of whatever name you may bear. From the 
Aathmik point of view, you are Raama or Krishna. 


Do not base your life on the body, It is impermanent. The spirit within is immortal. The body is 
Karmakshethra, the field of action. The heart is Dharmakshethra, the abode of righteousness. 
The human state is a combination of Karmakshethra and Dharmakshethra. 


Embodiments of Love! Recognise that there is Divinity in everyone. Man has all the potencies the 
power of Aakarshana (total attraction), Prakarshana (the capacity to transmit that power to 
others) and Sankarshana (the power of self-transformation). Krishna was considered the 


embodiment of Aakarshana (the power of attraction) and Balaraama as the embodiment of 
Sankarshana. The combination of Aakarshana and Sankarshana brings about Prakarshana---- 
the spread of the Divine power of attraction over the entire world. Sankarshana (which is one of 
the names of Balaraama) literally means transferring the foetus from the womb to another. The 
wider meaning of the term is the process of transformation of one thing into another. 


What is the Sankarshana we need today? The transformation of the human to the Divine. We 
should be attracted (Aakarshana) to this process of transformation (Sankarshana). And then this 
should be spread everywhere (Prakarshana). This is the type of saadhana (spiritual exercise) to 
which, people must devote themselves and not be immersed in Japa and dhyaana (chanting the 
Lord's name and meditation). 


Give up attachment to the body 


Concentrate on developing the firm conviction that you are the Dime. With this conviction you 
can achieve anything. Give up the attachment to the body. Even scientists sometimes forget their 
body-consciousness while absorbed in their experiments. If that is the case, why should the 
spiritually-minded persons retain attachment to the body, which is made up of the five elements 
and is a container of all foul things. 


Giving up the attachment to the body, the scriptures call men to surrender to God. What is meant 
by surrender? Forgetting the body and thinking of God, that is surrender. Surrender does not 
mean offering to God your worthless body and your perishable possessions. Such offerings have 
no meaning for the Divine. People going to Thirumala make all kinds of promises to God if their 
desires are fulfilled. Does God need any of their offerings? No. Why should God be 
commercialized? You should seek oneness with God. God will be pleased if you realise your true 
self. Your happiness is His bliss. 


Mind is man's most precious possession 


Develop, therefore, this sense of Ekaathmabhaavam (spiritual unity). It is the loss of this sense of 
unity that is at the root of all the differences and divisions in the world today. You have no need 
to search for God. God is truth. Adhere to truth; follow Dharma. What is Dharma? It is not 
charity or gifts of earthly goods that constitute Dharma. Dharma means purity and unity in 
thought, word and deed. Turn your mind towards God. All will be well with you. If you turn the 
mind towards the phenomenal world, you will experience only misery. The mind is man's most 
precious possession. Without it man ceases to be human. 


The human birth has been given to man for practising Dharma. This was the truth demonstrated 
by Raama. He practised his Dharma. He told Bharatha that the latter should rule over the 
Kingdom given to him and leave Raama to do his duty in the forest. When Bharatha argued that 
the kingdom should be ruled by the eldest son, Raama replied that he also had been given a 
kingdom to role over. "Dandakaaranya is my kingdom. I shall rule here. You reign over 
Ayodhya," said Raama. This means, that there is an Ayodhya in the Dandakaaranya and a forest 
in Ayodhya. "Realise the oneness of the two," said Raama. Such was the equal mindedness of 
Raama. 


Let people understand the Raama-principle and live upto it. Restrain your desires. Experience the 
bliss of the Divine at all times. That is true humanness, which manifests itself when you think of 
God. Happiness is union with God. How much bliss can you experience if you see God in 
yourself and in everybody! Let all differences cease. Recognizing the divinity that is present in 


all, you should foster the principle of love and develop compassion in the heart. Love is God. It 
transcends all human relationships based on attachment. Develop divine and selfless love which 
is enduring and infinite. A true lover of God will experience no sorrow. On this auspicious day, 
ponder over the sacred teachings and develop the spirit of oneness. 


Discourse in the Sai Ramesh Mandap on 28-3-1996, Raama Navami Day. 


You have to busy yourselves with activity in order to use time and 
skill to the best advantage. That is your Duty and Duty is God. 


Baba 


9. Make Swami's words your beacon-light 


EMBODIMENTS of love! Through the power of speech man is able to conquer kingdoms. 
Through speech man loses all his wealth. Man acquires kinsmen and friends through speech and 
loses them also by his words. Through words, again, man loses his life. Words are the root cause 
of all these happenings. Speech is important for man whether for experiencing loss or gain, 
prosperity or adversity or pain and pleasure. 


Life is extremely precious. Time is highly valuable. The heart is tender. The mind is a great 
possession. Though endowed with all these valuable things, man conducts himself as a mean, 
ignorant and miserable being. He is unable to recognise what a rare, sweet and blissful thing is 
human life. The reason is, man, forgetting his divine nature, is immersing himself in worldly 
pleasures and in mundane desires. 


Man should realise that he is subject to Time and Time has no respect for wealth or position. 
Man is devoting all his time to worldly pursuits and the demands of the body. Not realising the 
significance of time, man leads an animal existence. 


The heart, which is soft and compassionate by nature, has been hardened into stone by man. 
Humanness should manifest itself in a heart overflowing with compassion, but compassion has 
turned into hard-heartedness. 


The mind is all-powerful. It can see without eyes, hear without ears, speak without the tongue 
and move about without legs. Man tries to control the mind, but he is subordinate to it. As long 
as he is subject to the mind, man cannot understand the true nature of the mind. 


Scholarship alone does not make man a Panditha 


Although Raavana was master of a larger number of Vidhyas (types of knowledge) than Raama, 
he could enjoy no peace or bliss because he did not practise in the right way what he had learnt. 
Raama, on the other hand, was always blissful because he had fully digested what he had learnt 
and put it to proper use. 


Mere scholarship alone does not make a person a Panditha (a man of learning). “Pandithaah 
sama-dharshinah," says the Geetha. The true man of learning is the one who sees with an equal 
eye different beings. True knowledge should become an integral part of one's being, flowing in 
one blood in an endless stream. IIl-digested learning results in the diseases of egoism and pride, 
as in the ease of Raavana. 


Unfortunately education today has become a bookish affair, used only for passing examinations 
and forgotten immediately after quitting the examination hall. People who cannot make proper 
use of their knowledge for the nation's good, are traitors to the nation. They are a liability to the 
society and the country. Of what use is it to flaunt one's degrees if the only purpose of acquiring 
them is to earn a mess of pottage? 


Mansur's saga 


There was once in Northern India a Muslim called Mansur. From his childhood he was 
constantly meditating on God. Although he belonged to a poor family, his parents wanted him to 
have a good education. But Mansur had a pure unsullied heart filled with love and his only desire 
was to know his true self. When the parents wanted him to go to school, he asked what was the 
purpose of going to school. The parents said that he should get educated to be able to earn a 


living. Mansur said: "Mother! Have I to study only for earning a living? Are not dogs, birds, ants 
and many other creatures able to get their food without any education? Am I to waste my divine 
life for the sake of filling my belly?" He walked out of his home. He was a young lad, but there 
was an effulgence in his face. He sought nothing from any one. People seeing the effulgence on 
his face offered him things of their own accord. One old lady offered him food. The purity of his 
heart secured for him the food. His pure love was feeding him. 


Wherever he went, he was declaring: "Anal Haq! Anal Hag!" (1 am God. I am God). This 
corresponds to the Vedhaanthik declarations, "Aham Brahmaasmi" (I am Brahman), So-Ham (I 
am He). This declaration was treated with ridicule by some persons. The elders reviled him and 
asked: "You little fellow! How do you claim you are God? How can you be God?" Foolish 
people ask such questions in this world out of their ignorance and lack of faith. Why should they 
undermine the faith of others? 


Mansur's answer to them was: "I am uttering these words because I am God. There is divine 
energy in everyone. But some use it for good purposes and some others misuse it. I am using it 
for good purposes." He went on declaring "I am God. I am God." 


Meanwhile all the pandiths (scholars) came together and observed: "We have studied all the 
Vedhas and Scriptures. We dare not make a declaration of this kind. How is it a young student 
goes about making such a claim? How did he dare to make such a claim?" 


Do not allow your faith to be shaken 


It is not scriptural knowledge that confers the courage to make such a declaration. It is the faith 
in the heart. Whatever others may say, one should not allow one's faith to be shaken. Students 
should have such firm faith. 


The pandiths came together and went in a body to complain to the king. "Oh king! This. boy is 
insulting our scholarship. In spite of all our knowledge, we are not able to declare that we are 
God. This illiterate fool goes about saying that he is God. How to account for this? Either he is a 
lunatic or an arrogant fellow." The pandiths somehow wanted to put an end to this. It is the 
nature of the evil-minded to cause harm even to those who are innocent and good. They make no 
distinction between the bad and the good, just as white ants make no distinction between an 
expensive sari and a tom piece-of cloth. People who criticize others are like these white ants. 


Mansur's firm faith 


When the pandiths complained to the king, the latter ordered the boy to be brought to him. When 
the King summoned Mansur, he declared: "I am God." The King drew the boy near him and tried 
to appeal to him in soft words. "Child! you are an ordinary human being. You are illiterate and 
ignorant. You should not boast that you are God." Mansur replied: "I will continue to do so. Iam 
proclaiming the truth. I am God. You are God. All are God. The indweller in all is the one God. 
The Muslims say: 'Allah ho Akbar.’ The Christians say: 'God is great.’ The Hindhus say: 'So- 
Ham.' God is one. He is the Brahma-Suthra. He is the one thread running through all beings who 
are like beads in a rosary." Mansur went on arguing with the King in this manner. The King's 
words did not appeal to him. He said: "Oh King! You are seeking to divert me to a wrong path 
away from royal road. This is not proper on your part." Mansur continued to assert: "I am God." 


The King got angry. "You are despising my words," he said. He summoned a doctor and ordered 
him to gouge the eyes of Mansur. "This will force him to remain in one place and he will not 
disturb others." The doctor took away the eyes of the boy. But he continued to shout in joy: 


"Anal Haq! Anal Haq!" (I am God, I am God). The boy was free from body consciousness. The 
king then summoned a butcher and asked him to cut off the hands of the boy. Continuing to 
laugh, he exclaimed: "Anal Haq! Anal Haq!" 


The people in the audience hall could not bear to see the gruesome sight. But there was no sign 
of grief on the face of the boy. He continued to laugh. His faith was unshakable. He was 
unaffected by what others said. 


Of what use is education if there is no firm determination? Is the amassing of wealth and 
secreting money abroad, the purpose of education? No. Earning of money may be necessary, but 
it should be limited and the money earned should be used for good purposes. 


Seeing the determination of Mansur, the King ordered that his legs should be cut off. After this 
maiming, Mansur died. But the blood flowing from his tortured limbs was proclaiming: "I am 
God. I am God." The dead body was cremated. But from its ashes rose the cry "I am God. I am 
God." 


This happened three centuries ago in Northern India. The people were astonished at the 
phenomenon. The king felt repentant, but of what use is repentance after a grievous wrong had 
been committed? 


You should not pay heed to the words of all and sundry, Students should use their power of 
discrimination and should be guided by the voice of conscience. They should imprint on their 
hearts, the words of wisdom of the great sages. 


Students should realise that no one can escape the consequence of one's actions some time or 
other. But God's Grace can overcome a mountain of difficulties and sins. Why are you not 
taking the Sai medicine, which is the panacea for all ills? 


Ingratitude is a grievous sin 


You are the beneficiaries of totally free education in the Sai Institute. The gratitude you can 
show to the Institute is by your behaviour, as men of good character. Never be ungrateful to 
those who have been good to you. There is no greater sin than that. The sun, who is the presiding 
deity for the eye, punishes the ungrateful by denying them their eyesight. The consequences of 
one's actions may be felt instantaneously or after the lapse of some time. But they are bound to 
follow. I seek nothing from the students. All that I want is that the moment they see you, people 
should recognise you as the fine products of the Sai Institute. By your bad behaviour you should 
not bring a bad name to the Institute. More than a white uniform, you should have a white and 
pure heart. You must become ideal students. 


The situation in the outside world is appalling. Even tenth standard students are taking to drinks 
and drugs. The parents are not restraining them. Nor are they setting a good example. When the 
parents exchange words, the children exchange blows. The parents give a free rein to the 
children instead of controlling them. The parents are to blame for three-fourths of their children's 
misbehaviour. A child who had stolen a mango was praised by his mother for his cleverness. He 
grew up into a criminal and was sentenced to death for murder. Before the hanging, the man 
asked for his mother to be brought near him and he started strangling her, saying that she was 
responsible for making him a criminal. (Svaami related the story so vividly that the entire 
audience was deeply moved). 


When parents allow the children to go astray, some time or other they will suffer the 
consequences. It has become fashionable in this Kali Age to let the children have their own way. 
They fear that otherwise the children will run away or commit suicide. What does it matter what 
befalls such characterless children? Parents do not have today this kind of moral courage. They 
go on listening to bad reports about their children and end their lives in despair. 


Bhagavaan's grace 


Thanks to the Lord's Grace you young people have come to Svaami. You may not appreciate all 
that I have said at this age of yours. But you will realise the truth of Svaami's words in due 
course. You have been fortunate to secure something which few others have got. You are 
discarding it lightly. You are slighting Svaami's injunctions. You do not heed the words of 
Svaami. 


People do not listen to words of the wise, 
but easily fall a prey to bad advice. 
Such people, how can they 
hope to understand Svaami? 
Of what use is all their education? (Thelugu poem). 


They will not listen to good advice. But they will listen to bad talk. with both ears! How can they 
expect to know Bhagavaan? Can an ant fathom the depths of the ocean? Likewise you cannot 
cognise the truth about Svaami? But you can make good use of the opportunity that has come 
your way. "Sai has come to you because of your great merit. Arise! Wake up!". 


Earn a good name 


You are returning to your homes for the holidays. Conduct yourselves well. Bring a good name 
to your parents. Earn a good name in society. If you have no other work, join in any service 
activities of the local Sai organizations. Let service be your motto. That should become your 
life's goal. 


If all of you behave in this way how much will the country benefit and prosper. Promote the 
welfare of society. Do not succumb to some of the petty desires of your parents. "Oh boy! Get 
married soon. You will get a rich dowry of lakhs of rupees!" What a shame that parents should 
speak like this and that boys should give in to them! Should a son be sold for the sake of a girl? 
Whether it is ten lakhs or ten crores, do not sell yourselves. You must stand on your own legs. 
You must depend on your own strength. Do not be carried away by what others say. Do not 
become a slave. Be a master. Only then can you be a master over others. 


Students! Put into practice at least a fraction of what you have studied. Plunge into society and 
engage yourselves in social service. Make society happy. Having taken birth in society, if you 
achieve this much, it is enough. Remember that nothing lasts--the body, the mind or senses. Only 
one's reputation survives him. This is what Svaami expects from you. If you achieve a good 
name and bring credit to the Institute where you have studied, you would have rendered great 
service to the nation. 


Four claimants of wealth 


Do not become Raavanas. Earn a good name like Raama. Do not aspire to become a Birla, a 
Kirloskar or a Tata. A name earned by merely amassing wealth is ephemeral. Do not sell 
yourself for money. Earn a good income and make proper use of it. Money earned by sinful 
means will not last. Either thieves will rob you or the Income-tax department will seize it. 


For wealth there are four claimants: Number one is Agni (fire). Number two, thieves. Third, 
relatives. Fourth, enemies. These four are after one's wealth. Before any of them deprives of your 
wealth, you should make good use of it. 


Our students should not hanker after money either in the matter of marriage or in regard to a job. 
Work, work, work. That should be your sole concern. Become votaries of work. Work binds men 
to the world. The body is given for carrying out righteous actions. It is not given for enjoying 
carnal pleasures. 


Madhaalasa gave birth to four sons. When each son was born, she did not desire that they should 
study, go abroad, earn great wealth and acquire name and fame. From the time the child was in 
the cradle, she taught the child the ideal of Vairaagya (renunciation). She sang a lullaby for the 
child, treating Pranava manthra as the cradle, the Mahaavaakya "Thathvam-asi" (Thou art That) 
as the bed, Awareness as the cord drawing the cradle. The four Vedhas were the chains for the 
cradle. Rearing each child in this manner, she sent him to the forest telling him that he will find 
real rest there. 


Janaka and Gaargi 


King Janaka was similarly a seeker after Brahmajnaana (the Supreme Truth). He sought 
knowledge for the sake of Self-Realisation and not for the sake of creature comforts. He held an 
assembly of sages where he achieved fame. At the assembly Gaargi carried on a debate with the 
sage Yaajnavalkya. The debate was based on the scriptures. It was inconclusive. Then Gaargi put 
a question to King Janaka: "What is the mark of a Sthithaprajna?" (a person of steadfast 
Awareness). The King replied; "He is the one who realises, the Oneness of the Absolute. There is 
no second." Gaargi said: "If you have realised this state of Awareness, you will be conscious of 
Oneness alone. You are not in that state now. I wish to realise this Awareness." 


Gaargi said: "Oh King! I have one desire. Will you fulfill it?" "Certainly," replied the king. She 
asked him to marry her. The king said: "I have only one wife, Sunethra (the one with good eyes). 
I don't wish to have any other wife." Gaargi said: "You are a great Jnani. You have good eyes 
and your queen is a good-eyed lady. May I ask what reward you are giving to the great 
Yaajnavalkya?" The king said: "I shall give him whatever he asks." Yaajnavalkya was no doubt a 
great scholar but he did-not have total sense control. Yaajnavalkya asked the king again: "Give 
this Gaargi to me in marriage. Celebrate our wedding." There was a-great uproar in the audience- 
hall. The great scholars present there asked: "What is the meaning of Yaajnavalkya's request?" 
Gaargi then asked Yaajnavalkya: "What is the purpose of a marriage?" Yaajnavalkya replied: 
"To have progeny." Gaargi said: "No. The wife is one-half of the husbands----Ardhaangi. This 
means that she should pursue Diya together with the husband as a Dharmapathni (a righteous 
wife). Marriage is for the sake of pursuing Dharma. It is not for enjoying worldly pleasures. Our 
emperor enjoys carnal pleasures in his palace. The same pleasures are experienced by street 
dogs. Is that happiness?" 


Wealth is not the source of real happiness 


Thyaagaraaja asked: "Is wealth the source of happiness or serving the Lotus feet of Raama?" 
Students should ask themselves-"Does happiness consist in the acquiring of degrees or getting 
good jobs or attaining high positions? Real happiness consists in the acquisition of wisdom. 
However, till that wisdom is got, one should try to live in the world with morality and integrity. 
That should be the aim, while living in the world. Keep your vision on the Divine and lead your 
life in the world. This is the teaching of Sai. You need not renounce the world. You need not go 
after jobs like dogs hunting for crumbs. Stick to the job you have and take proper care of your 
family. Lead an ideal life. Always bear in mind the goal. Students should recognise this and 
conduct themselves properly. Therein lies true bliss. 


In olden days, after the disciples had completed their education and before they entered the life 
of house-holders, they stood before the preceptor to receive words of advice from him. This was 
similar to the convocations held these days. 


Today some of you are leaving for your homes after completing your studies and others are 
going for the vacation to return after the holidays. You must experience happiness whether you 
enter a new life or whether you come back. Do not get into bad company. 


As one of the students speakers said, cultivate good company. Avoid bad company at any cost. 
Seek good company with all your life. Serve your parents. Help your mother when she goes out 
shopping. You must confer happiness on the mother who bore you for nine months in the womb. 
Do not cause any displeasure to the mother. Be ready to give a helping hand to your father. Don't 
waste your time in idleness. Engage yourselves in social service. Those who can sing should take 
part in Bhajans. Serve patients in hospitals by purchasing medicines or providing clothes, but do 
not give them money. If you give them money, they turn into beggars. If you render service in 
these ways, you will be redeeming your human birth. 


Adore God: Abhor the world 


Keep your minds always fixed on God. That is the true meaning of Upavaasa, not observance of 
a so-called fast, followed by a sumptuous feast. (Svaami sang a Kannada song to illustrate how 
fasting is observed by some people to enjoy a feast later). 


Never forget God. Do not believe in the world, which is perpetually changing. Don't fear death. 
If you learn to observe these three maxims, you can accomplish anything. Svaami will take care 
of you. When students complain that Svaami is not talking to them, they should understand that 
Svaami does not want to talk to those who do not heed His words. If you are good, Svaami will 
talk to you of His own accord. If you act upto Svaami's words, Svaami will take good care of 
you. Avoid bad friends. Cultivate good friends. Above all, cherish faith in God. God is your sole 
protector. Do not trust anyone else. Today distrust of each other has become universal. Esteem 
God alone as your true friend. You forget God at your own peril. 


I seek your love 


Students! [had no intention to speak today. But the Warden appealed to me to say a few words to 
the students. I have spoken often enough. Even now I am saying the same thing. I seek nothing 
from anyone. I have not sought anything all these seventy years. My hand always gives. The 
only thing that I seek from you is Love. My love for you is pure, unchanging and selfless. What 
is your life worth if you cannot believe in such love? Believe in it. You place trust in double- 
dealers. Why don't you stand by the truth which you know? Receive my pure love with a pure 


heart. Make yourself holy. Live in love. Love is God. Bear in mind what Svaami has said and 
regard Svaami's words as a beacon light for your lives. With the light of Svaami's advice in your 
hearts, you can proceed on life's journey for any length of time. Remember with love God, who 
is everything. 


Discourse-in Sai Ramesh Mandap on 31-3-1996. 


10. Srishti and Dhrishti 


EMBODIMENTS of Love! In this world constituted by the three gunas-----Sathva, Rajas and 
Thamas (the qualities of serenity, passion and ignorance)., the mixture of happiness and sorrow 
prevents man from recognizing his divinity. Human existence is enveloped in Moham 
(infatuation). When man flees himself from this infatuation, he will experience real happiness. 
This infatuation breeds Ahamkaara (egoism) and Mamakaara (possessiveness) which bring 
about the loss of one's name and fame. One who is filled with ego will be unable to experience 
love from others. It is essential therefore to get rid of this infatuation. "Moham hithvaa priyam 
bhavathi" (one becomes endearing to others by conquering infatuation). 


"Krodham hithvaa nashochathi" (By conquering anger one is free from grief). As long as man is 
filled with anger, he can have no peace. To secure peace and happiness man has to subdue anger. 
An angry man may become the enemy of mankind. 


A man filled with anger 

will not be able to achieve anything. 

He will commit many sins 

and will be an object of derision. 

He will forfeit all prosperity 

and lose the respect of all persons. 

Anger is the cause of total ruin. (Thelugu poem). 
The first requisite for a person embarking on spiritual development is control of anger. 
Discriminate between necessities and luxuries 


"Kaamam hithvaa sukhee bhavathi" (Conquering desire, a man becomes happy). Life is a long 
journey. Desires are the luggage you carry. The less the luggage the greater the comfort during 
the journey. Man has to discriminate between necessities and luxuries and confine his desires to 
what is essential. 


"Lobham hithvaa sukhee bhavathi" (Happiness is got by overcoming greed). Life is an ocean 
filled with waves of pleasure and pain. Man is happy when his desires are fulfilled and is sad 
when they are not. "Joys and sorrows are inseparable. Joy is not separate. It is the fruit of 
difficulties," says a Thelugu poem. Pain and pleasure are like the two parts of a seed or the two 
sides of a coin. People should learn to treat pleasure and pain alike. In fact, pain enhances the joy 
derived from the pleasure that follows. Pleasure and pain, loss and gain, fame and infamy are 
inextricably linked in the world. Man's divinity consists in overcoming these opposites. 
Unfortunately, man falls a prey to limitless desires and ends his life in misery and despair. 


Examine your own faults and rectify them 


Man needs God's grace to experience real happiness. But by his own thoughts, words and 
actions, man forfeits the Grace of God. "See no evil; see what is good." But men today look at 
only other people's faults and do not think of their own failings. Examine your own faults and 
rectify them. 


Here is an example from the Mahaabhaaratha: The preceptor, Dhronacharya, asked the eldest of 
the Paandavas (Dharmaja) and the Kauravas (Dhuryodhana), to go round the kingdom and find 
out how many good persons and bad persons were there. Dharmaja came back and reported that 
he could not find a single bad person in the kingdom. Dhuryodhana told the guru that he could 
not find a single good person. Dhronacharya pondered over this divergent findings and realised 
that the outlook of each of them determined the nature, of their findings. Dharmaja, being a good 
man, found only what is good in everyone. Dhuryodhana, with his evil mind, could only see the 
bad side in every body. Everything thus depends on the outlook of the person concerned and not 
on the nature of the things he observes. If one looks at the world with a good mind everything 
will appear good. 


The entire cosmos is Vishnu-Svaruupa (a manifestation of Divine). It is called Srishti (creation). 
Prakrithi (nature) is a synonym for Srishti. Prakrithi means creation of the Divine. The five 
basic elements, which constitute Nature, are in every individual human being. Hence, it is 
declared that the Lord dwells in every living being. When this truth is recognized, there should 
be no room for anger, hatred or envy. The oneness of the universe is the reality, though there are 
a myriad forms and names. The unity that underlies the apparent diversity should be understood. 


Communion with the Divine is true Yoga 


Embodiments of love! Recognise the supreme significance of the Love-Principle. Today, it is 
love of the Divine that should be fostered. This love transcends the mind. Various forms of 
meditation are purely mental exercises. But Bhakthi (devotion) which emanates from the heart 
transcends the mind. Communion with the Divine is true Yoga. All other yogik practices are 
merely physical exercises. 


It is essential to limit one's desires and keep the senses under control. This is the only way to true 
happiness. The most important organ which has to be controlled is the tongue, which, unlike the 
other sense organs--the eyes, the ears and the nose--has a double function, speech and taste. The 
ancient sages practised silence for a variety of reasons. Silence serves to conserve energy, 
improve the memory and experience the Divine. Restraint in speech and avoidance of gossip and 
slander are commendable virtues. "Help ever, hurt never." This should be the motto of everyone. 


"See no evil; see what is good" is the prescription for the eyes. Keechaka (in the 
Mahaabhaaratha) looked with an evil eye on Dhraupadhi (who was serving as the Queen's maid 
in the palace of the king of Viraata dhesa). His lustful vision brought about his death. His very 
name is abhorred by everyone. Likewise, one should not pay heed to bad or evil-minded words. 
Kaikeyi (in the Raamaayana) is the example of well-intentioned woman who allowed her mind 
to be poisoned by the evil counsel of Manthara and was responsible for the death of Dhasharatha 
and the bitter resentment of her son Bharatha. Kaikeyi and Manthara have passed into history as 
infamous characters. 


How evil thoughts influence a person and bring about his ruin is illustrated by the story of 
Dhuryodhana in the Mahaabhaaratha. He always entertained evil designs against the Paandavas. 
What was the ultimate result? Not only did he ruin himself but he mined everyone in his clan. 
Likewise, Raavana, who was well-versed in all branches of knowledge, mined himself and his 
kinsfolk by his wicked actions. Innumerable examples of this nature can be found in the Indian 
Epics. 


The three stages to reach Self-Realisation 


Self-Realisation should be the Goal of human existence. It has to be reached through three 
stages: Self-confidence, self-satisfaction and self-sacrifice. Man should regard himself as the 
master of the body, the senses and the mind. He has to use the intellect to experience his oneness 
with the divine, the cosmic all-pervading consciousness. The Prajnaana (constant integrated 
awareness) which is in everyone is covered by the ash of worldly desires. When the ash is blown 
off, the fire of Brahman (Absolute Divinity) reveals itself. 


To give another illustration. There is a tree on which thousands of birds are resting. Their 
droppings on the ground below the tree make it unusable. How to drive the birds away? When 
you shout "Raama, Krishna, Govindha" and clap your hands the birds will fly away. Our life is a 
tree on which have gathered a big flock of birds in the form of desires. The desires pollute the 
heart. To get rid of desires you have to perform bhajans. 


Discourse in Sai Shruthi, Kodaikanal, on 12-4-1996. 


The dull and the ignorant will hesitate to be active for fear of 
exhaustion or failure or loss. The emotional and passionate 
individuals will plunge headlong and rave for quick results and 
will be disappointed if they do not come in. The balanced persons 
will be active because it is their duty; they will not be agitated by 
anything--failure or success. The Godly will take up activity as a 
means of worshipping God and they leave the result to God. They 
know that they are but instruments in the hands of God. 


Baba 


11. The triple transformation 


EMBODIMENTS of love! Bhaaratheeya culture declared from the outset that all people should be 
happy, that all should enjoy peace and prosperity and that all should lead sacred lives. 


Mankind today has progressed immensely in the physical and social spheres. But in the field of 
morality and spirituality mankind is unable to give up narrowness and pettiness. What is the 
reason? It is because over many lives men have grown in selfishness. In every effort of man, in 
every aspiration, self-interest is the driving force. Man has become a plaything in the hands of 
selfishness. Whatever object he seeks, whomever he loves, it is out of selfishness and not for its 
own sake. No step is taken without regard for self interest. This intense selfishness has resulted 
in the total decay of human values. This monster of selfishness has pervaded every field of 
human activity... the physical, the social, the economic, political and moral fields. 


Shed selfishness 


Hence, the primary endeavour of man today should be to shed selfishness, develop spirituality 
and realise the Divine. Three basic changes should take place in man. That is the truth contained 
in the Sai principle. S" stands for Spiritual change. "A" stands for "Associational" (or National) 
change. "I" stands for Individual change. By this triple change the nation will prosper. Without a 
change in the individual, society will not change. Without a social transformation, spiritual 
transformation cannot take place in the heart. 


Because the individual's behaviour has gone astray, society has got polluted. Concern for social 
good should influence every individual's action. The individual should give up the preoccupation 
with the interests of his own kith and kin. He must give up this attachment to "my and mine" and 
aspire for the divine. 


Obsessed with worldly desires and forgetting God, man is immersed in misery. Even devotion is 
tainted by selfishness. It does not stem wholly from the heart. It is only part-time devotion and 
hypocrisy. All should realise that the Divine is the basis of everything in the universe. Having 
evolved from the animal, man should aim at realising the Divine. Unfortunately, men today are 
descending to animality. As a result, peace and order are vanishing from every sphere of life. 


What is the use of all the progress m science, if people have no control over their senses and are 
not aware of the all-pervading Chaithanya (cosmic consciousness)? Everyone should recognise 
the indwelling Divinity in his heart. 


A minister becomes a devotee 


In the Tamil land, many great saints have taken birth. Many great scholars were born in the 
Tamil land. One of the Tamil kings was very fond of horses and sent his Prime Minister to buy 
horses. During his journey the minister came across a holy man named Thirukannan. He was 
attracted by the teachings of the holy man. The sage said that all worldly pleasures were 
ephemeral and God was the only reality. Inspired by these teachings, the minister decided to give 
up his mission (of purchasing horses) and used the money given to him to build a temple for 
Shiva. Meanwhile, the king was worried about what had happened to his minister and why he 
had not come back. He came to know that the minister had used the money, given to him for 
purchasing horses, to build a Shiva temple. He had the minister arrested and put in prison. The 
minister was unaffected. He continued to chant the Lord's name in the prison. 


Later the king realised his mistake. Recognizing that the minister was a great devotee, he 
summoned him to his presence and asked him What he had done with the king's money. He said: 
"Oh King! I used the money for God. What God had given, I gave it back to Him. Without the 
grace of God no one can have anything. Without the power of the Divine not a cell in the human 
can move, not a blade of grass will move. The whole universe exists by the will of God. Oh king! 
By a stroke of good fortune you have become a ruler. Because of my bad luck I became a 
minister." 


That minister considered his becoming a minister as a misfortune. When one becomes a minister 
he should be prepared to use all his energies and powers in the service of the Divine. Only when 
Spirituality prevails, will humanness blossom. The lotus blooms when the Sun's rays fall on it. 
The lotus of the mind residing in the lake of the human heart will blossom when the light of 
Divinity illumines it. 


Maanikka vaachakar's message 


The mind should blossom and proclaim the glory of the Divine. The minister told the king: “It is 
out of a realisation of this truth that I offered the money, given to me for buying a horse, to the 
Divine." The king ordered the freeing of the minister and allowed him to lead a spiritual life after 
his own heart. 


From that moment he started composing hymns in praise of God. He wrote many hymns. This 
work is known as "Thiruvaachakam." The author is known as "Maanikka vaachakar." His 
writings are spiritual aphorisms containing the sublimest spiritual truths. 


This kind of transformation should take place in every person. Only then will Bhaarath become 
an exemplar 'for the world. Today men have become worshippers of Mammon. Such persons are 
not human at all. What use is there in endlessly seeking wealth without securing the peace of 
mind? Why don't you spend at least a few moments on thoughts of God? 


If one spends a small fraction of the time, 

Devoted to numerous worldly affairs 

And to family, property and possessions, 

To thoughts on the Lotus feet of the Lord, 

He will have no need to fear the messengers of death.(Shloka) 


How much bliss will you derive from devoting five minutes out of the twenty-four hours of a 
day, to worshipping God? 


Prema and Seva (love and selfless service) are like a bird's two wings for a man. He can soar to 
any heights with those two wings. To cultivate these two qualities one has to achieve the triple 
purity in thought, word and deed. In addition one has to reduce one's desires. Today enormous 
money is wasted on useless luxuries while people grudge expenditure on incense and joss sticks. 
What folly is this! 


Years come and go. What avails the passage of years if there is no change in the minds of men? 
Time is precious. It should be used in the service of the Divine. All actions should be dedicated 
to God. Only through renunciation can man realise the Divine. Today people have forgotten the 
meaning of sacrifice. Sacrifice is Yoga. Enjoyment is Roga (disease). Make your heart blossom 
every moment. That is the way to greet the new year. Realise your oneness with the Divine. 


My life is love 


Promote love in your hearts and share it with others. That is the best form of worship. Love is the 
only property of Sai. My life is love. That is what I offer to one and all. I go on giving, giving. 
But to what extent are you putting into practice Svaami's teachings? Practise silence for at least 
ten minutes in a day. Meditate on Svaami's teachings at that time. Realise that in this transient 
world the Eternal is immanent. Hold fast to God. Experience the bliss of union with the Divine. 
Make love your life-breath. With love of God in their hearts the ancient sages could transform - 
even the wild animals in the forests. 


On the New Year's Day in Thamilnaadu people prepare a chutney made up of fruits, sweet, sour 
and bitter and take it as sign of their readiness to meet all situations in life with equanimity. 
Sorrow and happiness should be treated alike as gifts of God. 


Discourse at Sai Shruthi, Kodaikanal, on 13-4-1996. 


I am the embodiment of love; Love is my instrument. There is no 
creature without love; the lowest loves itself, at least and its "Self 
is God". So there are no atheists, though some might dislike Him 
or refuse Him, as malarial patients dislike sweets or diabetic 
patients refuse to have anything to do with sweet. Those who preen 
themselves as atheists will one day, when their illness is gone, 
relish God and revere Him. 


Baba 


12. The quest for truth 


EMBODIMENTS of love! Trees bear fruits, rivers carry water, cows yield milk, not for their own 
sake but for the sake of others. Equally the body is given to man for helping others. (This is the 
purport of a Sanskrith shloka with which Svaami began His discourse) 


We witness today humanity being racked by innumerable troubles and worries. No 
administration or authority can solve these problems. God alone can save mankind. Men have to 
develop Aathma-Vishvaasa (faith in the Self). Thereby they should acquire the grace of the 
Divine. Humanity as a whole is in need of God's grace. To receive this everyone has to fill his 
heart with love, render service to his fellowmen and thus redeem his life. Everyone has to 
embark perpetually on the quest for truth. In every thought, word and action this quest must go 
on. Truth is not merely what appears as a fact for the moment. It is changeless and beyond time. 
In uttering truth one should bear in mind that it should be pleasing and wholesome. It should not 
cause excitement. It should not cause harm to anyone. Truth that is practised in this way will 
transcend barriers of caste and creed. Rooted in the spiritual, it is valid universally. 


How is the quest for Truth to be undertaken? A distinction should be made between truth, 
untruth and apparent fact. What is apparent at one moment 'is liable to change at another. 
Moreover, what is apparent may not be the real truth, as for instance, in the case of the Sun 
"rising in the East" and "setting in the West". The sun in fact does not rise or set at all. It is the 
revolution of the earth round itself which produces the apparent phenomenon of the sun rising 
and setting. 


Change your vision 


To cite another example. The same pair of eyes look at different persons--the mother, the wife, 
the child and so on. Though the eyes are the same, the feeling with which each person should be 
viewed has to be different. The mother should be looked with a feeling of reverence. The child 
should be looked at with affection. The wife should be seen with endearment. The quest for truth 
in this instance calls for understanding how each person should be viewed in the context of his or 
her specific relationship. 


In looking at the world, man has to change his vision. There is nothing wrong in creation. It is 
man's vision that has to be rectified. The eyes look at good and bad things, the ears listen to 
sweet or harsh words. The sense organs are the same. It is the individual who has to discriminate 
between what is good and what is bad, in using the sense organs. The senses are misused when 
you look at bad things or listen to evil talk. The tongue is likewise misused when one indulges in 
bad speech instead of using it to chant the name of God. No one should indulge in abuse or 
criticism of others. 


The search for truth should go in every sphere of life. There is no need to search for God. He is 
everywhere. He is the indweller in everyone. As the Isopanishath declares: "God is immanent in 
the entire cosmos. 


All names and forms belong to God 


God can be called by any name---Raama, Krishna, Allah or Jesus. The same God is adored under 
different names. The names and forms are countless. All names are His. There is no name or 
form that does not belong to Him. 


"Sathyvam, Jnaanam, Anantham, Brahma" says the scripture. Truth is infinite. Everything is 


based on Truth. Today people have to adhere to Truth. Truth is God. The answer to the question, 
"Where is God?" is: “He is everywhere." 


Today the world is filled with hatred and discord. What is the reason? It is the feeling of "mine" 
and "thine." Everyone must try to find out the nature of his true self. Everyone answers the 
question, "Who are you?", with the reply: "I am so-and-so." The "I" that is proclaimed by 
everyone is Aham, the appellation of God. The inherent Divinity of each person is turned into 
Ahamkaara (egoism), by identifying the Self with the body. The body is liable to change and 
decay. It should be regarded only as an instrument for realising the Divine. The breathing 
process which takes place as long as life remains in the body proclaims through 'the manthra, So- 
Ham, that the individual is one with God ("I am He"). This manthra emanates from the heart. 
People today recite manthras mechanically. 


New year is a sacred day for purifying one's self 


Today is New Year Day for Malayaalis. The day is usually observed as a festival occasion. But it 
should be regarded as a sacred day for purifying one's self. One should get rid of all bad thoughts 
and fill the mind with good feelings. Hatred should be banished. One should cultivate this spirit 
of equal-mindedness in facing the ups and downs of life. People should contemplate on God as 
the embodiment of infinite bliss, the bestower of all happiness, as the transcendental Lord, as the 
Eternal witness in the hearts of everyone, the One Absolute, immaculate Being, free from the 
three gunas and the pure embodiment of supreme wisdom. The Lord is described as the 
embodiment of Brahmaanandham (Braahmik Bliss). This bliss is far beyond the comprehension 
of human beings. It is infinite and unchanging bliss. The heart is the seat of all bliss. There is a 
basic difference between the mundane happiness and Braahmik bliss. The former is temporary 
and is purely physical. Bliss resides in the Spiritual heart of man, which is on the right, side. 
From this new year day cherish pure thoughts and cultivate good feelings. 


Each should practise his own religion sincerely. A Christian should be a good Christian. A 
Hindhu should be a good Hindhu. A Muslim should be a good Muslim. Let each one be a true 
practitioner of his religion. No one should criticize or hate another's religion. Muslims should not 
hate Hindhus and Hindhus should not hate Muslims. "All are one. 13e alike to everyone," 
declared Jesus. The one God is common to all. 


Embodiments of Love! Whatever you may do, never give up your faith in God. Do not place your 
trust in the transient things of the world. Regard all humanity as one family. Transcend the 
barriers of creed, language and nationality. The message of the Vedhas is universal, meant for all 
mankind. The message is one of unity and harmony. "Let us live together, strive together and 
rejoice together." Develop this spirit of oneness. 


Discourse at Sai Shruthi, Kodaikanal, 14-4-1996. 


Conquer anger by means of fortitude; conquer hatred by love. Do 
not feed anger with retaliation; do not feed hatred with fury. Meet 
hatred with your innate Prema; meet grief with innate joy; meet 
anger with shield of Shaanthi, Inner Peace. You are bound to win. 


Baba 


13. Heroic mothers and noble sons 


EMBODIMENTS of Divine Love! For the benefit of others alone trees give fruits, rivers carry 
water and cows yield milk. Likewise the human body is given for rendering help to others. But 
not recognizing this truth, man uses his body for selfish purposes. Man today behaves in a more 
degraded manner than trees, rivers and cows. 


Man is forgetting the purpose for which he has been endwoed with a body.. From dawn to dusk, 
he is immersed ,wholly in selfish pursuits. He has no comprehension of what selflessness means. 
Man considers the phenomenal world as the only reality. 


People mistake the unreal for the real 
and the real for the unreal. 

But the real is the only One 

And there is nothing else in the universe. 


This visible universe is made up of three gunas (Sathva, Rajas and Thamas). This is the reason 
for describing the cosmos as Sthree. The term Sthree has three components: “Sa", "Tha" and 
"Ra". "Sa" signifies the Saathvik quality. This comprises qualities like forbearance, compassion, 
and love. "Tha" signifies 'the Thamo guna which includes qualities like modesty, bashfulness, 
fear and patience. "Ra" signifies the Rajo guna represented by such qualities as courage, sacrifice 
and the adventurous spirit. Every being born in the world has only feminine qualities. Merely on 
the basis of the physical form, a distinction is made between men and women. The three qualities 
in the term Sthree are to be found both in men and women. 


Role of the mother 


The term Sthree should not be treated lightly. The Bhagavath Geetha lists seven attributes to the 
feminine principle' Fame, Wealth, Speech, Wisdom, Intelligence, Fortitude and Determination. 
The Mother principle, which embodies these seven potencies, is highly sacred. Wherever you 
turn, you will see manifestations of the feminine principle in Nature.' When any person goes 
abroad, the first question that is put is: "What is your Mother-tongue?" No one asks, "What is 
your Father-tongue?" This shows how much- importance is attached to the role of the mother. 
The mother, fosters the child in the womb and goes through all travails to protect the child. There 
is no greater love in the world than maternal love. Hence the ancients accorded the highest 
honour to the mother and declared: "Maathru dhevo bhava" (Esteem the Mother as Divine) and. 
"Pithru dhevo bhava" (Esteem the father as Divine). For every person the first preceptor is the 
mother. It is from the mother that a child learns its first words of speech, the first steps in 
movement and many other primary lessons in behaviour. Hence, the mother stands out as the 
reflected image of Prakrithi (Nature). 


Heroic women in Indian history 


Despite the evidences of recognition of the greatness of the feminine principle, women have 
been described as abala (the weaker vessel). This appellation is applied to women because of the 
secondary status accorded to women in the performance of yagnas (sacrifice) and other rituals, 
though participation together with men was permitted. Women could not perform sacrifices and 
rituals by themselves. Even charitable and religious acts could be performed by women only in 


association with their spouses. 


Though the term abala is applied to women in this specific context alone, women are not weak at 
all in terms of strength or ability. We have innumerable examples of the strength displayed by 
women in the world. As against three potencies attributed to men, women are said to have seven 
potencies (according to the Geetha). Can you call as weak Saavithri, who made the Lord of 
Death restore to life her dead husband? Can Anasuuya, who transformed the Divine Trinity 
Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva into three babies and played with them, be called an abala (weak 
woman)? Sumathee was a great lady who stopped the sun from rising, because her husband was 
predestined to die the next morning. Could she be termed as abala? No. Was Dhraupadhi, who 
bore with fortitude for 14 years all the ordeals her husbands went through, a weak woman? Can 
Seetha, who shared with Raama all hardships of life in the forest and achieved ultimate victory, 
be called weak? Can Gaargi, who could carry on the debate with the Raaja yogi Janaka is a 
dauntless spirit, be called a weak woman? 


There are any number of such heroic women in recorded history. Though physically women may 
appear weak, in reality they are full of strength. As the embodiment of the three gunas, women 
are endowed with exceptional strength. Even in the spiritual field women display their boundless 
capacity. 


Gratitude to the mother 


It is in her role as mother that there is the highest expression of a woman's strength. Every child 
that is born owes its existence to the mother. Hence everyone should be extremely grateful to 
one's mother. 


The mother is the symbol of the Universal mother and father of the Dime Lord. There is a 
popular prayer in Sanskrith describing the Lord as everything: 


Oh Lord of Lords ! 

You are my mother and father, 
My kinsman and friend, 

My wealth and knowledge, 
My everything. 


The mother is the first teacher of speech. The first words taught to the child are Amma, Appa 
(mother, father). Then the teaching of the alphabet starts. The first lessons are: "Om Namah 
Shivaaya" or "Om Namo Naaraayanaaya." The teaching of language begins with the teaching of 
names of the Divine - Shiva and Naaraayana. In ancient times, the mother occupied the place of 
the first preceptor for the child. Unfortunately, in the world today, what are the parents teaching 
to the child? They are teaching them "A, B, C, D." Nor is that all. They go on to teach the child 
some meaningless stuff like: "Baa Baa black sheep!" (laughter). The mothers imagine that they 
are teaching something wonderful to the children. This is wrong. Teaching of the alphabet should 
begin with learning the names of the Lord. 


Ancient mothers taught Truth and Righteousness 


This was the way the mothers in ancient Bhaarath taught their children. The ancient teachings 
exhorted the people "“Sathyam vadha, Dharmam chara" (Speak the Truth, adhere to 


Righteousness). No mother taught the child to speak untruth. No mother would think of asking 
the child to follow unrighteousness. Their sole desire was to see that their children secured 
happiness by leading worthy and meritorious lives. Hence, in the attitude towards parents, the 
children should give the primary place to the mother. 


Today, we need to promote such ideal mothers. This is all the more necessary because the 
modern trends are disturbing. The tendency (among the affluent families) is to entrust the child 
from birth to a nurse or an ayah. The child does not get the love of the mother. The child has no 
knowledge of what a mother means. 


In ancient times, Queen Madhaalasa was teaching the children from their infancy the greatness 
of Vairaagya (detachment). She used to sing a lullaby while putting the children to sleep: 


Placing you in the cradle of Omkaara 
On the bed of the great saying 'Thath vam asi' 
Swinging to the music of Awareness, dear child, 


May the Gods lull you to sleep! 


The four Vedhas are the 
four chains of the cradle. 
May your heart be filled with 
the nine forms of devotion. 


Because the mothers in ancient times filled the child with devotion and detachment, Bhaarath 
stood out as a land of sacrifice, of wisdom, of yoga and contentment. Because today mothers do 
not bring up the child in this spirit, this sacred land is ceasing to be one of sacrifice and is 
becoming a pleasure-loving nation. The pleasures are turning into breeders of disease. Sacrifice 
in ancient times made this country the Yogabhuumi (land of yoga). Our goal should be to become 
yogis, not rogis (victims of disease). 


There may be bad sons but bad mothers are rare 


Embodiments of Divine love! You must be prepared to make even the supreme sacrifice for 
showing your gratitude to the mothers. Even the avathaars Raama, Krishna and others, owed 
their advent to their mothers. Everyone should pray for sacred mothers who will bring forth good 
children. There may be bad sons in the world but bad mothers are rare. Most mothers today 
lament over the bad behaviour of their children. No son who has caused distress to his mother 
can come to anything good. The Thelugu saying is: "There can be no prosperity in a home where 
the mother sheds tears." Today we need sons who will please their mothers. 


The mothers, for their part, should teach the children always to speak the truth. When a mother 
asks the son, "Where have you been?" he should not prevaricate. He must tell the truth and 
confess his mistakes if he has done anything wrong. Very few children tell the truth to their 
parents today. Of what use is education for such children? 


Today's boys and girls are the future redeemers of the nation. Hence, the parents should bring 
them up on right, lines so that they may be ideal citizens. 


Women in various places observe what is called Ladles' Day. The day should not be observed 
only by making speeches or holding bhajans. They should endeavour to help the poor and the 
destitute. Helpless women who have no means of livelihood should be taught some occupation 
like tailoring to enable them to earn an income. Slum dwellers should be helped to keep their 
huts dean. The environment also should be cleaned to help the children grow in a pure 
atmosphere. Proper housekeeping should also be taught to those people. Disease is caused 
mainly by unhygienic surroundings Moreover the air, the water, the mind, everything is polluted. 
This pollution is causing several, new types of diseases. 


Example of Vidhyaasaagar 


In the past, mothers used to play a big part in moulding their children. For instance, there is the 
example of Eeshvar Chandhra Vidhyaasaagar. He was a native of Calcutta. He justified his name 
by being a great scholar (Vidhyaasaagar means ocean of knowledge). He belonged to a very poor 
family. His mother brought up her son at the expense of her own food. Pursuing his studies 
under the most adverse circumstances, he completed his education and found a job on a salary of 
Rs. 50 per mensem. In due course, he rose to an eminent position by dint of hard work. 


One day he approached his mother and said: “Mother, I have reached an eminent position thanks 
to your blessings and guidance. I am now able to fulfill any of your wishes." The mother said: 
“Not yet, my son. I have three desires but I shall tell them in due course." Reaching a still higher 
position after sometime, Eeshvar Chandhra renewed his appeal to his mother. The mother said: 
“Our village is poor and the village has no school. Please set up a school here so that the children 
will not have to go outside for their education. That school will be an ornament for me." The son 
carried out her wish. 


Later, the mother revealed her second wish. She wanted Eeshvar Chandhra to set up a small 
hospital in the village to serve the villagers. She said this would be her second ornament she 
wanted from him. He set up a hospital as desired by his mother. In the following years, 
Vidhyaasaagar rose to greater eminence, but remained as humble and free from conceit as ever. 
He asked his mother what her third desire was. She said that he would build a small rest house 
(choultry) for travellers passing through the village to stay. Vidhyaasaagar built a small 
community hall in the village. 


Today's educated persons get puffed up over their petty educational attainment. It was his 
mother's teachings which made Vidhyaasaagar practise humility. 


Not penance, not rituals, not pilgrimages 
Are of any avail in crossing 

The ocean of human existence. 

Only service to the good 


Can take one across. (Sanskrith shloka). 


Service is most important, It helps to promote humility and to further the oneness of mankind. 
No room should be given for ostentation. True devotion is free from exhibitionism. 


Children should recognise the supremacy of maternal love, which is equal to Divine Love. 
Revere and love the mother. That is the meaning of Mother's Day. The parents are living 


symbols of God. Children must make them happy. 
Discourse in Sai Ramesh Mandap on 6-5-1996. 


The most direct method of achieving spiritual success is 
Nishkaama karma, action without any attention or attachment to 
'the fruit therefrom, action as duty, action as dedication, action as 


worship. 
Baba 


14. Message of the Avathaars and the Epics 


EMBODIMENTS of Love! This vast cosmos, consisting of moving and unmoving objects, is 
permeated with Truth. All names and forms are founded on Dharma (Righteousness). Dharma is 
the form of God. The Aathma (Spirit) which is present in the subtlest of the subtle and vastest of 
the vast as a witness, is verily the Brahman (all-pervading Consciousness). 


All the objects in the universe are made up of atoms. The atom is the embodiment of the Aathma 
(Spirit). Hence there is no place in the universe without the Aathma or Brahman. 


Forgetting the spiritual basis of the universe man gets entangled in misery through his worldly 
attachments. It was out of a recognition of this truth that Buddha declared: “Everywhere there is 
sorrow. Everything is momentary and everything is perishable." To consider the worldly things 
as permanent is the cause of sorrow. 


If man recognizes that the world is permeated by the Brahman, which is all bliss, he will free 
himself from the cause of sorrow. He fails to recognise the divinity that subsumes the whole of 
Prakrithi (Nature or the phenomenal Universe). Instead, he regards the Divine as a natural 
phenomenon and though the workings of the Divine can be seen in Nature, man in his folly falls 
to recognise the Divine. Nature in its myriad forms is the effect. God is the cause. The entire 
cosmos is a manifestation of cause and effect. Hence the universe is a manifestation of the 
Divine. 


See the divine in every human being 


Man should realise that the five basic elements which constitute the fundamental stuff of the 
universe are common to all mankind and should be enjoyed as such. He should see the divine in 
every human being. This was the purport of the prayer: Buddham Sharanam Gachchaami (I seek 
my refuge in the Buddha). The second prayer is: Sangham Sharanam Gachchaami (1 seek refuge 
in the Sangha). The implication of this prayer is that, after getting enlightenment, one should 
enter society (to serve it). 


The third prayer is: Dharmam Sharanam Gachchaami (I seek refuge in Dharma). The meaning 
of the prayer as a whole is that for the sake of upholding Dharma (Righteousness), one should 
use one's Buddhi (the enlightened intellect) and engage himself in social activity. Possessing 
intelligence, if a person does not do social service, how can he uphold Dharma? It has been said 
that man had been given a body essentially to pursue Dharma. 


Non-violence is the first dharana 


The observance of non-violence has been described as the highest form of Dharma. All the 
violence in the world today is due to the fact that people do not lead righteous lives. People do 
penance and perform various kinds of rituals, but they have secured no peace. Why? Because 
they have not sought to find out who they really are. 


This enquiry should lead to the realisation that one is the Divine in human form and deeming the 
body as the basic reality, men are misusing the body and the talents and qualities given to them. 
They are failing to recognise how to use their endowments for redeeming their human birth. 


Among the teachings of the Buddha to the world the foremost was Ahimsa (not causing harm to 
anyone). Non-violence is not merely refraining from inflicting injuries on others with one's limbs 


or weapons. Non-violence has to be practised with Thrikarana Shuddhi (purity of mind, tongue 
and body). There should be no ill-feelings which is a form of violence. To cause harm to others 
through the body is also Himsa (violence). No one should be harmed even by speech. The speech 
should be sweet, pleasing and wholesome. All actions should be helpful to others. 


"Buddha laid down three rules for all actions. All acts done by the hands should be good. The 
proper ornament for the Kantham (throat) is truth. For the ears the best ornament is listening to 
sacred lore. What other ornaments does anyone need?" (Sanskrith shloka). 


What are people doing today? They are listening to what is undesirable. They are looking at ugly 
scenes. How, then, can they hope to get peace? Only by the harmony of the mind, the heart and 
the tongue. There should be unity in thought, word and deed. 


Bhajans and Sathsang should make one purer 


Despite all the teachings, no real transformation is taking place in the behaviour of man. Of what 
use are Bhajans and Sath-sang (the company of the good) if one does not become purer? 
Through the company of the good, one should cultivate good thoughts, which in due course will 
lead one to Jeevan Mukthi (Self-realisation in this very life). 


Men should act according to the dictates of their conscience, which can discriminate between 
right and wrong. They should rise above animal tendencies and realise the glory of human birth. 
Men should lead ideal lives, manifesting their inner divinity. Everything they do, their speech 
and their manners, should be exemplary. Even the smallest act should cause no harm to others. 


Men today get easily enraged. Where can we find the example for such anger? In the 
Bhaagavatham. Likewise where can we find an example for Desire or lust? In the Raamaayana. 
Where is the example for the evil quality of greed? It is in the Mahaabhaaratha. 


How do these great works contain warnings against three grievous evils? In the Raamaayana, the 
all-powerful Raavana, a great scholar well versed in the 64 types of knowledge and one who had 
performed severe penances, was destroyed because of the one evil quality of Kaama (lust). All 
his other virtues were burnt up by the fire of sensuous desire. Kaama (lust) is destructive of all 
other good qualities in a man. Raamaayana demonstrates this truth. 


In the Bhaagavatham we have the story of Prahlaadha and Hiranyakashipu. Prahlaadha was a 
great devotee of Vishnu. His father, Hiranyakashipu, hated Vishnu. In his uncontrollable hatred 
of the Lord, he did not hesitate to subject his young son to the most terrible ordeals. His Krodha 
(anger) was the cause of his destruction. 


In the Mahaabhaaratha, Dhuryodhana stands out as the example for the evil quality of lobha 
(greed). He declared that he would not part with even a needle-point of land to the Paandavas 
(who were his cousins). His greed turned him into a totally wicked person. 


Bounden duty of all to get rid of evil qualities 


Raavana, Hiranyakashipu and Dhuryodhana were not men of common clay. They were all 
eminent in their own way. They were heroes by virtue of their accomplishments. But they.proved 
zeroes in their lives because of their specific vices. What use is there in possessing great talents if 
one is subject to a grievous vice? Raavana had numerous abilities and had made Lanka veritable 
paradise. But of what avail were all these when he had no Control over the sense? 


It is the bounden duty of every human being to get rid of his evil qualities and foster his good 


qualities. 


Avathaars and Dharma 


The role of every Avathaar (incarnation of the Divine) is to establish the reign of Truth and 
Righteousness, banish all that is evil, false and unrighteous in the world, and help to manifest the 
divinity in mankind. 


It was to establish the reign of righteousness Dharma samsthaapana--that the advent of the 
Raama Avathaar took place. No one should go back on his plighted word. There is no greater 
Dharma than Truth. In order to uphold the promises given by his father, Raama chose to go in 
exile to the forest. 


Likewise, in the Krishna Avathaar, the Lord declared: "I incarnate from age to age to establish 
Dharma." 


When you listen to these declarations, it will be clear that Dharma is the supreme ideal. What is 
Dharma? Any act that is done with purity in thought, word and deed is Dharma. But, how many 
act up to this dictum? Very few understand or live upto it. Practice is primary. 


The history of Bhaarath is replete with stories of the great men who have upheld Dharma. 
Buddha also had to face criticisms from his contemporaries. These are the familiar experiences 
of all Avathaars. No incarnation was free from calumny. All good causes also suffer from 
criticisms. Peace and good result from the work of the, Avathaars in spite of these attacks and! 
impediments. 


The following is the fourfold formula for all people. Welcome good company. Eschew all 
association with the evil minded. Perform meritorious acts ceaselessly. Always discriminate 
between the transient and the everlasting. 


Buddha's first teaching was, "give up bad company." In his wanderings Buddha used to take with 
him some young men. Some persons criticized Buddha, charging him with spoiling the young 
men. Buddha gave a free rein to his traducers. He listened quietly to their accusations and left 
without uttering a word in reply. When the disciples asked him why he chose not to reply to the 
criticisms Buddha said that unanswered criticisms return to the critics who made them. 


By not getting excited over the angry words of a critic, one becomes superior to the critic. 
Otherwise, one descends to the same level as the critic. Bear no ill-will towards anyone. That is 
the golden rule indicated by the Geetha. Buddha carried on his mission in this spirit of 
equanimity and tolerance. 


Animating principle of Avathaars is infinitely wide 


It is the quality of great men to face obstacles and opposition with courage and calmness. It is not 
easy to understand the inner urges of great men or the motives and actions of Avathaars. The 
animating principle of Avathaars is infinitely wide. Compared to it, the capacity of the ordinary 
man is infinitesimal. How can the atom comprehend the infinite? Can an ant measure the depth 
of the ocean? Impossible, Likewise the nature of Divinity is beyond human comprehension. 
Even the great sages like Vasishta and Vaamadheva could have no full understanding of the 
divine. 


Instead of trying to understand the Divine, it is better to practise what you have learnt. Jnaathum, 
Dhrashtum, Praveshtum (know, perceive and commune) are the three which draws the divine 


towards them. The bhajans should be sung with complete obliviousness of the body. Devotional 
fervour is more important than musical skill. The ladies who took part in the bhajans in the 
morning sang the bhajans whole-heartedly. Their hearts were full of sweetness. Hence sweet 
music flowed from their hearts. 


It is significant that a large number of devotees from Sri Lanka should celebrate their national 
festival of Buddha Jayanthi at Brindhaavan in the presence of Svaami. It is their good fortune 
that they have been able to have this celebration here despite all discomforts and inconveniences. 
Their bhajans have sustained them in these celebrations. They have been singing the bhajans at 
all places and as often as they could. They could find happiness and peace because of the 
bhajans. 


Discourse in Sai Ramesh Mandap on 15-5-1996. 


Sai is Sarvajanapriva and so any name which gives you joy, you 
can take up. Tastes differ according to temperament and _ the 
character one has earned by generations of activity as a living 
being in this world. 


Baba 


15. Bhagavaan Baba's exhortation to students 


Brahma Vidhya is the means by which 

One learns the way to achieve world peace 
And live in harmony with all, 

Eschewing narrow ideas, and cultivating unity. 


EMBODIMENTS of love! Dear Students! Boys and Girls! The main aim of a student should be to 
mould himself in such a way that he leads a purposeful and useful life in society. Unfortunately 
in the educational system today, there is no strength of purpose, no unity and no love. Whether 
one learns anything or not, whether one leads a meaningful life or otherwise, one's span of life 
melts away like a block of ice. Students should recognise this truth. Students today are not aware 
of what is the primary goal of life. They do not seem even to be worried about this. One in a 
million seems to be concerned about knowing the primary purpose of life. This concern is the 
first step in the ascent towards the goal. 


Most students and the common people in general think that food, clothes, shelter and sleep, 
having a wife and children and enjoying material comforts of various kinds constitute the goals 
of life. However, these are not the primary purpose of life. Without knowing this, life becomes a 
saga of misery. With the awareness of this purpose, man can get rid of that misery. 


Transcend beyond negative impulses 


In this context, it is necessary to know the proper meaning of Vedha. Vedha is described as 
higher Vijnaana (knowledge), as effulgence or knowledge of one's transcendental reality -- 
Uniki. It is only when these three are known that one can get rid of sorrow and experience the 
bliss of Vedha. 


What is the effulgence that is meant here? Is it the effulgence of the sun or the moon or the light 
of a lamp? No. It is the effulgence of the heart that is implied. 


What, again, is meant by the term Vijnaana? Is it the science of physics or worldly knowledge? 
No. Vijnaana refers to knowledge about the functioning of the heart. 


What is meant by "Uniki?" It is recognition of one's true nature. Are you the body? Are you the 
mind? Are you the senses or any other substance? No. Man has to realise that he transcends all 
these physical characteristics which are negative in nature, How can he realise his true 
transcendental positive nature if he fills himself with negative tendencies? What he can 
experience will be confined to the reactions and reflections of these negative factors and not that 
which is beyond them. 


The first requisite, therefore, is the eradication of the negative impulses. One should investigate 
the truth about the divinity inherent in humanness. 


Need for gratitude 


What is it that one should do in this mundane, transient phenomenal world? The students should 
realise what everyone owes by way of gratitude to every person that has helped him in one way 
or another. For instance, if a doctor has cured a patient of a serious ailment, he should not forget 
what he owes to the doctor by way of gratitude. He should not think that after all the doctor has 


done his duty. Likewise, when a mother bears the child in the womb for nine months and rears 
the child with love and concern, the child when he grows up should not merely consider that the 
mother has simply, done her duty. He should be ever grateful for all the travails the mother has 
gone through and for all the love and care she has bestowed on the child. 


You have to show towards the mother the same love and spirit of sacrifice with which she has 
brought you up. Similarly you have to be grateful to one who enables you to earn a living when 
you are without the means of livelihood. 


In the love of a mother for the child or the affection of a preceptor to the pupil, there may be an 
element of self-interest. But there is no selfishness in the bounties which the divine showers on 
mankind. God has no self-interest or selfish purpose to be-achieved. He expects no return from 
anyone. God is conferring on mankind countless benefits which no human being can offer. Can 
all the man-made lamps in the world equal the light coming from the sun? Can all the pumps you 
may install produce the amount of water that came down in last night's downpour? 'Who has 
given you the life-giving air that pervades everywhere? 


Various benefits conferred by God on mankind 


Thus, innumerable superhuman benefits are conferred by God on mankind. Even electricity is an 
expression of the Divine. From magnetism to electricity, heat and light, all these various forms of 
energy are considered as different forms of matter. This is not so. God is the source of all energy. 
If this is not realised, we will be failing to appreciate the true source of the air we breathe, the 
light we enjoy and the heat that sustains life. 


For the power we consume or the water we use, charges have to be paid for their supply. That 
being the case, do not we owe gratitude to the Divine who has provided the world with air, water 
and light free? As the beneficiaries of the benefits provided by the five basic elements (ether, air, 
fire, water and earth), we should show our gratitude to them as manifestations of the Divine. The 
five elements are the source of five qualities experienced by the five senses: Sound, Touch, 
Vision, Taste, and Smell. Man makes use of these five elements but shows no gratitude to them. 
Gratitude should be an essential quality in man. 


Unfortunately this is not very evident in man today. Everything is treated lightly. The result is 
disorder and discontent in the nation. 


Every action has its reaction 


Students should understand the relationships between cause and effect. Every action has its 
reaction. Every word has its resound. Every thought has its reflection in one's conduct. No one 
can avoid the consequences of one's actions. 


Man is a reservoir of all potencies. The eternal principle of divinity is present in man, but he is 
not able to recognise it as he is deluded by the external world. A man produces a brilliant 
diamond out of piece of rugged rock, but more value is given to the diamond than to the man 
who fashioned it. 


The educational system today has failed to bring out the spiritual effulgence in man. This really 
means that man is oblivious to his own real nature. Students have not learnt to use their faculties 
in the right way. They rely on others for forming their opinions. This is a kind of blindness. Of 
what use can such persons be to the society? Students should equip themselves to serve society 
and to promote its well-being. 


Students might know about some of the great intellectuals of Bengal like Bipin Chandhra Paal, 
Rabindhranaath Tagore, Aurobindo Ghosh and others. But very few remember them today 
except through books. But the name of an almost illiterate person like Svaami Raamakrishna 
Paramahamsa is remembered and cherished by millions because of his spiritual eminence. 


Education which is not based on ethics, morality and spirituality is utterly worthless. All 
education, all wealth, all ritualistic worship or penances are of no value without genuine devotion 
to God. Devotion can elevate the lowly to the highest level. Without faith in God, even an 
eminent person gets degraded. 


The culture of Bhaarath lays stress upon ethics, righteousness and spirituality. True culture 
consists in the recognition of the unity that underlies the diversity in mankind. The basis of that 
culture is love, which is essentially divine. Love is a much abused word today. What is called 
love is only attachment of different kinds based on relationships. 


Culture and spirituality are not different 


Love of the Divine is the only pure, unsullied, unchanging, enduring love. It is free from the taint 
of selfishness and self-interest. This is the love that is glorified in Bhaaratheeya culture. There 
should be no unfair comparisons between different cultures. All of them essentially are one. 
What is important is people should learn to live and strive in harmony for achieving things in 
common and sharing their benefits equally. This is the attitude that should be promoted among 
students in educational institutions. 


Students should also develop steadfast faith in God so that they can face with fortitude any of the 
vicissitudes of life. Prahlaadha is a supreme example of such faith. He bore with calmness and 
faith in the Lord all the persecutions to which he was subjected. 


Culture and spirituality are not different from each other. Ekaathma bhaava (Oneness of spirit) is 
culture. Students should combine spiritual education with academic studies. Moreover, 
cultivation of good conduct is equally important. 


Good behaviour should be maintained even after leaving college. Students of the Sai Institute 
should bear the stamp of morality and good behaviour wherever they go. They should act 
according to their conscience. Students should prove themselves exemplary citizens. 


The Vice-Chancellor has requested that from this evening I should give discourses on the 
Raamaayana during this summer course. Every syllable in the Raamaayana is relevant for us 
today. It is pregnant with moral and spiritual teachings. Humanity will be redeemed when the 
lessons of the Raamaayana are learnt and put into practice. 


Discourse to the Summer Course in Indian Culture and Spirituality on the morning on 20-5- 
1996, in the Institute Auditorium, Brindhaavan Campus. 


Develop Prema (Love) towards the Lord, the Parama-Prema 
(Highest Love) of which He is the embodiment. Never give room 
for doubts and hesitations, for questions, to test the Lord's Prema. 


Baba 


16. Infinite potency of the Raama principle 


EMBODIMENTS of Divine Love! Man is endowed with all potencies. Forgetting the divinity 
inherent in man, people behave as if the body, the physical instruments, is everything. The truth 
about man is taught as a secret in the Raamaayana. In the following discourse in this series you 
will learn more about Raama, Lakshmana, Bharatha, Kausalya, Seetha and other characters in 
the Raamaayana. Only then the true significance of the Raamaayana will be properly understood. 
The Spirit that is the indweller in all of them, is one and the same. Because they appear in 
different forms they are considered different. 


Embodiments of Love! The Raama Principle is a mystery. There is nothing that cannot be 
accomplished in this world with faith in the Raama-thatva (Raama Principle). It is a mighty 
force. That is the reason why the Raama Principle has survived in the hearts of Bhaaratheeyas 
even after thousands of years. Despite the efforts of foreign conquerors, this faith in the Raama 
Principle has remained firm. It remains as fresh as ever. It is infinitely mysterious. It is present in 
everyone. It survives as the imperishable nectar though the form went out millennia ago. We 
should not go by name and form alone. The Raama principle has infinite potency. Its true form is 
beyond description. The Raama Principle continues to illumine and inspire the hearts of men. 
When students grasp this truth, they will understand what is meant by maanavathvam 
(humanness). 


Do not mistake the cotton fruit for the mango 


If you wish to lead an ideal human life, you have to follow the example of the avathaars (Divine 
advents). Avathaars can come in human form. But you should not be misled by this 
phenomenon. Avathaars may appear in human form, but you should not equate yourself with 
them. In physical form both may appear alike. But there is a fundamental difference. You should 
not mistake the cotton fruit for the mango. 


God comes in human form because man has strayed away from the path of righteousness. To 
reform man and bring him back to Dharma, God has to take the human form. Birds, beats and 
insects lead lives according to their specific nature. They do not need avathaars. Today, only 
man has given up all righteousness, forgotten his divine essence and degraded his humanness. To 
reform man in this state, God has to come in human form. The avathaar has to protect the good 
parithraanaaya saadhuunaam reform the erring and punish the wicked. The role of the avathaar 
will be explained in detail in the ensuing discourses. 


Raamaayana has life-giving message for all 


The Raamaayana should not be treated merely as the story of Raamaa. It has a life-giving message 
for every human being. People lead artificial lives today. When they understand the Raamaayana 
they will know how to lead true lives. The first requisite is to know what is right. Then it has to 
be practised. There is no meaning in merely repeating the name, "Raam, Raam, Raam." The 
Raama Principle has to be fully understood. And one has to live up to it. This is possible only if 
there is love. Through love, one realises the Raama Principle and is transformed into an image of 
Raama. All scholarship and religious observances are of no value without such a mental 
transformation. The mind should be divinised. Faith in the name of the Lord is the basis for this 
transformation. 


Discourse in Sai Ramesh Mandap on the evening of 20-5-1996. 


17. Greatness of Vibheeshana 


THE lives of two noble, meritorious and righteous personalities stand out in the Raamaayana. 
One is Sugreeva. The other is Vibheeshana. The lives of these two are very sacred. Raama 
sought the association with Sugreeva. Vibheeshana came seeking Raama only. After securing the 
friendship of Raama, Sugreeva realised the greatness of Raama. But Vibheeshana realised the 
compassionate nature of Raama even before coming to him. Raama was supremely pleased that 
he had been able to secure such noble friends. 


The Mahaabhaaratha war lasted 18 years, but the war in Lanka between Raama and Raavana 
lasted 75 days. These battles have become memorable. But even today in the heart of every 
individual the Kurukshethra battle is being fought between the forces of evil (as represented by 
the Kauravas) and the forces of God (as represented by Paandavas). Equally the battle between 
Raama and Raavana is going on symbolically in everyone. This means that the war between truth 
and falsehood, between good and evil, is a perennial one. In the battle in Lanka many died on 
both sides. I do not relish dilating on wars. What we should seek to understand is the nature of 
the forces ranged against each others, what forces stood for truth. 


Even among Raakshasas there are good people 


Even in Lanka (ruled by Raavana) there was no lack of good people. While the battle was going 
on, one Raakshasa woman was running along, carrying a child in her arms. Hit by an arrow 
released by Lakshmana the child fell from her arms. Abandoning the child to its fate the woman 
continued to run. Seeing this Lakshmana remarked to Raama: “Brother! look at the callousness 
of these Raakshasas. Without caring for the fate of her infant child, the Raakshasa woman is 
running away to save herself." The all knowing divine Raama told Lakshmana: “Lakshmana! 
you are making a mistake. That woman is not selfish. She is full of devotion." Immediately 
Lakshmana sent a monkey to fetch the woman. He asked her: “How is it you went on running, 
caring only for your own safety, without bothering about the fate of the child that fell from your 
arms?" The woman replied: “I was not running for the sake of saving myself. It is not as if I had 
no love for my child. I am clinging to my life with the sole desire 'to serve Raama if he takes us 
to Ayodhya after the destruction of Raavana. I pray for the advent of Raamaraajya. I want to 
serve Raama." Then Raama remarked: “Do you see, Lakshmana, how mistaken you were? 
Even among Raakshasas there are good people. Vibheeshana is the supreme example. Such 
persons do not need any protector. They are protected by their own Righteousness." 


The next day, the battle started in the morning. Both sides blew their trumpets. That day 
Raavana's son Indhrajith used all his magical powers to inflict injuries on the monkey hordes. 
Vibheeshana knew well the wizardry of the Raakshasas. He shattered all the special missiles 
used by Indhrajith and infused courage among the monkeys. Noticing this, Raama observed: 
“When Vibheeshana came to me seeking asylum, all kinds of objections were raised against our 
accepting him as one of us. Do you see how helpful he is to us now?" 


Indhrajith and Vibheeshana in the battlefield 


Indhrajith began performing a yajna to destroy Raama, and Lakshmana. Earlier, in the battle 
between Indhrajith and Lakshmana, the latter had fallen unconscious after being hit by 
Indhrajith's Asthra (missile). Lakshmana regained consciousness after the application of a herb 
from the Sanjivini mountain brought by Hanumaan from the Himaalayas. Lakshmana resumed 
the battle with Indhrajith, carrying himself on the shoulders of Hanumaan. Vibheeshana took 


both of them to the place where Indhrajith was performing his Yajna. Indhrajith was offering 
many human beings as sacrifice at the Yajna that was being performed at the foot of a blackberry 
tree. So long as Indhrajith remained under that tree he could wield extraordinary powers. 
Vibheeshana told Hanumaan and Lakshmana to see that Indhrajith was kept away from that tree 
as much as possible. Hearing this, Indhrajith got very angry. He burst out: “Oh Vibheeshana! Are 
you betraying my secrets and the secrets of Lanka to the enemy? You are a traitor to your race." 
He went on berating Vibheeshana in this manner. 


Vibheeshana makes Indhrajith understand the Truth 


Vibheeshana retorted indignantly: "Indhrajith! It is natural for Raakshasas to be abusive as they 
like. But, remember that Raama is the very embodiment of peace. He is pure of heart, utterly free 
from selfishness. It is not possible for Raakshasas to understand the truth about such a Divine 
Being. Raama has entered Lanka for rescuing Seetha and not for seizing the country. How can 
one who gave up Ayodhya itself voluntarily covet Lanka? Raama has no desire for anything. For 
a long time I had been warning Raavana that is a grievous sin to kidnap another, man's wife and 
appealed to him to restore Seetha to Raama. However, Raavana, paid a deaf ear to my word. He 
is destroying by his own hands his kingdom and his clan. Who is to be blamed for this? Is it me 
or your father?" 


Indhrajith asked, "If my father did not listen to your words, you should have remained silent and 
not allied yourself with our enemies. Is this kind of treachery justified?" 


Vibheeshana gave a fitting reply: "Indhrajith! You are an ignorant fool who knows nothing about 
truth and untruth, right and wrong. I am one who is well aware of the rules of right conduct. It is 
unworthy for a person to remain silent in the face of wickedness. Such inaction can destroy an 
entire society." 


A comparison of Bheeshma and Vibheeshana 


In this context, it is interesting to study the conduct of Bheeshma and Vibheeshana in similar 
situations. It is clear Vibheeshana is a greater person than Bheeshma. Why? Knowing that the 
Kauravas were committing a grievous wrong, Bheeshma remained silent without condemning 
them. Moreover, he accepted the role of Commander-in-chief of the Kaurava armies in the 
Kurukshethra battle. Vibheeshana acted differently. He roundly condemned the wrong action of 
his brother. He advised Raavana to return Seetha to Raama. Ultimately he renounced everything 
and sought surrender at the Feet of Raama. 


Lanka had many such high-minded persons besides Vibheeshana. But cowed down by the 
wickedness of the Raakshasa, they were unable to protest against the bad persons. 


When Hanumaan entered Lanka he noticed Vibheeshana. Vibheeshana told Hanumaan: 
“Hanumaan! I am living in the midst of the wicked Raakshasa like the tongue surrounded by 
sharp teeth, How long am I to live like this? How will I secure the grace of Raama? When will I 
be blessed with the bliss of being in His Divine presence? I have long been waiting for that great 
moment." Vibheeshana lamented in this manner. 


Hanumaan gave a significant message to Vibheeshana then, "Vibheeshana! Do not think that you 
are alone in being subject to these ordeals. There are many great souls who experience similar 
troubles. 


The Raakshasas constantly harass the Sages, the Avathaars and all good men. However, take 
note of one fact. The tongue came first and the teeth emerged later. The teeth which emerged in 
the middle drop away in due course! Likewise these Raakshasas also will fall away soon. Do not 
have any doubt on this score. 


Hanumaan then went on: "Vibheeshana! You have been attracted to the Lotus Feet of Raama. 
Cling to them firmly. Either He should bless you because of your perseverance, or your should 
merge in Him in course of time. There is no other way. It is wrong to give up the Lord in the 
middle. This is not the mark of a true devotee. What is devotion? It is not mere repetition of 
Raama's name endlessly. While contemplating on Raama, you must take part in service to 
Raama." 


Vibheeshana desired only to promote the prosperity of Lanka and the welfare of the Raakshasas. 
He was not interested in getting the crown. Raavana and Indhrajith derided such a high-minded 
noble person. 


The three boons granted by Brahma 


Once Raavana, Kumbhakarna and Vibheeshana performed a severe penance to invoke the 
presence of Brahma. Brahma appeared before them and asked them what they wanted. He said 
he would grant them whatever boon they wanted. Kumbhakarna wanted to ask that he should be 
never at anyone's mercy--nirdhaya. But by a slip of the tongue he asked for nidhra (sleep). 
Brahma declared: "So be it." Raavana asked freedom from death at the hands of all deities, but 
did not ask for freedom from death by, humans because he considered them trivial beings. 
Vishnu then decided to come in human form to put an end to Raavana. What did Vibheeshana 
pray for? "Oh Lord! Fill my heart with compassion and make me lead a righteous life." Because 
of this boon, Vibheeshana remained totally unaffected in spite of all the raillery and abuse by 
Raavana and his sons. Vibheeshana always remained compassionate, never yielding to hatred or 
anger. Because his heart was full of compassion, he secured God's grace and proximity to the 
Divine. One without compassion is a demon and not a human being. 


Discourse in Brindhaavan on 26-5-1996. 


Scriptures are endless; Saadhanas are countless; opportunities are 
few; time is already overstocked. But you can easily win the battle 
of life, in spite of these handicaps, provided you arm yourself with 
Love, which is the essential teaching of all Scriptures, the goal of 
all varieties of Saadhana, the best use to which all opportunities 
can be put and the most profitable way of utilising the precious 
capital time. 


Baba 


18. The greatness of Raama-Raajya 


That day alone is a true day 

When all good devotees gather 
to pray to the Lord; 

When people serve the poor and the needy 
in a spirit of brotherliness; 

When a feast is offered to the servants 
of the Lord who sing His glories; 

When holy men visit our homes and relate 
the exploits of the Lord; 

All other days are days of mourning. 


IT WAS the great day of Shree Raama's Coronation. The City of Ayodhya was en fete, with the 
people rejoicing in the festive celebrations. The crown that was first worn by Manu, had been 
worm by successive emperors according to hallowed tradition. That day the sages Vasishta, 
Vaamadheva and Jaabali earned the crown for the coronation of Shree Raamachandhra. 


To participate in the historic ceremony several kings, chieftains and lesser rulers were entering 
the Durbar Hall, along with many sages. At the main entrance gate, a gigantic message was 
blazoned across the gate in a novel manner. The message read in Sanskrith: "“Sathya- 
Dharmaabhih yukthaanaam naasthi mrithyu bhayam" (Those who adhere to Truth and 
Righteousness will have no fear of death). The message declared that for the one who adhered to 
Truth and Righteousness there was no fear of rebirth. This means that such a one need have no 
fear of death again after this life because he will have no re-birth. Without birth there can be no 
death. 


Adherence to Sathya and Dharma in Raama-Raajya 


The Raamaayana brought home to one and all this significance of Truth and Righteousness. The 
glorious story of Raama spread the name and fame of Bhaarath to all countries. In the Raama- 
Raajya (reign of Raama) the two words, Sathya and Dharma, (Truth and Righteousness) 
reverberated everywhere in the Kingdom. Dharma prevailed everywhere and young and old, men 
and women, scholars and illiterates, one and all adhered to these two principles. 


As is the ruler, so are the ministers. As are the ministers, so are the administrators. As are the 
administrators, so are the common people. The ministers strictly adhered to Truth and 
Righteousness. Lakshmana, Bharatha and Shathrughna were assigned the duty of enforcing 
Shree Raama's orders in all parts of the Kingdom. They kept a close watch over what was 
happening in every nook and corner of the realm, how far the people were adhering to truth and 
righteousness and how they were getting on in dally life. For this purpose a large body of 
officials were employed to go round the country. These messengers gathered all information 
everyday about the difficulties experienced by the people and their conduct. This system 
prevailed as long as Raama reigned over the Kingdom. 


Raama performed a hundred Ashvamedha yaagas (horse sacrifices) and many other sacrifices. 
Together with these sacrifices Raama propagated among the people the qualities of truth and 
right conduct. 


The golden days of Raama-Raajya 


In Raama's reign, all married women were Sumangalis (whose husbands were alive). 
Widowhood was unknown. It is natural for parents to die before their children. But it is unnatural 
for children to die earlier than their parents. In Raama-Raajya there was not a single case of 
premature death. Death of young people was not known. There were none suffering from 
disease. There was no sign of poverty. The rains came in the right seasons. The harvests were 
bountiful. There was no shortage of food. Unrest was unknown. All people were happy and 
peaceful. 


Comparing those days with the present times, we realise what apathetic plight is ours. Bhaarath 
will enjoy Raama-Raajya only when it has rulers like Raama, ministers like Sumanthra, saintly 
advisers like Vasishta and Vaamadheva and brothers like Lakshmana, Bharatha and 
Shathrughna. During Raama's reign there was no conflict anywhere. People did not indulge in 
mutual recrimination. Everyone in the Kingdom was grateful for any act of help and was eager to 
repay the act of kindness. 


Raama expresses gratitude to all who helped Him 


The first pronouncement which Raama made on the occasion of the coronation is remarkable. He 
said: "Who is it that is primarily responsible for making today's celebration possible? Hanumaan 
was solely responsible for the successful search of the whereabouts of Seetha and helping me to 
recover her. Hence, at the outset I express my deep gratitude to Hanumaan." 


Raama then expressed his gratitude to Jataayu, who sacrificed his life in fighting against 
Raavana while he was carrying away Seetha. 


Next, Raama expressed his gratitude to Sugreeva, who had helped him in organising the search 
for Seetha and in providing the hordes for the war on Raavana. He next expressed his gratitude to 
Vibheeshana, who had come over to him, despite the suspicions of Raama's companions, and 
who had revealed to Raama many of the secrets of the enemy. 


Above all, there were the huge hordes of monkeys, who had no direct connection with Raama or 
Seetha, who endured many hardships and even laid down their lives for his sake and he 
expressed his gratitude to all of them. In this manner, Raama expressed his gratitude to one and 
all who had helped him in the epic Raama-Raavana battle. 


The supreme lesson to be learnt from the Raamaayana is that one should be grateful all his life to 
anyone who has helped him in a crisis. Only the man who shows such gratitude can be termed a 
human being. The ungrateful man is a demon. The human and the demonic are not different in 
external appearance. It is by his actions that one is called human, demonic or divine. All those 
who indulge in bad thoughts, bad speeches and wicked acts are described as demons. Equally, 
those who do harm to those who have helped them were regarded as demons. So also, those who 
renounce Truth and Righteousness and cherish falsehood and wickedness as their life-breath 
were treated as demons. 


Every substance has its inherent quality 


Today men have a fascination for untruth. Ignorant of what is meant by Righteousness they 
practise unrighteousness. Our Vedhas teach: "Speak the truth: follow righteousness." Men today 
are not qualified even to utter these words, much less to practise them. 


Every substances has its Dharma (inherent quality). This quality is independent of one's belief. It 
is its inherent nature. For instance, that which has the quality of burning has been called Agni 
(fire). The natural quality of fire is to bum. This quality is not based on anyone's faith or opinion. 
Whether you are aware of this quality or not, when you touch fire it will cause a burn. Likewise, 
the quality of ice is coldness. This, again, is independent of anyone's belief. If coldness is absent, 
it is no longer ice. It has forfeited its nature. Similarly, the sun's nature is to shed light. One may 
fail to see the sun because it is covered by clouds or one is blind. But that does not detract from 
the sun's dharma of shedding light. 


Likewise man has a dharma. This dharma (natural trait) is to perform all actions with 
Thrikarana Suddhi (purity in thought, word and deed). Man's natural function is to behave with 
harmony in thought, word and deed (unity of body, speech and mind). Where there is divergence 
between thought, word and deed, the resulting action is unrighteousness. It is because today there 
is no harmony between thought, word and deed in the conduct of human beings, unrighteousness 
is rampant. This triune unity is not prevalent among the educated or the illiterate. 


One who lacks faith, but acts as if he has faith, is bound to face ruin. He is of a demonic nature. 


Today Truth and Righteousness have declined alarmingly. The first task is to produce young 
men and women who are wedded to Truth and Righteousness. Only a nation where the men and 
women adhere to these two principles will be prosperous and happy. When Bhaarath has such 
men and women it will achieve great prosperity. 


Rulers are to be blamed for today's troubles 


Bhaaratheeya culture gave to the world spirituality and proclaimed the message: "May all people 
everywhere be happy!" In ancient times, the rulers, the sages, the householders all strove to 
practise Truth and Righteousness. The rulers set the example and all others followed them. 
Today we see that as are the rulers, so are the people. The people are not to be blamed at all. The 
faults lie entirely with the rulers. 


Because of the lapses of the rulers, the people are subject to all troubles. Each one pursues his 
own self-interest and selfish gain. Each is after power and pelf. There are no leaders who are 
concerned about the people's needs and their well-being. If the nation's progress is to be 
promoted, the rulers must follow the advice of high-minded leaders in society. 


Bhaarath's survival even in its present condition is due to the fact that in the past the rulers 
accepted the guidance of great sages. The sages had no personal interest of their own. Why did 
sage. Vasishta come to Emperor Dhasharatha? He was not interested in wealth or pomp. He 
wanted to be there when the Lord incarnated as Raama. Seetha esteemed Hanumaan in the same 
manner. She said that even if she were to offer him lordship of the three worlds, she would not 
be discharging her debt to him. "You are the embodiment of sacrifice. You exemplify pure 
devotion. Because of these two qualities, you are entitled to move freely in all the three worlds. 
All the three worlds will experience prosperity through your presence." 


Restoration of Sathya and Dharma is the primary need 


What we need today is the restoration of the supremacy of Truth and Righteousness. There are 
some who cavil at the use of these two terms. If they do not know what Truth and Righteousness 
are, they cannot be deemed human beings at all. Truth and Righteousness are the inherent natural 
qualities of human beings. Human life is based on Truth and Righteousness. What folly is it to 
declare that one does not know what they are? 


Truth is utterance of what you think. Righteousness is acting according to your words. The unity 
of thought, word and action is essential. Truth and Righteousness are not qualities to be acquired, 
as was suggested by Narasimha Murthy (in his speech prior to Svaami's discourse). They are 
inherent in man, born with him even as his limbs and his life-breath. There is no need to search 
for them elsewhere. They emanate from one's heart. They dwell in everyone. What is necessary 
is to see that these inherent qualities are not lost. No one is entitled to live in this world if he does 
not practise truth and righteousness. 


Treat ups and downs of life with equanimity 


It has been declared that for the practise of these two qualities, Vairaagya (renunciation) is 
essential. Renunciation does not mean giving up hearth and home. True renunciation consists in 
treating happiness and sorrow alike. One must have the spirit of equanimity in facing pleasure 
and pain, profit and loss. Do not get elated over ‘happiness or depressed by sadness. Treat praise 
and censure alike. This is true renunciation or detachment. Treat the ups and downs of life with 
equanimity. 


Consider the example of Seetha. She was a prisoner in the Ashokavana of Raavana. He had 
enhanced its beauty in many ways to make it alluring to Seetha. But Seetha had no interest in 
these allurements at all. But she was deeply moved when a small monkey sang in praise of 
Raama from the top of the tree under which Seetha was sitting (Svaami sang the song of 
Hanumaan in praise of Raama). 


Seetha found more beauty in the monkey than in all the flowers in Ashokavana. It was the 
chanting of Raama's name which lent beauty to the monkey's face. She was full of bliss at that 
moment. The name was alike nectar to her. Bliss without beauty is sterile. Raamaayana taught 
the integral relationship between beauty and bliss. 


Wherein lay the bliss of Seetha and Raama? It was in the well-being and happiness of the people. 
They sought nothing from the people. They were interested only in giving and giving what was 
good for the people. This applies to all Avathaars from Raama to the present day. What is it that 
I am asking frown you? I do not ask even for a small shell. Free education is given to the 
students. Free treatment is offered in hospitals. All that is offered by Svaami is free. The students 
bear only their mess charges. Where can you see such free provision of education and medical 
aid? Nowhere else. I do not ask for anything from anybody. This is the bliss I shall experience if 
you lead good lives and stand forth as noble citizens. 


The mistaken attitude of people 


In the world today you find that only when students pay a heavy price for education, they show 
greater interest in studies. People have greater confidence in hospitals where they pay heavily. In 
private hospitals you are asked to deposit in advances Rs. 2 lakhs for a heart operation. The 
patients feel that they will get high-class treatment because of the heavy charges they pay. This is 
sheer folly. Little attention is paid to the patients after the operation is over. 


In the Sai Super-Speciality Hospital everything is done free, the best facilities are provided and 
loving concern is shown for the patients. All this is taken for granted because no fees are paid to 
the doctors. This is a totally mistaken attitude. No doubt the value of what is offered free will be 
realised in due course. But I am sorry that such wrong impressions should exist. If even students 
feel in this way, what is the benefit they derive from their education in Sai institutions? Is it for 
merely earning a livelihood that you are pursuing your studies? Earning money is no great thing. 
Even dacoits make money. Even beggars are known to have amassed large sums by beggary. 
Education should be sought only for the acquisition of Vijnaana (wisdom), not for acquiring 
wealth. The one who is interested only in money will never be able to foster good qualities. All 
our Institute students should be concerned only with fostering virtues. Many Kings have enjoyed 
wealth and passed on. Where are they now?. Only their wicked deeds are remembered. 


Character matters more than riches and affluence 


During the past ten days you must have heard a great deal about Raavana. There was no limit to 
his riches. Kubera (the god of wealth) was his cousin. His fort and city were paved with gold. 
What was the use of all his riches and affluence? He had no character. Ultimately he lost 
everything. 


Hence, promote your character. Acquisition of good qualities is the mark of true education. What 
matters how much wealth a man has if he has no morals? A rich man hardly enjoys peace of 
mind. 


No doubt money is necessary for carrying on one's life. But excessive money is harmful. You 
owe a duty to your family. For that purpose you have to earn an income. Excessive wealth is the 
cause of all bad thoughts and feelings. You can see that in most cases it is the children of the rich 
who go astray. 


People should always remember that the ultimate end may come at anytime. One should reform 
one's life well before the end comes. Greatness consists not in wealth but in virtue. A true human 
being is one who recognizes the Divine within him. He should lead a godly life. Everyone should 
strive to recognise the Indwelling Spirit within, which is the master of the body and the senses. 
The highest education is Aathma-Vidhya (Self-Knowledge). The Spirit is invisible like the roots 
of a tree. But it is the basis of real bliss, just as the fruits of a tree are derived from the roots. The 
external pleasures you enjoy are based on the power of the Spirit within. The air you breathe, the 
light you see, the water you drink are all derived from the Divine. 


Stand by your plighted word 


Students should recognise the Divine power that sustains everything in the universe. It was the 
faith in the Divine that sustained Seetha during the ten months she lived alone as a prisoner in the 
Ashokavana. The divine power that sustained Seetha in her captivity is in everyone. Rely on that 
power. All that you have to do is to turn your vision inward. Follow the dictates of your 
conscience. Education should teach you good qualities, right thinking, right conduct, discipline 
and devotion to duty. 


Students should develop unwavering faith in truth and Righteousness. Stand by your plighted 
word. That is the message of Raama's life. "One word, one wife, one arrow." Raama exemplifies 
these three signs. You must experience the Raama Principle residing in your heart. 


Raama is not the remote son of an emperor. He is the Eternal Spirit in one's heart. Live upto your 
conscience and you will please God. 


Every human being has to develop faith in Sathya and Dharma, practise them in daily life and 
lead worthy lives. 


Students! Boys and girls! You are likely to assume positions of leadership in the nation in future 
years. The nation's future depends on how you conduct yourselves. Go forward to serve the 
nation, whatever trials you may have to face, do so with faith in God. Follow the divine 
injunctions. It will contribute to your welfare and the welfare of the nation and the world. 


Discourse in Sai Ramesh Mandap on 29-5-1996. 


See in Me yourself, for I see Myself in you all. You are My life, My 
breath, my soul. You are My Forms all; when I love you. I love 
Myself, when you love yourselves, you love Me! I have separated 
Myself from Myself so that I may love Myself. My beloved ones, 
You are my own Self. 


Baba 


19. Render unto God what is His 


Without Sathya, Dharma, Shaanthi and Prema 
all knowledge is useless; 
Without these four, all charity and righteous 
acts are of no use; 
Without these four, the value of 
all good deeds is zero; 
Without these four, the exercise 
of power is profitless. 
For the edifice of the Ancient Dharma 
these four qualities are the main walls. 
What else can I convey to you, 
virtuous and noble minded students ? 


STUDENTS! Wherever you turn, you see in the world only unrest and disorder. There is little 
trace of unity, harmony and brotherliness. 


Unrest and confusion prevail at every level from the individual to the nation as a whole. There is 
discord between man and man, from family to family, village to village, district to district and 
province to province. These conflicts are due to the craze for power, insatiable desires and 
intense selfishness. Moreover, the growth of unrest and chaos in society is also due to the 
weakness of government, the decline of truth and righteousness and the failure of people in the 
mass to discharge their respective duties. 


Everyone talks about the presence of the Divine, who is the embodiment of Truth and 
Righteousness. People speak about the omnipresence and omniscience of God. But few care to 
understand what this means, to experience it and to live according to it. A few drops of nectar on 
the tongue will work wonders, but of what use are barrels of nectar which remain untouched? 


To preach without practice is repugnant to spirituality 


Many lectures are given today about the Divine as the embodiment of Truth and Righteousness. 
How many have direct experience of this? How many practise Righteousness? Have they tried to 
practise even a small fragment of this teaching? Have they made the slightest attempt to secure a 
vision of this Truth? To preach without practice is repugnant to spirituality. 


Devotees like Potharaaju, Thyaagaraaju and Goparaaju (Raamdhas) experienced bliss by their 
spiritual austerities. They sought no positions of power. They were content to seek the grace of 
the Divine. Their sole objective was to earn the love of God. 


Owing to the influence of the Kali age today, even spiritual seekers are eager to earn wealth and 
positions, forget the Divine and lead unworthy lives. People should not pray to God for any 
position. In the pursuit of pleasure men today spend any amount of money. But they hardly try to 
spend even a fraction of this money on charity, good deeds and service to the Divine. Many 
people grudge to give even small amounts of money to the women in the house for the 


performance of worship with joss-sticks, flowers and fruits. They even question the usefulness of 
such offerings. It may well be asked what benefit such persons derive from their lavish 
expenditure on their pleasure and comforts. These sensual pleasures confer fleeting happiness. 
But acts of charity, goodness and sacrifice confer divine benefits. 


Pleasure and pain contribute to the beauty of life 


Man should learn to treat pain and pleasure alike because both contribute to the beauty of life 
like the variety of flowers in a garland. People should also learn not to sneer at the traditional 
practices of the common people who do many simple acts out of reverence for what they regard 
as sacred. A young man travelling in a train ridiculed the act of a simple village woman who 
piously offered a few coins to the Krishna river when the train was going over the bridge. The 
woman asked him of what use was the money he was spending on smoking, which was ruining 
his health. She said that the few coins she had thrown in the river was an offering to Krishna. It 
happened once in a way. "But how much are you wasting everyday on your smoking? What will 
you gain from it except lung cancer or T.B? Without realising the grievous mistake you are 
committing, you are ridiculing my simple action," she said. 


Pothana's dedication to God 


The life of Pothana, the immortal author of the Thelugu Bhaagavatham, shows the difference 
between the God-oriented poet and a poet who seeks the favours of rulers and wealthy patrons. 


Once, Pothana's brother-in-law, the poet Shreenaatha, told Pothana that if, instead of relying on 
Shree Raama, he dedicated his Bhaagavatham to a local chieftain, the latter would offer him gifts 
of land and properties which would relieve his poverty. Pothana declared: "Brother-in-law! You 
are making a serious mistake. Our real protector is Raama and not any Raaja (ruler). How many 
have been helped by these rulers and for how long?. I revere my mother Earth. My life will be 
redeemed by my trust in mother Earth and by my faith in Shree Raama." (Bhagavaan recited a 
poem of Pothana in which the poet firmly declared that he would prefer to live on what he got 
from the soil rather than offer his sacred work to unrighteous rulers for the sake of a mess of 
pottage). Pothana told Shreenaatha, "My poem is the very embodiment of the Goddess 
o£Wisdom, Sarasvathi. Such a work should be offered to Brahma and none else. How can I offer 
such a sacred work to wicked rulers?" 


Shreenaatha was displeased with Pothana's attitude. He conveyed Pothana's sentiments to the 
local ruler, who also felt slighted. In his bitterness, he sent his minions to set fire to Pothana's 
house. The entire house was burnt down except the shrine where Pothana worshipped Raama and 
kept his Bhaagavatham. While the flames were burning, Pothana prayed to Raama as the Lord of 
everything. When a person believes whole-heartedly, in God, he will not come to grief. With 
their interests primarily in worldly benefits and material gains, men pray to God with their lips 
and not their hearts. Rather than pray with lips, it is better to serve with the hands. This was the 
lesson which Hanumaan taught to Vibheeshana, when the latter was disappointed that he had no 
vision of Raama. 


Men are engaged in the pursuit of wealth and position, but not in the quest of the Divine. They 
forget that lasting happiness and peace cannot be got by wealth, scholarship or position. Only 
good qualities can confer happiness because a good man finds a place in the Lord's heart. 


Sacrifice is the essence of Raama Principle 


The ancient sages and savants offered all their knowledge and scholarship as an offering to God. 
They did not regard knowledge as a means of acquiring wealth. In the days of Raama everyone 
was filled with a spirit of sacrifice. Raama set the example by His readiness to sacrifice the 
kingdom for life in the forest as an exile. Before leaving for the forest, Raama gave away all his 
personal possessions as gifts. Sacrifice is the essence of the Raama Principle. To develop the 
spirit of sacrifice the first requisite is firm faith in God. 


Students should realise that their only true friend at all times is God. He will be with them 
wherever they go. No others will accompany them like God. Hence, they should cultivate love 
for God. There is nothing greater than that love. 


Discourse in the Sai Ramesh Mandap on 30-5-1996. 


There is no living being without the spark of love; even a mad man 
loves something or somebody intensely. But, you must recognise 
this love as but a reflection of the Prema Svaruupa (the 
Embodiment of Love), that is your reality, of the God who is 
residing in your heart. Without that spring of Love that bubbles in 
your heart, you will not be prompted to love at all. Recognise that 
spring, rely on it more and more, develop its possibilities, try to 
irrigate the whole world with it, discard all touch of self from it, do 
not seek anything in return for it from those to whom you extend it. 


Baba 


20. The four beacons 


Pradoshe deepakas-chandhrah 
Prabhathe deepako Ravih 
Thriloke deepako Dharmah 
Suputhrah Kuladeepakah 


PRADOSHE deepakas-chandrah (At night the moon illumines the world). Prabhathe deepako 
Ravih (At daybreak the sun is the illuminator). Thriloke deepako Dharmaha (For the three 
worlds Dharma is the beacon-light). Suputhrah Kula Deepakah (A virtuous son is a beacon for 
the whole family). 


The difference between Amaavaasya (New Moon light) and Puurnima (full moon light) is 
between darkness and light. During Amaavaasya, the night is pitch dark. People do not relish this 
darkness in any way. Darkness invokes fear. It also breeds evil thoughts and provides 
opportunities for evil deeds. 


Darkness is welcomed only by evil minded persons. No good-intentioned persons will welcome 
darkness. Darkness is a valuable ally for thieves and rogues. Hence only the evil-minded will 
hail the advent of darkness. The good-intentioned and righteous persons will welcome the advent 
of the full-moon. The hearts of good persons .filled with good feelings, are cool like the moon. 
Children delight in the sight of the moon. Poets are inspired to pour forth the joy in their hearts at 
the sight of the moon. On the day of the Puurnima (full-moon) man's heart is also pure and 
bright. People should recognise the relationship between the fullmoon and the mind. The Vedhas 
declare that the moon emerged from the mind of the Viraat-Purusha (Cosmic Person) and the 
sun emerged from his eye. The human mind is a reflection of the moon and when there is the full 
moon the mind blossoms effulgently. Moonlight dispels the darkness of ignorance, drives away 
fear and confers peace and joy. 


Reasons for the worship of sun 


During the day, the sun affords light to the world. Without the sun, the world will cease to exist. 
The sun is the visible deity for the world. Without the sun there can be no life on earth. Crops 
cannot grow. There will be no air, no food and no means of sustenance for living creatures. It is 
only because of the sun that rivers flow, crops are grown, life is sustained and there is happiness 
and comfort. It is the power of the sun that helps to purify the heart. Hence, for the planet earth 
the sun is the visible manifestation of God. The earth receives its life-sustaining oxygen from the 
sun. 


Thriloke deepako Dharmah (The light that illumines the three worlds is Righteousness). What is 
this Dharma? "Dhaarayathe ithi Dharmah" (Dharma is that which upholds .everything). This 
means that without Dharma the Cosmos cannot exist. Dharma is the lifebreath of all actions. 
There can be no life without the sustaining power of Dharma. Every object in the universe is 
governed by its Dharma (the law of its being). For instance, there is fire. What is its Dharma? 
The capacity to bum is the basic trait of fire. When the burning power is lost, it ceases to be fire. 
It becomes mere charcoal. Likewise, the Dharma of ice is coldness. When ice loses its coldness, 
it ceases to be ice. For man, the Dharma is Righteousness. 


Righteousness implies harmony in thought, word and deed. The unity of body, speech and mind 
promotes purity and sacredness in man. This triune purity constitutes humanness. All actions 
should be pure and according to the dictates of the conscience. The tongue is sacred organ 
endowed on man to chant the glories of the Lord. But today it is being misused to utter untruth. 
The dharma of man is to speak the truth and adhere to righteousness. 


Three maxims for primary obligations of man 


Three words describe the primary obligations of man: Preethi, Bheethi and Neethi. Preethi 
pertains to the Dhaiva Preethi (love of God). Bheethi is related to the Paapabheethi (fear of sin). 
Neethi is related to Sanghaneethi (morality in society). If these three are observed, there will be 
peace and. non-violence. Dhaiva Preethi (love of God) is the basis for all human values. This 
love is inherent in all human beings. It is the index of man's divinity as proclaimed by the 
scriptures. 


How is God to be experienced? God is present in everyone like butter in milk. Your heart is the 
container. Love is the milk present in the heart. When this love is offered to the Lord, it acts as 
the churning process for getting butter. There is then the direct experience of the Divine. 


Some devotees fall asleep during the discourses or brood over some extraneous matters without 
listening to the discourses. Raamakrishna Paramahamsa once chided Raani Raasmani for 
thinking about her court cases while appearing to listen to his talk. Persons who are not 
interested in the discourses should keep away from the meeting. 


Man's dharma is threefold. It relates to his body, his mind and his Aathma. Good deeds, good 
thoughts and Godly experience of bliss are the expressions of this triple Dharma. The reference 
to the light that illumines the three worlds should be understood in this way. 


Who is a good son? 


"Suputhrah Kula deepakah" (A good son is a beacon for the family). Who is a good son? He is a 
good son, who is always immersed in the contemplation of God, in sacred activities and leads a 
godly life. A good son is one who reveres his parents, pleases them by rendering service, and is 
grateful for all that he has received from them. Nor is that all. A good son earns a good name in 
society. A good son sheds greatness on the family like the fragrance of a jasmine creeper in a 
forest. 


Nowadays, parents distribute sweets on the birth of a son. But it is not the birth that is the right 
occasion for celebration. The right moment for celebration is when the son earns a good name in 
society. 


"The father will not rejoice on the day a son is born. 
He will rejoice when he hears the praise of the virtues 
Of his sort by others," says a Thelugu poem. 


God also will be happy when a son earns such a good name. A son should be called a good man 
by one and all. Such a Suputhra (good son) is a beacon-light for the entire family. 


The four illuminators 


There are three kinds of light. The lamp in a house illumines only the house. The moon at night 
gives his light to the world, although it is. a dim light. But the sun who illumines the day sheds 


his effulgence everywhere. The light that burns inside a home is comparable to svaartham (self- 
interest). The light coming from the moon may be compared to Paraartham (for the benefit of 
others). The light of the sun is Yathaartham, the effulgence of Truth. Truth is God. The sun who 
illumines everything is verily God. For this reason, from early times Bhaaratheeyas were 
worshippers of the Sun-God. They offered Suuryva-namaskaar (salutations to the Sun). They 
regarded the Sun as the visible manifestation of God. 


Thus, what people need today are moonlight at night, sun-light during the day, and the light of 
Dharma which illumines all the three worlds, and a good son who is the beacon-light for the 
family. 


Education alone does not make one a good son. One should be good in his actions and 
behaviour. The marks of a good son are good behaviour, good manners, good discipline and 
good devotion. These are the most important things. If there is devotion all other things will 
come easily. 


Three sects, but one truth 


Today there are three schools of philosophy prevalent in Bhaarath. Dhvaitha, Visishta-adhvaitha 
and Adhvaitha (Dualism, qualifies Non-dualism and Non-dualism). In the Dhvaitha philosophy, 
there is dualism, separation between jeeva, the individual self and Supreme Omni Self. There is 
no great difference between Visishta-Adhvaitha and Adhvaitha. 


Whatever the creed, whatever the country or nationality, Truth is one. "Ekam eva Adhvitheeyam 
Brahma" (The Omni Self is one only, without a second). 


The variations between the three systems of philosophy can be explained by an example. You 
have sugarcane, with a number of knots. Whatever the shape of the sugarcane, the juice in all of 
them is the same. Adhvaitha (non-dualism) may be compared to the juice which is one and the 
same irrespective of the cane from which it is extracted. The juice drawn from any cane has the 
same sweetness. There is no other taste. 


Raamaanuja (founder of the Visishta Adhvaitha system) conducted his own enquiries and came 
to the conclusion that the sugar cane juice cannot be preserved indefinitely and therefore it 
should be converted to sugar. The sugar can then be used, any day at any time. This is qualified 
non-dualism. 


Madhvaachaarya was the exponent of Dualism. Madhvaachaarya viewed the problem in this 
way. He declared: "Oh Lord! I do not want either sugarcane juice or sugar. I wish to be born as 
an ant that relishes the juice or the sugar. The sugar does not know its own sweetness. Only the 
one who consumes sugar can know its sweetness. O Lord! You are the very embodiment of love. 
I do not wish to be mere love. I want to be one who enjoys love. You should remain as God and I 
should remain as Jeevi (individual soul). It is only when the individual is separate from God that 
he can enjoy the Divine." This is the essence of dualism----the distinction between God and the 
individual self. When the individual self starts enjoying sugar (the Divine), in due course he 
becomes the Divine itself. "The knower of the Divine becomes the Divine." 


Common truth proclaimed by all philosophies 


Magnifying the differences between the three systems of philosophy, Bhaaratheeyas are wasting 
their time. All the three are essentially one. Adhvaitha is like the sugarcane juice. Visishta- 
Adhvaitha is sugar. The consumer of sugar is a Dhvaithin (dualist). 


The truth is that sweetness is common to all, though the names and forms may vary. Similarly, in 
the world the different nations and countries have diverse forms and names. But the Divine in all 
of them is one and the same. The Indwelling Spirit is the same in all beings. The Divine energy 
is common to all, like the current which activates all bulbs, fans etc. God is present equally in 
everyone. The differences among human beings are the result of the differences in their 
capacities. When one is immersed in thoughts of God, his capacity will grow. 


Develop greater love in your heart. As your love grows, the Spirit in you will shine brighter. 
Spiritual growth calls for restraint on desires. In addition, you have also to get rid of-bad 
qualities like attachment and aversion. The three great enemies of man are kaama (desire), 
krodha (anger) and lobha (greed). Desire destroys devotion, anger annihilates wisdom and greed 
poisons every action. These three vices are destructive of Sath-Karma (good deeds), Upaasana 
(devotion) and Jnaana (spiritual wisdom). All the three have to be totally given up. The only 
cure for them is to burn them in Premaagni (the fire of Divine Love). 


Example of Raama for being a good son 


Good qualities can be acquired only by practice. The practice may be difficult, like moving an 
object uphill. But the effort has to be made. The saadhana (spiritual practice) must be done with 
full faith and no doubts. God is omnipresent. To experience God certain disciplines are required. 
This is the significance of the term Suputhrah (a good son). To realise God you have to be good. 
This means that one has to cultivate good qualities like reverence for parents, humility, respect 
for teachers and elders. 


How did Raama achieve such greatness? By carrying out the injunctions of his father. Raama 
also exemplified friendliness and brotherliness. He moved among the people with. a sense of 
endearment. He identified the people's welfare with his own well-being. 


When you utter the prayer "Lokaas-samasthaas-sukhino Bhavanthu!" (May all people in all the 
world be happy), you should pray whole-heartedly with the conviction that the same Divine 
dwells in everyone. 


Cultivate love for God. There is nothing greater than that. That is the message of Thulasidas and 
Meerabai. Realise God through Love. 


Discourse in the Sai Kulwant Mandap on 18-6-1996. 


It is on account of the mutual help, the collaboration that the 
Gopis of Brindhaavan were able to attain Moksha; their Bhakthi 
towards Lord Krishna endowed them with the Highest Jnaana 
also. Now the essence of Bhakthi as well as Jnaana is Shaanthi. 
The highest type of Shaanthi, Prashaanthi. Prashaanthi leads one 
on to Prakaanthi, the Glory of Spiritual Effulgence, and thence to 
Paramjyothi, the Super-effulgence, of the Highest Revelation. 


Baba 


21. Importance of discipline 


While uneducated birds and beasts 
Know how to lead regulated lives, 
Alas! Man endowed with intelligence 
Does not lead a disciplined life. 


EMBODIMENTS of love! Discipline is vital to every living being. For man it is even more 
important like the spinal column. Without discipline mankind will be ruined. 


Discipline means the observance of certain well-defined rules. Without such regulation it is not 
possible to maintain humanness. Such regulation contributes to the glory of human existence. 


Discipline cannot be acquired from books. Nor can it be learnt from teachers. It has to be as 
natural component of one's daily life in the discharge of one's duties. Discipline is essential from 
the moment of waking to the time of going to sleep. 


Discipline is essential in everyday life 


Discipline is essential for every group, for every society and for every political institution. 
Without discipline there can be no society or Government. No nation can exist without 
discipline. It is discipline that unites man to man, and one society to another. Hence discipline is 
one of the basic insignia of social life. 


Discipline has to be observed in speech, in sport and in every kind of relationship. For instance, 
during bhajans, all those singing in chorus have to maintain the same tune. Discordant singing 
will jar on the ears. Singing in unison in bhajans is a form of discipline. 


In games, you have an umpire to enforce the rules of the game. Every player has to observe the 
rules strictly. Sometimes while playing, in their enthusiasm, the players fall to observe the rules. 
The umpire, however, sees to it that the rules are enforced and the players have to obey him 
implicitly. Any player who does not obey will be violating the rules of the game. 


Today it is because people do not observe the rules, whether in sports or elsewhere, life has 
become intolerable. Some persons hold positions of authority in business, in administration or in 
other institutions. Here also discipline is essential, dust because one holds an office, he cannot 
behave as he likes. He cannot be free with his tongue. In his words and his writings he should 
observe restraint. In the use of words, whether in speech or writing, care should be observed 
regarding their future implications. Your discipline will protect you in whatever you do. Even in 
a simple matter like walking on the road, many do not observe the rules. They choose to walk on 
the middle of the road instead of using the pavement. Jaywalking on the road is not only harmful 
to oneself but is a hindrance to others. Your motto in life should be: Help ever; hurt never. 


Discipline must start from the early years, But it is needed not only by students but by elders and 
all persons in authority. 


Students should learn the right way of doing things even in ordinary actions like sitting or 
reading. They should sit erect and keep the spinal column straight. This enables the Kundalini 
shakthi (coiled energy) to move up from the base of the spine--Muulaadhaara--to the top of the 
head. Sahasraara---through the vertebral column. This movement takes place during the yogic 


exercise known as Praanaayaama (breath control). This exercise is also useful for improving 
one's memory and powers of concentration. 


Important elements of discipline 


One of the important elements of discipline is physical purity. This does not merely mean 
keeping the body clean by a good bath. Real bodily purity calls for involvement in good actions. 
Good actions and good thoughts lead to purity of mind and the intellect. 


Another important aspect of discipline is keeping one's plighted word. The importance of this is 
illustrated by an incident in the life on Shirdi Baba. There was a sheristadhaar by name Tharkad. 
His wife and 16-year-old son were ardent devotees of Shirdi Baba. Tharkad did not object to 
their worship of Baba. One day when they wanted to go to Shirdi, he gave them his consent. But 
Tharkad himself did not go to any shrine as he was a Brahmo Samajist. He did not go to Shirdi 
despite many appeals from his wife. 


Tharkad's son told his father that he would not go to Shirdi because he was performing regular 
worship to Shirdi Baba in their house. This worship would be affected if he went to Shirdi. The 
lad told his father that every day he was making an offering of sugar candy to Baba and he was 
partaking part of the candy as prasaadh (blessed offering) out of the conviction that Baba was 
receiving the candy. He declared: "I do not want any break in this practice. Hence I do not want 
to go to Shirdi." The father had great affection for the son. He told the son: "Babu, I shall 
perform that duty. You better go to Shirdi." The boy wanted an assurance from the father that he 
would carry out the promise. "Will you offer worship to Baba as I have been doing? Will you 
offer candy to him and later eat part of it as prasaadh?" The father was moved by his son's 
determination and gave him the promise to carry on the worship during his absence. The mother 
and son left for Shirdi. 


The father's lapse 


The father kept the word given to his son and performed the worship in the manner of the son for 
a few days. Offering candy to Baba, he took a part of it after the worship before taking his meal. 
On a Thursday, Tharkad had some urgent business in the court and left the house in a hurry after 
performing puuja (worship). Returning for his meal, he asked the cook to bring the prasaadh. 
The cook informed him that he had not offered any offering of candy that day. Tharkad felt very 
sad over his lapse in failing to keep the promise he had given to his son. He was sorry that he had 
failed to make the offering to Baba. 


At Shirdi, when the mother and son went to see Baba on the following Friday, Baba told the son: 
"Babu, yesterday I had been to Bangra, but no one gave me any food. Even the candy which you 
used to offer daily was not available. I have come back very hungry. Will you give me 
something to eat?" The boy was shocked on listening to Baba's words. He returned home and 
wept over his mother's lap. "Father gave me a promise, but he has not kept it and Baba was 
disappointed. I cannot stay here any longer. I must adhere to my daily routine. I shall go back to 
our place." At that time, Baba sent a chit to the boy through one dog. In his message, Baba said: 
"There is no need for you to go now. Your father failed to keep his word, but you have not failed 
in your duty. You have all my Grace. You can stay here as long as you wish." The boy stayed on 
for a few more days feeling very depressed and frustrated. 


Truth is one. You must adhere to Truth 


When the boy returned home, the father rushed towards him and begged his pardon. He said, 
"You. are young and I am old. But I am seeking your pardon because I failed to keep my 
promise." The boy said: "You must seek pardon not from me but from Baba. Whatever the 
Samaaj (society) to which you may belong, whatever your beliefs, the promised word must be 
kept. Truth is one. You must adhere to truth. This is your duty as a lawyer. You have studied the 
law. You know very well how Emperor Manu upheld Dharma. If you do not adhere to Truth, 
you are violating the law." 


If discipline is observed in this manner, one can experience the Divine directly. The first 
requisite is purity of the body. 


What is it you gain, oh man, 
From waking to sleeping 

If you seek only bodily comforts, 
Forgetting God? (Thelugu poem) 


Restraint has to be observed even with regard to eating. Excessive eating is the cause of many 
ailments. One fourth of the stomach should remain empty. 


Discipline should govern every action of yours all through the day. Then it becomes Karma 
Yoga--the Yoga of Action. You must be the master of Karma and act according to Divine 
commands. This is the way to make education fruitful. 


Discourse in the Sai Kulwant Mandap on 19-6-1996. 


Be silent yourself; that will induce silence in others. Do not fall 
into the habit of shouting, talking long and loud. Reduce contacts 
to the minimum. Carry with you an atmosphere of quiet 
contemplation, wherever you happen to be. 


Baba 


22. Selfless love and firm faith 


A heart without love is lifeless; 
Can you call that life 

Merely because there is 
Breath in the body? 

It is just a pair of bellows. 


EMBODIMENTS of Love! The hall-mark of love is thyaaga (selfless sacrifice). Love seeks 
nothing from anyone. It bears no ill-will towards anyone. It is utterly selfless and pure. 


Failing to understand the true nature of love, man yearns for it in various ways. Love has to be 
cherished with feelings of selflessness and sacrifice. In what is deemed as love in the world-- 
whether it be maternal love, brotherly love, or friendship---there is an element of selfishness. 
Only God's love is totally free from the taint of selfishness. Divine love reaches out even to the 
remotest being. It brings together those who are separate. It raises man from animality to 
divinity. It transforms gradually all forms of worldly love to Divine love. To experience this 
Divine love, men must be prepared to give up selfishness and self-interest. They must develop 
purity and steadfastness. With firm faith in the Divine, they must foster the love of God re- 
gardless of all obstacles and ordeals. 


However, even the feeling of universal brotherliness is not the same as the experience of 
Ekathvam (oneness). Even in such a fraternal feeling there is an element of self-interest. Those 
who really wish to promote universal brotherhood should develop the consciousness of the one 
Spirit dwelling in all beings. Even brothers are often found engaged in mutual bickerings and 
hatred. What is described as fraternity may not be real and unsullied love. True love should 
express itself in the awareness of the presence of the Divine in one and all. Names and forms 
may differ but the indwelling Spirit is the same in all. 


One filled with Divine Love will be fearless 


Fill your hearts with love. One will be betraying himself if he entertains evil thoughts, but 
pretends outwardly to be full of love. No one having Divine love will ever fail to manifest it 
anywhere at any time. Students, who behave well during their stay in the Institute, should 
maintain the same behaviour wherever they may live or work after leaving the Institute. There 
should be no room for any outside association or circumstances to change their conduct. Love 
should be firmly implanted in their hearts. One filled with Divine Love will be fearless, will seek 
nothing from others, and will be spontaneous and selfless in expressing his love. There is no 
need to pray for gifts from God. God will give of His own accord what is good for any devotee. 
Did not Shabari and Jataayu get the grace of Raama even without their asking for it? God will 
decide what to give, when to give, and where. Hence, all actions should be dedicated to God and 
He should decide what the devotee is fit to receive. When everything is left to God out of pure 
love and total faith, God will take care of the devotee. People today lack such firm faith. In the 
path of devotion many ordeals have to be overcome. Great devotees in the past faced such 
ordeals with faith and fortitude. Ultimately they secured the grace of the Divine and experienced 
bliss. 


Dhruva's example 


For example, take the case of Dhruva. He was a five-year old boy, who knew little about the 
affairs of the World. He acted upon the advice of Naaradha and through severe penance was able 
to have a direct vision of God. His faith enabled him to secure this experience. But, when Vishnu 
appeared before him and asked him what he wanted, Dhruva said: "Lord! You came to me, 
knowing where I was doing my penance. Is it conceivable that you could not know what I 
want?" The Lord said: "I know what for your performed the penance.. When you set out from 
your home you took a resolve that you will perform penance and secure a boon from the Lord 
that you should be enabled to sit on the lap of your father. I want to know whether your words 
and actions are in harmony." Dhruva said: "It is true that I came to perform penance for a small 
favour, a piece of valueless glass as it were. But, experience of your Form is like a diamond to 
me. What good fortune is mine that while seeking a glass bead I had found a brilliant diamond. I 
have no use for that glass piece." The Lord saw the contradiction between Dhruva's original 
resolution, his penance and his present desire. The Lord told him that he should stick to his 
original wish for which he had performed the penance and therefore return to the kingdom with 
the Lord's Blessings. This emphasizes the need for unity in thought, word and deed. 


Recognise the Divine in the entire cosmos 


For achieving anything in life, two things are essential: firm faith and pure love. People should 
not think that pleasure and pain are caused by some external forces. It is not so. They are the 
result of one's own thoughts. There is no meaning in blaming others. If you develop love of God, 
that love will banish all sorrow and evil tendencies like attachment, anger and envy. Students 
should pursue both spiritual education and secular studies. 


You have to realise that Nature is also a manifestation of God. Hence, Nature should not be 
ignored. Nature is the effect and God is the cause. Hence you should recognise the imminence of 
the Divine in the entire cosmos. 


Discourse in Sai Kulwant Mandap on 20-6-1996. 


23. As you sow, so shall you reap 


ALL the pains and pleasures man experiences are the results of his own actions and not due to 
any act of the Divine. God is only a witness. God is like a postman. He delivers to you whatever 
letter is addressed to you. The grief or joy you derive from the contents of the letter are your 
own. Likewise the suffering or happiness one experiences are the results of one's own bad or 
good deeds and are not derived from God. 


However, there is the operation of special grace on certain occasions. When you pray to God 
with a pure heart, without a trace of selfishness and with sacred feelings, God confers special 
favour. Moreover, when a person has done some unique act of sacrifice in a previous life or at 
any time in the past, the Divine confers an appropriate reward for it at the proper time. 


Krishna came to the rescue of Dhraupadhi when Dhuryodhana attempted to disrobe her, by 
making her sari endless, in return for the readiness with which Draupadi tore off a piece from her 
sari to bind the bleeding finger of Krishna. 


The spontaneous magnanimity of Karna 


Even a noble and large-hearted hero like Karna became an accomplice of the wicked Kauravas 
because of his association with them. Students should avoid bad company. To illustrate the 
spontaneous magnanimity of Karna I would relate an episode where Krishna had contrived to 
bring home to Arjuna the extent to which Karna was prepared to sacrifice himself to satisfy any 
one who came to him for help. Krishna assumed the form of a Brahmana and came to Kama on 
the battlefield asking for some gold. As the only way he could satisfy the Brahmana was to pull 
out his two golden teeth to give them to him, Kama did not hesitate to do so. He got them 
washed in Ganga water aiming an arrow at the ground and making the river spout forth. Arjuna, 
who had a high opinion of his own prowess and devotion to Krishna, felt humbled at the sight of 
Karna's boundless generosity. 


The ways of the Divine should be properly understood. God exists not for one nation or one 
community. God incarnates on earth for the benefit of all mankind. Each one gets the reward 
according to his deserts, As are his actions, so are the fruits thereof. Hence before doing 
anything, one should consider whether it is right or wrong. One should see that no harm occurs 
to anyone on account of one's actions. This is not easy for one who is attached to the pleasures 
of the body. All sorrow is related to the body and worldly desires. You experience desires in the 
waking state. In the sushupthi (deep sleep) state one is totally unaware of even the body and of 
the phenomenal world. Hence there is no sorrow in that state. 


Rely primarily on the power of the Divine 


By constant contemplation on God the mind should be turned away from mundane desires That 
is the way to get rid of both pain and pleasure. Man has to make up from the sleep of ignorance 
and realise his divine essence Sath-Chith-Aanandha. To the extent worldly desires are reduced, 
to the same extent bliss will be experienced. Simultaneously with the control of desires men 
should also get rid of Ahamkaara (egoism). 


Men today are filled with fear because they have no confidence in themselves. A bird can brave a 
storm because it has faith in its wings. But man succumbs to the slightest reverses of fortune 
because he does not rely on the power of the Spirit. People must rely primarily on the power of 


the Divine. With confidence in the Self, they should devote themselves to good deeds. This is the 
purpose of life. Every step you take must bring you nearer to God. 


Discourse in the Sai Kulwant Mandap on 30-6-1996. 


24. Not salaries but service 


EMBODIMENTS of Love! The educational system today prepares students for pursuing worldly 
gains and comforts, but makes no attempt to cultivate in them the qualities of righteousness, love 
of peace and promotion of social welfare. Both students and educationists are mainly concerned 
about using education for getting jobs and earning large incomes. What kind of life do they lead 
in their earning, career? After a so-called hard day's work, they spend their evenings in clubs, 
imagining that they get peace and rest there. If they wanted real peace they should have it in their 
homes. In the clubs they spend their time playing cards and having "bottles." Is this 
commendable? Does this befit persons calling themselves educated? Far from it. Not only do 
they ruin themselves this way, but also ruin their families. 


Instead of falling a prey to such pernicious habits, the educated should use their knowledge for 
the improvement of society and thereby redeem their lives. Addiction to drink makes a man 
ultimately a slave of the bottle. 


Man's debt to God 


Man is the beneficiary of innumerable gratuitous gifts of God: wind, rain, sunlight and so on. 
What gratitude is man showing to God for all these, while he his paying a big price for every 
small benefit he derives from services like water supply and electric power? God is the provider 
of all that is essential for life. What recompense is man making to God? On the contrary he goes 
on praying for more benefits. This insatiable desire is the cause of all man's evil qualities. The 
truly human qualities are calmness, forbearance and compassion. Man should lead a contented 
life. 


God has given to man a wonderfully beautiful world, with mountains, forests, rivers and the 
glorious moon. Above all, God has endowed man with a compassionate heart. But he is polluting 
it. What is it that man owes to God for all his gifts? The ancient sages called it bali (sacrificial 
offering). The term bali has been misunderstood as the offer of an animal as sacrifice. The right 
meaning of bali is tax. 


Many such terms are often given wrong meanings in common usage. For instance, the term 
Shikhandi is interpreted as referring to a hermaphrodite (one who is neither a man nor a woman). 
The true meaning, however, is "one who wears a peacock feather." The term is applied to 
Krishna. 


What is the bali (tax) to be paid to God? Only the expression of our gratitude by a heartfelt 
prayer. That prayer is an expression of one's joy and thankfulness. The hands should be lifted in 
prayer and the words should come out full-throated. It is unfortunate that even those who are 
gifted with good voices do not sing aloud in bhajans. Man has been endowed with a tongue to 
sing the praise of God. If he falls to do so, he remains indebted to God. 


The right attitude of the devotee should be one of total surrender. As one devotee declared: "I am 
offering to you the heart which you gave me. I have nothing I can call my own. All are yours. I 
offer to you what is yours. What else can I do?" This was the spirit in which Lakshmana served 
Raama. As long as this spirit of total surrender is not developed, man will have to be born again 
and again. One should offer one's heart to the Divine, and not be content with offerings like 
flowers, and fruits. 


You should offer your knowledge for the benefit of the people. You should set an example to 
your fellowmen. Cultivate the spirit of oneness of all mankind. It is to teach this message that the 
Sai advent has taken place. Sai has come to indicate the omnipresence of God. The Avathaar has 
come down to declare that God is present everywhere. This is as necessary as the need for some 
one to light a lamp even if you have a lamp holder, oil and wick. The Avathaar comes not only to 
proclaim the eternal virtues but also to shower His love on all mankind. But each one will get the 
benefit according to the size of the vessel he holds. 


Discourse in the Sai Kulwant Mandap on 1-7-1996. 


25. Adherence to truth 


THERE is an eternal Truth which transcends the categories of time and space and is beyond the 
three gunas--Sathva, Rajas and Thamas. This Truth is God. All creation has emanated from this 
Truth and merges in it. The phenomena perceived by the senses are by their very nature transient 
and ever changing. The Spiritual reality is unchanging. The three letters in the term Sathyam 
represents Praana (life), Annam (food) and the Sun, who is the sustainer of all life. All the three 
represent the Brahmam. Another meaning of Sathya is control of the outward and inner senses. 
When there is such sense control combined with purity in thought, word and deed, one 
experiences the Divine. 


' 


Dharma is based on Sathya. The Upanishathik saying is: “Sathvam vadha; Dharmam chara' 
(Speak the Truth and practise righteousness). Today the number of persons adhering to truth is 
one in a thousand or so. Most of one's life is spent in untruth. A true being should lead a life 
based wholly on truth. Man is in desperate search of bliss in the external world, forgetting that 
the source of bliss is within him. Ignorance of his inherent Divinity makes a man miserable. 
When the ignorance goes, his blissful nature reveals itself. Man has to realise this basic truth. 


Overcome difficulties by adherence to Truth 


Students! You should realise that whatever difficulties you may encounter in life, you can over- 
come them by steadfast adherence to truth. You must carry out your promise at any cost. You 
have the example of Emperor Bali, who honoured his pledge to Vaamana even at the cost of his 
kingdom and against the warning of his preceptor. Bali declared that there is no greater sin than 
going back on one's plighted word. 


Even ten persons who adhere firmly to truth can save the world. How many today are prepared to 
sacrifice all theirs for truth? People listen to endless discourses, meet noble personalities and 
read all the scriptures. Of what use is all that when there is no practice of the teachings? 


Man has evolved from the animal to the human and he must progress towards the Divine. 
Unfortunately today he tends to revert to animality. Man should realise the infinite preciousness 
of human birth. 


Discourse on 2.7.1996. 


26. Bhagavaan deplores devotees' lapses 


Without giving up Thaamasik tendencies 
How can the truth be realised? 

Without giving up Raajasik qualities 
Bhakthi cannot be promoted. 

The practice of Bhakthi 
Is the Saathvik quality. 

Hearken! Oh valiant son of Bhaarath! 


THIS entire phenomenal universe is an expression of three qualities--Sathva, Rajas and Thamas. 
Every human being is an embodiment of these three qualities. How can such a being transcend 
the three qualities? It is only when man recognizes these qualities that he can go beyond them. 
For all ordinary persons, all the three qualities are essential. Man cannot live without sleep. Man 
cannot perform any action without prior enquiry. Thought must precede any action. Sleep, 
enquiry and mentation are Thaamasik qualities. 


Man cannot carry on his normal daily life without Raajasik activities. All desires arise from the 
Raajasik quality. Even the yearning for God is a Raajasik quality. There is a Thelugu saying: 
"No one can have the desire for liberation without experiencing other desires." Desires may be 
diverse, but their essential nature is the same. Qualities like anger, jealousy, hatred, pride and 
pompousness are Raajasik in nature. Even in the Raajasik quality there is an element of the 
Saathvik quality. Like the river Sarasvathi which is said to flow unseen between the rivers Ganga 
and Yamuna, the Saathvik quality is also present in a subtle form as the undercurrent between the 
Thaamasik and Raajasik qualities. As one examines each of these qualities individually, it will 
be found that there is a substratum of the Saathvik quality in the other two. 


To develop the Saathvik quality, the Thaamasik quality is an accessory and the Raajasik quality 
is a necessary stage. When one goes beyond these two, the full nature of the Saathvik quality 
manifests itself. 


From highway man to sage 


How does one get over the Thaamasik quality? There is the example of Rathnaakara, who was 
originally a highway robber harassing and plundering wayfarers. Absence of compassion and 
consideration for others is the mark of Thaamasik nature. Such a person was transformed into a 
great sage by the contact and teaching of the Seven Sages (Vasishta and others). Not only did he 
become a sage, he also became an immortal poet, the author of the Raamaayana, the epic story of 
the Raama Avathar. The term Kavi (poet) signifies one who has a vision of the past, the present 
and the future. The so called poets of today can hardly be called poets in the ancient sense of the 
term. 


Vaalmeeki and Vyaasa, by their penance, transcended the three qualities, experienced the Divine 
and acquired the capacity to envision the three categories of time--the past, the present and the 
future---thereby they became immortal poets. The company of the good was responsible for the 
transformation of a totally Thaamasik person like Rathnaakara into the totally Saathvik sage, 
Vaalmeeki. This shows that no one need feel that a Thaamasik person cannot become a Saathvik 


person. For every transformation Divine Grace is the cause. It is possible at one jump to proceed 
from the Thaamasik to the Saathvik nature by Divine Grace and association with Godly persons. 


From emperor to Brahmarishi 


Coming to the Raajasik quality; it is characteristic of persons belonging to the Kshathriya 
(warrior) caste. Hatred, jealousy, ostentation, egoistic pride, are some of the traits associated with 
the Raajasik quality. The sage who exemplifies the transformation from the Raajasik to Saathvik 
quality is Vishvaamithra. Vishvaamithra, who was steeped in Raajasik tendencies, became a 
great Raajarishi and later a Brahmarishi. His antipathy to sage Vasishta went to the extent of 
even contemplating the destruction of the sage. Vishvaamithra was hovering near the aashram 
when he overheard a conversation between Vasishta and his spouse, Aurndhathi. Arundhathi 
expressed her admiration for the beautiful unblemished light the fullmoon was shedding that 
night. Immediately Vasishta observed: "Tonight's fullmoon is shining untainted like the pure 
penance of Vishvaamithra." 


On hearing these words, Vishvaamithra realised how mistaken he was regarding Vasishta and 
rushed into the aashram, fell at the feet of Vasishta and prayed to him to forgive him. Vasishta 
lifted Vishvaamithra and hailed him as Brahmarishi (a sage who has realised the Supreme Self). 
Vasishta, who had previously described Vishvaamithra as a Raajarishi (a royal sage), 
spontaneously hailed him as a Brahmarishi. Vishvaamithra could not contain himself and asked 
Vasishta on what grounds he was calling Vishvaamithra a Brahmarishi. Vasishta said: 
"Vishvaamithra! Hitherto you were filled with self-conceit. You are born with ego, grew with 
ego, and never bowed your head to any one. Today you put an end to your ego and fell at my 
feet. This is the significance of egolessness. A Brahmarishi is one who is free from egoism, 
acquisitiveness, pride and arrogance. 


A true rishi is one who is free from evil tendencies 
A rishi is not one who is a great scholar or a ritualist, but one who is free from evil tendencies. 


The transformation of Rathnaakara from a highwayman to a sage, who could compose the 
Raamaayana, was possible because of his association with great risihis. But association alone 
was not enough. He practised wholeheartedly what the sages taught him. He lost his body 
consciousness in the contemplation of the name of Raama to such an extent that an ant-hill rose 
over him from which vibration of Raama's name could be heard. 


A similar transformation occurred in the case of Vishvaamithra also. From a Raajasik King he 
became a Brahmarishi by sacrificing all earthly pleasures and performing severe penance. 


Coming to the Saathvik quality, it should be noted that its main characteristic is a perennial state 
of peace. Other traits related to Sathva are forbearance, compassion, truth and similar virtues. 
The Saathvik quality gives no room for vices like lust, anger, greed and envy. The Saathvik 
person converts any action of anger into an act of love. If one cannot effect such a change, all his 
austerities are useless. 


Devotees' failures to practise love 


Now, I wish to refer to a matter which you should consider without any misunderstanding. I have 
been propagating the message of love for many years. In every discourse Prema (Love) is 
repeatedly mentioned. How many of you are comprehending this love or practising it? If any 
comes to you with a query, can't you give a loving answer? I have not seen a single individual 


giving a loving reply. Either in the Mandhir, or in the canteen or in the Book Stall, or in the 
Accommodation Office or in the Hospital or in any other establishment there is not a hint of the 
word ‘Prema.’ Why, then, should you listen to these discourses? If any newcomer asks about 
how to have dharshan of Svaami he is rudely brushed aside with a "get away!" Cannot you tell 
somebody calmly what you know? If educated persons are approached, they dismiss the seeker 
of information with a curt: "No, this is not my duty." Should answering a question be prescribed 
as a duty? What does anyone lose if he gives a calm and loving answer? 


Whether it be women or men devotees who have been staying here for over two decades, no one 
has a loving heart. They profess to perform saadhana, or japa or meditation, but what for are 
they doing all this? What has happened to the love in them? They seem to be stifling it. They are 
developing ill-feelings. If you are really serious about listening to Svaami's teachings, why don't 
you put them into practice? People live in the aashram, but their practices are unbecoming. 


Is anyone doing any duty assigned to him with dedication? Are they uttering truth? Are they 
speaking pleasantly? I have neither seen nor heard such things. 


If anyone wants to talk to you, you can excuse yourself if you want to avoid any talk. You can 
explain sweetly: "Svaami disapproves of excessive talk. I have to adhere to His injunctions." 


Open your hearts for God's love 


I do not find any teachers or students, doctors or nurses talking lovingly. There should be some 
benefit from your listening to the discourses. But there is nothing of the kind. During bhajans the 
women are engaged in mutual recrimination. They quarrel over seats. "This seat is mine. That is 
yours." They compete for front seats. Cannot they experience Bhagavaan wherever they are? 
You have plenty of time and are receiving plenty of love. But you don't avail yourself of it. If 
you keep your pots topsy turvy, how can you collect any water even if there is a downpour? 
Today those who listen to the discourses are keeping the pots of their hearts upside down. Hence 
not a drop of love gets into your hearts. Why, should you come here? Cannot you live 
elsewhere? What is the use of your coming here? What are you achieving from your stay? What 
bliss are you deriving? Nothing at all. It is sheer waste of time. 


Treat patients with love 


At least from now on, reply with love to anyone who comes to you. Those functioning in the 
Accommodation Office or Public Relations or other places in the aashram should not behave 
like bull-dogs or Alsatian hounds. We are spending crores of rupees on the hospitals. Why 
should not the patients be treated with love? Many patients will get well merely by kind and 
sweet words. But many of them are turned away rudely. This is totally unbecoming of persons 
claiming to be devotees. If they have come to serve Svaami, they should cultivate love as the 
first quality. Svaami is the embodiment of love from head to foot. I offer love. You accept it, but 
do not make good use of it. 


Embodiments of love! I continue to call you as such though you are lacking in love! You need 
not cultivate anything but love. That will be equal to any amount of penance you can possibly 
do. 


When new devotees come to the aashram you must welcome them as the air-hostesses do on a 
plane. In the Institute also, freshers who join in the new year should be welcomed and treated 


with special regard and affection. They should be made to forget the separation from their 
parents. In outside colleges, new entrants are subjected to ragging by the old students. 


This conduct is demonic. Is this the way to treat the new entrants, who should be made to feel 
happy and comfortable? Likewise new entrants to the hostel should be welcomed with love and 
helped to adjust themselves to their new life. It is only when you show them due consideration 
that you would have really understood Svaami's Prema-thathva (Love Principle). 


Stony devotion 


Learn to respect all. Only then will you earn the grace of the Divine who is the Indweller in all 
beings. Harming living beings and worshipping inanimate idols, what kind of devotion is this? 
Bullocks which work night and day are whipped, but a stone idol of Nandhi is adored by going 
round it. This is stony devotion! Not devotion from the heart. 


At least from now on, make your hearts pure. Fill it with genuine compassion instead of talking 
about compassion ad nauseam. 


You have been in this aashram for many years. Ashram means a place where there is no stress or 
strain. Many devotees feel that they are being driven about like street dogs outside the aashram 
and pray for at least a few quiet moments in the interview room. But, how many can be taken 
into the interview room? It is not possible to give an interview for all at one time. Hence, this 
open interview for all! All are being treated alike. Develop love. From tomorrow you must speak 
to one another lovingly. Get rid of your animal qualities. Love all. This is the true Saathvik 
quality. 


Manifest your humanness and progress towards the Divine. Get rid of animality and demonic 
qualities. To acquire Svaami's grace the path of love is the only royal road. 


Discourse in Sai Kulwant Mandap on 3-7-1996. 


Youth is the stage in life when the slightest turn towards wrong 
will spell disaster. Thoughts shape the careen You plan to earn 
much wealth, because you imagine that rich people are very 
happy. The rich have plenty to eat, but they have no appetite. The 
rich wield power over others but they are held down by disease. 
The rich can have many servants but they cannot live in peace. So, 
plan to be rich in virtue, in devotion and dedication to good 
causes. Be rich in sovereign character. 


Baba 


27. The human adventure 


Through meritorious deeds And acts of sacrifice, 
Developing love in the heart, 

Suppressing demonic traits, 

Fostering devotion to God, 


Lead your daily life, Oh Man! 


In boyhood man is immersed in sport; 

In youth he is lost in sensual pleasures; 

In old age, unaware of the Divine Lord, 

He pursues one thing or another; 

Unable to give up evil tendencies. 

Incapable of taking to the path of Devotion 

He wallows in the cesspool of Karma 

And makes human life a clod of earth. (Thelugu Poem) 


Man intelligent being, but does not know how to utilise his intelligence. Some persons, even 
though they know how to use it, pursue wrong paths. If they are asked, why they behave like 
this, they glibly answer that the whole thing is Maaya, an illusion. Maaya is only called by the 
name illusion, but it has no existence in reality. People imagine that it is Maaya which produces 
the phenomenal world and makes it appear as real in all its varied forms. Scholars have described 
Maaya as a Narthaki (dancer). This Maaya is said to make every man dance. How is Maaya to 
be controlled? Read the word Narthaki in reverse and you have the answer Keerthana. This is 
proclaimed as the path of devotion. 


Misconceptions about Saadhana 


There are several misconceptions about Saadhana (spiritual exercise) for Self Realisation. For 
instance, some women devotees feel sad when they are unable to attend Bhagavaan's discourses 
because of their preoccupation with domestic duties and attending to their spouses and children. 
What is the service they render by taking part in a Sathsang or a discourse? To attend to one's 
household duties, look after the children and attend to the needs of the husband and others at 
home constitute the right type of saadhana. Even the preparation of meals in the home is a great 
saadhana. To remove the stones from the rice before it is cooked is one kind of yoga--- 
gunathraya vibhaaga yoga--the yoga of division of the three qualities. Every stage in the 
cooking of vegetables may be deemed a spiritual exercise. Likewise every household chore can 
be sanctified without a sense of regret that you are missing a bhajan or a discourse. Even the 
sweeping of the house may be considered as a process of purifying the heart. All such thoughts 
are spiritually exalting. Such actions are better than listening indifferently to a discourse and 
forgetting the teachings thereafter. Doing one's duty is the highest spiritual endeavour. 


Giving up bad qualities is true renunciation 


There are many ochre-robed persons going about flaunting their so called renunciation while 
they are full of pride and possessiveness. During an encounter between a renunciant and Ubhaya- 
bhaarathi, wife of the scholar Mandana Mishra, she made the renunciant realise how he was 
filled with attachment and egoism in spite of his having renounced everything. The ascetic fell at 
the feet of Ubhayabhaarathi and sought her forgiveness. He assured her that thereafter he would 
practise renunciation in the true sense of the term. 


Thyaaga (Renunciation) does not mean giving up hearth and home but giving up bad qualities. 
That alone is true sacrifice and real yoga. It is enough if man gives up raaga (attachment) and 
dhvesha (hatred). If everyone adheres to his Aashrama-Dharma (the code of conduct pertaining 
to one's stage in life), devotes his time to meditation on God, he will be redeeming his life. 


There is no need to go in search of Divinity elsewhere. The Divine is the Indweller in every heart 
like sugar at the bottom of a tumbler filled with water. If the water is stirred with the spoon of 
Buddhi (the intellect), Divinity will be experienced in the heart. 


Have the conviction that God is within you and in every being. Hence bear no ill-will towards 
any-body. Show your love and esteem for everyone. 


Sai is the Mother for the motherless 


Let me refer to something, which I am not anxious to reveal. A young boy who gave his word to 
me years ago continues to stand by it to this day. The student who spoke first this afternoon is a 
boy from Shimla. I am seeing him today. Ten years ago he came as a small boy. He was studying 
in the primary school. A younger brother of his (who was in the Mandap) is also studying in the 
primary school. Their mother was brought in a stretcher from Himaachal Pradhesh to 
Brindhaavan. I drew both the boys close to me and told the mother: "They are my children. Don't 
worry about them. Have no worry on their account." The mother gave her word to Svaami. "I am 
entrusting my children to you, Sai Maatha!" Uttering these words, she closed her eyes. 


I brought the two boys from Brindhaavan to Prashaanthi Nilayam. They were very young at the 
time. The elder boy said at that time: "My mother is Mother Sai". The father also affirmed the 
son's words. 


From that moment these two boys have not shed a single tear. These children at that tender age 
held fast to their words. In life once a promise has been made to the Lord there will be no room 
for grief. That is the meaning of Sharanaagathi (surrender to the Lord). 


The mother was no more. Even the father appeared rarely. The children were left totally in the 
care of Svaami. Morning and evening I used to speak to the boys and enquire about their welfare. 
Their tender hearts were filled with total faith in Bhagavaan. Today the elder boy spoke well 
about faith. He is full of that faith. They did not feel at any time the loss of their mother. 


One day the warden brought the boy to me from the primary school, saying that he was feeling 
the absence of his mother. She told Svaami that the boy is not taking food and is weeping 
incessantly. He was five years old at that time. He was in the first standard. I took him inside the 
interview room, gave him a ring and spoke pleasantly to him and made him forget his loss. From 
that moment he has always been smiling and laughing. 


What is needed is total faith 


The hearts of the children are so pure. Today elders are unable to understand such pure love. 
Love is so sacred. It confers limitless courage and forbearance. What would have been the plight 
of these children in any other place? They could get on here because they were with Svaami. 
Svaami takes care of them with the love of a thousand mothers. This truth is not being 
understood even by many renunciants. They perform Japa and sit in meditation. But to what 
end? They are immersed in their egoism and attachment. 


What is needed is total faith; in a simple word: Love. Abide by it and lead a worthy life. Love 
will confer every kind of strength you need to sustain you in life. If you recognise the Divine in 
all, you will be blessed with everything. 


Svaami's boundless love 


Students should understand that I take interest in the welfare of every child. I constantly enquire 
about all of them with the warden. Students who are not aware of Bhagavaan's boundless love, 
feel depressed when they think Svaami does not speak to them. But I am having my eyes on all 
of them. The boy who spoke earlier said that he had lost one mother but found a thousand 
mothers. How many will make such a declaration? He began his speech with an appeal to 
Mother Sai. It is this faith which is sustaining them and making them overcome all problems. 


Hence, develop this Love Principle. Moreover, you have also got to develop discipline. In recent 
months, there appears to be a falling off in discipline in Prashaanthi Nilayam. As soon as the 
bhats are over, the devotees get up and make a lot of noise. Similarly, when the people called for 
interview, go into the interview room, the people in the Mandhir verandah and outside get up 
after the door is closed and indulge in noisy talk as in a market-place. After Bhagavaan's 
discourse is over, devotees should ruminate over Svaami's speech and not indulge in idle talk. It 
is all one cacophony frown both the men's and women's wings of the Mandap. There should be 
no such talking, not only in Prashaanthi Nilayam but outside also, in the bazaars. Discipline is 
like a shadow. It should follow you wherever you may go. Bhagavaan desires from all of you 
only discipline. Hence, when the discourse is over or when the bhajans end, you should go out in 
silence. When you get back to your apartments you may discuss your private affairs. But as a 
rule observe restraint in speech everywhere. It helps to conserve energy. Excessive talk affects 
the nerves. You are liable to forget what you have heard. 


Moreover, elders set a bad example to students by talking in front of them. You should realise 
that the voice of the Divine is heard in the depths of silence. 


Restraint in speech also calls for the avoidance of harsh words. Speaking lovingly and ever 
thinking of God, you will be oblivious to all worldly things. 


Discourse in Sai Kulwant Mandap on 4-7-1996. 


The very first lesson of the Primer of the spiritual text is Control of 
Speech. The speech is the armament of man; other animals have 
fleetness of foot, sharpness of clam, fang, horn, tusk, beak and 
talon. But man has sweetness of speech which can disarm 
opposition and defeat all the designs of hatred. Sweetness makes 


you Pashupathi -- Divine; harshness makes you Pashu beastial. 
Mere outward politeness or sweetness is hypocrisy, sincere speech 
must flow from real sweetness of heart, a heart full of love. 


Baba 


28. Saadhana and sense control 


Of what use is all Saadhana 
without sense control? 

Of what avail is practice of yoga 
without forbearance? 

Of what use is japa without 
Peace of mind? 

It is like ploughing a barren field. 


STUDENTS! "By diligent efforts success can be achieved, says the adage. An ant can cover 
miles by continuous movement. But even Garuda (the celestial eagle) cannot soar two feet if it 
has no will to fly. Likewise, without good thoughts and good deeds based on them, a man cannot 
accomplish anything good. The child Dhruva could achieve what he desired because of his firm 
determination and the spiritual austerities he observed, despite the ordeals he had to go through. 
By his sublime thoughts, he achieved the status of a star in the sky. Likewise, any man 
irrespective of age or abilities, who has faith and determination, can accomplish what he wants. 
You are aware of the stories of many sages who embarked on severe penances but failed to 
complete them because of lack of faith and determination. Vishvaamithra was repeatedly foiled 
in this way by either loss of self-control or succumbing to temptation. 


In every field Saadhana (steadfast performance) is essential. For instance, the participants in the 
bhajans have improved their singing by constant practice. The sage Dhurvaasa, despite all his 
penances, could have no peace because he could not control his temper. 


Together with peace, the quality of Kshama (forgiveness) is also essential. 
Forgiveness is truth, it is Dharma, 
It is the essence of the Vedha, 
It is non-violence and it Yajna, 
It is the source of joy and everything else 
says a Thelugu Poem. Kshama (forbearance) is for every man a third eye. 
Entire life is a dream 


For all these, the primary quality that is necessary is love. Without love there can be no life. A 
student who spoke earlier said: "Life is a dream, realise it." What is a dream? Entire life is a 
dream. During the day you sit here and listen to Svaami's discourse. This is not a dream. You see 
with your eyes, listen with your ears, absorb with your mind and chasten your heart. All these are 
apparently proofs of Prathyaksha Pramaanam (direct perception). But how far is this real? When 
you go to sleep at night, all this direct perception vanishes. In your night dreams you experience 
joy and sorrow. How long do they last? Till you wake up. Then all the dreams become unreal. In 
the waking state, the dream world has no existence. In the dream state the waking world does not 
exist. So, what we have are a day-dream and a night dream distinct from each other. But you are 
present in both the states. Hence you are omnipresent. When both the waking and sleeping states 


are experienced as dreams life itself becomes a dream. Realise it. That means, you must realise 
the true nature of these states. 


The student said: "Life is love, enjoy it." Verily love is God. Purandhara-dhaasa sang about the 
glory of the devotee's love for God. "Even as a lotus adorns a lake, the moon adorns the sky and 
waves are the adornment for the ocean, for your devotees. Oh Lord! love is the greatest 
adornment." Nothing lends greater beauty to a devotee than his love for the Divine. 


Love is like mariner's compass 


Hence love is Divine. Have love for all. Impart your love even to those who lack love. Love is 
like mariner's compass. Wherever you may keep it, it points the way to God. In every action in 
daily life manifest your love. Divinity will emerge from that love. This is the easiest path to God- 
realisation. But, why are not people taking to it? This is because they are obsessed with 
misconception relating to the means of experiencing God. They regard God as some remote 
entity attainable only by arduous spiritual practices. God is everywhere. There is no need to 
search for God. All that you see is a manifestation of the Divine. All the human beings you see 
are forms of the Divine. Correct your defective vision and you will experience God in all things. 


Love for Svaami has brought you here 


Develop the sense of the spiritual oneness of all beings. The power of love is immeasurable. $0 
many of you have assembled here. What has brought you all here? Love alone is the primary 
reason. You have gathered here in such large numbers because of your love for Svaami and 
Svaami's love for you. You have all come of your own accord. The binding factor is love. 


Speak lovingly, act lovingly, think with love and do every action with a love-filled heart. There 
is no need for counting beads or sitting in meditation, while your mind is preoccupied with 
worldly matters. The japa you have to perform is constantly to remind yourself of the Divine 
within you. This is the supreme message of the Vedhas. 


Realise that the path of divine love is the easiest, the sweetest and surest path to God. 


Discourse on 5- 7-1996. 


Whatever I do, it is for you, not for Me. For what is it that can be 
called Mine ? Only you. 


Baba 


29. Love for the divine transcends all kin 


Happiness emerges from total love; 
Truth and renunciation lead to peace; 
Without love there is no well-being; 
Hearken! oh valiant son of Bhaarath! 


STUDENTS! There can be no human being who is unaware of love. The universe is permeated 
with love. Love is beyond description. It is beyond the grasp of the mind and speech. Naaradha 
declared: "Love is beyond the scope of words." 


How can an ordinary man, living in this phenomenal world, understand such love? This love is 
an expression of Divinity. Like the mariners compass, it always points to the Dime wherever it 
may be present. As oil makes a lamp burn, love illumines life itself. 


What is termed love in ordinary worldly life is not real love at all. It is only one or other form of 
attachment based on human relationships in the family or in society. 


True love is pure, selfless, free from pride, and is full of bliss. Such love can be got only through 
love. All worldly attachments are not real love at all. They are transient. The everlasting, pure 
love arises from the heart. In fact, it is ever-existing and all-pervading. How is it that man is 
unable to recognise such all-pervading love? It is because man's heart today has become barren 
and is polluted. The heart is filled with all kinds of desires and there is no room in it for pure, 
unsullied love to enter. It is only when the worldly attachments are expelled from the heart that 
there will be room for real love to abide in it and to grow. 


Quality of true love is to give and not to receive 


As a man grows from childhood to manhood, his attachments change from the mother to friends, 
to wife and children, and then to the acquisition of wealth. In the ups and downs involved in the 
pursuit of wealth, he begins to feel the need for God. This perpetual alternation of attachment 
and separation cannot be called real love which is spiritual and enduring. 


The quality of true love is to give and not to receive. How many are to be found today in the 
world who love to give? Even a father hesitates to part with his property to his children. Only 
God can be the infinite giver. Hence love is a divine quality. Although inherently love is present 
in every cell of the human being it does not manifest itself because of the pollution of the heart. 
A man without love in his heart is as good as dead. 


Make the preceptor's message part of your being 


Once a preceptor summoned all his disciples and told them that he was going to give them 
something extremely sweet which they should protect from insects and rodent. The disciples 
resorted to various devices to safeguard the guru's gift. However, one of them ate the sweet, 
digested it and derived considerable strength and energy from it. 


What is the lesson to be drawn from this story? It means that the teachings learnt from the 
preceptor are not to be merely preserved in safety. The nectarine message of the preceptor should 
be enshrined in the heart. It should be made part of one's being. Then the recipient acquires 
vigour and strength. 


In the same manner, whatever you see or hear or read should be taken to heart and then put into 
practice. Only then you have the full satisfaction of benefiting from the teachings. Hearing is not 
enough. You must take in and digest what you have listened to. It must be put into practice in 
daily life. This was the prayer which the gopikas addressed to Krishna that the nectarine music 
flowing from His flute should fill their dry hearts with divine love. A pure heart is essential for 
progress in the spiritual or other fields. 


Divine love is all-compassing and the whole cosmos is contained within it. Hence it is essential 
for man to comprehend the nature of this love. Today, the world is riddled with disorder, 
violence and unrest.. Injustice, exploitation, corruption and immorality are 'ubiquitous. All these 
are the very antithesis of love. Only through the divine love can the world be transformed. 


Aathmik love (Spiritual love) has to be distinguished from love or attachment related to the body, 
the mind or the intellect. These latter attachments are related to the world and they are the source 
of sorrow. 


Four types of love 


Love of the Divine is of four kinds. One is Svaartha-Prema (love based on self-interest). The 
second is Samanjasa-Prema, the third is Paraartha-Prema, and the fourth is Yathaartha-Prema. 


Svaartha-Prema is like a lamp kept in a room. The lamp illumines only the room. This kind of 
selfish love is confined to a limited group and does not extend to others. 


Samanjasa-Prema may be compared to the light from the moon. This moonlight is visible both 
outside and inside. It is, however, not very effulgent. The light is dim. This kind of love extends 
to a wider group but is not very intense. 


The third is Paraartha-Prema. It is like sun-light. It illumines both inside and outside with 
brilliance. But it is not continuous in the sense that the sun is not visible at night. But this is not a 
permanent absence, because the sun rises again. Actually, the sun is always there. Likewise, this 
selfless love may appear to be absent some times, but it will appear again. 


The fourth one is Yathaartha-Prema or Aathma-Prema This love is present always, inside and 
outside, in all places and at all times, in all circumstances. This is Divine Love. It is 
imperishable. It is eternal. It is immanent in everyone. When this love is manifested by a person, 
he achieves the peace that passeth understanding. 


Supreme example of Vibheeshana 


How the love of the Divine manifests itself in a devotee is illustrated by the example of 
Vibheeshana, the younger brother of Raavana. Vibheeshana submitted himself to many 
indignities at the hands of Raavana out of the love he had for Raama. In the battle against the 
Raakshasas in Lanka, Raama and Lakshmana destroyed many of the great Raakshasa 
warriors on the first two days. On the third day a formidable warrior stood before them. 
Vibheeshana told Raama: "If you conquer this warrior, the whole of Lanka will be yours. He is a 
greater warrior than even Raavana." Raama fought with this mighty Raakshasa the whole day, 
but could not vanquish him. Raama was on the point of giving up the battle for the day. At this 
stage-, Vibheeshana, who was behind Raama, said: "This is not the time to give up the fight. You 
must rally all your strength and destroy the enemy. You should not miss this chance. I am 
telling this out of my love for you." Egged on by Vibheeshana, Raama continued the fight and 
destroyed his opponent. 


The formidable warrior fell on the battlefield. The moment he learned that the warrior was 
dead, Vibheeshana also collapsed on the ground. Recovering himself after chanting the name of 
Raama, Vibheeshana got up and confessed to Raama: "Svaami! This is a mark of weakness on 
my part. I should not have succumbed to such weakness. Having filled myself with your love, 
how could I succumb to such weakness?" Raama observed: "That's all right. But why did you 
collapse so suddenly?" Vibheeshana replied: "Svaami! This happened because of bodily 
attachment. It was due to parental affection. That mighty warrior was my son." 


He was Vibheeshana's son! See what Vibheeshana did. To ensure the victory of the Lord, 
Vibheeshana did not. hesitate to get even his son killed in battle. 


God is greater than son 


Raama asked Vibheeshana: "Why did you do this? Is it not wrong on your part? Why did you not 
tell me at the beginning itself that he was your son?" Vibheeshana replied: "When you are facing 
an enemy, you should not worry about any kind of relationship on the battlefield. In this war 
there is no room for considerations of relationship. When anyone takes up arms against you, he 
ceases to be a relation. Whether it is mother, father, son or anybody else, when he figures as an 
enemy especially against God, there can be no question of relationship. I have completely 
surrendered to you. I am your servant. I must be primarily be concerned about your victory and 
not about any temporary kinship. The only truth for me is your will." 


It is this abounding love of Vibheeshana for Raama, which contributed to Raama's victory. Love 
for the Divine should be inextricable bond. All other worldly attachments are impermanent. 
Thaamasik bonds are like iron chains. Raajasik bonds are copper chains. Saathvik bonds are like 
chains of gold. But, whether the chains are of iron, copper or gold, they are chains all the same. 
The nature of the metals may vary, but the chains are shackles nevertheless. Vibheeshana 
declared: "I have no use for any of these bonds. I am content with the pure love of Raama." 


It is to demonstrate to the world the supreme quality of total love for the Divine that 
Vibheeshana acted in this manner. 


Vibheeshana is a saathvik (Supremely sacred) friend of Raama. Despite his long intimacy with 
Raama, Lakshmana was not in the same category. He was a saathvik brother, not a saathvik 
friend. Sugriva was a Raajasik friend. Jaambhavan was a thaamasik friend. Vibheeshana, though 
he belonged to the Raakshasa brood, stands out as a saathvik friend (pure and selfless). It is in 
this unalloyed purity that love shines. It is utterly invaluable. 


Divine Love as glorified by the Vedhas 


About Divine love the Shruthi (Vedha) declares: "It did not originate from the firmament. It did 
not grow from the earth. It has no birth and .death. It is all-pervading. It emerges from the heart 
when the knots of ignorance are broken." This is how the Vedhas glorified Divine Love. Even 
Naaradha, the author of the Bhakthi Suthras, could not describe the nature of Divine Love. He 
described in various terms the state of mind of the devotees filled with love of the Lord, but he 
could not describe prema (love) itself. He compared Prema to a priceless gem. Likewise 
Tulasidas also referred to Raama's name as a precious gem. 


Where is this love to be found? It can be got only from Bhagavaan Himself, who is the very 
embodiment of love. Do not treat lightly this infinitely valuable love, which is eternal, pure, 
sacred and powerful beyond words. 


Do not miss this opportunity given to you by Sai. 

It is only devotion to His feet that will redeem you. 

Do not be swayed by anyone's words. 

Come all of you! Come! 

Come along and bask in this blissful love! 
Discourse in Sai Kulwant Mandap on 27- 7-1996. 


My desire, if I can put it that way, is this: More and more should 
yearn for me. That desire can be realized only if I assume this form 
and come among you. Those of you who have been following the 
unfolding of my story will have discovered this by now ... My 
purpose can be understood in a general way only by earnestly and 
vigilantly watching, trying to get to the meaning of every word and 
action with patient attention. 


Baba 


30. Seek the guru within you 


All the stars are Brahman; 

The Sun is also Brahman; 

The Moon is Brahman; Water is Brahman; 
Svarga is Brahman; Vaikunttha is Brahman; 
Speech is Brahman, the individual is Brahman; 
Birth is Brahman; Sustenance is Brahman; 
Death is Brahman; 

All actions are Brahman; the body is Brahman; 
The whole of nature is Brahman; 

Life is Brahman. This assembly is Brahman. 


The Sai proclaiming this Truth is Brahman. 


The tree growing out of the soil returns to the soil; 
The individual arising from Brahman 
returns to Brahman; 
This truth is not easily perceived 
That is the mystery of this marvellous creation. 


EMBODIMENTS of Brahman! When a seed is sown in the earth, it sprouts as a sapling and 
grows in due course into a big tree. In the tree, the branches, the leaves, the flowers and the fruits 
all appear as distinct from each other. Moreover, each of them is used for a specific purpose. But 
all of them are different forms of the mud from which they have originated. 


Seeing a rope at a distance, suspecting that it may be a snake, a man develops fear. Soon another 
person arrives and assures him that it is not a snake but a rope. The moment he realises that what 
he feared was a snake, was only a rope, he gets rid of his fear. During all the stages, the rope was 
only a rope. 


Likewise, the ignorant man mistakes the phenomenal world for the Brahman, till a jnaani reveals 
to him that what he thought was Nature is in reality Brahman. All that one sees in the entire 
universe is a manifestation of the Brahman. Some people declare: "Where is Brahman and what 
are we, petty human beings? How can we be equal to the all encompassing Brahman?" This is 
not correct. You are that omnipotent, all-pervading Brahman. Because of your worldly attitude, 
you are not recognising the Reality. You are separating yourself from the Divine. All that you 
see is Brahman. To search for God as something different from you is a delusion. But this truth 
is not easily recognised by man. 


When you look at the ocean, its endless series of waves and the foam from the waves, they all 
appear separate from each other. But the truth is they are all one. The water in the waves and in 
the foam comes from the same ocean and has the same qualities. 


Likewise, from the infinite ocean of Sath-Chith-Aanandha_ (Being-Awareness-Bliss), 
innumerable living creatures emerge like waves. While the Divine is in the state of Sathvam- 
Jnaanam-Anantham (Truth-Wisdom-Infinity) man is in the state of Sath-Chith-Aanandha. 


Fill your vision with love 


Embodiments of Divine Aathma! When you fill your vision with love, the whole creation will 
appear divine to you. 


The cosmos appears to you as a manifestation of diversity, but in reality there is no diversity. No 
one makes any effort to discover the unity that underlies the diversity. 


In every human being, both Divinity and the Maaya principle are immanent. How is this to be 
comprehended? Sath-Chith-Aanandha represent the Divine in man. The names and forms which 
man perceives are expressions of the Maaya principle. 


On the ocean, the wind is the cause of waves, on the ocean of Sath-Chith-Aanandha, the wind of 
Maaya gives rise to the innumerable living creatures. Therefore, the individuals who have 
emerged from the ocean of Sath-Chith-Aanandha are manifestations of the Divine. Divinity is 
everywhere. But because of man's ignorance, man is a prey to numerous troubles. Here is an 
example: 


Today is described as Guru Puurnima day. This is not quite correct. The day got its name 
because of some gurus who wanted to have an occasion for receiving offerings from their 
disciples. The right name for this day is Vyaasa Puurnima. 


Vyaasa was born on this full-moon day. He completed the codification of the writing of the 
eighteen pure has on this day. Owing to the passage of time Vyaasa Puurnima came to be called 
Guru Puurnima. 


The Trinity and the three gunas 


The true meaning of Guru is "one who dispels the darkness of ignorance". Another meaning of 
the word is "one who is beyond attributes and forms, namely, the Supreme Self (The Brahman)". 
When this Self is within you where is the need to search for someone to teach you? A teacher 
who teaches others has had a teacher himself. The one who has no Guru above him is the true 
guru. The Sanskrith stanza which hails the guru as Brahma, Vishnu and Maheshvara and as 
Parabrahman is misinterpreted. The right approach is to consider Brahma, Vishnu and 
Maheshvara as the guru. These three are symbolised by the three gunas: Brahma is Rajas, 
Vishnu is Sathva and Shiva is Thamas. The whole cosmos is constituted by the three gunas. The 
three gunas are present in man. The Trinity are present in the form of the three gunas in every 
human heart. 


Hence, you are your own guru. You need not seek him elsewhere. The so-called gurus of today 
seek to impart some manthras and receive fee-offerings as Guru-Dhakshina on Gum-Puurnima 
day. The manthra is whispered in the ear and the palm is stretched for an offering. This is what 
happens today. It is not the proper sign of a guru. 


You are a guru unto yourself. All potencies are within you. This is indicated by the Gaayathri 
Manthra. 


You have to feel at all times your inherent divinity, which is also present in everyone. When you 
help or feed someone you must feel that the Divine in you is feeding the Divine in others. 


Follow Svaami to get the powers 


Embodiments of Divine Aathma! For many years you have been pursuing wrong paths because of 
the feeling of separateness. The truth is you are part of the Samashti (collective). This collective 
is a part of Srishti (creation). Beyond creation is Pushti (the cosmic energy).. Transcending that 
energy is Parameshtthi (the Supreme Omni Self). You are all these as an embodiment of the 
Divine. You have to proceed from the individual to a realisation of the Omni Self. 


All are manifestations of the Divine. You may ask whether you can ever acquire the powers 
possessed by Svaami. Follow me. You are bound to get that power. That power is latent in you. 
But you are not aware of it. You want to experience bliss. If you truly follow Svaami, you will 
discover that bliss within you. Nor is that all. You will find that bliss all around you, wherever 
you go. You cannot find that bliss in the physical world. It is wholly within you. Consider 
yourself as Brahman (Divine) at all times and in all situations. You will thereby become one 
with the Divine. 


Turn your mind Godward and you will experience the bliss of the Divine. It is for this reason that 
Svaami gives you advice from time to time as to what you should do and what you should avoid. 
All this is not for my sake but for your own good, to make you take to the path of God 
Realisation, to teach you the Supreme truth about the Brahman and to make your sacred life an 
ideal one. 


Every man should strive to become an ideal human being. This means that every one should 
testify to his Divinity. Imagine how happy everyone would be if the entire world was filled with 
this pure, sublime and sacred ideal. 


Recognise that God is your preceptor. He is the preceptor of preceptors. When you have such an 
all-pervading guru, why should you hanker after gurus of lesser breed? 


Names vary but the Lord is One 


All are children of God. All are embodiments of the Divine, as declared in the Geetha. Vishnu is 
described as the Lord carrying in His four hands the conch, the discus, the mace and the lotus. 
These four represent the cosmic power of sound, the wheel of Time, the puissance of the Lord 
and the heart in which the Lord dwells. 


There is a certain naivety about the way in which Vaishnavites and Shaivites adore the same 
deity, Venkateshvara. Vaishnavites hail Him as "Venkataramana," while Shaivites hail Him as 
"Venkateshvara." The votaries of each sect derive some special satisfaction from using a 
particular name, though the Lord they worship is one and the same. The names vary but the Lord 
is one. 


Shiva is called Pashupathi (the Lord of cattle). Krishna is worshipped as Gopala (the Lord of 
cows). The emblems of Shiva and Vishnu have common characteristics. Sectarian differences are 
out of place in the worship of the Divine. 


Students should learn a lesson from a musical instrument like the Veena. It has different strings 
producing different vibrations. But if the vibrations are discordant the music jars on the ears. Just 
as there should be harmony in playing on the Veena, there should be harmony among people in a 
country professing different faiths. 


Shraddha and Bhakthi 


Shirdi Baba used to ask for two rupees from devotees who came to him. The two rupees 
symbolised Shraddha (earnestness) and Bhakthi (devotion). These are the two qualities he 
expected from the devotees. The combination of the two is essential for spiritual progress. Only 
then bliss will emerge like a plant from a seed. 


From this day onwards, give up all differences and concentrate on realisation of the Brahman 
(the Omni Self). All are embodiments of Brahman. In due course all will realise this truth by 
eschewing narrow-minded differences. Develop the sense of spiritual oneness by continuous 
practice. This sense .is bound to grow if you act upto Svaami's injunctions. The primary 
requisite is love for God. 


Discourse in the Sai Kulwant Mandap on 30-7-1996. 


31. The message of Vedhaantha 


One may master the scriptures, 

Or be a great composer of poems, 
But without purity of heart 

These accomplishments are valueless. 


EMBODIMENTS of Divine Aathma! From ancient times Bhaarath has been famous for its 
exposition of the four Purushaarthas (the four goals of life--Dharma, Artha, Kaama and 
Moksha) and the teachings of the Vedhas and Vedhaangas. The Vedhas embody the sublime 
truths experienced by the sages and the seers. 


Vedha is derived from the root 'vidh.' It means knowledge. The Vedha proclaims the truths, 
which are valid for all time, for all the three worlds, relating to the well-being of mankind and 
the divinisation of human life. The Vedhas taught the principles of daily life and how people 
should order their lives. Their approach is dualistic, being concerned about how men should 
achieve the four goals of life in the world. 


The Vedhas, which originally constituted a single body of hymns, were later divided into three 
sections: Rig-Vedha Yajur-Vedha and Saama-Vedha. The Yajur-Vedha later got subdivided into 
Shukla and Krishna Yajur-Vedha. Then came Atharvana-Vedha. 


The nine Vedhas 


The Vedhas are known by nine names. The first is Shruthi--that is, what is learnt by listening. 
This was necessary in ancient times when printing of books was unknown. The others are: 
Anushravana, Aamnaaya, Samaamnaaya, Chandhas, Adhyaasa, Gamana, Nigama, Aagama. 
Nigama and Aagama refer to the breathing process of the Divine. 


All the Vedhas relate to the affairs of the phenomenal world. Each Vedha has a Samhitha 
(collection) made up of Brahmanas, Aranyakas and Upanishaths. All these lay down the 
practices that should be observed in the stages of Grihastha (householder) and Vaanaprastha 
(hermit leading an ascetic life). The practices were intended to control the mind. They are not 
designed to enable one to have direct experience of God. 


It is Vedhaantha that deals with the question of Self-Realisation. For the spiritual journey, it is 
the guide-post and the destination. 


There are three essential things to be understood regarding Vedhaantha. First is Thaarakam. 
Second is Saankhya. Third is Amanaskam. 


Thaarakam calls for the understanding of four, principles: Kesari, Dhesari, Madhyama and 
Bhagavathi. Thaarakam calls for the investigation of five mudhras (ritualistic hand gestures) and 
after realising their spiritual insignificance, concentrate on Sath-Chith-Aanandha and merge the 
mind in the bliss of that experience. 


Saankhya envisages twenty five entities made up of the five sense organs, the five sheaths, the 
five life-breaths, the five elements, the mind, the body, the intellect, the inner motivator and the 
individual soul. This system of yoga calls, for an enquiry into the reality of each of these entities 
leading to the discovery that the Reality, Sath-Chith-Aanandha, is beyond all these and to 


recognise one's identity with this transcendental Aathma. This calls for an exploring of both the 
external world and the internal world of mind and spirit. 


Amanaskam means the realisation that the entire universe is nothing but Brahman, which is the 
only Reality. When there is this realisation of Brahman the one without a second--even the mind 
ceases to exist. It is only the operations of the mind that result in the perception of diversity in 
the universe. When oneness is experienced, there is no mind at all. All is Brahman in that state of 
consciousness. There is room only for Prema (Love) in this state. That love is Truth. 


Power of love experienced in the state of oneness 


The power of that love is illustrated by an episode in Bhaagavatham. Once Yashodha went in 
search of Krishna and could not find him anywhere. She met Raadha and asked her whether she 
had seen Krishna. Raadha closed her eyes and meditated intensely on Krishna. That very 
moment Krishna appeared there. Yashodha realised that the love of a devotee like Raadha for 
Krishna was infinitely greater than her own maternal love for him. 


This is how the Divine reveals Himself to devotees. Krishna appeared instantaneously before 
Raadha because of her pure, selfless love. If the heart is polluted or filled with pride, God cannot 
be experienced even if one tries for endless years. 


Yashodha confessed to Raadha that her devotion had removed the veil of ignorance and pride 
clouding her vision all along. She admitted that there were many who loved Krishna more than 
she did and requested Raadha to teach her how to love Krishna. Raadha told Yashodha that this 
love cannot be taught by others. Each one has to develop it by one's own pure and total devotion. 


After Krishna came home, Yashodha chided him for going to others houses to steal butter while 
refusing to eat what was available in plenty at home. The lesson to be drawn from Krishna's 
action is that He preferred to enjoy the devotion and love of His devotees rather than the 
maternal solicitude of Yashodha. 


How to realise the presence of Divine within 


This means that if you have pure, sacred, selfless love for God, the Divine will appear at that 
very instant. 


How do you realise the presence of the Divine within you? Your body is made up of physical 
constituents like iron, water, phosphorus and lead, the value of all of which totals barely a few 
rupees. And yet within the body there is a power which can make millions. Wherefrom does that 
power come? Does it come from the mother who gave birth to the child? No. Till the child in the 
womb is four months and nine days old, the foetus is just a round mass of jelly. Then a force of 
vibration enters the embryo. Wherefrom does that vibration come? That is the Brahma-Thathva 
(Brhaman principle). That is the Praana-Thathva (Life Principle). From that moment the child in 
the womb starts moving. Simultaneously the Brahman Principle enters the foetus. The 
combination of the two in the body is Thaarakam. This is one of the secret doctrines of 
Vedhaantha. This process is treated as a human phenomenon. It is not something human. It is a 
manifestation of Brahman. 


When I speak through the mike you are able to hear me. But without the current the mike cannot 
function. The mike is matter. The current is energy. Their combination enables my voice to reach 
all of you. 


Likewise, the coming together of Brahman and Maaya results in emergence of the Brihath- 
Svaruupa (the cosmic form of the Lord). Brihath-Svaruupa is the all-pervading energy. 


How to realise the Self 


You must realise that whatever scriptures one may master or whatever power and wealth one 
many acquire, without love one cannot achieve liberation. All .of you are looking at the external 
world. Turn your vision inward. The external vision is useless. It is when you look inward that 
you will recognise your true form. The master of a house throws out all the useless things but 
safeguards what is most valuable inside an iron safe in the house. Each of you should realise 
what is most precious within you. The three processes of Thaarakam, Saankhya and Amanaska 
are extremely precious spiritual gems. They are within you, but you are not aware of their 
existence, because you have not related yourself to the owner, the Master within you. That owner 
is the Paramaathma (Supreme self). How to relate yourself to the owner and cultivate his 
friendship? To enable the students to understand this I am explaining this truth of Vedhaantha in 
simple temps. 


Neutralise Maaya to reach the Paramaathma 


The master resides in the upper floor of the house. You are outside the gate, guarded by a mastiff 
called Maaya. How, then, are you to approach the master, the Paramaathma? You shout His 
name. He comes down, recognises you and takes you inside. Maaya does not trouble you. 


To neutralise Maaya, you have to prove your oneness with the Divine. This has been proclaimed 
in the Upanishathik saying: "Adhvaitha dharshanam Jnaanam" (The Supreme knowledge is the 
perception of the non-dual unity). This is the path of knowledge The other path is that of 
devotion. The Lord comes down to help you when you chant His name at all times. You may ask 
how this can be done when one has to attend to many other things everyday, including study of 
books etc. There is no room for this doubt. Consider every act of yours as an offering to God. Do 
what is appropriate for each action. All this is necessary till you secure God's grace. Thereafter, 
they are unnecessary. 


Awareness consists in the conscious remembrance of God on all occasions. 


In the presence of evil actions, the Godly man should not remain a silent spectator. He has to 
stand up for truth. Because of their failure to do so when the Kauravas were attempting to 
disrobe Dhraupadhi, Krishna accused Bheeshma. Dhrona and other Aachaaryas of being 
accomplices in Dhuryodhana's sinful act. Because of this grievous lapse on their part all these 
preceptors came to a sad end. 


Lord's name should be remembered with total faith 


Vedhaantha declares that three kinds of attachment--attachment to wealth, wife and children--are 
the cause of a great deal of sinful deeds. Hence, Krishna enjoined Arjuna to remember the Lord 
always and fight the battle. That will ensure his victory. 


However, the Lord's name should be remembered with total faith. This is what the students 
should bear in mind. Krishna sought to instill such faith in Arjuna through the Geetha. Whoever 
it may be, if he carries out Svaami's commands with total, unwavering faith, he will have direct 
vision of the Divine in a moment. This principle is taught by Saankhya Yoga. 


Vedhaantha in its essence is extremely simple. It is easier to grasp than butter. God is softer and 
sweeter than butter. To experience God you have to apply the heat of Jnaana-Agni (the fire of 
spiritual knowledge) to the heart filled with love. You must come near to God and become dear 
to Him through your love. When that happens desires disappear. 


Vedhaantha is replete with such profound truths expressed in short aphorisms. Dr. Jumsai (who 
had spoken earlier) said that all are children of God. In fact all are the Divine itself. Instead of 
being a lover, whose love is confined to a few, become love itself so that you can love all. This is 
the supreme truth proclaimed by Vedhaantha (Vedhic metaphysics). 


Discourse on 31 - 7-1996, in the Sai Kulwant Mandap. 


What exactly is the aim and purpose of all the sastras, the 
Bhaagavatam, the Puraanas, these discourses and the harikathas? 
It is to tell man the truth about himself. There is no plot to mislead 
you. That is not the desire of the Sages who wrote down these 
annals and their own experiences. You know only the present and 
what is happening before your eyes. You do not know that the 
present is related to the past and is preparing the course for the 
future. It is like the head-lines and titles of a film on the screen, as 
the letters gleam one after the other, you read them and pass on to 
the next that comes to view. Each new letter or word wipes out the 
one already before your eye, just as each birth wipes out the 
memory of the one already experienced. 


Baba 


32. Man's true kith and kin 


Truth is the mother; 

Wisdom is the father; 

Right conduct is the brother; 

Compassion is the friend; 

Peace is the spouse; 

Forgiveness is the son; 

These six alone are the Real relations for everyone. 


IN THIS vast phenomenal universe, we consider the body as the mother. But the body is 
perishable by the very name given to it--Shareeram---that which decays. The bodies of the 
mother and the son are both impermanent. Hence for every human being the real mother is 
Truth--Sathyam Maathaa. Truth is that which remains unchanged for all time. Truth is eternal 
and changeless. Hence from ancient times the sages esteemed Truth as Divine. Truth, therefore, 
should be considered one's real mother. 


Pithaa jnaanam (Wisdom is the father). Is the one who fosters and protects your body the father? 
He is only a guardian. The true father is wisdom, which is Divine. The Upanishaths hailed Truth 
and Wisdom as Divine. 


Dharmo bhraatha (Righteousness is the brother). The uterine brothers who are elder or younger 
than one are not one's real brothers. From the worldly point of view they are one's brothers. But 
one's true brother is Dharma (Righteousness), which is Divine. 


Compassion is one's true friend 


Dhayaa Sakhaa (Compassion is the friend). People look upon associates with bodies as friends. 
This is not correct. One's true friend is Compassion. 


Shaantham Pathni (Peace is the spouse). One's true spouse is peace, without which no existence 
is possible. Peace is a shining ornament for man. It is Divine. 


Kshama puthrah (Forgiveness is the son). This is not obtained easily by everyone. Today, 
because of the influence of the Kali age, sons are more keen on getting at the properties of their 
parents than on rendering them service or looking after them. Shri Raama was a son who had 
such supreme regard for the honour and good name of the father that he willingly chose to 
go into exile to the forest and face all difficulties. Hence Raama is hailed as the very embodiment 
of Dharma Raamo vigrahavaan Dharmah. Such a son is verily the Divine. To have Kshama 
(forgiveness) as one's son is to possess the Divine. 


These six qualities are the right relations for every man. Human birth has been conferred on 
humanity to acquire these relationships. 


Today these basic human values have been forgotten. People remember what happened 
yesterday or today, but do not remember the great truths inherited from the past. With the result 
that man is plunged in misery and worry perpetually. 


Men have forgotten their ancient culture. They are lost in the transient values of modernism. 
Remembering this, you students should pledge yourselves to uphold human values. 


You should become "Lovers of the Aathma" 


What you should seek to acquire today are not scholarship and wealth. You must acquire the 
supreme quality of prema (love). The Vice-chancellor (in his speech earlier) said that you should 
prepare yourselves to become soldiers. You should become not "soldiers" but seekers of "soul- 
dears." You should become lovers Of the spirit. The term soldiers has a political tinge. But you 
should become "Lovers of the Aathma" Cultivate human values. Remember that you are born in 
Bhaarath, breathe the pure air of Bhaarath, live in Bhaarath and grow in Bhaarath. The denizens 
of Bhaarath have been described as Hindus. What is the meaning of Hindu? Anti Kumar said (in 
his speech earlier) that Hindus are those who have abjured Himsa (harming others). This is not 
correct. Hindu stands for the five following qualities. "H" for Humanity. "I" for Individuality. 
"N" for Nationality. "D" for Divinity and "U" for Unity. These embody the Hindu tradition. 


These five qualities are the Pancha-praanaas (five life-breaths). They are the Pancha-Thathvas 
(five vital principles). The ancient Bhaaratheeyas, who have drawn sustenance from these five 
values, have esteemed them as the Samskrithi (essence of their culture). 


Samskrithi means that which has been refined. To make a silver tumbler you have to subject a 
piece of silver to the process of melting, processing and shaping it into a tumbler. Only after the 
metal goes through all these processes can it become a tumbler. This applies to every object of 
utility. The raw material has to be processed before it can become a useful object. 


The four goals of human existence 


Men should consider, however, of what use is their ceaseless pursuit of material objects, 
forgetting God? All day long men everywhere are pursued by endless desires and worries. Only a 
proper culture can convert these desires and worries into purposeful actions. 


It is for this reason that the ancient sages placed before Bhaaratheeyas the four goals of human 
existence. Dharma (Right Conduct), Artha (the acquisition of material things), Kaama 
(satisfaction of desires) and Moksha (Liberation). 


Today, people have given up the first and last of these four goals--Dharma and Moksha--and are 
immersed only in the pursuit of Artha (wealth) and Kaama (sensory pleasures). What is 
necessary is to infuse Dharma (Righteousness) into the pursuit of Artha and Kaama. The 
acquisition of wealth and the enjoyment of sensory pleasures should be based on Dharma. The 
entire life should be founded on Righteousness. Only then wealth acquires real value. 


Human life is related to both Artha (material) and Paramaartha (spiritual) wealth. The 
combination of material wealth for daily life and spiritual wealth for achieving supreme bliss 
constitutes the meaning and goal of human life. 


These basic human values have been forgotten today and human life has been devalued. Today 
the price of everything has gone up inordinately. Even a broomstick is very costly. But the value 
of man has depreciated, because men no longer possess the qualities which a human being 
should have. 


Learn to speak sweetly and avoid excessive talk 


Human values are essential for man. They are the hall-mark of his humanness. These values 
should be manifested in daily life. Your words should demonstrate their sacredness. Your actions 
should sanctify these values. 


Oh Students! Pay heed to my words! 
Eschew harshness in speech. 
Excessive talk is harmful. 

Idle strolling is a bad habit. 

Let your light shine; 

Become lamps for others. 


The first thing students should learn is to speak sweetly and avoid excessive talk. They should 
avoid going from room to room like rats and cats. This is part of the culture they have to imbibe. 


In the culture of Bhaarath, there are three basic elements: Naithikam (Morality), Dhaarmikam 
(Righteousness) and Aadhyaathmikam (Spirituality). These are the threefold aspects of man. 


First, Naithikam (Morality). This is based on pure thoughts. When there is purity in thoughts, 
there is righteousness in speech. Out of righteousness ensues spirituality. There should be unity 
in thought, word and deed. 


Love is the force that binds person to person 


Whatever you may learn or do, the fundamental requisite for right living is love. Love promotes 
truth in speech. That speech should be both pleasing and wholesome as indicated in the Geetha 
"Sathyam Hitham preethikaram. " 


There is love in Jnaanam (wisdom). Without love wisdom is like bagasse after the sweet juice 
has been taken out of the sugarcane. 


The dharma should be rooted in love. Of what use is charity or an act of goodness without love 
in it? There is love in peace and in all other qualities. It is the undercurrent flowing through truth 
and other qualities. Without love, there can be no genuine relationship between different beings. 
Love alone can foster unity. Hence love and unity are essential for mankind. Unfortunately men 
have become morally blind without the two eyes of love and unity. 


Love is the force that binds person to person. Unfortunately today, though Bhaarath has achieved 
freedom, she is far from achieving unity. Let us have a look at the past. You know about 
Emperor Ashoka. The top of the Ashoka Pillar, with figures of four lions looking in the four 
directions, is independent India's national emblem. 


A lesson from Emperor Ashoka 


Emperor Ashoka had established a certain custom of giving presents to his feudatory Kings on 
the occasion of his birthday. Today is India's fiftieth Independence Day. On the occasion of 
Ashoka's fiftieth birthday, all the feudatory rulers had assembled in the capital. 


A ruler from the east submitted to the Emperor the following message: "Your Majesty! I have 
collected this time three, times as much revenue as in previous years and I am offering it to the 
Emperor's treasury." The Emperor appeared pleased with the offering and accepted it. 


Then came a ruler from the western region. He said: "Your Majesty! I have cut down as much as 
possible the public expenditure in my kingdom, reduced the salaries of public servants and have 
brought six times as much tribute as I used to give in earlier years." The Emperor requested the 
King to resume his seat. 


A ruler from the northern region made the following submission. "Oh Lord! I have been unable 
to bring any offering to your Majesty because of the failure of rains in my kingdom. Owing to 
the poor harvests I could not make any collections from my subjects." The Emperor expressed 
his approval and requested the king to resume his seat. 


Next came a ruler from the south. He informed the Emperor: "Your majesty! This year I have- 
had to raise the taxes, reduce the expenditure and put down unrest in different parts of the 
Kingdom and round up all the troublesome elements. As a result peace has been established all 
over the kingdom. This is the offering I am making to the Emperor." The King requested him to 
resume his seat. 


Then the ruler of Magadha rose from his seat and approached the Emperor: "Your Majesty! My 
sole concern is about the welfare of my people. I have used all the taxes collected from the 
people for establishing schools and hospitals for the people and to provide other amenities to 
them. I got wells dug for providing drinking water to the people. I got tanks to be dug for storing 
water. Without causing any hardship to the people, I spent all the money collected from them for 
their own benefit. All the people are happy. I did not reduce the emoluments of public officials. I 
allowed them to use the money collected from the people to be used for the benefit of the people, 
thereby encouraging them to discharge their responsibilities with zeal. Hence, I could bring to 
the Emperor only my love on this occasion. I offer the well-being of my kingdom to Your 
Majesty. My people are living in peace and plenty." 

Emperor Ashoka was supremely pleased on hearing these words. He .summoned his attendants 
and offered to the ruler of Magadha presents of the kind he had not offered to anyone before. 
Duty of rulers 


What is the significance of this episode? This means that rulers should be .concerned solely with 
the well-being of their people. They should seek to provide what is essential for the people. The 
king built choultries, constructed roads, set up schools, built hospitals for daily life. When these 
are provided there will be no discontent among the people. 


To ensure peace among the people, the sense of spiritual oneness should be developed, as 
declared in the Geetha: "Mamaathmaa Sarvabhuutha antharaathma" (I am the Indwelling Spirit 
in all beings). When this feeling prevails, there can be no room for any kind of differences and 
strife. If one sees the same spirit that is within him in all the others, how can he hate the others? 
If one sees his image in a mirror, will he hate it? Everyone loves his own self. 


What Svaami wrote as a boy 
In this context, I may recall a poem I wrote at the age of seven. It was as follows. 


To see your face in a mirror 


do you need anybody's help? 
Why do you need anyone's 

friendship for this purpose? 
To view the moon in the sky 

do you need a lamp? 
To look at the moon shining in the sky 

do you require any other source of light? 
To know your own Aathma 

why do you need a guru? 
The Aathma is your God, 

your Vishnu, Shiva and Brahma. 
One who has realised this, 

why does he need any preceptor? 


Therefore, everyone should realise that the same Universal Divine Spirit is the Indweller in every 
being. All are embodiments of the Divine. When this sacred feeling fills everyone there will be 
no room for conflict or chaos. 


Today people have forgotten this sacred truth. Hatred alone is ubiquitous. Envy is rampant. 
Selfishness prevails everywhere. Self-interest is predominant. Because of these evil tendencies, 
pure human relations have been undermined. 


The relationship which you should develop is that of spiritual oneness. "I and you are one." That 
is the truth you have to realise. Who is the "You"? It is also another "I." Everyone knows himself 
as "I." In the declaration, "I and you are one," "You" stands for God (who is in everyone). The 
first name of God is Aham ("I"). Then came 'Aum.' Every person, in every reference to himself, 
describes himself as "I" (Nenu in Thelugu). 


When a man declares that "I am a man," the reference to man is finite and impermanent. The "I" 
is permanent, everlasting. 


Brahman is infinite love 


Hence, the scriptures declare: "Sathvam Jnaanam Anantham Brahma." The Brahman is Truth. 
Wisdom and everlasting. The term Aham applies to Brahman. Hence the Mahaavaakya, "Aham 
Brahmaasmi." Brahma here is not a four-headed deity depicted in the films, it refers to the 
Universal, all encompassing Spirit. Brahman is infinite love. It is all pervading in its 
expansiveness. This means that there is no place in the cosmos where love is not present. 


This is illustrated by an incident in the Bhaagavatham. A gopika heard a knock at the door. She 
was in two minds whether she should open the door or not. Debating in her mind about this she 
realised that the one outside was the same as the one within her. "That being so, what does it 
matter whether the door is opened or closed?" 


The Brahman is the same effulgence shining within you and within everybody else. The gopika 
experienced the Divine as a cosmic mansion which had no exits and entrances. "When the Lord 
of the Universe is with- in me, where is the need for a door or a welcome?" (Bhagavaan sang 
with feeling a song expressing the dilemma of the Gopika and the delight that fills her 
mind when she realises her oneness with God). 


All is within us. The heart is the container of everything. It is the source of strength and of 
weakness. The pure-hearted man is full of courage. The man with a guilty heart is weak. 
Love is the source of strength. Get rid of all fear by developing love for God. Thereby the door 
of your heart opens and you experience Divine Bliss, which is symbolised by the term Kailaash, 
the abode of God. 


Students! Purify your hearts by the waters of love. Apply the cleansing powder of Shraddha 
(earnestness). The heart will shine like a star, "a diamond in the sky." Every student should be 
like a star, twinkling in the sky. 


Develop love and cherish concern for the welfare of the people. Realise the goal of union with 
God. (Bhagavaan explained the significance of Namaskaaram and how japa should be done). 
Redeem your lives by loving all and serving all. 


Discourse on 15-8-1996. 


33. God is the sole refuge 


The form of love is Brahman; 

Brahman is permeated with love; 

Love is bound to love alone; 

If one is filled with love 

He is eligible for union with God. 

Not from the heavens above, 

Nor from the netherworld, nor from the earth, 
But by the destruction of 

The knot of ignorance in the heart: 

One gets liberation, declares the Shruthi. 


EMBODIMENTS of love! Liberation will not drop from the sky. Nor can it come form the 
paathaala (nether world). Nor can it be found on the earth. Liberation can be attained only when 
ignorance is dispelled. In this vast universe every creature lives according to the law of its being. 
Man alone, who has the gift of this extremely precious human birth, is failing to realise the 
purpose of his existence and ignores his duties. 


Immersed in sensual mundane pleasures, man forgets his spiritual destiny. All scholarship is 
valueless without Self-realisation. Raavana, Bhasmaasura and Kamsa were not lacking in 
scholarship or even religious practices. But all these were related to the Pravritthi-maarga 
(externals) and not to the Nivritthi-maarga (cultivation of the Spirit inside). Hence their basic 
demonic qualities did not change. 


It is only when impure and unholy thoughts are expelled from the mind that sacred feelings will 
enter it. To experience lasting bliss the heart has to be sanctified by filling it with love. Through 
that love has to be secured Jnaana (the highest wisdom). 


The goal for youth 


The foremost goal modern youth should set before themselves is to sow the seeds of love, rear 
the plant of forbearance and distribute the fruits of peace to society through dedicated service. 


The secret of peace is not in the external world but is within each individual. He should realise 
that the whole universe is permeated by the Divine. Today the world is filled with strife. It is not 
possible to make a distinction between a human being and a demon. Man, who evolved from the 
animal, instead of proceeding towards Divinity, is regressing to animality. Man's primary duty is 
to uphold the human values of Truth, Righteousness, Peace and Love. Man today is enveloped in 
attachment and hatred. The moment he casts them off, he will realise his divinity. 


Students! You must realise that the spiritual path is easier than the academic studies you pursue. 
Education should serve to refine the heart, not fill the mind with useless lumber. 


(Bhagavaan sang two poems deprecating the preoccupation with jobs for filling the belly, 
forgetting the Supreme Lord.) 


The country today has lost all sense of ethical and spiritual values. The countryside is rampant 
with evil practices. Uncontrolled selfishness and insatiable desires are the root cause of the 
present evils. In the pursuit of worldly objects is there enduring happiness? Not at all. (Svaami 
sang stanzas from Bhaja Govindam to emphasize the point that youth, wealth and progeny are all 
ephemeral). Late in life, after going through all the experiences of family life, man even in his 
last years seeks a happiness that deludes him. Where is happiness to be found? The answer was 
given by Thyaagaraaja when he sang that happiness is not to be got through wealth but only 
through the worship of Shri Raama. 


The glory of sacrifice 


Worldly comforts cannot be adjured. But the spiritual goal should always be kept in mind. There 
should be a limit to the enjoyment of sensual pleasures. The money that is earned should be used 
for public good. Bhaaratheeya culture has always glorified the quality of renunciation. 
Immortality can be got only through sacrifice, declare the scriptures. 


Students should realise that God's love alone is totally selfless and boundless. Even the love of 
parents, wife or children is tainted by a tinge of selfishness. Dedicate all your actions to God. 
Surrender to God all your bad qualities. God will offer you what is good for you. 


How good are relations? 


In this context I would relate the story of a student who used to go to a preceptor's hermitage in a 
forest for his studies. 


The guru used to teach the student that there is no use in depending on one's mother, father, 
brothers, or relations or on wealth and property. All these are transient. Therefore he should be 
on his guard. 'Thasmaath Jaagratha! Jaagratha!" He also used to teach him that life is full of 
sorrow upto the very end and hence he should be always on the alert. The boy told the guru that 
this teaching might be all right for recluses like the guru, but was irrelevant for ordinary persons 
like himself. He told the guru: "My parents are exceptional, my wife is good, without me she 
will not take her food. All of them love me. How can I disown them?" 


The guru said, "I shall prove to you the truth of my teaching." He gave a pill to the student and 
said that after taking it he will become almost lifeless, but he will be conscious of what is 
happening around him though others will consider him dead. "Then you will know the truth." 


The lad returned home, took the pill and dropped dead (as it were). The mother came, called the 
father and started wailing over the death of the son. The wife came out on hearing her cries and 
seeing the husband's body started crying. "I am my father's only daughter. If my husband goes, 
what will happen to me?" Everyone wailing over the body cried: "What is to happen to me?" 
Other relatives also gathered and lamented on the death of a young man who was virtuous and 
spiritually oriented. 


At this stage, the preceptor came there. Everybody made way for him. The guru asked the 
mother, the father and the wife why they were wailing. They all mentioned the grievous loss of 
they had suffered in the death of the young man. "What will happen to me?" was the refrain of 
each of them. He asked the mother to fetch a glass of water. He dosed his eyes as if in prayer and 
then told them: "If anyone drinks this water, that person will die but the young man will be 
restored to life." He first offered the water to the wife as the one dearest to the young man. She 
said: "I am the only child of my parents. If I die they will collapse. Hence I cannot drink the 


water." The guru said: "Your husband will live. Why don't you give up your life?" She replied: 
"The dead man is no more in any case. Why should I die?" 


The guru next asked the mother. She said: "My daughter has come for confinement. She is 
helpless. And I have two more young daughters to be married. How can I leave them?" When the 
father was asked, he replied: "I am the head of the family. If I go only two ladies will be left in 
the house, my wife and my daughter-in-law. My wife will become a widow. With no male 
member in the house, they will be helpless. How can I give up my life?" All the three declined to 
drink the water. They went inside the house and drew up a master-plan. They came out and said: 
"Svaami! You are immensely compassionate. You have no other attachments. Please drink the 
water yourself and restore our son's life. We will build a samaadhi in marble for you." 


At that moment, the guru sprinkled the water on the young man's body. He got up. The guru 
asked him, “What did your wife say? And your mother and father?" He replied: "They all said, 
let me die." 


God's love alone is unselfish 


The guru observed: "The world is impermanent. Birth is a misery, old age is a misery. There is 
trouble with the wife. Entire life is miserable. Therefore, be careful!" says a Sanskrith sloka. 


As long as one is alive, all seem to love the body. This is also for purely selfish reasons. God 
alone is utterly selfless. Loving that God, you can lead your lives in the normal way. There is 
nothing wrong. Whatever you do, treat it as an offering to God. See God in everyone. Don't have 
ill will towards anyone. Do not have excessive attachment for anyone. Direct all attachments 
towards God. Love all. But do not rely on anyone except God. Realise the impermanence of the 
body and place your trust solely in God. Seek refuge in Him. 


The faith is what is most needed today in this Kali Age. It is the loss of faith that is responsible 
for all the strife and chaos in the country. 


Dear students! You are the victims of a purely secular education devoid of roots in spirituality. 
As often as possible, when you get the chance, meditate on God. That will ensure a good future 
for you. Earn the esteem of society by your service. 


Discourse on 16-8-1996. 


34. Man's debt to God 


Fear of Sin has vanished; 

Wicked deeds have become common; 
Devotion to the Lord is gone; 
Indescribable misdeeds 

Have enveloped the world. 

Oh man! Only the contemplation 

Of the name of Hari, which is 

The refuge of all renunciants, 


Will confer happiness on You. (Thelugu Poem) 


Devotion alone confers the Supreme gift; 
Devotion alone destroys the disease of mundane existence; 
Devotion alone stirs the yearning for the Divine; 


Devotion alone is the means of Liberation. (Sanskrith Poem) 


EMBODIMENTS of Love! To realise the Supreme, the path of devotion is the only royal road. It 
is the panacea for all worldly ailments and for the disease of birth and death. Devotion is the 
most effective means for awakening the spiritual urge. 


The Upanishaths are the great spiritual legacy of ancient Bhaarath. "Ishaavaasyam idham 
sarvam" (The entire cosmos is the dwelling place of the Lord) declares the Upanishath. If the full 
import of this one aphorism is understood and practised by Bhaaratheeyas, the country will be 
free from all difficulties. Any person who has true faith in this declaration will be free from all 
troubles. 


The Upanishaths declared: "Thath Thvam Asi" (Thou art That). This truth should get implanted 
in the hearts of devotees. Equally, the great saying, "Aham Brahmaasmi" should get enshrined in 
the hearts of all human beings. "Sarvam Khalu idham Brahma (Verily all this is Brahman). The 
Brahman permeates everything in the cosmos. 


Prayer is essential for developing love for God 


Man has to realise how much he owes to God who has provided so many things for his life and 
comfort. Prayer is the expression of man's gratitude to God. It is also the means of awakening an 
awareness of the eternal Divine within him. The Upanishaths beckon man to realise the bliss 
within him. Prayer is essential for developing love for God. 


The prayer should be heart-felt. Raavana worshipped Shiva but without giving up his demonic 
nature. Hence he could not get the grace of God. 


What pleases the Lord 


The Lord is pleased with even the simplest things offered with full devotion to Him. It is enough 
if the devotee offers his body, mind, heart and the joyous tears flowing from his eyes. 


Students should realise the supreme value of human birth. The indwelling spirit in every one is 
the same Divinity. Forms may be different but the Spirit in all is the same. It is pure, unchanging 
and timeless. It is ever blissful. It is nectarine. Everyone should recognise this Aathmik Principle. 


The body is like a chariot. It is essential for the journey of life. But you are the charioteer, not the 
chariot. The four Purushaarthas (Goals of life) are the four wheels of the chariot. 


Students! In driving the vehicle, you have to be mindful of the state of the road. You have to see 
how the body is used for various purposes in society according to the prevailing circumstances. 
You should know how to behave towards elders, teachers, parents and above all, how to love 
God. You should use your discrimination in the discharge of your duties. Only then you can 
make the journey of life smooth and safe. 


Look upon the body as a shrine in which the Dime is installed. Dedicate all actions to God. 


Today many are becoming slaves to wealth, power, position or name. Students should not 
become such slaves. They should be upholders of sacred ideals. "Help ever; hurt never." Let that 
be your motto. 


Discourse on I 7-8-1996. 


35. The Gospel of hard work 


SCIENCE and technology have advanced so much that man is able to explore space and dive 
into the deep ocean. But he has not learnt how to live like a human being on earth. It is more 
important for man to learn how to lead a good life on the earth than explore space. Man's life is 
based on the earth. 


Man's primary aim should be to recognise the unity that underlies the diversity in the 
phenomenal world. To break up what is one into many pieces is easy. But it is difficult to bring 
them together into a meaningful unit. It is in the unifying process that the utility of things can be 
understood. The role of both diversity and unity in life has to be properly understood. 


When a tailor has to stitch a bush coat out of a piece of cloth, he has first to cut it into various 
pieces and then stitch them together to make a bush coat. The scissors are used to cut the cloth. 
The needle is used to stitch the different pieces. Today human beings trend to behave like. the 
scissors rather than as the needle. With the result that all man's intelligence is being used to 
divide society rather than unify it. 


Beyond birth and death 


There is a family of three, father, mother and the son. When the father brought home his earnings 
the mother felt happy. Whenever he came home empty-handed the mother used to get angry. The 
son watched the alternation of happiness and sorrow in the home. Unable to bear the troubles at 
home, the father went to a temple of Kaali. He prayed: "Oh Dhevi! I cannot bear these troubles. I 
cannot live with my wife. Please see that her life is ended soon." "Be it so!" declared the 
Goddess. The wife died. 


Watching this, the son went to the Kaali temple. He prayed intensely to the Goddess. She 
appeared before him and asked what he wanted. "Please restore the life of my mother," he 
pleaded. "So be it!" declared the Goddess. 


The father desired the death of the mother. The son desired her revival. Their prayers revolved 
around death and life. Have such prayers any meaning? How much more sensible would it have 
been if they had prayed for the gift of goodness. The father surely could have asked the Goddess, 
"Oh Dhevi! Confer good sense on my wife." The prayers of the father and son only 
brought about death and birth. 


(Svaami sang the Bhaja Govindam song in which Aadhi Shankara deplores the human condition 
which is caught up in the cycle of birth and death and Govinda is the only redeemer). 


What folly is it to be caught up in the endless cycle of birth and death? What is the purpose of 
life? It is to live for some ideals. The Vice-Chancellor (who had spoken earlier) said that there is 
the practice of performing annual ceremonies for one's departed ancestors. The Vice-Chancellor 
said that while performing these ceremonies the young people should remember the departed 
ones with gratitude and love. The children should show their gratitude first and foremost to their 
parents because they owe their life and all that they enjoy to their parents. The anniversary of 
their passing should be remembered with grateful tears. 


Students should recognise the supreme importance of time. Most of them are wasting three- 
fourths of the time they have at their disposal. They indulge in useless gossip and scandal. 
Abusing others amounts to abusing God. 


Why borrow from others? 


Bhaarath would be a land of plenty if people worked hard instead of being lazy and idle. 
Bhaarath is well endowed with land, rivers and other natural resources. Bhaarath has become 
dependent on other nations because the people do not work hard enough. We are borrowing from 
so many countries. Why? Let us use our resources well. We can then easily feed our people. The 
people should work hard It is good for their health and happiness. 


People today waste a lot of time and energy on meaningless arguments and controversies. 


Students! Realise that what I think, say and do are in perfect harmony. Hence there is no loss of 
memory or weakness of any kind. Look at the young people in their teens. They have castor oil 
faces and look worn out. They should look happy and cheerful. 

A lesson from history 


Recall how a small nation like the British ruled over a vast country like India before we got our 
freedom. The British could do it because Indians betrayed the nation for selfish interests. 


Every student should realise his potential strength. All of it is derived from the Divine. (Svaami 
sang songs from Thyaagaraaja to point out the power of devotion to achieve the impossible). 


Students should cultivate moral values. It is the decline in moral values that is responsible for the 
deplorable state of the country. Three things are most essential today. Fear of sin, love of God 
and morality in society. 


Discourse in Sai Kulwant Mandap on 18-8-1996. 


Egoism is a thorny bush, which when planted and fostered, makes 
us suffer. It makes enemies even of close friends and does not 
allow men to work together. Grief follows ego like a shadow. 


Baba 


36. Shirdi Baba's first miracle 


SEEN physically Nature alone is perceived. But seen with the spiritual vision the entire universe 
is Bhagavaan alone. From the perspective of Prema (love) everything will appear Divine. 


A young man who had studied Aadhi Shankara's Philosophy, came to me and said: "Svaami! 
Shankara says' Brahma Sathyam: Jagath Mithya. Please let me know what is the truth and what 
is unreal." 


Svaami told him: "You simpleton! Leave it to Nature to demonstrate what is real and what is 
unreal. Concern yourself with knowing your own reality. There is no need for you to enquire into 
the nature of Prakrithi (the phenomenal universe). Do not argue." A man who is not aware of his 
own true nature, how is he competent to know about the reality or otherwise of the cosmos? 


A man regards his visible body as real and the invisible Spirit as unreal. He does not realise that 
the invisible is the cause of his pleasure and pain. "Let no one imagine that beauty, youth and 
vitality will last for ever. Old age is looming ahead and will bring in its train all miseries." 


Dheha and Dhehi 


There are two entities in man: the dheha (body) and the Dhehi (the Indwelling spirit). The body 
is governed by three factors: Vaatha (wind), Pittha (bile) and Kapha (phlegm). The wind factor 
is responsible for 80 types of diseases. The bile accounts for 82 kinds of ailments, phlegm is the 
cause of 224 types of maladies. In all, the three account for 386 types of diseases. Recognising 
the multitude of disease to which the body is prone, the sages of yore sought to give up 
attachment to the body, while taking care of it for essential purposes. 


Many of these diseases are insidious and hence may not be noticed in an apparently strong 
person. Disease lies hidden in almost every action of man from breathing to eating. The body by 
its nature is perishable. But the Dhehi (the Indwelling spirit) is undying. Through the 
impermanent body, the eternal spirit has to be experienced. Men are immersed in seeking the 
passing pleasures of the senses forgetting the lasting bliss to be derived from the spirit. People 
should realise that true happiness can be got only by union with God. 


Some people imagine that God bestows excessive grace on a few, appears to be indifferent 
towards some others, and totally to ignore some others. All these are only the aberrations of the 
people having such thoughts. For God all are the same. You can see your true image only in a 
glass covered on the rear with the mercury of love. Everyone says he has not experienced God, it 
is not God's fault. The feeling that God favours some and not others is born of jealousy. 


I would relate an episode from the boyhood years of Shirdi Baba. 
Shirdi Baba and Venkuusa 


When Shirdi Baba was about ten years of age, Patel took him to Venkuusa. Patel had a dream in 
which he was told: "Patel! You are not likely to live long. The boy whom you have brought up 
so far cannot be looked after by anyone. There is a person called Venkuusa in a certain place. 
You take the boy to him and leave him in his care." 


Venkuusa was giving spiritual lessons to a number of boys. When the young lad was being 
brought to him, Venkuusa had a premonition of his coming. He called the lad: "Aaoji! Aaoji 


(Come, Come). I have been waiting for you all these years." He spoke lovingly to the boy and 
asked him to go in and have his food. 


From then onwards, Venkuusa developed great affection for the boy. Seeing this, the other 
students felt envious and started talking about him among themselves. "How is it that the teacher 
is showing so much love for the new boy? We have been here for years. He has not shown us 
such Love." This was the way some of them spoke. Some others said: "He is lucky to have such 
love." Some others remarked, "perhaps our teacher expects some money from Patel, who is a 
wealthy man." 


Plan to kill Baba 


The attachment between Venkuusa and the young Baba grew steadily from day to day. One day 
both of them were going to a forest called Sikhaara. After they had gone, the other boys drew up 
a plan to do away with the young Baba. "Then Venkuusa will have greater liking for us," they 
thought. They went to the forest and took rest behind a hut. One of the bigger boys, according to 
the plan they had already made, took a big brick and hurled it towards Baba. Venkuusa had great 
love for Baba. Immediately on noticing the brick, Venkuusa stood in front of Baba and let the 
brick hit him. What was aimed at Baba struck Venkuusa. Blood was streaming from Venkuusa's 
head. 


Baba immediately tore a piece of cloth from his robe and bandaged Venkuusa's bleeding head. 
When Baba and Venkuusa were speaking about the wound caused to Venkuusa, some of the 
boys came rushing towards them bringing a dead body. That was the body of the boy who 
wanted to kill Baba. "Biter bit," says the proverb. (If you intend to harm others, you will be 
harming yourself). 


The boys cried: "Guruji! Forgive us" and fell at his feet. Venkuusa told them: "Children! I have 
grown old. This young lad is carrying on all the work I was doing. Love alone can protect you. 
When there is no love no one can save you." On hearing these words, the boys. fell at the feet of 
Baba and placed the dead body before him. Baba burst into laughter. Why did he laugh? Not 
because he felt that the boy who intended to kill him was dead. He knew that death could come 
at any time, in any place and in any situation. Even at the young age Baba had realised this truth 
relating to the body. Baba transcended time. Age did not matter to him. He was the Cosmic 
Person. 


He told the boys: "Today this boy has died. Your turn may come tomorrow. No one is immortal." 
The boys cried: "How can we explain this calamity to the parents?" 
Baba told them: "Tell the parents what actually happened." 


The boys realised that if they told the truth they would be put to shame. If they told what did not 
happen, they would be uttering falsehood. Recognising their dilemma, Baba asked them: "What 
is it you want now? 


"Please restore the life of this boy." Immediately Baba placed the head of the dead boy on his lap 
and passed his hand over it. The boy revived. This was Shirdi Baba's first miracle. 


Dust unto dust 


Students should realise that the body is made up of materials coming from the earth and will go 
back to the earth when life is extinct. The body is like a mud pot which serves its purpose for a 


time and when it is broken,it becomes in the course of time one with the mud from which it was 
made. A seed sown in the ground grows into a tree with branches, flowers and fruits. All the 
things in the tree have come out of the earth. Likewise the body is made up of the five elements. 
It must be used properly. 


The essence of Vedhaantha can be summed up in one sentence: "The Aathma in you is the same 
as the Divine." Only those who have this feeling can experience God. 


Discourse in the Sai Kulwant Mandap on 20-8-1996 when Bhagavaan narrated the 
circumstances in which Shirdi Baba, as a young lad of ten years, performed his first miracle by 
restoring to life a dead boy, who had intended to kill him. 


One's duty is to act; act well, act in fear of God: act within the 
bounds of morality; act in love; continue acting; the consequences 
will naturally follow as the fruit flows the flower. One need not 
worry or exult. Act enthusiastically, with faith, success is yours. 


Baba 


37. Jnaana and Bhakthi 


EVERYTHING in the cosmos is made up of the five basic elements, which are manifestations of 
the Divine. The Divine has no separate form. This truth is not realised by mankind. Avathaars 
come to dispel the ignorance of humanity. 


Avathaars do not come in unique form. The reason is all the creatures in the world carry out their 
specific functions. Animals, birds, insects, ants and mosquitoes do not deviate from their 
respective roles in leading their lives. But, man alone has forgotten his duties. Birds obey "reason 
and season." Man alone behaves without regard to "reason and season." Hence the Avathaar has 
to come in human form to reform man who has gone astray. Thus it is declared that “Dhaivam 
maannusharupena" (God comes in human form). If God comes in any other form, say, a bird, it 
will be driven away. Man will take no notice of it. If the Avathaar comes in the form of a 
buffalo, it will be driven away with a stick. 


There is nothing greater than devotion 


In this context, two points have to be noted. There were two brothers, Jnaanadheva and 
Bhakthidheva. Both were going on a journey. On the way, they felt thirsty. Bhakthidheva asked 
Jnaanadheva, "I am thirsty but I cannot see water anywhere." Jnaanadheva said: "Let us see 
whether there is any well nearby." After going some distance, they noticed an old well with 
water deep at the bottom. 


Jnaanadheva declared: "Jnaanaath-eva-thu-kaivalyam" (Through Wisdom anything can be 
accomplished). 


He immediately assumed the form of a bird, flew down to the water in the well, quenched his 
thirst and came up. Jnaanadheva had the ability to assume any form because of the supreme 
knowledge of the Self. 


Bhakthidheva could not get down into the well. He sat near the well and prayed to God with 
intense love. After sometime, the water in the well rose to the level of his feet. Noting the 
wetness of his feet, he opened his eyes and saw that the water in the well had overflowed. 


Jnaana requires a change in one's form. Bhakthi needs no such change. Intense loving devotion 
will suffice. What the devotee needs will come running to him. There is nothing greater than 
devotion. 


Bhakthidheva wrote a letter to Jnaanadheva. It was a blank piece of paper which he sent in a 
cover. When Jnaanadheva opened the letter, he found there was no writing on it. Jnaanadheva 
then started writing his reply in page after page. He could not come to the end of his writing. His 
entire life was spent on enquiry and investigation. There was no time for doing anything 
practical. The life of most scientists is spent this way: continuous experimentation, with no 
experience. This sort of endless pre-occupation with enquiry is of no use. Devotion is easier than 
Jnaana maarga (the path of Knowledge). Through devotion, constant chanting of the name and 
loving remembrance of God, anything can be accomplished. 


Never forget God 


Students! See that the love that is inherent in you is not diverted in wrong directions, in anti- 
social activities, or in ways opposed to the wishes of your parents. So far as love for God is 
concerned, you need not submit yourself to anyone. 


When you love God with all your heart, the bliss you experience is unexcelled. This was the 
experience of the Gopikas. This has been described as the fifth Purushaartha, the experience of 
union with God Paramab-hakthi---Supreme devotion. 


Students! Whatever you may do in life, never forget God. Whatever positions one may achieve, 
whether President or Prime Minister, if he forgets God he is nothing. Hero becomes zero if he 
forgets God. These officers come and go. You must never give up your faith in the supreme. 
That is the way to redeem human life. 


Discourse on 21-8-1996. 


38. The Lord and the devotee 


Why do you search for God hither and thither? 
Is He not present in your heart? 

Offer service and receive the love of God. 

This is the way to realise the Divine. 


STUDENTS! Humility is the hall-mark of education. Humility calls for actions free from egoism 
and self-importance. 


The inherent goodness in man is covered by the ashes of attachment and hatred. Remove the 
ashes and the goodness will manifest itself. 


There are three ways of recognising the Self. One is to consider yourself as the Dhehaathma. 
This is the dualism. The second is: "I am Jeevaathma." This is Vishishta-Adhvaitha (Qualified 
non-dualism). Aham Paramaathma (I am the Supreme Self). This is Adhvaitha (non-dualism). It 
will be seen that in all the three concepts, the common entity is Aathma. The Deham (body), 
Jeeva (Individual) and Param (the Absolute) are separate. All the three are present in the same 
person as is clear from the Gaayathri Manthra. Bhur-Bhuvas-Suvah represent Bhu (the body), 
Bhuvah (the Life-Force) and Suvah (the Aathma). The body is inert matter. The Life-Force 
animates the body and is vibrant in every cell. 


The power of the spirit is exemplified by the life of Kabeer. He was a poor weaver, who used to 
help the poor out of his earnings. While plying his loom, he constantly chanted the name of 
Raama. The clothes woven in such a devotional spirit were prized high. But he used to sell his 
cloth at fair prices and often gave it free to those who could not afford the cost. 


Greek devotees: Bhakthi 


In this context, I wish to refer to a current incident. Here are some 25 Greek devotees. They 
landed at Bangalore by plane. They strapped their baggage to their backs, carried water bottles in 
their hands and started walking all the way to Prashaanthi Nilayam. Such is their devotion! At 
every step they recited the manthra: "Om Shri Sathya Sai Baabaya Namah!" and reached 
Prashaanthi Nilayam. I went towards them and received them on arrival at the Mandhir. I asked 
them: "Do you feel pain in the legs?" They said: "Oh Lord! Not at all. We are ready to walk 
another ten miles if necessary, chanting all the way. If we had come by car, we could not have 
remembered the Lord's name. 


Kabeer was in the habit of uttering "Raam! Raam!" at each step as he walked. The greatness of 
his devotion spread to all parts of the country. A ruler of that time also came to know about it. 
Realising Kabeer's poverty and helplessness, the king sent various presents to Kabeer in a 
palanquin. Kabeer saw the palanquin nearing his house while returning from a bath in the river. 
Astonished at the sight, Kabeer asked the four bearers of the palanquin: "What is all this? In our 
house, there are only two of us. For whose sake did four of you bring the palanquin? Both of us 
are quite hale." Kabeer hinted that only a dead body is carried on the bier by four persons. 
"Please inform the king that we are quite well," said Kabeer. 


The planquin-bearers said: "We have brought in the palanquin clothes, provisions and other gifts 
from the king who sympathizes with your plight. The king has ordered us to offer them to you 
because he considers you anaatha (an orphan). 


How Kabeer delved into the meaning of Anaatha 


Kabeer said: "Oh! Did the king say so? But, I am not anathaa. Bhagavaan is my overlord. I. am 
not without a protecting master. Raama is the only one who is an anaatha--there is no Lord 
above Him. You better offer all these things to Raama." 


See how Kabeer has delved into the meaning of the word anaatha. No one in the world is an 
anaatha (without a master). God alone is anaatha, as there is no naatha (master) above Him. 
Everyone has a master. God alone has no one above Him. 


Some people come to Svaami and say: "Svaami! Don't make us anaatha. I used to tell them: "It 
is not you who are anaathas. | am the anaatha(Master-less). Never consider yourself anaatha 
(helpless). 


Many people feel miserable and forlorn because they do not understand the ways of God. To 
those who firmly believe in God, there can be nothing lacking. 


First of all, you have to get rid of attachment and hatred. Develop love. 
Bhagavaan's example for egolessness 


Get rid of ego and possessiveness Here is a small example. Bhagavaan sets the best ideal for you. 
How? You are all seated where you are. I Myself walk towards you, bending my back, stretching 
my hand, to receive your letters. If I had chosen to sit and ask you to come and hand over the 
letters, what would be wrong? Still, with no sense of ego, I am going to each of you, to set an 
example. This is Sai's ideal. 


So many who have come so far at such. expense, will they shrink from walking a few feet 
towards Svaami? But to demonstrate that I am free from ego, I am acting in this manner to teach 
a lesson to you. I have no feeling of attachment to any one to treat some as mine and others as 
not mine. All are mine and I am yours. Every student and devotee should recognise this truth. 
This is what the Geetha declares: "I am the indwelling spirit in all beings." 


You may ask: "Why, then, is God not visible? Why are some near to God and others remote?" 
God is not to blame. People are immersed in worldly concerns. 


Modern youth are all crazy over their games and pastimes. With the result that they sing 
ridiculous songs, indulge in silly games and revel in meaningless talk. They are not eager to take 
part in bhajans or interest themselves in devotional activities. Some listen to discourses with one 
ear and expel them out of the other. Very few listen and take to heart what they have learnt. 
Some merely repeat parrot-like what they have heard. 


Treat sensuous pleasures with contempt 


Unfortunately today there are no good teachers and very few earnestly interested speakers. 
Students must develop real interest in the teachings. They must convert all work into worship. 
(Svaami sang Thyaagaraaja's song to illustrate how the Lord should be worshipped as 
omnipresent). God does not judge anyone by his external appearance. This was the lesson which 
Ashtaavakra taught to the pandits at the court of king Janaka when they laughed on seeing the 


crooked body of Ashtaavakra. The latter laughed at them and told them: "I thought you were 
great scholars. I find you are only a set of cobblers. You judge a person by the skin on his body." 


Students should have firm faith in God and minimise their desires. You must treat with contempt 
sensuous pleasures. Whenever any worldly desires arise in the mind, treat them as garbage that 
should be thrown only. By this means, students will enter on the path of purity. Then the Divine 
will welcome you and fill you with bliss. There is no greater goal, no higher destiny. 


Discourse on 22-8-1996. 


39. The greatness of Bali and Prahlaadha 


EMBODIMENTS of Love! In this phenomenal world, physical relationships like parents, 
brothers, sisters, wife and children are natural. But in the spiritual context, man should develop 
relations which are permanent, sacred and transcendental. 


One's true relations are Sathyam (Truth) as mother, Jnaanam (Wisdom) as father, Dharmam 
(Righteousness) as brother, Dhaya (compassion) as friend, Shaanthi (Peace) as wife and Kshama 
(forgiveness) as son. The physical relations are temporary and bound to pass away. But the six 
great virtues are the true imperishable relations. 


The foremost duty of everyone is to make 
love of God flow towards all in creation. 
Every man lives not for his own sake 
but to render service to society. 
To forget concern for the body 
is the way to realise self-realisation. 
Of what use is human birth if you do not manifest 
unsullied love towards all beings? (Thelugu Poem.) 
Oneness with God 


Man performs a variety of spiritual exercises to achieve self-realisation and the bliss of oneness 
with the Divine. These include the nine forms of devotion. In these forms of worship God is 
regarded as mother, father, friend or master. The highest form of worship is to regard God and 
the individual as one. "You are I and I am you." This attitude flees man from bondage. 


Human beings are different in form and name. Oneness amongst them can be achieved only by a 
feeling of oneness in thought, by a recognition that the whole cosmos is permeated by the 
Divine. 

God is the cause, the world is the effect. In this marvellous universe, why is man unable to 


recognise his true nature? Divinity is present in every atom of the cosmos. You have to realise 
that you are that Divinity. 


This truth was declared by Prahlaadha long ago. Emperor Bali, whose return to the earth for one 
day in a year is celebrated today in the Onam festival, was the grandson of Prahlaadha. Bali 
belonged to a line of great renunciants. His father, Virochana was also known for his spirit of 
sacrifice. He regarded the welfare of his people as his own well-being. 


Mr. Wellington (who had spoken earlier) said that service to humanity is service to God. This 
principle was observed by Virochana. Emperor Bali also followed the same rule. 


Experiencing God by renouncing bad qualities 


Once several persons gathered round Buddha and asked him to teach them something about God 
as he had been pursuing the spiritual path for a long time. The Buddha remained silent. No one is 
competent to engage in discussions about God. God is in "Yes" and in "No." He is in Dharma 
and Adharma, in Truth and untruth. How can you have an argument over one who is 


omnipresent? It is a waste of time. (God is the very embodiment of Dharma, of Sathya and of 
Ahimsa (non-violence). Hence, Vedhaantha exhorted mankind: "Speak the Truth, follow 
Righteousness. 


Some persons gathered round Raamakrishna Paramahamsa and asked him: "Sir! Have you seen 
God?" Raamakrishna had a hearty laugh. He said: "Yes! I have seen God as I am seeing you. All 
are forms of God. However, your vision is different. You look at all persons as human beings. 
But all that you see is Divine. Why are you failing to see the Divine? You cry about your wife, 
your children, your wealth and your position. Have you ever cried for God in the same way? No. 
When you cry for God intensely, God will appear before you." Once you renounce you bad 
qualities you will experience God. 


When the Lord as Vaamana, was approaching Emperor Bali's yaaga, the Emperor received him 
reverentially and asked him what he wanted. He said: "I want three feet of ground measured by 
my feet." Ball said: "Why come all the way to ask for just three feet of ground?" Vaamana 
declared: "That is all I want." The Emperor's preceptor, Shukraachaarya warned the Emperor 
against making the gift, as the seeker was no ordinary person. But the Emperor firmly declared 
that there is no greater sin than going back on one's promise. He kept his word. 


Emperor Ball stands forth as the great upholder of the plighted word. That is the reason why the 
people of Kerala worship him to this day and celebrate the festival of Onam in his memory. 


Love is the supreme value 


What is that is adored today? It is Truth. Without truth nothing has any value. Without the values 
of Truth, Righteousness, Peace and Love, all education and other attainments are useless. 


Love is the supreme value. It is not mundane love, but Divine love that is precious. That Divine 
love encompasses every other form of attachment to friends and others. Cultivate the enduring 
friendship of God. 


Emperor Ball was prepared to offer everything, including himself, to God. That is his greatness. 
It is not the gift of mere three feet of land. He offered himself to the Lord. "I am offering all that 
is mine, my family and wealth, and myself, keeping nothing for myself. Save me, Oh lord, who 
has sought refuge in you," says a Sanskrith shloka. "The heart which you gave to me, I am 
offering to you. What else can I offer at your Lotus Feet?" says a Thelugu poem. This is the spirit 
in which Bali surrendered to the Lord. 


Prahlaadha's gift of his character to Indhra 


Many students do not know the full story of Prahlaadha (grandfather of Bali). If you have to 
name anyone for his highest character, it is Prahlaadha alone. 


Once, Indhra conquered Prahlaadha and enjoyed Swarga (the realm of the gods). Later 
Prahlaadha overcame Indhra and deprived him of Swarga. Indhra was forlorn and sought the 
advice of his high-priest for winning back his kingdom. The priest told him that Prahlaadha was 
performing a great yaaga called Vishvajith and Indhra should assume the form of a Brahmana 
and seek a gift from Prahlaadha. Prahlaadha will give whatever one seeks from him. Indhra went 
to Prahlaadha in the guise of a poor Brahmana. Prahlaadha welcomed him and asked him what 
he wanted. 


As advised earlier by his high-priest, he asked Prahlaadha to offer him Prahlaadha's Sheelam 
(character). Prahlaadha enquired of the Brahmana of what use was his character to the seeker. 


The Brahmana replied that there was no need to go into all that. He had expressed what he 
wanted in response to Prahlaadha's offer to give whatever anyone asked at the Vishvajith 
sacrifice. "Are you prepared to give or not?" Prahlaadha immediately gave what the Brahmana 
asked with due ceremony. 


Within a few minutes, an effulgent flame emerged from Prahlaadha. Seeing the effulgent form, 
he asked: "Who are you?" The effulgent figure prostrated before Prahlaadha and said: "I am your 
character. Hitherto I was in you. I fostered your name and fame. Now you have given me away 
as a gift. Hence I am leaving you." 


When character is lost everything is lost 


When character left Prahlaadha, shortly thereafter another beautiful effulgent form issued forth 
from Prahlaadha. Prahlaadha asked him: "Who are you, oh King?" The radiant figure replied 
"Prahlaadha! I am your Keerthi (Reputation). When character has left you, I have no place within 
you. Hitherto I was the servant of Character. When Character has left you, I have to follow suit." 


Prahlaadha was puzzled. Then came another beautiful radiant female form from Prahlaadha. 
Prahlaadha respectfully asked her: "Mother! Who are you?" "Prahlaadha! After the departure of 
Character and Reputation, I, namely Rajyalakshmi, (the goddess of royal prosperity) have no 
place within you." Indhra, who had come in the form of a Brahmana, took all the three with him. 


That very moment, Prahlaadha lost his kingdom. You can see from this how one's fame and 
prosperity are dependent on one's character. Character is a supremely Divine quality. Hence God 
is described as having six great attributes including Righteousness, infinite wealth, boundless 
prosperity, indescribable fame and unfathomable wisdom. 


Prahlaadha was the embodiment of character. After Indhra had taken away his character from 
Prahlaadha, the latter got married and had a son by name Virochana. 


You may realise from this episode what importance is attached to character in the spiritual 
process. This character should be offered only to God and none else. God is utterly selfless and 
therefore offering your character to God will mean no loss to you. 


In the relationship between the devotee and God, no other relationship should be allowed to 
prevail. Ball ignored the warning of his preceptor in carrying out his promise to Vaamana. 
Bharatha condemned his mother's action which resulted in his separation from Raama. 
Prahlaadha did not submit to his father when it was a question of his devotion to Naaraayana. 
Meera did not allow her husband's conduct to come in the way of her devotion to Krishna. 


Do not give up God 


Whatever may happen you should not give up God. God is the only unfailing protector. 
Abhimanyu obtained his mother's blessings before going into battle at a time when Arjuna was 
away and Krishna was not available for advice. But her blessings were of no avail when God's 
strength was not available. Abhimanyu died in the battle valiantly like a hero. 


All forms of strength, physical, material, manpower, etc., are of no use without Divine strength 
on your side. 


Divine support and Dharma (Righteousness) are the two things essential for success. Whatever 
spiritual exercise one may practise, one should concentrate on achieving union with the Divine 
as the primary aim. 


Discourse in Sai Kulwant Mandap on 27-8-1996. 


40. Krishna's life and message 


Sweeter than sugar, tastier than curds, 
Extremely sweeter than honey, 

Is the chanting of the Divine Name. 
Recite, oh mind, the Nectarine Name 
Of Shri Krishna for ever. 


EMBODIMENTS of love! It is easy to criticize or belittle the /ee/as or infinite potencies of God. 
But it is very difficult to comprehend the truth about the Divine. The omnipresent Divine is 
present both in Truth and untruth. He is present both in Dharma (righteousness) and Adharma 
(unrighteousness). He is present in good and evil. With regard to such an all-pervading Divine, 
how can anyone determine what is good and what is bad? 


From the earliest times men have been proclaiming what is Divine. That the Divine has a form 
and possesses innumerable auspicious qualities was declared from their experiences. 


The cosmos functions on the basis of three types of actions. Creation, sustenance and dissolution 
are the three processes. The truth of this phenomenon cannot be denied by anyone at any time or 
place, whether he is a Vedhaanthin or a scientist, an engineer or a man of the world. While this 
has enabled people to describe the Divine, it has not served to demonstrate God. But they were 
able to indicate the means by which one can experience God. 


Experiencing the power of the Divine 


A distant star like the Dhruva nakshathra (Pole Star) can be pointed to some one by reference to 
some nearby physical object like a tree. Likewise the Vedhas and Scriptures, while not 
demonstrating the Divine, have helped to indicate the path leading to the realisation of the 
Divine. 


The spectacle of a dense forest confers delight. The sight of all tall mountain excites wonder. 
Seeing the torrent in a river one rejoices. All these are evidences of the power of the Divine. 


The stars shine. The planets revolve. The sun blazes forth. The wind blows. All these are signs of 
the Divine at work. When you see the spark of a fire, you can infer the nature of fire. If you 
know the nature of a drop of water, you can understand the nature of Ganga. Likewise, if you 
understand the nature of the atom, you can understand the nature of the entire cosmos. 
Recognising this truth, the Upanishaths declared: "The Divine is subtler than the atom and vaster 
than the vastest." 


The human is indeed a manifestation of the Divine with numerous potencies. It is the Divine that 
shines effulgently in every human being. But, because of his attachment to the body, he is unable 
to develop attachment to the Aathma (Spirit). 


Recognising the omnipresence of the Divine in all things, the quest for Truth should be 
undertaken. What is the Truth? Where is it? How to search for that which is everywhere? A 
distinction must be made between an apparent fact and the unchanging Reality. In daily life the 
sun appears to "rise" and "set" everyday, but in reality these apparent phenomena are due to the 
movement of the earth round itself and round the sun. Likewise what is apparently true about 


you, as is inferred from external observation, is not the real you. It is the effulgent Divine within 
you. 


The spiritual quest involves the churning of the heart by meditation. The qualities like 
compassion emerge from the heart. The human heart, which should be an ocean of milk, has 
been turned into an ocean of brine now infested with creatures like hatred, lust and greed. 


Krishna's leelas 


The childhood episodes relating to Krishna have an esoteric meaning. For instance, when his 
mother, Yashodha, chided Krishna for eating mud (as alleged by Balaraama), Krishna replied: 
"Mother am I a child, or a silly brat or a crazy fool to eat mud?" In this way Krishna, even 
though he was a child, was affirming His divinity indirectly. The Divine teaches profound 
lessons to mankind in this indirect manner. God's actions should be understood not by the 
external events but by their inner meaning. Moreover, many changes in the ordinary ways of 
living are necessary to understand the ways of God. Aadhi Shankara indicated in the Bhaja 
Govindam song how even a brief experience of the Divine by a devotee fills him with ecstasy. 
This bliss can be got only through the Aathma. The experiences of the gopikas and gopaalas of 
Brindhaavan during Krishna's early years at Gokulam have been misunderstood and 
misinterpreted. Krishna was in the village for five years only. It is absurd to suggest that a five- 
year child behaved in an objectionable manner. After going to Mathura Krishna did not return to 
Repalle. 


Awareness of the Divine will confer bliss 


To ascribe anything improper to the pure and Divine life of Krishna is sheer blasphemy. The true 
nature of the Divine has to be fully understood. Divinity is the all-pervading Cosmic 
Consciousness present in all. The nature of this consciousness should be understood. It is chith, 
which illumines every object in creation. Chith illumines what exists and thereby makes it 
cognisable. Existence is sath. Cognisability is chith. The combination of sath and chith confers 
thrupthi (satisfaction derived from enjoying the object). This Aanandha is thus the very nature of 
every being. The Divine pervades everything inside and outside. Awareness of the Divine will 
confer bliss. But few are able to realise this. 


Once, an individual, unable to bear the difficulties in his family, left hearth and home. Later, 
after earning some money he set out to return to his house. A young son, who was in the house 
when the father left, was so grief-stricken over the father's absence that he died after sometime. 
Before reaching his village, he took shelter in a choultry during a storm. There he had a dream in 
which he saw himself as a king in a palace living with six princely sons. He was enjoying the 
dream. A peal of thunder woke him up. He wondered what had happened to all the beautiful 
things he had been enjoying so far. He realised that it was all a dream. There was no trace of the 
SIX Sons. 


The reality in both dream and waking states 


He reached his home in the morning. On seeing the husband, the wife broke into tears. On the 
one hand she was happy over the husband's return. On the other, she was filled with sorrow over 
the passing of her son. The father asked her: "Where is our son?" She replied that he passed 
away, unable to bear the separation from the father. The man was stupefied. He did not feel sad 
or happy. He stood transfixed like a statue. The wife asked: "How is it you are not moved by the 
loss of the son whom you loved so much? What is the reason?" 


He then related to his wife the remarkable dream he had experienced the previous night. In that 
dream his six sons had died. "Am I to grieve over the loss of those six sons or over the loss of 
this one son?. For whose sake should I weep? They were my children in the dream state. This 
son was my child in the waking state. What was present in both the state is the reality. All other 
things are transient." This realisation came to him. 


If people today wish to achieve spiritual bliss, they have to follow three principles: First, they 
must know what has to be known. Second, they must give up what has to be renounced. Third, 
they must reach the goal that has to be attained. By observing these three, bliss can be realised. 
What is it that has to be known? What is this world? How long will I live? We see many passing 
away. Coming and going are continually happening. When the transient nature of the physical 
world is understood, bliss will be realised. 


Next, what is it that you have to give up? The delusion under which what is unreal is considered 
real and what is real is treated as unreal. People consider that they are in the grip of Maaya and 
that they are caught up in misery. Misery has no limbs to hold you. It is you who are hugging 
misery. This is due to your ignorance. When you get rid of this ignorance you will experience 
bliss. 


We have to go back to our source 


What is the goal you have to reach? You have to go back to the source from which you came. 
You have come from the Aathma and you have to return to the Aathma. This is what the 
Upanishaths sought to convey when they declared: "Asatho maa sadhgarnaya" (Lead me from 
the unreal to the Real). Where there is truth, untruth exists as its shadow. 


"Thamaso maa jyothirgamaya" (Lead me from darkness to light). What is darkness and what is 
light? Light alone exists. Darkness is only the absence of light. Discovering the light leads to the 
elimination of darkness. 


"Mrithyor-maa Amritham gamaya" (Lead me from death to Immortality). Birth and death are 
incidental to the body alone. Your Self has neither birth nor death. What is born (the body) dies. 
Death relates to the body and not to the Aathma. The Aathma is eternal. It is the truth. You have 
to acquire this awareness to experience lasting bliss. To experience permanent bliss one has to 
develop firm faith in God. 


The distinction between Krishna and Raama 


Today we celebrate the birthday of Krishna. Where was he born? In a prison. What were his 
possessions? Nothing. Born in a prison, he was taken to the house of Nandha and then he went to 
Mathura. He owned nothing. But he became the greatest figure in the world. What does this 
show? Worldly possessions are not the secret of greatness. Krishna's greatness consisted in his 
permanent state of Aanandha (bliss). 


If you recognise the distinction, between Krishna and Raama, you will appreciate better the 
nature of Krishna. Krishna always smiled at the outset and carried out his task later. For Raama, 
the deed came first and then the smile. Krishna made women cry. Raama wept for the sake of 
women. Raama went into the battle only after-having a strong cause for it. Krishna first 
provoked the conflict and then determined its outcome. 


The Krishna principle revels in delight. The Raama principle is based on the concept of 
baadhyatha (obligation). 


The Raamaayana is intended to promote the reign of Truth and Righteousness on earth. The 
Krishna Avathaar was intended to give a perennial message to the world. He sought nothing for 
himself. He kept nothing for himself. He gave away everything to the people. He slayed his 
maternal uncle, Kamsa. He installed on the throne Kamsa's: father Ugrasena. He did not covet 
the Kingdom. He befriended the Paandavas, defeated the Kauravas and crowned Dharmaja as the 
emperor. He did not make himself king. He was a king without a crown. He was the king of 
kings. He had no kingdom of his own. But he ruled over the hearts of the millions. It is this 
profound truth that is proclaimed by the Krishna-thathva (Krishna principle). 


If you enquire deeply, you will find that every Avathaar has incarnated to convey a special 
message and carry out a particular mission. 


Krishna's divine power 


The gopikas used to complain to Yashodha about Krishna's pranks. But whatever Krishna said in 
fun or did as a prank was based on truth. Krishna never indulged in untruth even by way of a 
joke. But those who could not understand the inner meaning of His statements used to accuse 
him of lying. This kind of misunderstanding has been a disease in all yugas (ages). 


When a gopika complained to Yashodha that Krishna had entered the house of a cowherd at 
night and played some mischief, Krishna pleaded before his mother how he could have gone out 
anywhere when he was sleeping beside her. The truth was that Krishna was in both places 
because of His Divine power. Krishna displayed any number of such baffling miracles. 
(Bhagavaan sang a series of songs about the complaints of the gopikas to Yashodha against 
Krishna). Against each complaint Krishna had a convincing alibi. Indirectly Krishna was 
revealing His divinity. Krishna explained to His mother the ways of the Divine in a way she 
could understand. 


Krishna used to visit the houses of the cowherds and drink curds and milk. The symbolic 
meaning of this action is Krishna's preference for sathva, represented by the pure white curds 
and milk. 


Krishna explained to Yashodha the reason why he preferred the butter in their homes to the 
butter offered by Yashodha. The hearts of the gopikas were pure and filled with selfless devotion 
to Krishna. Their devotion was superior to the maternal affection of Yashodha, which bore a 
taint of selfishness. Krishna told Yashodha: "I am attracted to the hearts of those who are pure 
and selfless." 


Follow the footsteps of the Lord 


Krishna had always eluded the gopikas after playing his mischief. But once, out of compassion 
for them, he wanted to provide a clue by which they could trace him. One day they all lay in wait 
round their houses to catch Krishna. Krishna went into a house stealthily, broke a pot of milk and 
quietly hid himself. The gopikas found that he had broken the pot and tried to trace him. The 
milk white steps which he had left revealed to them his hide-out. Then, Krishna revealed to them 
the spiritual truth that if they cling to the feet of the Lord they realise Him. "Follow my footsteps 
and you shall find me," Krishna told the gopikas. 


In the Bhaagavatham, the lessons you learn are according to the state of your mind. To 
understand the glories of the Lord as related in the Bhaagavatham, you have to enjoy the /eelas 
(frolics) of Krishna and realise their inner meaning. For instance, the real meaning of the story 
about Krishna taking away the clothes of the gopikas while they were bathing is that to realise 


the Lord they have to abandon the attachment to the body, which is the vesture of the Spirit. 
These stories should not be treated in a spirit of levity or profanity. 


Krishna dedicated the flute to delight Raadha 


In the case of Raadha, Krishna churned her heart and gave here the nectar of Divine bliss. 
Raadha had no attachment to any of her kith and kin. (Svaami sang sweetly a song of Raadha 
expressing her grief over separation from Him). Krishna appeared before Raadha before she gave 
up her life and blessed her. God will give anything for the devotee including Himself. No one 
can equal Him in the sacrifice He will make for the sake of the devotees. Krishna asked Raadha 
what she wanted at the last moment of her life. Raadha said: "I don't want anything except to 
listen to the music of your flute once before I pass on.” "Sing, Oh Krishna, speak to me to fill my 
heart with bliss," sang Raadha. "Distill the essence of the Vedhas and make it flow into the 
eternal music of your flute, Oh Krishna." Krishna took out His flute and played on it and when 
Raadha closed her eyes, He threw it away. He never touched it again. He dedicated the flute to 
give delight to Raadha. 


Thus, all the mysteries of Krishna served to relieve the distress of the devotees. Krishna used all 
His powers to serve the devotees. When the purport of the Bhaagavatha stories is properly 
understood, one can realise the pussiance of the Lord. 


In the life of Meerabai, for instance, when the Raana's sister gave to Meera a cup of milk 
containing poison, Meera drank it as an offering to Krishna. The result was Krishna absorbed the 
poison and left the sweet milk alone for Meera. 


By making an offering of all that you eat to God before taking it, the food gets purified and 
sanctified. 


The gopikas were illiterate and totally innocent. But their love for Krishna was unalloyed and 
exclusive. Even while engaged in their daily activities, their thoughts were centred on Krishna. 
Hence they experienced indescribable joy. 


Proclaim the message of unity 


Devotees should cultivate unity, transcending all barriers of caste, creed and nationality. (Svaami 
then related the story of Suguna who was oblivious to her hand getting burnt because she saw the 
figure of Krishna in the flame of a lamp. Svaami sang a song expressing the delight of the 
gopikas on seeing Suguna in the state of Divine forgetfulness). 


Krishna's mystery and miracles are beyond words. He was all things to all people. He is the 
indweller in the heart of everyone. There is no room for religious differences. Students should 
resolve themselves to restore the pristine glory of Bhaarath by leading ideal lives. Proclaim the 
message of unity to the whole world. 


Before concluding My discourse, I would make an announcement to the students. In view of the 
ever-growing number of devotees coming to Prashaanthi Nilayam Svaami is not in a position to 
devote individual attention to students. Those who wish to get married and settle down in life, 
might happily do so and come to Bhagavaan for His blessings. Svaami will not perform any 
marriages in the Nilayam. But the Kalyana Mandapam can be used for marriages if they desired. 
Svaami will perform, however, mass marriages and mass Upanayanams. Svaami's grace and love 
will be available to you wherever you may be. You may get married, lead a worldly life as 
householders and serve the nation. 


Today is Gokulaashtami, the day celebrated as Krishna's birthday. But it is not this celebration 
that is important. What is important is the adherence to Krishna's teachings. Krishna is not 
different from His teachings. The Geetha is Krishna and Krishna is Geetha. 


Discourse in the Sai Kulwant Mandap on 4-9-1996. 


Develop Prema (Love) towards the Lord, the Parama-Prema 
(Highest Love) of which He is the embodiment. Never give room 
for doubts and hesitations, for questions, to test the Lord's Prema. 
Baba 


41. The power that draws devotees 


The unwise man thinks about the external world; 
The man of wisdom contemplates on Vishnu; 
The former becomes a worldy man; 

The other realises the Divine, 

Hearken! Oh valiant sons of Bhaarath. 


EMBODIMENTS of Love! Man, although he is inherently the embodiment of Sath-Chith- 
Aanandha (Being-Awareness and Bliss), unaware of this truth, seeks this bliss in the phenomenal 
world. This is because he considers the physical world as the ultimate reality and forgets his own 
true Divine nature. This is a mark of his Ajnaana (ignorance). When one's vision is turned 
Godward, this ignorance disappears. 


Many persons yearn for God, worship God or contemplate on God. God cannot be realised by 
any of these means. All these activities are based on separating themselves from God. What is 
needed is a sense of oneness. How is this to be obtained? When you cultivate the feeling: "I and 
you are one." This oneness is beyond the grasp of the mind and the senses. It is only the Buddhi 
(Intellect) that can experience what is beyond the senses. 


The message of Vedhaantha 


There is no need for penance or japa or other austerities to realise oneness with the Divine. Love 
alone is enough. This is the message of Vedhaantha. 


When Aadhi Shankara set out on a tour of the country to propagate Adhvaitha, he met Mandana 
Mishra, a great Vedhik scholar. They wanted to have a philosophical debate. They had to choose 
a judge to declare who had won in the debate. Aadhi Shankara, who was a thrikaalajnaani (one 
who knew the past, present and the future), chose Mandana Mishra's wife, Ubhaya-bhaarathi, as 
the judge. She was a lady who could rise above personal attachments. The debate was held and 
Ubhaya-bhaarathi adjudged in favour of Shankara. She declared in unqualified terms that 
Mandana Mishra had lost in the debate. Immediately the verdict was declared, Mandana Mishra 
took to sanyaasa. Thereafter, Ubhaya-bhaarathi also, as Mandana Mishra's better half, followed 
suit and became a renunciant. 


Ubhaya-bhaarathi established an aashram of her own to which only women were admitted as 
disciples. One day she was going with some of her disciples to the river Ganga for a bath. On the 
way she saw an ochre-robed saadhu resting under a tree with his head on a Kamandalam (a 
vessel used for keeping water). He was a renunciant only in external vesture but not a whole- 
hearted renunciant. He kept the gourd water container under his head lest some one should take it 
away when he fell asleep. 


A lesson for the saadhu 


To teach the saadhu a lesson in genuine renunciation, Ubhaya-bhaarathi spoke loudly to her 
disciples: "Ladies! Look at the man's renunciation! He has not given up his attachment to his 
worthless Kamandalam and is concerned about its safety." On hearing her words, the byraagi 
(renunciant) got angry. When Ubhaya-bhaarathi was returning from the river, he ostentatiously 
cast off the gourd-bottle. Ubhayabhaarathi then exclaimed: "What a pity? I thought the saadhu 


was only a victim of Abhimaana (attachment). I find that he is also filled with Ahamkaara 
(egoism). If he was not so egoistic would he have thrown his Kamandalam at me?" She stood 
before the saadhu, and told him: "Your egoism is growing along with your attachment. This does 
not befit the robe you are wearing. You cannot be a real renunciant as long as you are filled with 
attachment and egoism. Give up attachment to the body and develop attachment to the Aathma" 
She taught this lesson in a quiet and convincing manner. 


In the sphere of wisdom, there are no distinctions of sex, or creed. Hearing Ubhaya-bhaarathi's 
words, the saadhu came running, fell at her feet and sought her forgiveness. He said: "Oh 
Mother! Because I had no one to teach me the truth in this manner, I was leading this double life. 
From now on, you are my guru. 


The Lord's grace 
In human life, many pursue different forms of spiritual exercises. 
Whatever ochre robe they may don, 
Whatever sacred garland they may wear, 
However fast they may roll the beads, 
Finally they have to come to Baba. 
His grace is essential 
For anyone of any eminence. 
Only His grace can redeem you. (Thelugu poem) 


So many are engaged in formal spiritual practices of various kinds. But of what use are they to 
win the grace of the Divine? Are you searching for the path that will help you to earn God's 
love? When you earnestly search within, you will get the answer. 


Among the nine forms of devotion, the foremost is the cultivation of the sakhya (friendship) of 
God. Friendship is followed by total surrender to the Divine. 


A great devotee once lamented that all his limbs and organs were utterly useless unless each of 
them was used to serve the Divine, to see the Divine or to listen to the glories of the Divine. The 
same feeling was expressed by saint Suurdhas when he said that the gift of eyesight was of no 
value if the eye did not see the beauteous form of the Dime. Those with ears who would not 
listen to the songs in praise of the lord might as well be as deaf. (Svaami sang a number of songs 
which deplored the pitiable plight of those who did not use their God-given organs for 
experiencing the Divine). True humanness consists in using all one's senses and limbs for sacred 
purposes and not misusing them in various ways. 


The man of faith need not worry about who will take care of him if he devotes all his time to 
thoughts of the Divine. The Lord who is the universal provider will take care of his devotees. 
This faith in the Lord was emphatically proclaimed by Purandharadhaasa in his songs. 


Recognise the miraculous powers of the Divine 


How many realise the wonders in God's creation? There is a chick inside the egg. A huge tree 
comes out of a small seed. A human being is born from a human being. Who is responsible for 
all this? Only the Divine will. Without recognising these miraculous powers of the Divine, 
people make much of human achievements. 


Look at what is happening here. What is it that makes people from Australia, Argentina and 
other countries come here? What is the power that draws them here? Without the power of the 
Divine, will they come here? Thyaagaraaja glorified the power of Raama in a song in which he 
extolled how Raama's Divine power enables Hanumaan to leap over the ocean and how it 
induced Lakshmana and Bharatha to worship Him. 


It is the same Divine magnetic power which is attracting people from all over the world to come 
to Bhagavaan. 


Once Raama desired to install a linga of Shiva while He was going to the south for the recovery 
of Seetha. He had asked Hanumaan to bring a linga from the Himaalaayas within a stipulated 
time for performing the installation. As Hanumaan did not come in time, Raama created a linga 
and performed the prathishta ceremony. Hanumaan, who adored Raama more than any other 
deity, threw away the linga nonchalantly. 


Later, while walking, Raama's foot hit against a stone in the ground. Raama appeared as if he 
had lost his balance. Lakshmana asked Raama what had happened. Raama said that it was a 
small stone. Hanumaan came forth and said that he would pull out the stone lest some one else 
should stumble on it. Raama was inwardly seeking to test Hanumaan and teach him a lesson. 


He remarked: "Hanumaan! You are capable of carrying mountains. Why do you bother about 
this small pebble? I shall walk more carefully. It is no fault of the pebble." Hanumaan, however, 
was determined to remove the pebble. It was a mark of his simian nature. He tried to remove the 
pebble with his left hand. He could not remove it. Later he used all his strength, but the pebble 
could not be removed. He was surprised and asked Raama: "Lord! What is this mystery?" Raama 
remarked: "Oh! It's nothing." He steeped forth and lifted the pebble with a toe and flung it afar. 
That pebble was in fact the linga which Hanumaan had cast away. 


An effulgence emerged from the linga and merged in Raama. And an effulgence from Raama 
entered the linga. Raama thereby wanted to demonstrate to Hanumaan that there was no 
difference between Him and Shiva. He taught that both Vishnu and Shiva should be adored alike. 


Today people have their own preferences regarding the deities they adore:Raama, Krishna, 
Shiva, Sai and so on. Why cherish such differences? God is one. Names and forms differ 
according to differences in taste. But the Divine is one alone. When you develop the feeling of 
spiritual oneness of all beings, you become one with the Divine. 


Students! Do not consider God as distant from you. Do not also entertain the crazy notion that if 
you worship Him, He will appear before you. Offer yourself to Him and in a moment you will 
experience Him within you. There is no need for any other severe penance. 


Truth is God. Wisdom is God. Everything is God. 
Discourse on 5-9-1996. 


The Jnaani says, "Sarvam Brahma mayam" (God is All); another, 
a Yogi, says all is Energy; a third, who is a Bhaktha says all is the 
play of Bhagavaan. Each according to his taste and according to 


his progress in spiritual saadhana. Do not blame or ridicule them, 
for they are all pilgrims trudging along the same road. 


Baba 


42. Ways of the Divine : Advent of Shankara 


LAY is one substance. But out of it a variety of products with different names and shapes can be 
made. Likewise, out of gold, a variety of ornaments can be made. The same white milk is got out 
of cows of different colours. The Supreme Self is one, but dwells in innumerable bodies, with 
different names and forms. 


If you examine the cosmic scene, you will find that out of the same basic substance a variety of 
objects with different forms are produced. For instance, out of a single seed, comes a tree with 
various branches, leaves, flowers, and fruits. These different things vary in form, name and use. 
But they have all come from one seed. 


"Ekoham bahusyaam" (The One chose to become the many).. There are three factors involved in 
this. For making a pot, a potter is the cause and the pot is the effect. The base for the production 
of the pot is clay. The pot may break but the clay remains as such. Out of the permanent 
substance, clay, the potter makes a pot. The fate of the pot does not affect the potter. The clay in 
the pot also remains as such. 


The analogy applies equally to gold, the goldsmith, and the jewels made from gold. 


On the same analogy, God is the changeless creator who creates the innumerable objects in 
creation which are subject to changes in names and forms. The relations between the three 
entities involved should be properly understood. The potter cannot make a pot without clay. No 
pot can be made if there is clay alone but no potter. Both potter and clay are necessary for 
making a pot. 


Five forms of the Lord 


The Creator is the nimitha-kaarana (instrumental cause of creation). The bodies are like the pots. 
They are used for various purposes and are a source of enjoyment. But, like the pots, the bodies 
are perishable. When their time is up, they fall away. But the Creator is permanent. The elements 
out of which the bodies were made remain. Only the bodies have gone. The bodies are capable of 
being put to good or bad uses. 


Divinity has five names. The first is Para-naamam. Second, Vyuha-naamam. Third, Vibhava- 
naamam. Fourth, Antharaathma-naamam and fifth, Archana-naamam The Divine functions in 
the cosmos in these five names. 


Para-naamam refers to the abode of the Supreme, Vaikunttha. Vaikunttha means that which is 
unchanging. There the Supreme Lord dwells under the name Para-naamam. 


No one can enter that abode of the Lord. The Lord dwells there as an effulgence. He oversees 
everything. But He is not visible to anyone and no one can see His form. 


The second is: Vyuwha-naamam. This name refers to the Lord who reclines on a serpent on the 
ocean of milk. The Lord in this form can be seen only by Dhevas (the various deities). 


Only those with special powers can see the Lord here. Ordinary beings cannot do so. But the 
Lord in His Vyuha form fulfils the desires of the: Dhevas. You are aware of the story of 
Hiranyakashipu. He was harassing the Dhevas in various ways. So, they went to the Lord's couch 
on the ocean of milk and prayed to Him. In answer to their prayers the Lord agreed to incarnate 
on earth. 


Various human forms in which Lord incarnates 


Third is: Vibhava-naamam. This refers to the various human forms in which the Lord incarnates 
on earth as Avathaars of Raama and Krishna to protect the good and punish the wicked and turn 
them to the righteous path. The incarnations that are adored as the ten Avathaars belong to this 
category of Vibhava-naamam. In this form, the Lord manifests the relationship between God and 
the devotees. 


The fourth is: Antharaathma-naamam. In this form, the Lord pervades every part of a human 
being as an indwelling spirit. This indwelling spirit is Divine. 


The fifth is: Archana-naamam. This refers to the form in which the Divine can be worshipped, 
praised and adored for securing His grace. 


Man through the aeons 


Avathaars of the Lord in these different forms have been manifesting themselves for aeons and 
aeons. This may be quite astonishing to children of today. For instance, when they hear about the 
state of things in the Kritha Yuga they will feel that they are amazing and incredible. Human 
beings in that age used to live for hundreds of years. Moreover, their bodies were not as small as 
in this age. They were gigantic figures, with arms as long as six feet. What kind of life did they 
lead? In the Kritha Yuga, life remained in the body as long as the bones were intact. All other 
parts of the body may disintegrate, but life remained in the skeleton. 


In Thretha Yuga, the height of human beings was less. The longevity was also less. Life 
remained as long as muscles and flesh remained in the body. 


In Dhvaapara Yuga, life remained as long as blood circulated in the body. As you may know, 
Bheeshma lay on a bed of arrows after he had been wounded in the Kurukshethra war. As long 
as blood remained in his body, he lived. His life lasted for 56 days. 


In the present Kali Yuga life lasts as long as there is food in the body. Without food man cannot 
survive. 


In Kritha and Thretha Yugas, men had intimate relationship with God. Food was not so 
important. In Dhvaapara Yuga, the head became important. 


In the Kritha and Thretha yugas, Dharma was all-important. Dharma muulam idham jagath (The 
cosmos is based on Dharma). In Dhvaapara Yuga, the decline started and wealth became all 
important. Dhana muulam idham jagath (The world is founded on wealth). The war between the 
Kauravas and the Paandavas was over property rights. 


In the Kali Yuga, neither Dharma nor Dhana (wealth) is as important as Dhaya (compassion). It 
is because of the absence of compassion that the world today is afflicted with so many troubles. 


The advent of Shankara 


In the early centuries of this Kali Age, Buddhism and Jainism mere predominant religions. At 
that time, a young child was born in a village called Kaaladi in Kerala to a couple, Shivaguru and 
Aryaamba. In those days, there used to be frequent wars between Kings of different territories. 
These wars generated hatred between peoples of different regions. The feeling of national unity 
was lost. With the loss of unity, all kinds of bad practices developed. Untruth, injustice, 
dishonesty and disreputable conduct became the order of the day. Nor was that all. Even the 
learned pandithhs, scholars and intellectuals of the time started interpreting the Vedhas in 


perverse ways. The very face of the scriptures was blackened. With the result that the people's 
faith in the Vedhas and scriptures was undermined. 


At such times, God or a divinely inspired saint or messiah makes His advent on earth to reform 
the wicked and restore the reign of Dharma. Such incarnations are known as Archana-naama 
forms of the Divine. In this Archana-naama form, the manifestations are regarded as Amsa- 
avthaars--manifestations of aspects of the Divine. 


The Vibhava avathaars (like Raama and Krishna) are Puurna-avathaars (total manifestations of 
the Divine). The Archana-avathaars are Amsa-avathaars (partial manifestations). Such 
avathaars incarnate from time to time, not only in India but in all countries. 


Jesus declared at first that He was "a messenger of God." Who are these messengers? They are 
of two kinds: Yamadhuutha and Avadhuutha. Yamadhuuthas are messengers who inflict harm 
on people. Avadhuuthas are messengers who protect. Jesus belonged to the second category. In 
due course, he recognised his own inner divinity. Then he declared: "I am the Son of God." 
Thereby he proclaimed his right to a share in all the qualities of God. When he acquired all the 
qualities of the Divine, he announced: "I and my Father are one." 


The same threefold progress can be seen in the pronouncements of Zoroaster. First, he declared: 
"I am in the light." Then he said: "The light is in me." Finally he declared: "I am the light." These 
declarations can be compared to the three systems of Indian philosophy Dualism, Qualified Non- 
dualism and Nondualism. In propagating the doctrine of Non-dualism, Shankara considered 
himself a servant of God. 


Shankara and his guru 


Shankara's father, Shivaguru, passed away when Shankara was barely three years old. In this 
context, it is interesting to note how the Divine operates. Ten days before his passing, Shivaguru 
had a vision of an effulgence. The effulgence conveyed a message to Shivaguru. "Perform the 
upanayanam of your son," was the message. Shivaguru hurriedly arranged to have the 
upanayanam performed for the three-year old child. The little boy started reciting the Gaayathri 
Manthra. 


After the passing of Shivaguru, the grief-stricken mother devoted herself to bringing up the little 
boy. She took him to a guru, who taught the boy all kinds of scriptural knowledge. By the time 
he was 16, Shankara had completed study of the four Vedhas and the six systems of philosophy. 
Normally even 50 years would not have sufficed for such study. Shankara was a prodigy. He 
could grasp anything at the first mention of the subject. Even the guru was astonished at the 
boy's genius. 


Meanwhile, the mother, was anxious to get the boy married and broached the subject with the 
guru. The boy was totally opposed to marriage. "I want to be a sanyaasi (renunciant)," he said. "I 
want to dedicate my body, mind and all else to God. They are all gifts of God. I have surrendered 
myself to God." 


How Shankara obtained sanyaasa 


The mother was in deep distress over the son's resolve. One day she was going to the river to 
fetch water. The young Shankara followed her earnestly pleading: "Mother! Permit me to take to 
sanyaasa." She did not agree. When she got into the river for her bath, Shankara jumped into the 
river and going down the river for a while, he raised one hand and shouted: "Mother, a crocodile 


has caught hold of me. At least now permit me to become a sanyaasi." The mother said: "If you 
can be saved from the crocodile by taking to sanyaasa, you better do so, so that you may live." 
Shankara then came out of the river and told his mother: "In the ocean of samsaara I was about 
to be drowned by a crocodile in the form of a wife. When you let me become a sanyaasi I was 
free from the hold of the crocodile. No one could marry a sanyaasi." 


Sanyaasa does not mean a mere change-in the colour of the robe. It is really a change in one's 
qualities. 


Shankara prostrated before his mother and took her leave to embark on his career as ascetic. At 
that time, the mother made Shankara take a pledge that he should come and see her at her last 
moments. 


Triumphal tour to all sacred shrines in the land 


Shankara set out on his wanderings, visiting all the sacred shrines in the land. All travel had to be 
done by foot. He went to every assemblage of scholars and vanquished them in debates. He 
propagated the Adhvaithik doctrine. He declared: "The bodies are different, the forms are 
different, but the inner Self is one alone. The Divine is present in all like sugarcane juice which 
is the same, regardless of the cane from which it is got." 


He had an encounter with Mandana Mishra, who was an upholder of the Karma siddhaantha (the 
doctrine of action). He defeated Mandana Mishra in the debate. 


In this manner, Shankara went all over the country, from Kashmir to Kanyaakumari, several 
times. He convinced the scholars of the truth of Nondualism. "Ekam eva Adhvitheeyam" (The 
Self is one only; there is no second). 


Aadhi Shankara was able to convince all the scholars about the truth of Adhvaitha. People are 
deluded by the multiplicity of names and forms. But the basis for all this diversity is the one 
Divine. Without the basis nothing can exist. This fact is recognised by all faiths. God is one and 
the goal is one. The doctrine of Adhvaitha is not easily understood. It has to be explained to the 
students in simple and intelligible terms. 


Shankara passed away at the early age of 32. But he completed the mission for which he had 
come. Before his passing, he collected five lingas and installed them in five different centres: 
Puuri, Dhvaaraka, Shringeri, Benares and Kaanchi. At Kaanchi he installed the Yoga Linga. One 
of the pontiffs was Suresha, who was none other than Mandana Mishra before he took to 
sanyaasa. 


By establishing these mutts and promoting the sense of spiritual oneness among the people, 
Aadhi Shankara promoted harmony in the country. Unfortunately some of his disciples started 
distorting Shankara's doctrines and attributing their own views to Shankara. Ultimately the 
disciples fell out and opposed each other's views. 


Similarly, among Christ's eleven disciples differences developed and they fell apart. Only 
Mathew remained true to Jesus. He propagated the gospel. Peter was the first among Jesus's 
disciples. But he denied Christ when the authorities questioned him. 


Raamaanuja who came after Shankara enunciated a modified version of Shankara's Non-dualism. 
Then came Madhvaachaarya, who propounded dualism. I would explain their doctrines in 
subsequent discourses. 


Discourse on 7-9-1996. 


43. The glorious saga of Shankara 


When the branch of a tree robs 
against another branch incessantly, 
Fire emerges from the branches. 
When you repeatedly chum buttermilk 
you get butter from which ghee is got. 
By engaging one's selfin a 
continuous process of enquiry 
One realises the Divinity within. (Thelugu Poem). 


BY perseverance anything can be accomplished, says a Thelugu proverb. The Geetha declares 
that by repeated practice one acquires the wisdom that ultimately leads to Thyaaga 
(renunciation). Every activity in life is based on practice. Likewise, to realise the Divine, 
constant practice is necessary. Mere repetition of the lord's name is not enough. Devotion should 
express itself in social service. Any service done with social well-being in mind will become 
service to God. 


"The one Self dwells in a myriad bodies like butter in milk, oil in thil seeds, fragrance in a 
flower, sweet juice in a fruit and fire in a faggot," says a Sanskrith sloka. This is the truth 
proclaimed by Vedhaantha. Today, modern youth, not realising this truth, are wasting their lives 
in every way. 


The doctrine of Adhvaitha 


Aadhi Shankara demonstrated that underlying all forms, names and qualities, there is one basic 
reality which alone is real and changeless. This is the doctrine of Adhvaitha (Non-dualism). Out 
of a mango seed comes a tree with branches, leaves, flowers and fruit each with distinct forms 
and uses. But all the myriad things that have come from the seed owe their existence to the seed 
from which the tree arose. This truth was declared by Krishna in the Geetha when He said: 
"Beejam maam sarvabhoothaanaam" (I am the seed that is the origin of all beings). All things in 
the universe are manifestations of the One Divine. 


Yesterday I related the story of how Aadhi Shankara took to sanyaasa at an early age and came 
to his guru, Govindha. The preceptor for Govindha was Gaudapaadha. Gaudapaadha 
distinguished the Riks in Rig-Vedha which proclaimed the oneness of the Divine. Shankara 
received this teaching from Govindha and mastered all the Vedhas and Shaasthras by his 
fourteenth year. Earnest pursuit of knowledge leads to total understanding (Jnaana). 


Shankara's debate with preceptor 


One day, to test Shankara's mastery of the scriptures Govindha engaged Shankara in a 
philosophical debate. It was a debate between the preceptor and the disciple. Shankara was full 
of humility and reverence for the guru Hence, before entering on the debate he prostrated before 
the preceptor and prayed to him for permission to argue with him. With the guru's sanction he 
began his argument with amazing skill and demolished, with due scriptural authority, the 
propositions of the preceptor and presented his views in accordance with Vedhik authorities with 


due regard to worldly understanding and showed how the MNivritthi (inward) path could be 
harmonized with the Pravritthi (external) path. 


Shankara was deeply perturbed over the conduct of great Vedhik scholars of those times who 
were concerned about making a money out of their scriptural scholarship than to gain spiritual 
wisdom from it. They forgot that knowledge should not be used for commercial purposes. Even 
today many students consider education as a means for earning a living. This is utterly wrong. 
One should work for a living. But knowledge should be sought for acquiring wisdom. Shankara 
sought to bring about a change in the use of scriptural knowledge. 


Of what use is the acquisition 
of all kinds of knowledge if 

One does not think of God and use his hands 
for the adoration of the Divine? 

All such knowledge is a sheer waste, 
says a Thelugu poem. 


Shankara was deeply distressed over the conduct of the scholars. His preceptor Govindha 
observed Shankara's sadness. Govindha's guru, Gaudapaadha, also felt unhappy over this state of 
things. Both of them were elated at the sublime feelings of the young Shankara. They both 
realised that Shankara was best qualified to use the sacred teachings of the Vedhas to combat the 
prevailing unrighteous and immoral tendencies in the society. They summoned Shankara-and 
told him "Child! There is no need for you to stay here any longer. Leave for Kaasi tomorrow. 
You must meet the great pandiths in Kaasi and propagate the doctrine to the whole world. 
Nobody else can carry out this mission." 


Students today should realise that they are the most powerful instruments for rectifying all the 
evils rampant in our society today. 


Shankara's journey to Kaasi 


With the permission of the two preceptors, Shankara set out for Kaasi. No modern means of 
transport were available in those days. Shankara had to walk all the way to Benares. The sixteen- 
year-old lad gathered his disciples and left for Kaasi. On the way he saw a pandith sitting under a 
tree and cramming the rules of grammar. At that moment, he began composing the famous 
hymn. "Bhaja Govindham." (Svaami recited the opening stanza from Bhaja Govindham). "You 
dull-witted fellow! Why do you immerse yourself in the rules of grammar? They will not save 
you when death knocks at the door. Instead, worship Govindha!" At the time of death nothing 
and nobody will follow the departing soul when it leaves the body. Only the remembrance of the 
name of the Lord will keep you company at all times. Shankara advised the pandith to chant the 
name of the Lord instead of conning the rules of grammar. 


After teaching him this lesson, Shankara proceeded to Kaasi with his disciples. Shankara's 
teachings were spreading far and wide. The of Benares arranged for a grand assembly of scholars 
in the holy city. 


Shankara and the scholars 


Many scholars had gathered there in all their regalia. Nothing was lacking in terms of ostentation 
at that assembly. Shankara entered in a simple way, wearing a dhothi covering upto his knees 
and a towel over his shoulder. On seeing him, the pandiths seemed to feel that it was all a joke. 
Some pandiths remarked: "He does not even wear a rudhraaksha maala (a garland of beads). 
Apandith should have an imposing figure. What is it that this stripling can tell us?" They 
addressed him thus: "We have come to know that you are proficient in all the Vedhas and 
Shaasthras, an authority on grammar and logic and a great exponent of the Adhvaitha doctrine." 


Shankara then sang the Bhaja Govindham songs, pointing out the transitory nature of material 
wealth and exhorting all to give up worldly desires. He declared that pandiths should be equal- 
minded and should give up the desire for wealth, which is the result of one's actions. "Give up 
this thirst for money. Develop the thirst for God," declared Shankara in strident terms. Then he 
gave a superb exposition of the metaphysics of Adhvaitha. 


All the pandiths and their disciples were astonished at the performance of the young Shankara. 
They realised that here was one who was not only a great teacher but one who practised what he 
taught. This unity in thought, word and deed is the mark of greatness. Shankara was the very 
embodiment of unity and purity in thought, speech and action. 


Many pandiths got up and plied Shankara with questions. He answered them all with perfect 
ease. He declared that Adhvaitha means oneness of the spirit and awareness of this oneness is 
true Jnaana (wisdom). Spiritual wisdom alone is true wisdom. Pandiths today, he declared, are 
not having this realisation. 


Exposition of Adhvaitha 


Shankara pointed out that though names and forms may be many, the Self is one only. That Self 
resides in everyone's heart. He exhorted the pandiths to purify their hearts and follow the dictates 
of the conscience. Shankara made it clear that creeds may vary but God is one. 


Shankara called upon the pandiths to be content with moderate incomes and not hanker after 
riches. Vast knowledge and petty desires go ill together. 


Students should realise how a young lad born in Kaaladi brought greatness to Kerala and 
Bhaarath. 


Students should cultivates human values like love, compassion, righteousness and truth and 
become truly human. Every student should strive to lead an ideal life like Shankara. 


In this context, I should like to mention that in Bhaja Govindham Shankara commends 
renunciation of all worldly attachments. People may feel that Svaami is telling the students these 
unworldly teachings. This does not worry me, because what I am saying is the Truth. Is 
renunciation acquired so easily?. No. People who have been listening for years have not changed 
to the slightest extent. To imagine that a single discourse is going to make a big change is 
fanciful. Only a fortunate few experience such transformation. If real renunciation is promoted in 
anyone, there can be no greater blessing than that. 


Nearness to God will inspire the spirit of renunciation even without one being conscious of it. In 
that renunciation lies fulfillment. And one's life is redeemed. 


Discourse in Sai Kulwant Mandap on 7-9-1996. 


Steady adherence to Truth, Renunciation, Genuine Prema (Love), 
Self-less service these are the essential components of character. 
Follow the dictates of your conscience. You can never be wrong. 


Baba 


44. Vedha and Vedhaantha 


One may have mastered the Vedhas 
Or be a versatile writer; 

But, without purity of mind, 

He will take to bad ways. 

Hearken, oh son of Bhaarath! 


To this good counsel. 


EMBODIMENTS of Love! Shankara propagated the view that the Vedhas uphold Dhvaitha 
(dualism) and Vedhaantha teaches Adhvaitha (non-dualism) on the basis of citations from the 
scriptural texts. The difference between the Vedhas and Vedhaantha is like the differences 
between various organs in the same body. The eyes, the ears, the nose, the arms and the feet are 
different parts of the body. The individual is a limb of society. Society is a limb of humanity. 
Humanity is a part of Nature or the phenomenal world. Nature is a limb of the Paramaathma 
(Supreme Self). In Kaasi (Vaaranaasi), at the assembly of scholars, debates raged over many 
philosophical issues. Amused at this spectacle, Shankara remarked: "Vaadhe Vaadhe Vardhathe 
Vairam" (Enmity grows with controversy). Continuous disputation only results in increasing 
bitterness among the disputants. Argumentation is not the proper method for setting spiritual 
issues. 


Dualism of the Vedhas 


Man is obliged to resolve problems in life. In daily existence man will never be free from worry. 
From birth to death man is confronted continuously with worries. The only way out of them is 
for people to develop love for God. Love is the sovereign remedy for all ills. 


The Vedhas, however, have not given sufficient importance to this love. Their emphasis is more 
on aasayam (aspiration) than on anubhavam (experience). There are innumerable Vedhik 
scholars who ceaselessly chant the Vedhas. All this is verbal and not concerned with active 
practice. This attitude was described by Shankara as Dhvaitha (dualism). All the Vedhik 
manthras were in the form of prayers for favours. (I want this, I want that). Desire is at the root 
of dualism. Desire arises because of the feeling that there is the "other." The one who desires and 
the object that is desired are two things apart from each other. True non-dualism is the extinction 
of this separation by the unifaction of the subject and the object. Dualism exists when the object 
that is desired, for instance, a kerchief, is distinct from the person who desires it. 


Non-dualism can only be experienced 


Non-dualism is a state of consciousness which can only be experienced and not described in 
words. In this regard, the Adhvaithin is like a dumb man who has enjoyed a delightful dinner but 
cannot describe the taste of the dishes he has consumed. There are two kinds of proof for the 
existence of anything. Prath yaksham (direct perception) and Paroksham (indirect proof). The 
bliss derived from the Adhvaithik consciousness is beyond words. It can only be experienced, but 
cannot be described or explained. In this matter, if indirect proof did not exist, direct perception 
would be out of the question. Unfortunately, today people attach value to direct perception alone 


and have scant regard for indirect evidence. This is not the right attitude. For instance, one sees a 
block of ice. It appears solid, but it is entirely made up of water, which is a liquid. Thus water, 
whose presence is inferred indirectly, is the basis for the solid block of ice that is seen by direct 
perception. Thus it can be realised that what is indirect is the basis for what is perceived directly. 


Likewise, for this visible phenomenal universe, the invisible is the Divine. Not recognising this 
truth, men go by the Vedhik conception of dualism instead of recognising the truth of the 
Vedhaanthik doctrine of non-dualism. 


Man spends his life immersed in worldly affairs. To point out to mankind the more vital inward 
path, Shankara dedicated his life. His preceptor, Gaudapaadha, gave Shankara all help and 
encouragement. Despite being young in years, Shankara showed great determination and 
strength of conviction. At the age of 16 he could convince the venerable pandiths of Kaasi about 
the validity of the Adhvaithik doctrine. 


What is Adhvaitha? The oneness of everything is Adhvaitha. The scriptures have declared that 
the cosmos is permeated by the Divine. It is the desire of devotees to worship the Divine under 
different forms and names that is the reason for the various creeds and sects. 


The form and the substance 


An affluent devotee, filled with dualistic feelings, adored the form of Krishna. He wished to offer 
worship regularly to an idol of Krishna. He got a gold idol of Krishna made by a goldsmith out 
of 20 coins. He got a golden cow made to match the idol. He got made a peacock and a golden 
cup to perform the abhishekam for the idol, both of the same weight as the idol. 


Everyday he used to perform the abhishekam and enjoy the worship of Krishna. But the tide of 
time brought in its wake a decline in his fortunes and he found himself nearly destitute. He 
collected all his golden articles of worship and took them to another rich man to sell them. Each 
of the four items was weighed and valued at Rs. 60,000 each. The old devotee could not bear to 
learn that his revered Krishna idol was valued at the same price as the cow, the peacock and the 
cup. He said that more should be paid for the Krishna idol. The intending purchaser said: "Sir, 
for you the Krishna form is more precious than the other. But for me only the weight matters, not 
the form." 


What is happening in the world today is that men are attaching value to the external forms and 
not to the Divine substance which is common to all of them. The five elements constituting every 
being are Divine. Apart from the five elements there is no sixth element. People imagine that. 
there is a sixth element and go after it. 


This crazy desire is the cause of much of man's misery. Desires are inescapable. But there should 
be a limit for them. In the story of Midaas, he prayed and got a boon that whatever he touched 
should turn into gold. He soon found that he could not even eat his food as it turned into gold at 
his touch. He prayed again to the good fairy to take back the boon she had given to him. 


It is evident from this story what will be the grave consequences of insatiable desires. Those who 
act upto Divine injunctions will be happy and prosperous. 


Shankara, therefore, warned mankind against the mad pursuit of wealth and exhorted everyone to 
reduce one's desires. (Svaami sang a Thelugu song. "One gets wealth according to his Kanna. 
Therefore be content what you get."). 


Control your desires 


Control your desires. Cultivate love of God. That love will confer on you everything according 
to your needs. There is no need for you to ask for anything from God. "Did He not give to 
Shabari what she needed without her asking? Did He not bless Jataayu with His grace?" 
Dhasharatha had prayed for so long that his son should perform the last rites for him. But he did 
not get it, while the bird Jataayu had the privilege of getting his last rites done at Raama's hands. 
Jataayu got liberation after receiving the saving drops of water form Raama. Shabari was eagerly 
waiting for the arrival of Raama and made all the arrangements to welcome him and offer him 
the sweetest fruit. Shabari's intense devotion to Raama got its reward. 


God confers His grace according to each one's deserts. The Divine is marked by Anugraha 
(Grace) and not Aagraha (anger). But devotees tend to judge the ways of God according to their 
own predilections. A man standing before a mirror will see his moods reflected in the mirror. 


It is impossible to escape from karma 


No one can escape from the consequences of his actions whatever efforts he may make to run 
away from them. (Svaami sang a song with the refrain, "Karma-dhaatha vasamaa, naanaa"--Is it 
possible to escape from Karma, oh man?) As are your actions, so are the reactions. 


In the cosmic context, nature is the mirror. God is the viewer. All that is reflected in nature is 
Divine. The One alone exists. The object and the image appear because of the presence of the 
mirror. When there is no mirror there is no image. This is the mystery relating to nature and the 
wonders of the Lord. The glories of the Lord are multifarious and marvellous beyond words. 


God's arithmetic is different from man's. For instance, when a mirror is placed before you, you 
have three entities. Yourself, the mirror and your image. When you take away the mirror, 
according to ordinary arithmetic, three minus one should be two. But when the mirror is removed 
only you remain. Three minus one becomes one! 


Many people think and many people say: "Money makes many many things." But I say: "Money 
makes many wrongs." 


Only when the distinction between the worldly point of view and the Divine point of view is 
understood that people will learn to make proper use of money. 


"You and I are one" 


This is the distinctive significance of Shankara's non-dualism. Shankara related the experiences 
of daily life to the doctrine of Ekathvam (spiritual oneness). The Divine is one, but is adored 
under different names and forms: Allah, Jesus, Buddha, Zoroaster, Raama, Hari or Hara. All are 
the same. Shankara did not approve of God being described as mother, father, etc. The 
relationship between God and man is oneness. "You and I are one." This is the essence of the 
Adhvaithik doctrine. This awareness of oneness can give infinite joy, according to Shankara. 


This experience does not come easily. One has to undertake intensive enquiry and also practise 
samskaaras (spiritual discipline). When the samskaaras lead to the refinement of the spirit, the 
experience of oneness with the Divine comes. How fortunate is the one who gets that experience! 
None can be more fortunate. 


The one who gets this experience is the Lord of the universe. As the Master of the Self he is the 
Lord of the Cosmos. This Aathma is present in every cell of the human body. When this 


nectarine truth is realised, man will not seek the ephemeral. Everyone should therefore seek the 
nectar, of enduring Aathmik bliss. 


Shankara made all endeavours to propagate the Adhvaithik message to the entire country and to 
every person whether he was a king or a commoner, scholar or ignoramus. 


Pledge to the mother 


Shankara had given a pledge to his mother that he would, reach her in the last moments and 
perform the last rites for her. Being a pure and high-souled being, he was determined to keep his 
word. For the pure-hearted the plighted word is bound to be kept. Moreover, whatever they say 
will happen. 


The Divine chooses the time and the situation for showering H.is grace and conveying His 
message. In the ease of Arjuna, the Kurukshethra war was the right moment for Krishna to test 
Arjuna's total faith in Krishna and his deservedness for receiving the message of the Geetha. 


Discourse in Sai Kulwant Mandap on 8-9-1996. 


The true strength can be acquired only through Love. All other 
efforts are of no avail. Thus we should seek from God only the 
strength of LOVE. 


Baba 


45. Shankara's call to youth 


What does it matter 

If the petty-minded 

Slight noble souls? 

Does mighty elephant lose 

Its grandeur when dogs bark? 


EMBODIMENTS of the Divine Aathma! All objects in the world which you see display some 
kind of colour. We think that these colours are natural to those objects. It is not so. The colours 
are really a reflection of our own vision. The sky appears blue when we look at it. The ocean 
appears dark blue in colour. We say that the sky is blue, the ocean is blue. This is incorrect. 
Neither the sky nor the ocean is blue in colour. It is the vastness of space and the depths of the 
ocean which produce this impression of bluishness. When you take a handful of seawater and 
look at it you will find that it is colourless. It will not show the colour that you fancy. 


Likewise, good and evil depend on one's thoughts and feelings. The true colour of any object is 
not perceivable. Equally, the true form is not apparent. 


Electrical energy is generated from a hydroelectric power station. The electric current is not 
visible to us, though the different uses to which the energy is put are obvious. Likewise, all 
beings, all living creatures, emerge from the Aathmik Principle. But this Principle is not apparent. 
We can see the beings arising from this Principle and their behaviour, good and bad. 


A promise fulfilled 


After Shankara propagated his Adhvaithik doctrine from Kaasi, there was an assembly of great 
scholars in the holy city. Shankara, who was in that assembly, closed his eyes for a moment and 
experienced the vision of his mother in great distress. Immediately he dispersed the assembly 
and left for Kaaladi. He reached his mother in her last moments, as promised, administered 
thulasi water to her lips and discharged his duties to the mother. 


At that time, the people of Kaaladi did not view with approval the actions of Shankara, because 
in their view, one who had taken to sanyaasa, should not revert to the activities of a householder 
and perform rituals. Sanyaasa means giving up all desires. The view of the orthodox.pandiths 
was that once a person had taken to sanyaasa he should not perform the last rites for a mother or 
a father which are the obligations of a householder. 


To enable the students to understand the implications of this incident, I shall explain what 
sanyaasa means. Before one takes to sanyaasa, the Viraja Homa is performed which signifies 
that the person dies as it were and gives up all his previous worldly commitments and enters on a 
new life, assuming a new form and wearing a new robe. The old form is cast away and the 
former name is also given up. He gets a new name related to the ascetic order. The suffix 
Aanandha is tacked on the name, though few of them, experience Aanandha! After going 
through this ceremony, where is the place for mother or father? 


Svaami's visit to Hrishikesh 


In this context, I should like to recall an incident which happened when I was travelling with 
Burugula Raamakrishna Rao, the then Governor of Utthar Pradhesh. He was a good devotee and 


was proficient in a number of languages. He was a very intelligent person. He resolved to make 
the trip to Badhrinaath and Kedhaarnaath "in the company of the Lord Himself (Bhagavaan 
Baba)." On learning that Svaami was going to Badhrinaath, nearly 200 devotes joined 
Bhagavaan's group. The Raamakrishna Rao couple were very pure and pious people and every 
day they would take their food only after the 200 devotees with Svaami had taken their food. 
Such was their devotion! When the devotees sat for the meals, Raamakrishna Rao himself would 
serve water for all of them. He would not allow his A.D.C. or others to do this service. He used 
to declare-"I am a servant of Svaami, not a Governor." 


Raamakrishna Rao was previously Chief Minister of Aandhra Pradhesh at Hyderabad. When 
Svaami went there during that period, thousands of persons were lined up in a queue for 
dharshan of Svaami at Malakpet. The volunteers were hustling the devotees in the queue to save 
time. 


I should like the students to realise what a tender heart Raamakrishna Rao had. He joined the 
queue. The Inspector General of Police approached Raamakrishna Rao and appealed to him to 
come separately and not join in the queue. Raamakrishna Rao told him: "Politically I may be 
Chief Minister. Spiritually I am a cheap devotee! I am not such a great devotee." Such was the 
devotional spirit of Raamakrishna Rao! 


Svaami and Shivaanandha 


All of us reached Hrishikesh. Raamakrishna Rao had arranged for the stay of the entire party in a 
big guest house and nearby cottages. At that time, Shivaanandha and a group of his devotees 
came to the guest house and requested Svaami to visit Svaami Shivaanandha's aashram the next 
day, which happened to be Shivaanandha's seventieth birthday. Svaami remarked: "It is not 
Shivaanandha's birthday but Kuppusvaami's birthday. Before he assumed the name. 
Shivaanandha, as a renunciant, his name was Kuppusvaami. He was a doctor. That Kuppusvaami 
ceased to exist with the taking of Sanyaasa. He then adopted the name Shivaanandha. That was 
26 years ago. Hence the Svaami is only 26 years old as Shivaanandha. It is the 70th Birthday for 
Kuppusvaami and only the 26th Birthday for Shivaanandha!" Shivaanandha said: "Svaami! No 
one has told me this truth so far in this forceful manner." 


This body is 70 years old. People recognise the physical, but do not recognise the basis that 
sustains it. This truth can be understood only by Divine personalities like avathaars and not by 
others. From the moment of birth till the end of this body it will bear one form and one name. 


People who profess Adhvaitha, often remember their pre-sanyaasa life and continue to think of it 
while carrying on their life as renunciants. 


Practice of cremation in the backyard in Kerala 


Shankara was confronted with a difficult situation. No one in his village was willing to help him. 
He had to perform the obsequies for his mother. The local Nambuudhiri Brahmins declared that 
they could not touch the body. They felt that Shankara was going against scriptural injunctions. 


Utterly helpless, Shankara carried the body himself to the backyard of the house and cremated it. 
What Shankara did then is practised even today in Kaaladi. When any elders pass away, their 
bodies are cremated in the backyard of their houses. There is no separate cremation ground for 
them. 


When you go to Kerala you will find houses facing the street but the backyard will be open 
space. Anyone who goes there will have to take a purifactory bath. In this manner Shankara 
fulfilled the promise he gave to his mother. 


Shankara then left for Kaasi. He was deeply pained at the attitude displayed towards him by the 
people of Kaaladi. Shankara was walking all the way to Kaasi, with just a stick in his hand and 
an oil torch to light his way at night. 


Advice to the young 


Looking at young men and women going about on his way, Shankara remarked to his disciples 
that young people were more keen about sensuous pleasures than to enquire about the Aathma. It 
is a pity that people are attached to the body which is a container of many filthy objects. They are 
carried away by the external physical attractions of the body. It is a crying shame! What a pity 
that people should be so attached to this impermanent body! How long can youthhood last? 
Shankara then and there taught the people about the transitoriness of carnal pleasures. 


His message was a warning to youth to be very careful in the life they led. They should give up 
attachment to the body. In this context I would relate the story of a prince who wanted to marry a 
merchant's daughter for her beauty. The girl who was devoted to God and wished to remain 
single, devised a plan to rid the prince of his infatuations. She sent word that she would agree to 
marry the prince if he approved of her after a week. Meanwhile she took a series of purgatives, 
collected all the purgings in vessels and went to meet the prince. By that time she was so 
emaciated that all her youthful charm had gone. She told the prince that the beauty he saw in her 
was all contained in the vessels. The prince learnt the lesson and decided also to remain single 
and devote himself to serve God. 


Shankara sought in this manner to turn the minds of the people away from sensual pleasures to 
thoughts of God. Shankara did not call upon all young men to take to sanyaasa. He exhorted 
them to do their duty and dedicate the body to the service of the Divine. He preached the truth, 
practised it and broadcast it to the world. 


Young people today have become slaves of the senses and are behaving like the lower animals. 


Shankara pointed out how worldly life is like the scenes on a screen. They come and go, but the 
screen remains. He declared: "Brahma Sathyam. Jagath mithya" (The Self is real. The world is 
illusory). Shankara also declared: "Sarvam Vishnumayam Jagath" (The Universe is permeated by 
God). When scholars pointed out the contradiction between the two statements, Shankara said: 
"Worldly life is illusory because it is continually coming and going." At the same time, this 
worldly life is lived like the moving scenes on a permanent screen. In this process the world and 
the Divine become one as it were like the oneness of the screen and the pictures on it. This is the 
basis for the statement: “Sarvam Vishnumayam Jagath." Hence, the Upanishathik declaration 
that the whole cosmos is dwelt in by God. 


Adhvaitha and worldly duties 


This was the non-dualism preached by Shankara. Consider the Divine as the fundamental basis 
and lead your worldly life recognising its impermanence. Without the Divine the cosmos has no 
existence. Hence man must recognise the one Divine Aathmik Principle that is present in all 
beings. It may be called by different names. The Eternal Divine is birthless and nameless. 


(Svaami described Shankara's successful debates with Mandana Mishra and his wife, Ubhaya- 
bhaarathi, both of whom took to sanyaasa thereafter. Shankara then went to Kashmir.) 


Shankara's atonement in Kashmir 


The ruler of Kashmir was a great patron of scholars. Shankara wanted to defeat them in debates. 
The moment Shankara entered Kashmir, the gates of the temple of Kanaka-dhurga closed. All 
the efforts to open them proved fruitless. All the pandiths went to the temple and prayed to the 
goddess. In answer to their prayers the Goddess spoke in an ethereal voice: "Shankara is a great 
Achaarya (preceptor). But he suffers from one taint. Only when the taint is removed will these 
doors open." Shankara then sang hymns in praise of Shiva. Shankara realised that he had 
committed a mistake in entering the dead body of the king of Kaasi to acquire the experience-of 
a householder for carrying on the debate with Ubhayabhaarathi, the wife of Mandana Mishra. To 
atone for this lapse he decided on a eleven days fast, without food or water, to perform a thapas. 
On the twelfth day, the doors of the temple opened of their own accord. This showed the power 
of Shankara's determination and penance. 


Krishnamurthy and Sandipan Chatterjee (who had spoken earlier) referred to Prema and called 
upon the students to cultivate love. What is the kind of love they should develop? Shankara has 
given the answer. The love should arise from the Aathma. True prayer should stem from the soul 
and not the body. That love is God. Live in love. 


Develop detachment 


Shankara continuously preached the doctrine of detachment to young people because he realised 
that attachments developed over many lives cannot be shed by listening to one or two speeches. 
There was a businessman who feared that his son might develop aversion to the world if he 
listened to the discourse of a pandith who was expounding the greatness of renunciation. The 
pandith assured the merchant that one day's talk was not going to reform his son, when a series 
of talks had no effect on the father. When there was need for constant purity in daily life, the 
efforts at spiritual cleansing should be continuous. This was the way Shankara was preaching to 
the young the philosophy of renunciation and detachment. Students should hold fast to God as 
the only true friend and supporter. When you have firm faith, the Divine will manifest Himself to 
you. This is the truth, the truth and nothing but the Truth. 


Today several pandiths expounded Adhvaitha, but few practise it. Adhvaitha should be lived, not 
merely repeated in words! Realise the truth: “Sathyam, Jnaanam, Anantham Brahma!" 


Discourse in Sai Kulwant Mandap on 9-9-1996. 


46. The conquest of attachment 


With what ingenuity does the tongue 
Manage to move about in the mouth 
Without getting caught between the teeth! 
Man also should behave likewise 

To avoid the perils of life. 

Forget not these good words, Oh man! 


SHANKARA looked upon man's existence in the world as that of an actor on the stage, who 
plays his part, by being born, growing and dying. 


Man's life is like a drop of water 

Shimmering without rest on a lotus leaf: 

It is filled with grief and sorrow. 

Give up attachment to this life 

And start worshipping Govindha, 

Oh man! lacking in wisdom. (Thelugu Poem). 


Human life is like a house filled with many rooms in the form of desires. Desires and 
disappointments are the order of the day. Doubts are rampant. Man is racked by fears. Fear 
haunts him wherever he goes or remains. He is caught up in a maze of troubles. How is he to 
escape from it? Even the happiness which he seems to derive from life is coupled with fear. 
There is no freedom from fear. How is it to be got? Where there is no attachment, there is no 
fear. How is this state to be got? By proximity to the Divine. 


Shankara exhorted mankind to banish fear by cultivating vairaagya (detachment) and journeying 
towards the Aathma (Self). It is through Self-Realisation that the true nature of fear is 
understood. Joy and sorrow, profit and loss, light an darkness are pairs of opposites in which the 
absence of one is the sign of its opposite. For both, the root cause is the Aathma. All things 
originate from the Aathma. Here is a flower. It has many petals. These petals appear distinct 
from each other. But all petals have emerged from the same single stem. The stem is the seat of 
the Aathma, from which the petals have emanated. But we view the flower as a single object. 
The flower is one, but the petals are many. The petals have come out of the one stem. 


The ocean, waves and foam 


The analogy is applicable to the endless number of waves arising on the ocean. The waves are 
many and distinct. But they are of the same stuff as the ocean. From the waves arises the foam, 
which has the same properties as the waves and the ocean though different in form and name. 
These three are based on the ocean. The three represent the three kinds of proofs in logic 
Prathyaksha (direct perception), Paroksha (indirect evidence) and Anumaana (inference). This is 
the logical basis for Adhvaitha. It is termed Thriputhi--the three-in-one--the Aathmik principle. In 
the human, this three-in-one is found in the unity of the body, mind and Aathma. The body 


functions on the basis of the mind. The mind is based on the Aathma. The Aathma is the basis for 
everything. For humanness, the Aathma is the basis. This is the doctrine of Non-Dualism. 


Ignoring this truth and pursuing the myriad ephemeral objects of the phenomenal world, people 
ultimately come to a realisation of the Aathmik Principle. 


Siddhaartha's discovery 


After a long period Shuddhodhana had a son, named Siddhaartha. The King kept Siddhaartha 
entirely within the palace so that the boy should have no knowledge of the sufferings in the 
world outside. Once Shuddhodhana introduced his son to a high-souled pandith who had come to 
the palace. The pandith was an oracle. He told the king: "Shuddhodhana! This lad will become a 
renunciant. Moreover he will become a great teacher of wisdom to the people." Shuddhodhana 
was alarmed on hearing this. 


Apprehending that the prince might develop Vairaagya (total detachment) if he went out, he kept 
the prince from going out. The king got him married when he reached his eighteenth year and 
crowned him Heir-Apparent. After his coronation as Yuvaraaja, Siddhaartha desired to go round 
the kingdom. There was no meaning in a ruler confining himself to his palace. He should know 
how the people lived. Hence he wanted to go round the country. Despite his apprehensions, the 
king agreed to the prince's request because he was now married and was unlikely to break away. 


Old age, disease and death 


Siddhaartha got into his chariot and set out on a tour of the capital. He saw an old woman, bent 
with age, trudging, on the road with a stick. He asked the charioteer: "Who is this strange 
creature moving on the road?" "Lord! When one grows old, the back is bent and one becomes 
infirm. This is an old woman." The prince asked: "Does this happen to everyone as a result of old 
age?" He replied: "It is inescapable. It is a law of Nature." 


The chariot went further. A sick man was sitting under a tree, coughing and wailing. The prince 
asked what the matter was with the man under the tree. The charioteer replied: "The human body 
is subject to a variety of ailments. That man is suffering from a severe ailment. No one can tell 
when anyone may be afflicted with disease." The prince took note of this. 


The chariot proceeded further. A dead body was being carried by four persons on a bier. The 
prince asked what it was that the four men were carrying. He replied: "It is a dead body." "What 
is a dead body?" asked the prince. The charioteer replied: "A dead body is without life." "What 
about us?" asked the prince. "We are Shivam (alive)." The prince asked: "Does everyone lose his 
life?" "Yes. Death is unavoidable, sometime or other." The prince heard this. He dropped the 
sword in his hand and returned to the palace. 


He did not eat that night. He went to bed, but could not sleep. By his side, his wife Yashodhara 
and his young son were sleeping. He looked at them intensely. The thought flashed in his mind: 
Sarvam duhkham (All is sorrow). Then he declared: "Sarvam Bhayam, Bhayam, Bhayam" (All is 
filled with fear). Next, he declared: "Sarvam anithyam, anithyam, anithyam" (Everything is 
transient, transient, transient). Then, he declared: "Sarvam shuunyam, shuunyam, shuunyam" (All 
is emptiness). Making these declarations, he left the palace. 


What great renunciation is this! We see any number of ailing persons, old people and dead 
bodies. How many get the feeling of renunciation after seeing these scenes? Only Siddhaartha 


got this feeling. To acquire such a control over the senses (as to give up all attachments) God's 
grace is necessary. 


The Jithendhriya kingdom 


Likewise, a prince went to a forest for hunting. Feeling tired and thirsty, he went to an aashram 
for rest and water to drink. The sage of the heritage asked the prince who he was and what 
brought him to the aashram. He said: "My name is Jithendhriya. I have come from the kingdom 
of Jithendhriya. I need some water." The sage offered water and asked him to sit. The sage 
wanted to find out whether the stranger was one who lived upto his name. (Jithendhriya means 
one who has conquered his senses). There are many persons who have names like Dharmaraju, 
but who belie their names. 


The sage asked the prince to hand over his royal clothes to him and wear an ascetic's robes 
himself. He took the prince's clothes, sprinkled some red powder on them and set out for the 
kingdom of Jithendhriya. At the palace gate, the sentry greeted the sage with reverence and 
asked him the object of his visit. The sage told them that the prince had been killed by a wild 
animal in the forest and that he had brought the prince's clothes. He asked them to convey this 
message to the king. The gatekeeper smiled and asked: "Who is free from death? Everyone that 
is born is bound to die. Birth and death go together." There is a practice in the railways to stamp 
on every railway wagon the date on which it has to be returned to the workshop for repair and 
repainting. Likewise everybody has a return date, though it is not visible. 


Indifference to death 


After hearing the sentry's words, the sage went in to meet the king himself. He told the king that 
his son had died and started crying. While the Sanyaasi was wailing, the king was having a 
laugh. The king said to him: "You are wearing the ochre robe. But your words are unbecoming 
of a renunciant. Why do you cry? This is no matter for grief or worry. At dusk hundreds of birds 
return to a tree for rest. The next morning they fly away. What is the relationship between the 
different birds? Likewise on the tree of my family, birds like wife and children rest for a while 
and depart. No .one can tell when and where any of them will leave. There is no cause for grief 
over their departure. It is a law of nature." The sage felt that the king was a heartless man. He 
then went to the queen, thinking that as a mother she would grieve over the death of her son. He 
told her: "Mother! Your son is dead. Here are his clothes." She too laughed. "Oh Saadhu! You 
are one who has renounced everything in the world. How can you entertain any concern for the 
ephemeral? Life is like a choultry where wayfarers stay for a while and then pass on. Each has 
his own time of departure. There is no need to grieve when any one leaves the world." 


Then the sage went to the prince's wife to find out whether she at least reacted differently. He 
broke the news about the death of her husband. She remarked: "When it rains, leaves fall away 
from a tree. When there is a flood, two pieces of wood come together for a while and separate 
again. In this ocean of life I am one such piece. The prince was another. We came together and 
we have gone apart. Why be surprised or lament over this? For all these, the cause is either 
attachment or possessiveness. The events themselves are not to be blamed. They are bound to 
happen. Why worry about them?" 


True detachment 


The sage realised that what the prince had said about the kingdom was all true. Yet, he wanted to 
test the prince himself. He returned to the hermitage and exclaimed before the prince: "Oh 


prince! Your kingdom has been overrun by invaders and your father and mother are kept as 
prisoners. You must leave immediately to recover the kingdom and release your parents. Get 
ready for war." 


The prince replied: "All that has happened is according to the Will of God. I did not bring that 
kingdom with me when I was born. Can I take it with me when I die? Why should I wage war to 
recover it? 


It is not my kingdom. My kingdom is the kingdom of the Aathma (Spirit). I am striving to realise 
it. That is the Kingdom of Heaven: That is what I seek to secure. It cannot be got by waging by 
war. It has to be won through love alone. I have no interest in other kingdoms." 


Be true to your role 


Then, the sanyaasi prostrated before the prince and confessed: "We don the robes of renunciants, 
but we have none of the qualities of true renunciants. How many householders are leading lives 
free from worldly attachments." 


I would relate another story, to show that whatever role one has to play in life, he should, be true 
to it. Once an actor appeared before the court of a king in the guise of Shankaraachaarya, 
declaring in strident terms the unreality of all human relationships and the impermanence of 
worldly possessions. The actor gave such a powerful exposition of Adhvaitha that the king 
directed his minister to present the actor with a plate of gold cons. But the Shankaraachaarya 
firmly refused to accept the present, saying that it would be unworthy of him to receive it in his 
role as Shankaraachaarya. The next day the same actor appeared in the role of a beautiful dancer: 
and performed an excellent dance before the king. The king was so much impressed with the 
dance that he directed the minister to present a plate of gold coins to the dancer. This time, the 
dancer declined to accept what was offered as too small a reward for his performance. The 
minister who realised that the dancer was the same person who had come as Shankara the 
previous day, then asked the actor what was the reason for his refusal to accept the plate of gold 
coins the previous day and to ask for more that day. The actor explained that he declined the 
previous offer in keeping with his role as renunciant. But, in the role of a dancer he was free to 
ask for more as it was natural for dancers to make as much money as they could. 


Shankara's call to humanity 


Shankaraachaarya called upon mankind to realise that as human beings they should cherish 
human values and practise them. Otherwise they would be betraying their true role in life. 
Shankara went round the country exhorting people to lead spiritual lives, shedding their animal 
qualities. His disciples imbibed the essence of Shankara's doctrines and became proficient in 
expounding Adhvaitha. For a time the Adhvaithic doctrine held sway all over Bhaarath. In course 
of time, however, the doctrine lost its hold. 


Students! 1 do not want you all to become sanyaasins and to give up everything. All that I want 
you to do is to carry on your duties, place your faith in God and realise that there is one 
fundamental Reality underlying all things. When you get this realisation, detachment will 
develop in you of its own accord. Detachment is not acquired by compulsion. As love of God 
grows, indifference to worldly things develops naturally. 


Discourse in Sai Kulwant Mandap on 10-9-1996. 


47. The Vinaayaka Principle 


EMBODIMENTS of Love! When you rub piece of sandalwood on the grindstone, the more you 
rub it, the greater the fragrance it emits. As you chew a piece of sugarcane, the more you chew 
the greater the sweet juice you get from it. As gold is heated more and more in the crucible, it 
acquires greater brilliance, getting rid of all impurities. A noble being displays his good qualities, 
however much he might be subjected to trials and tribulations. Thereby he stands out as an 
example to the world. (Svaami explained the purport of the opening Sanskrith stanza thus). 


God is the embodiment of bliss. He is eternal. Every living being originates from bliss, grows on 
bliss and merges in bliss. 


Among the myriad names of God, the foremost is Sath-Chith-Aanandha. Sath is that sacred thing 
which has no change in the three worlds and in the three categories of time (past, present and 
future). It is permanent. Chith means total awareness. When Sath and Chith become one, 
Aanandha (bliss) is realised. Hence, the Divine is described as Sath-Chit-Aanandha (Being- 
Awareness-Bliss). This principle is all-pervasive. It is present in all. The scriptures declare: 
"Sarvam-Vishnumayam Jagath" (The cosmos is permeated by the Divine). 


Failing to recognise this truth and treating the body as the only reality, man distances himself 
from bliss. Men identify themselves in terms of their professions or nationality. But all these are 
acquired characteristics and not innate to the persons. concerned. Essentially everyone is an 
embodiment of the Aathma (the Self). All the other aspects are transient. To identify yourself 
with the body is to mistake the dwelling for the indweller. When the truth is investigated in this 
manner, spirituality will become apparent. 


Aathmik principle resides in everyone 


The basis of the Adhvaithik doctrine is the spiritual oneness of the entire cosmos. It is the Spirit 
that is common to all beings. The Spirit is the source of all beings and their ultimate destination. 


The Aathmik principle resides in the heart of every being. Hence there is no need to go in search 
of God. You are the Divine. 


Today the nation is racked by divisions of all kinds based on religion, language and region. 
People should strive to realise the underlying unity of all religions, languages and regions. God is 
called by different names by people of different faiths. But all names signify the same God. All 
of them stress the unity that underlies the apparent diversity. 


Vedhaantha indicates the four stages in realisation of the Divine. Saalokya (perception of the 
Divine), Saameepya (proximity to the Divine), Saaroopya (experiencing the vision of the 
Divine) and Saayujya (merger in the Divine). The Divine as such has no form. Whatever the 
form in which the devotee worships the Divine, the Divine assumes that form for the devotee. 
However, all forms are His. "Sathyam, Shivam, Sundharam." Truth is God. Beauty is God. The 
unity of Truth, Goodness and Beauty is Sath-Chith-Aanandha. 


Emperor Janaka's transformation as a Raja-Yogi took place after he learnt from Yaajnavalkya 
that his present queen was in his previous birth his mother. This knowledge immediately made 
Janaka renounce everything and become a seeker of the Divine. While Yaajnavalkya hesitated to 
reply to the King's persistent query about his previous birth, once he revealed the truth, the king 
considered it a blessing and became a yogi. 


Worship of Vinaayaka 


Today we celebrate the birthday of Ganapathi. What is the significance of this term? Ga means 
Buddhi (the intellect). Na means Vijnaana (wisdom). Pathi means Master. Hence, Ganapathi is 
the master of the intellect and wisdom. Another meaning of the term is Master of the Ganas (the 
hosts of spirits). The name Vinaayaka means one who has no leader above him. 


Before we commence any activity we offer prayers to Vinaayaka so that the action may be 
successful without any impediments. Vinaayaka is worshipped not only in Bhaarath but in many 
other countries. The worship of Vinaayaka has been prevailing from the times of the Rig-Vedha. 


The Vinaayaka principle protects man from the various hurdles in life and ensures peace and 
security. Hence on every auspicious occasion Vinaayaka is worshipped. 


The devout offer worship to Vinaayaka with the well-known prayer beginning with the words, 
Shuklaambara-dharam (The one who wears a white garment). Vighneshvara is described as one 
who is white like the moon, who has four arms (two for giving worldly protection and two for 
spiritual benediction), who has an ever-pleasing countenance and to whom obeisance is offered 
for removing all obstacles. While the pious used this prayer in a devout spirit, the impious 
misused the words to distort the meaning and make it a prayer to a quadruped which is employed 
for carrying washed clothes. It is by such misinterpretation that some people have sullied the 
great culture of Bhaarath and undermined faith in God. 


Fill your hearts with love 


Students! Instead of filling your minds with scriptural knowledge it is enough if you fill your 
hearts with love. One ounce of practice is worth tons of spiritual knowledge. Today men should 
show their humanness in action and not their physical features. Students should be filled with 
idealism and serve the Motherland in a sacred spirit, with firm faith in God. 


The preciousness of human birth is indicated by the declaration in the Geetha that every human 
being is a spark of the Divine. Everyone should look Godward while attending to worldly duties. 
If you dedicate all actions to God there will be no obstacles. Good thoughts will lead to good 
actions which produce good results. 


Students! You should seek to earn the love of God and His grace. All other acquisitions are 
worthless and impermanent. 


Discourse in Sai Kulwant Mandap on 16-9-1996. 


Bhaarath has been blessed with many saints and sages and with 
many manifestations of Divinity in Human Form. A doubt may 
arise why such appearances take place in Bhaarath, more than in 
any other place, when the world is so big and we have humanity 
everywhere to be saved and guided. There is a reason for this, 
believe Me! Well, why should, in all India, Kolar alone have gold? 
Where there is a gold mine, there is the need for mining engineers 
and chemists who will extract it, separate it, purify it and distribute 
it to the various places where gold is in demand, is it not? 


Baba 


48. Who is dear to the Lord? 


EMBODIMENTS of Love! Human life is precious, noble and virtuous. It is a pity human beings 
do not realise this. The whole purpose and goal of human life is to know one's true nature. 
Forgetting one's true nature, man is caught up in worldly concerns and plunged in misery. The 
ancient sages indicated the. path to be pursued for the redemption of mankind. 


They commended nine forms of worship any one of which could confer bliss and redeem a man's 
life. 


To experience the proximity of the Divine the easiest path is Naama-smarana, remembering 
constantly the name of the Lord. Sage Vedha Vyaasa declared that in this Kali Yuga there is 
nothing greater than chanting the name of Hari for realising God. It is the easiest path for one 
and all, the scholar and illiterate, the rich and the poor. 


In the Geetha, the Lord has indicated the qualities which a devotee should possess to enable him 
to earn the love of the Lord. Among these qualities, Krishna declared Anapeksha (desirelessness) 
as important. Today there are few without desires of one kind or other. All sensual pleasures are 
ephemeral. But most people are content with them. Greater than the sensual is the transcendental 
path, Shreyo maarga, which confers lasting bliss. 


When one does any action as an offering to God, it gets sanctified. Such an act becomes 
anapeksha (desireless act). Every selfless act of devotion becomes an action free from the taint 
of desire. 


The second quality is Suchi (purity). What is required is both internal and external purity. God 
cares only for Chittha-shuddhi (internal purity of the mind). 


Faith and service 


The third quality is dhaksha. This means that the devotee should be steadfast and unwavering in 
any situation. With his mind firmly rooted in God, he should engage himself in service to others 
and perform actions in a spirit of detachment. Only such a devotee is eligible for God's love. He 
is unaffected by pleasure or pain, gain or loss or what happens in the mundane world. The fourth 
quality is Udhaaseenah indifference to external happenings. The fifth quality is freedom from 
egoism and possessiveness. One should get rid of the idea of doership and ownership and 
surrender everything to God. 


Today all spiritual exercises are ostensibly undertaken for realising God. But there is no need for 
undertaking them. Human birth itself is a mark of Divinity. What is essential is to recognise the 
indwelling Divinity and live on that basis. 


Where is God? Not in temples or pilgrim centres or other places. He dwells in the heart of 
everyone. To experience the Divinity within, one has to see the Divine in all others and render 
them service in that spirit. 


Worship of paadhukas 


Today we are celebrating the worship of paadhukas (sandals sanctified by the touch of the Lord's 
feet). Worship of paadhukas is not of recent origin. 


Even during the Kritha Yuga, the sages used to worship paadhukas, experience divine bliss and 
share it with others. By worshipping the Feet of the Lord, they achieved the goal of their 
penance. 


In the worship of Dakshinaamurthy, adoration of the sandals of the Lord as guru (preceptor) is 
considered important. Even Shankaraachaarya resorted to the worship of the Lord's Feet as 
essential. In a famous hymn, he extolled the Lord in many ways and declared that he was taking 
refuge in the Lord's feet (Shambhu). He declared that Shiva's feet were enshrined in his heart and 
not elsewhere. 


The glory of the Lord's feet is demonstrated by a significant episode in the Raamaayana. After 
Raama left for the forest, Bharatha came to him and pleaded earnestly with him to return to 
Ayodhya. Raama was equally determined not to return. Vasishta noticed the equal determination 
of the two brothers. The sage told Bharatha: "Raama has come to the forest to carry out the 
command of his father. It is not right on your part to ask him to change his mind. Let us take his 
paadhukas to Ayodhya. Those paadhukas will reign over the kingdom." Vasishta gave this 
timely advice and persuaded Bharatha to take Raama's sandals and install them on the throne in 
Ayodhya. 


These incidents show that the worship of the Lord's feet and of the Lord's sandals has a long 
antiquity. The sacredness of this worship was propagated to the world by Bhaarath from ancient 
times as part of its spiritual message to mankind. Indians today have largely forgotten this 
ancient practice. In those days it was the practice of the disciples, after the completion of their 
education at the guru's aashram, to take with them paadhukas of the guru to worship them on 
their return to their homes. But even the worship of paadhukas is an external activity. True 
devotion calls for the installation of the paadhukas in the heart. 


This means that starting with the external form of worship, we should in due course make it an 
internal exercise. 


Karma, Bhakthi and Jnaana 


All these are related to the Karma Maarga (path of Action). Beginning with the path of action, 
progressing towards the Bhakthi Maarga (path of devotion), one should ultimately achieve- 
Kaivalya (Self-realisation) by the Jnaana Maarga (the Path of Wisdom). "Jnaanaath eva thu 
Kaivalyam" (Realisation is only through Wisdom), declares the scripture. 


The entire life should not be spent on only worldly duties. One must progress spiritually from 
stage to stage. Karma-Upaasana-Jnaanam (Action-Devotion-Wisdom)--these are the three steps 
in Self-Realisation. 


Subramania Chettiar has been engaged in these devotional activities for a long time. Looking at 
his age, you can realise that physically he is not fit to undertake long journeys. But because of his 
intense devotion and strong faith in Bhagavaan he has been able to carry on this work. The 
Divine grace has been giving him all this abundant energy. 


So far as the worship of the paadhukas is concerned you need not bother about what others think. 
Every man should take up such sacred activity to get nearer to God. 


To get close to the Divine, you have to engage yourselves in activities which please the Divine. 
The supreme maxims of the Bhaaratheeya culture are: "Speak the Truth. Follow Righteousness." 
When you adhere to these two maxims, all your actions will be sacred. 


The Purushaarthas 


Of the four goals of human life prescribed by the scriptures, the first is Dharma (Righteousness). 
It is the feet in the human body. The entire body rests on the feet. Artha, the second goal, rests on 
the feet. Hence, the acquisition of wealth should be based on righteous means. The third goal is 
Kaama (desires). For the fulfillment of desires you need the Bhujabalam (strength of the arms). 
Both Kaama and Artha are based on Dharma. Moksha is the culmination of a life based on 
Dharma. 


Today people have forgotten Dharma and Moksha and are immersed only in Artha (acquisition 
of wealth) and Kaama (the pursuit of sensual desires). For the realisation of the goal of human 
existence, you have to rely on the feet, namely, Dharma, and the head, namely Moksha 
(Liberation). This is the meaning of the symbolic description of the Cosmic Person in the 
Vedhas. The face of the Cosmic Person symbolises the Brahmik Principle. The feet symbolise 
Dharma. Thus basing oneself on Dharma, one should pursue Artha and Kaama to attain Moksha. 


People should seek the Divine in all possible ways. In the worship of the paahukas, devotees 
should offer worship with all their heart and not as a mechanical ritual. 


How to recite manthras 


For instance, when the chief priest was reciting the manthras, anyone would have been deeply 
moved by listening to them. Our pandith pronounced the words with extreme clarity. Let me not 
be misunderstood when I say that, whether in Thamil Naadu, Kerala or even in Northern India, 
Sanskrith words are not pronounced correctly. But the pandith pronounced all the words very 
clearly this morning. Every syllable was pronounced in such a way that it appealed to the heart. 
His assistants were also closely following him. 


Governor Burugula Raamakrishna Rao took one group to Badhrinaath. The priest in the temple 
there was a Nambuudhiri and a Sanskrith pandith. Yet, when the pandith was reciting the 
manthras, Raamakrishna Rao closed his ears. Raamakrishna Rao exclaimed: "Oh pandith! Do 
not massacre our Sanskrith!" The pandith was saying: "Jaanthaagaaram Bhujaga Jayanam 
Badmanaabham---(laughter) instead of saying "Shaanthaakaaram  bhujagashayanam 
Padmanaabhan ...."" What humiliation is inflicted on the Sanskrith language! It is praiseworthy 
that a pandith living in Tamil Naadu should pronounce Sanskrith manthras more clearly and 
correctly than even Aandhras. 


It is because of the help of such pandiths that Subrahmanya Chetty's burdens are lightened. 
A blissful experience 


The spectacle you witnessed this morning was indeed a blissful experience for one and all. It 
looked as if all were in Vaikunttha (the Abode of the Supreme Lord) or Svarga (the abode of 
Indhra). It was not at all a command performance. Everyone silently performed the puuja 
(worship of the paadhukas) with his/her full heart in it. The pandith explained the meaning of 
every word in the manthra. It is rare to find pandiths who recite the manthras so clearly and 
explain their meaning intelligently. This has been the problem in Bhaarath for quite a long time. 
Very few are concerned about the well-being of society. People carry on their work, professing 
that duty is God. That was not the case with the pandith who officiated at the function today. It is 
thanks to such pandiths that we have devotees who practise the rituals sincerely. 


Now, let me say a word about Dr. Gadhia (who has addressed the meeting earlier).. You know 
about him. His grandfather, Kaaka Dheexith, was in Shirdi. He has not seen the old man. But I 
have seen him. Kaaka Dheexith's son came to Bhagavaan and stayed with Svaami for 30 years in 
Brindhaavan. He showed to Svaami the diary written by Kaaka Dheexith. The Dheexith family 
had relations with Svaami which have continued to this day. Dheexith stayed with his wife in 
Svaami's aashram. He showed to Svaami Kaaka Dheexith's diary. In it he had written what 
Shirdi Baba told him: "Child! you will again be close to Baba. Whatever troubles may come, do 
not give up your faith." Then Gadhia came to Baba. I sent him to Manipal to study a course in 
Medicine. After completing his medical studies in Manipal he came to Bangalore. I told him that 
there was no point in his remaining in Bangalore and directed him to go to London. 


In this manner, Gadhia and his ancestors have been associated with Sai! Like this, many 
devotees have been associated with Svaami over many lives. Without such association in the past 
it would not be possible for all of you to come here. You are not aware of this but I know it all. 
These sacred associations have been maintained over many life-times. 


Association with Sai 


Thus, many of you have from immemorial times had links with the Aathmik Self. This link is 
unbroken. It is eternal, infinite. Such sacred relationships should never be given up. All should 
return to the place wherefrom they came. That is the strident declaration in the Bhaagavatham: 
"It is natural for every living creature to go back to the source from which it came." You have 
come from the Aathma and you must merge in the Aathma. Till the goal is reached you must not 
treat lightly the sacred journey of life. 


People forget the route by which they came and are searching for new paths. Many approach me 
anti ask: "Svaami! show a way." I tell them: "There is need for me to show you a path. You go 
back by the route you came. 


Wherefrom did you come? Not from your mother. Nor from any particular place. The body came 
from the mother, but the Aathma came from the Aathma. You are not the body or the senses or 
the mind. You are the Aathma alone. You are the son of immortality. Being an Amritha-puthra 
(son of immortality), why are you seeking this anrutha (untruth). What is the way to 
immortality? Removal of immorality is the only way to immortality. If you get rid of evil 
qualities like attachment, hatred and envy, you will realise immortality. These bad traits make 
you remote from God. When you get rid of them, God becomes close to you. 


The Lord is with you 


Hence, gradually: you have to give up the animal qualities and develop godly qualities such as 
truth, righteousness, justice and morality. By a process of self-enquiry you can get rid of your 
animal qualities like anger. How long are you going to remain in the same round of birth and 
death without realising the goal of human existence? All puujas, rituals and penances are 
performed for this realisation. You have secured an extremely precious gift by your present birth. 
Do not waste it. Utilize every available moment for a worthwhile purpose. Devotees are yearning 
to realise the Divine by worshipping the Lotus feet and offering their worship to the paadhukas. 
Have the conviction that when you have the sanctified paadhukas with you, the Lord is also with 
you When you enter the Mandhir you leave your shoes out side. But the Lord's feet are present 
wherever His sandals are kept. Bear in mind this sacred idea. Live upto the conviction that the 


eternal Divine is omnipresent. Maintain purity and harmony in thought, word and deed. That is 
the way to secure Jnaana-shuddhi (Divine Wisdom). 


Thanks to many meritorious lives in the past, you have got this sacred opportunity. Of the 
hundreds of millions in Bhaarath, how many have got this opportunity? Many who wished to 
come here have been unable to do so for one reason or another. Make the best use of the rare and 
sacred opportunity that has come your way. 


Spread the message of worship of Paadhukas 


Dr. Gadhia observed that many significant events are likely to take place before 1998. Dr. 
Gadhia invited Svaami for a big paadhuka celebration to be held in Birmingham in 1998. In 
accordance with this desire, Subramania Chettiar should be blessed with the necessary health and 
strength. He is willing to take on any burden, but is physically weak. But his faith and 
determination will give him the strength he needs. Our Shaasthri (who officiated at the function 
in the Nilayam) should also take a resolve. 


He should spread the message of the worship of the paadhukas among wider sections of the 
people and dispel the darkness of ignorance. Whoever carries on the divine mission, unaffected 
by success or failure, joy or sorrow, will be the recipient of God's grace. Krishna has declared 
that such a devotee is dear to Him. Such a devotee develops detachment towards all worldly 
concerns and is indifferent to the happenings in the phenomenal world. He is indifferent to praise 
or censure, pleasure or pain. 


The next quality a devotee should have is giving up attachment to the fruits of one's actions. 
Even the egoistic sense of doership should be given up. Everything belongs to the Divine. 
Engage yourself in good acts and experience the Divine. (Bhagavaan then honoured the Pandith 
with a gold kankanam and fastened a gold wristlet on Subrahmanya Chettiar. The entire 
gathering broke into applause. Bhagavaan also presented shawls to the other pandithhs who had 
participated in the function). 


Discourse in Sai Kulwant Mandap on 3-1 O- 1996. 


It is here in India that there is a mine of spiritual wisdom and 
spiritual treasure: the Dharshanas, Upanishaths and the Geetha 
and the Vedhas. This has to be distributed, pure and unsullied, 
guaranteed in value and quality, to eager aspirants everywhere 
and so, we have here a succession of sages and saints. On account 
of the teachings and the lives of these people, there is a vast field 
of spiritual virtue in this land, which needs only a little care to 
yield a rich harvest. 


Baba 


49. The devotee's ordeals and God's grace 


YOU must acquire the friendship of God. Once you acquire that friendship you can achieve 
anything. All happiness can be derived therefrom. 


You know how Kuchela was a friend of Krishna in their boyhood. Because of his prolific 
progeny. Kuchela was immersed in a sea of troubles. His wife reminded him that if he went to 
Krishna, who was his boyhood friend at the guru's aashram and who was now a ruler at 
Dhvaaraka, Krishna would relieve him of his poverty. While he had some apprehensions whether 
Krishna would remember him and receive him, he got over them and set out for Dhvaaraka. 
Though Kuchela was in tattered clothes, the moment Krishna learnt that his old friend had come, 
he rushed towards him and embraced him. He exclaimed: "How long ago is it since we last met? 
Where have you been all these years? How have you been faring?" Kuchela remembered the 
Lord only because of his troubles. 


Another example may be found in the Mahaabhaaratha. After completing their years of exile, the 
Paandavas returned to their capital. Happy over the safe return of her sons, Kunthi went to 
Krishna to offer her salutations. Krishna said: "Dear aunt! Are you happy? Is there anything 
more you want? I shall fulfill your wishes." Kunthi said: "Krishna! I don't need anything. I have 
to enjoy your support, your guidance and your nearness at all times. I must be blessed with 
troubles always. It is because my children experienced innumerable troubles during our exile in 
the forest, living on roots and fruits, that we found you were always with us, beside us and 
behind us and you saved us so many times. If we are to enjoy your proximity we have to face 
troubles." 


Experience of two students 


In this context, let me reveal a significant episode in Sathya Sai's career which is not known to 
anyone. Every year summer courses used to be conducted in Brindhaavan. In view of the growth 
in number of students at Brindhaavan, we undertook to build a new hostel for them. That year I 
took all the students to Ooty during the summer. All the arrangements for the summer course 
were completed successfully. Svaami told the students a day before they were to leave Ooty: 
"Boys! You have had the chance to come to Ooty. You had better go on a sight-seeing trip and 
enjoy the grandeur and beauties of the Lord's creation." Svaami asked them to go out sight- 
seeing, but they insisted on Svaami also coming with them. The boys are a stubborn breed. 
Svaami told them that if He came with them, large crowds would gather wherever He went and 
they would not be able to see anything. 


Modern boys have a stubbornness of their own. They said they would not leave unless Svaami 
also came with them. Svaami relented and made arrangements for all the students to leave by 
buses for Doddabetta, the highest point in the Neelgiris range (above 8000 feet altitude). They 
wanted to take photographs with Svaami on the top of the hill and Svaami agreed to follow them 
to take photographs with them. Svaami left half an hour later from Nandhavanam to Doddabetta. 
Two young men went to Nandhanayanam to see Bhagavaan. They were told that Svaami had left 
for Doddabetta. Immediately the two young men got up on their motorcycle and started driving 
at high speed to catch up with Bhagavaan's car on the road to Doddabetta. Their only anxiety 
was somehow to get a glimpse of Svaami. 


Svaami noticed the boys and wanted to know who they were. Someone in the car remarked: 
"They might be some rowdies." Svaami remarked: "No, no. Without knowing the truth you 


should not make such remarks. They might be boys eager for Svaami's dharshan." When 
Svaami's car was taking a turning, the boys came at high speed near Svaami's car. At the turning 
the motorcycle fell on a side. Both the boys fell down from the vehicle. Immediately, I stopped 
my car, went near them, wiped the mud from their bodies and enquired of them: "Boys! Have 
you suffered any injuries! Why did you drive at such a high speed? You should not have done so. 
If you wanted to see me, you could have come to Nandhavanam." I sought to comfort them and 
gave them two Kamala oranges to eat. 


The two boys, who were local college students, said: "Svaami! We came to have your dharshan. 
Because of this mishap, we not only got Svaami's dharshan, but also sparshan, sambhashan and 
prasaadham If this accident had not happened, would Svaami have come near us, wiped our 
backs and spoken so endearing to us? Svaami! We yearned for your dharshan. We earnestly 
sought you. We got all three dharshan, sparshan, sambhaashan (see you touch you and speak 
with you). Any trouble is worth while if these three can be got. Please give us always such 
troubles." 


There is no pleasure and pain for the Lord 


Kunthi prayed likewise to Krishna. The benignity with which the Lord considers a devotee in the 
moment of his troubles, He is not likely to show .at other items. Of course, the Lord thinks of the 
devotee even at happy occasions. For the Lord there is nothing like pleasure and pain. 


When Kuchela was in Krishna's palace he forgot to ask Krishna what he had come to ask. But 
there is no need to ask the all-knowing Lord. After lavishing all the hospitality on him, Krishna 
sent Kuchela back in a palanquin. After going some distance Kuchela reflected on his folly. "I 
enjoyed all the sumptuous feast Krishna gave me, but I forgot all about the plight of my children. 
I forgot to ask Krishna what I had gone to ask him. What a fool I am!" But when he neared his 
old home, what he saw was a magnificent mansion. His wife was dressed in fine clothes and was 
shining with all ornaments. She came out to welcome Kuchela like a queen. Kuchela wondered 
whether she was some princess or his wife. 


She approached Kuchela and asked him: "Lord! What did Krishna tell you?" Kuchela described 
how lovingly Krishna rushed to meet him and embraced him endearingly. "How can I describe 
his all-encompassing love? He is love itself. Is there anyone who could confer countless 
blessings in return for a handful of Kuchela's parched rice!" (Svaami sang a Thelugu song). 
"What a fool I was not to realise the boundless grace of such a Lord!" Reflecting like this 
Kuchela went round the mansion, deeply moved by Krishna's love for him. 


Believers will never suffer 


Nothing will be lacking for those who believe in God. Many non-believers have suffered in life 
in various ways, but no one who had full faith in God has ever suffered. There are none such 
sufferers, none at all. Unfortunately many suffer because of lack of faith. Very often they suffer 
disastrous losses. On the other hand, the real believers are often carried from the depths of life to 
the Abode of the Lord! Hence, faith is supremely important. Faith is everything. This faith can 
be acquired and strengthened only through love. 


During the past four days, innumerable devotees from all parts of Andhra Pradesh have come 
here and experienced the bliss of heaven on earth. All of them are utterly innocent people. Their 
hearts are pure and unsullied. They have firm faith in God. Bhaaratheeya culture today survives 
to some extent only in the villages. 


No one can adequately describe the joy experienced by these innocent villagers. That is true 
devotion. All other devotees present in Prashaanthi Nilayam were deeply moved by the devotion 
of these Aandhra village folk. I bless all of them to be happy, to be ever blissful and lead sacred 
lives. 


Discourse on 22-1 O- 1996. 


Love for the Lord should not degenerate into fanaticism and hatred 
of other names and forms. This type of cancer is affecting even 
eminent men nowadays. But you must avoid-it. Believe that all who 
revere the Lord and walk in fear of sin are your brothers, your 
nearest kith and kin. Their outer dress or language or skin-colour, 
or even the methods they adopt to express their reverence and ear 
are not important at all. 


Baba 


50. The glory of Bhaarath's women 


Fear of sin has gone, 

Evil deeds are rampant, 

Devotion to God is wavering. 

To fight these tendencies 

Chanting the name of the Lord 

Is the only remedy, oh man! 

If women go out for jobs 

Who will take care of the homes? 

If husband and wife go to offices 

Who will look after the children? 
Earning money may solve some problems 
But how will it resolve domestic problems? 
Truly speaking, working women 

Do not enjoy much happiness. 


LOVING Embodiments of the Divine Self!. It is not my view that women should not get educated. 
They should have education. You may also take up jobs. But you should live up to the 
obligations and glory of womanhood. The first title given to a woman is GrihaLakshmi (the 
goddess of Home). A woman is expected to confer all prosperity, honour and good name on the 
home and the family. She is characterized as Grihalakshmi and not Office-Lakshmi. 


Another title for a woman is Ardhaangi (The better half. This means she is the better half of the 
husband and not a partner in his job. 


The third title is Illaalu (the Mistress of the Home). She is the mistress in the house and not in the 
office. 


Dharmapathni 1s the fourth title conferred on a married woman. This implies that the home is the 
dwelling for all righteousness. The home is the birth place of all the Dharmas (rules of right 
conduct) hallowed by usage from ancient times. 


What we have to safeguard and protect today are Truth and Righteousness and not the nation. 
When Truth and Righteousness are protected, they will protect the nation. Hence righteousness 
should be fostered in the home. A home is no trivial place. 


The home is a veritable university teaching many subjects, 
The home is centre of comfort and pleasure conferring joy; 
The home is a stone that can make even the creator, 
Brahma, sing and others dance. 


The home with the husband 


Is a school for the wife. (Thelugu poem) 


The home is the abode of Dharma, which protects and safeguards the country. The home is 
beacon which illumines the world and sustains it. Women should realise that, irrespective of their 
education or position, their foremost obligation is to protect the home. For lakhs of students and 
children who go to school, the mother is the first teacher. From the moment of birth, for every 
one the mother is the preceptor. If such a teacher leaves her home to teach other children, who 
will teach her children? 


For Bhaaratheeya women, the first duty is to reform the home and run it along ideal lines. 


The home and the family is the basic social institution everywhere in the world. When the home 
improved, the whole world will be better. 


The home is a heaven itself 


In this phenomenal world, whatever pleasures and satisfactions one may derive elsewhere, if 
there is no joy at home, it becomes a veritable hell. The home is heaven itself. It is the duty of 
women to maintain it as such. 


There is a proverb in the Aandhra Country: "First care for the home and then think of other 
things." Since ancient times, Bhaarath's name and fame have rested on the greatness of women 
(Bhagavaan sang a song in Thelugu, praising the greatness of Saavithri, who made the Lord of 
Death restore the life of her husband, the power of Chandhramathi, who stood by her husband's 
determination to sacrifice everything for Truth, the chastity of Seetha who went through an 
ordeal by fire, and Damayanthi, who shared all her husband's troubles with fortitude. Bhaarath 
was noted for such heroic women whose chastity and courage are an example for all humanity). 
To be born as women in such a country where there were such heroic women, is indeed a 
privilege. 


Should not the sacred river Ganga be worshipped as a mother? Is not Bhaarath the home of 
Gomaatha, Bhuumatha and Vedhamaatha--the land in which the cow, the earth and the Vedhas 
are worshipped as a mother? It must be realised that it is not proper for Bhaaratheeya women to 
forget their sacred vocation and engage themselves in outside activities contrary to their great 
heritage. 


(Bhagavaan sang a song glorifying the quality of forbearance, which was the hall-mark of people 
in this sacred land, the love for mother and the Motherland, and the readiness even to sacrifice 
one's life to uphold one's honour). Unfortunately these values have been lost today. Bhaarath was 
the leader for the entire world in the realm of spirituality. Hindu tradition stood for the welfare of 
all mankind all through the ages. To uphold these ideals the kings and women in ancient 
Bhaarath made great sacrifices. Everyone must take a pledge to revive and uphold these great 
ideals. 


Consequences of uncontrolled immoral desires 


The great epics, the Raamaayana and the Mahaabhaaratha, and the supreme Puraana, the 
Bhaagavatha, have taught the great lesson for all mankind regarding the disastrous consequences 
of uncontrolled immoral desires. Raavana, who Was a great scholar and warrior, became victim 
of an evil passion. Hiranyakashipu met with his end because of his intense hatred for God, 
despite the fact that he was a master of all sciences and had acquired many powers by his 


penance. Dhuryodhana was the victim of incurable jealousy and insatiable desire for power and 
property. 

Many women have played a great role in the past in trying to restrain husbands from indulging in 
evil deeds. Mandodhari was a notable example of such a woman who tried to impress on 
Raavana the error of his ways. But Raavana paid no heed to her. 


Women who are the embodiments of the Divine spirit! At least from now on you must strive to 
sanctify the home and turn the family towards the Divine path. 


Mind can make one a demon or Divine 


Women must realise the enormous power of the mind for good or evil and see that its power is 
used only for doing good. The mind can make a person a demon or Divine. The mind is under 
the control of the intellect. The intellect is governed by the Aathma. Self-realisation will bring 
about control over everything. 


The dire conditions prevailing in the world are known to everyone. The root cause of all this is 
the failure of people to realise their inherent divinity. Excessive desires, fuelled by selfishness, 
are the cause of all troubles. The primary requisite is confidence in one's self. Without that 
confidence, nothing can be accomplished. 


Men are in quest of peace. But how is it to be secured? Faith in God is essential. That faith has to 
be generated in the family. Then alone the children will develop sublime thoughts. They are the 
future citizens of the nation. Hence they have to be brought up well. Unfortunately today 
mothers in affluent families neglect their children. They leave the children in the care of nannies 
and the children have more love for the nannies than for their mothers. 


In ancient times, children who were fed on their mothers milk developed into good persons. 
Today the children are fed not on mother's milk but on tin milk. With the result the children 
develop a "tin" mentality. 


Only women can restore the glory of the land 


If the mothers take care of the homes on right lines, they will be protecting the nation. Mothers 
should foster in the children love for truth and righteousness and tell them stories about the lives 
of great men and women. In olden times, the elders used to tell the young children all about the 
nation's great heroes and saints. Where are such elders today? 


Modern youth even mock at such old people. It is the seed sown by those elders which has kept 
our ancient culture alive to this day. Only the women of the nation can revive and restore to its 
glory the ancient culture of our land. 


The culture of Bhaarath is a hallowed one. Everyone got up from bed with the name of God on 
his lips. You are all aware that in Kaashi (Vaaraanasi) there is the practice of reciting the name 
of Raama in the ears of dying persons. The idea is to remember the name of the Lord at the time 
of death because of the belief that one's rebirth is related to one's thoughts before death. 


Teach the children sacred things and not nonsense verses. In the old day, the first words a child 
was taught at school were "Om Namasshivaaya" (the five-letter Divine manthra) or "Om Namo 
Narayanaaya." Today, as the sacred ritual of initiating, a child is taught a nursery rhyme like 
"Baa baa black sheep," or "Ding dong Bell, Pussy is in the well." Is this the kind of stuff that 


should be taught to our children? What should be implanted in the hearts of our children are 
sacred names like Raama and Krishna. 


How should devotees conduct themselves? 


Chaithanya used to exhort his tongue to glory in chanting sweet names of the Lord, "Govindha, 
Dhaamodhara and Maadhava." (Bhagavaan sang sweetly the song of Chaithanya). How should 
devotees conduct themselves today? Their looks should be cool and soothing like the moon. 
Their speech should be soft like butter. Their hearts should be sweet like honey. 


Seethalakshmi (who had spoken earlier) had quoted part of a poem of Svaami. (Svaami recited 
some other passages from the poem). "Oh brother, open your eyes and see the Lord Sai, who is 
in your hearts and not in Shirdi or Parthi." Fill your hearts with divine thoughts and feelings. 


How do devotees behave today? Thinking that God is in Badhraachala, Thirupathi, Badhrinaath 
or Kedhaarnaath, they prepare themselves for long pilgrimages. But they will not appreciate the 
statements that God is in one's own heart and there is no need to go out in search of him. They 
have no faith in the God who is so close to them. They are prepared to incur any expense to go in 
search of God who is declared to be in some distant place. The statement that God is somewhere 
else is bhrama (delusion). The truth is God is within you. People forget that the divinity within 
you is there to guide you. Everyone should be good, think good and do good and enjoy good 
results. This is true Vedhaantha. 


Have full faith in God as your Indweller. Develop pure sublime love. That alone will be lasting. 
All other qualities come and go. Learn to live in love. Women are the fountain-source of love. 
Bhakthi is considered a feminine quality wile Jnaana (wisdom) is considered masculine. Let me 
not be misunderstood if I say that for the presence of all the male devotees present here, women 
alone are responsible. It is they who by their sacred feelings brought their menfolk here. Their 
work is sacred in every respect. They seek not only to sanctify their lives but the lives of all 
others in the family. 


It is sinful to look down upon women 


Women are not to be treated lightly. The Geetha says that women are endowed with seven kinds 
of powers while men have only three. It is sinful to look down upon women. 


Consider, for instance, this fact. There are any number of women who have tried to bring back 
their dead husbands or to venerate their memory. How many men have done likewise for their 
wives? Many hasten to acquire a second wife. 


In this respect, Bhaarath has been an example to the world. 


Wherever women are honoured, there is prosperity and happiness. Women should never be 
slighted or treated with disrespect. A home in which the housewife sheds tears will be bereft of 
all prosperity. This is the ancient conception of the role of women in the home. 


Discourse in Sai Kulwant Mandap on 19-11 -1996. 


You might say that the karma of the previous birth has to be 
consumed in this birth and that no amount of grace can save man 
from that. Evidently, some one has taught you to believe so. But I 
assure you, you need not suffer from karma like that. When a 


severe pain torments you, the doctor gives you a morphine 
injection and you do not feel the pain, though it is there in the 


body. Grace is like the morphine, the pain is not felt though you go 
through it. 


Baba 


51. Adhere to Sathya and Dharma 


This motherland of ours gave to the world 
Noble souls renowned in all the continents; 
It is the land which freed 

The nation from Western rulers. 

This Bhaarath is reputed for its scholars hip. 
It is the sacred land which stood forth 

As the master in the realms or music, 
Literature and sacred lore; 

Born in the land of Bhaarath, 

Noted for its fine arts and natural beauty, 

It is your bounden duty to foster 

The glory and prosperity of the Motherland. 


BHAARATH, which in the past was noted for its educational achievements in various spheres, is 
today confronted with a crisis in its educational system. The system attaches value only to the 
acquisition of degrees. Is it for earning a mess of potage that these degrees should be got? Or 
should they be acquired for rendering service to society? Or are they to be acquired for getting 
Vijnaana (wisdom)? Neither students, nor the authorities, nor the parents appear to be bothered 
about these questions. 


The educational system of today 


Can an education which is not of use to society or the nation be called education at all? Every 
year the colleges are letting lose upon the world lakhs of degree-holders. What is their future? 
What is the goal of the educational system? When you pose these questions, the answer you get 
is that the educational system has become mechanic. In today's education you find no trace of 
character-building, respect for values and regard for tradition. Education is pursued for selfish 
purposes and not for serving society. 


There are in Bhaarath today 200 universities, 90,000 colleges and nearly a crore undergraduate 
students. What is the outcome of all this prodigious educational effort? What is happening to 
these millions of students and how is the outside world affected by them? The educational 
institutions appear to be mainly factories turning out graduates. Even the educational authorities 
seem to be content with statistical progress rather than the real achievements of the educational 
system. Schools and colleges are mushrooming everywhere, with or without official sanction. 
There is a pretence of acquiring education, without anyone being aware of what it really means. 


Knowledge against Character 


"Of what use is the acquisition of all kinds of knowledge if one has not good qualities and has no 
moral values?" says a Thelugu Poem. What for is academic knowledge acquired? Is it for 
deceiving others? Or is it for promoting one's selfish interests? Or for the selfish enjoyment of 
pleasures? Education today is being, used largely for these purposes than to promote the well- 


being of society or the nation. An education that serves no useful purpose in daily life in utterly 
worthless. 


Education today promotes largely intellectual cleverness. 
What is the use if the head is filled with bad thoughts, 
If the ears listen only to scandals, 
If the eyes look enviously 
And the mind is plotting misdeeds? (Thelugu poem). 


All that is noble in human life is being destroyed. The students of today are divorced from all 
that is ennobling. 


Educated youth, instead of going to the relief of the suffering and the needy, are raising problems 
for society. But they are not to blame. The fault lies with the educational system. Governments in 
India set up many committees to report on the reform of the system. From the time of Morarji 
Dhesai till today these committees have been set up. No one knows what happened to the reports 
of these committees. There is no evidence that anyone in authority is concerned about training 
our young people to be useful and ideal citizens of the nation. In the place of high ideals, 
students today are cultivating high ambitions. What is required is not Aasa (desire) but 
the Aasana (ideal). 


Students have no awareness of the greatness of humanness. They do not understand the 
significance of unity in thought, word and deed. Instead of unity and harmony, you have only 
discord and division. All problems arise out of this discord. 


Respect for culture undermined 
What is important is samskaara (culture) much more than mere knowledge. 
Occidental education has undermined 
Respect for Indian culture, 
Eclipsed Truth and Righteousness in daily life, 
Encouraged fascination for foreign languages 
And eroded the love or native languages, 
Broken the norms of social behaviour, 
And destroyed the respect for teachers. 
(Thelugu Poem) 
The higher values of education are being eroded continuously. 


Education is getting increasingly commercialized, especially in professional courses like 
engineering and medicine. I am unable to understand what joy the students derive from going 
through these excessively expensive courses. 


Students should first of all know how to deal with the problems of daily life. They have to 
acquire general knowledge and common sense. Practical knowledge is more important than 


familiarity with books. It is this kind of bookish education that has led young people astray and 
made them lead worthless lives. 


Serve the Motherland 


Students! You are the children of Mother Bhaarath. You must cherish and foster the great culture 
of Bhaarath. Born in this motherland, you breathe her sacred air, drink her holy water and are 
sustained by her produce. Follow her sacred footsteps, engage yourselves in service to society in 
a spirit of dedication. You have to transform yourselves in accordance with our ancient culture. 
Only then will your humanness be vindicated. Otherwise all your education will be like 
cultivating a barren land. 


Your own conduct accounts for how you live. There is no need to blame anyone else. Begin with 
the purification of your minds. Then your thoughts, your looks and your behaviour will become 
pure. 


Today men's actions are governed by selfishness and self-interest. Even when one appears to 
love another, it is only out of self-interest. Self-interest is bound to exist. But there should be a 
limit to it. As long as they remain as students, the young people appear well-behaved. But the 
moment they get out of colleges and enter the outside world, they get polluted. 


Students! Wherever you may be, remain in good company. Entertain and do good deeds. Adhere 
to good conduct. 


Inherently all students are good. But the social environment pollutes their minds. They are 
spoiled by bad associations. Hence they should take good care about the company they keep. 
They must bear in mind three vital maxims: One, "Sarvabhuutha hithe rathah" (Rejoice in the 
well-being of all living creatures). Two: "Sarvajnaana samayukthah" (Have comprehensive 
knowledge of all things). Three: "Sarvaguna Samayukthah" (Develop all qualities equally). 
When you develop these qualities, your life becomes exemplary. 


Today the world is filled with violence and fear. The root cause of all this is selfishness. Adhere 
to truth. Truth is your life breath. Truth transcends the categories of time. It is changeless. It is 
invincible. "Sathyameva Jayathe" is our national motto. The Chinese, though different in culture 
from us, also adore Truth. Truth is the basis of genuine prosperity. 


The importance of Truth 


There is a story relating to Prahlaadha. Once Indra secured from Prahlaadha the gift of his 
Sheelam (character). When character left Prahlaadha, the goddesses of Fame, Royal Prosperity 
and Prowess left him one after the other. Prahlaadha allowed them to go. But when Sathya 
(Truth) started to leave, Prahlaadha prayed to the goddess not to leave him. The moment Truth 
stayed with Prahlaadha, the other deities representing Fame, Prosperity etc. also returned. 


Students! In whatever situation you may be placed in your official careers, never give way to 
untruth. You must uphold Dharma, which means acting according to your conscience. Always 
follow the dictates of your conscience. This is the meaning of the Upanishathik dictum: 
"Sathvam Vadha, Dharmam Chara" (Speak the truth, follow righteousness). This was the advice 
given by the Rishis to their disciples when they completed their studies. 


Students! This is a great opportunity in your lives. Esteem this day of the Convocation as a 
sacred day. Take to your hearts the good counsel given to you. Dedicate your lives to righteous 


ways. Earn a good name for yourselves. That is all that I desire. Bring a good name for your 
parents and for the Institute where you have studied. 


Shed all fear except the fear of swerving from Truth. You should not be afraid because you are 
not an animal. You should not cause fear in others because you are not a wild beast. You are 
human beings. When you act upto this truth, you will benefit society. 


I bless you all with the hope that you will not onlylead good lives but make your friends and all 
others with whom you are associated lead worthy lives. 


Discourse to the Fifteenth Convocation of the Shri Sathya Sai Institute of Higher Learning on 
22-11 - 1996, in the Puurnachandhra Auditorium, Prashaanthi Nilayam. 


Values for Education; Education Jar Life; Life for Love; ; Love for 
Man; Man for Service; Service for Spirituality; Spirituality for 
Society; Society for Nation; Nation for World; World for Peace. 


Baba 


52. Fill your hearts with love 


Whether one is a great scholar 

Or a ruler living in a mansion, 

Or a hero who has won great victories, 
Or a destitute grovelling in poverty, 
Without love in his heart, he is nothing. 


A devotee with love is more worthy of veneration. 


Of what use are men in Bhaarath 

Who can make the stones sing in joy, 

Men who can play with the heads of the enemy, 
Men who can wield power over the land, 

If they have no awareness 

Of the wail of the oppressed, 

When will they respond 


To the cries of the poor? 


EMBODIMENTS of Love! The cosmos is filled with love. Love is Righteousness. Love is Truth. 
The universe is based on love. Lost in the transient pleasures of worldly life, man is forgetting 


this supreme Love Principle. 


What is the reason? Selfishness has grown and selflessness-has declined. Narrow-mindedness is 
widespread. Broadness of heart is on the wane. Desires have increased. Ideals are vanishing. 


Human life is dominated by selfishness and self-interest. 


The ancient sages enthroned thyaaga (sacrifice) on the highest pedestal. They adored 
Righteousness. Today these sublime ideals are forgotten in Bhaarath. As a consequence the 


country is racked by every kind of trouble. 


A heart without love is a cemetery. Love demonstrates the existence of the Divine. It is all- 
pervasive. It is the basis for human unity. Only when selfishness goes and faith in the Divine 


grows will human unity be achieved. 


Hence, every human being should fill his heart with love. 


God is love; Love is God. 
Love is linked to love. 

When one is full of love 

He is fit for oneness with God. 


It is most vital for everyone to recognise and practice this Love Principle. At all times love has 
existed among the good and the bad, in the forest or in a palace, in attachment or in separation, in 
one's conduct as well as in one's speech, in the mind as well as in action. It is all-pervasive. 


The power of love 


The most powerful weapon to destroy the forces of evil rampant in the world today is love. 
Unfortunately men are not pursuing the right path to acquire this sacred love. 


Love is the seed of love. It is also the branches, the flowers and the fruit. To enjoy the fruit of 
love, one has to practise Love. 


Instead of seeking to know the true nature of love, man is engaged in the pursuit of wealth and 
power. No doubt wealth and power are necessary, but only within limits. The vast ocean, when it 
swells beyond its bounds, is censured for its misbehaviour. The human body and mind will be 
healthy only when food is consumed within limits. Excessive eating causes various disorders. 


Everything in the world is governed by the bounds set for it. However, love has no limits. 
"Anirvachaneeyam Prema" (Love 1s beyond the power of words), declares the sage Naaradha. 


The flow of love is the life-giving water for everyone. How is this love to be secured by one? 
Not by Japa (chanting the Lord's name) or meditation or by studying the scriptures. God does 
not dwell in the Vedhas or the Puraanas. God dwells in the heart and should be sought there. 
People should close their mouths and open their hearts. Then they will experience the divine 
bliss. 


Today love has been almost totally banished. Where love should prevail hatred has taken its 
place. Petty jealousy has usurped the place of compassion. Man can experience true happiness 
only when the appropriate qualities reside in their allotted places. 


Transform your entire life into a saga of love. You will then lack nothing to make you happy. All 
wealth and position will be added unto you. Love conquers all. 


Have a feeling of total surrender 


What is the nature of this love? When praying to God, you should have a feeling of total 
surrender. If you are really keen about realising God, if you are hungering and thirsting for God, 
then you should cultivate this all-absorbing love. Mere expression of desire is not enough. You 
should endeavour to experience union with the Divine. If your heart is full of selfishness, how 
can you experience the Divine merely by a wish? 


There is love of sorts today. It is related to the body consciousness and not to the Self which is 
the basis. Spiritual love begins with the concept of Dhaasoham (I am your servant) and 
culminates in the concept of Soham (He and IJ are one). Without the feeling of Dhaasoham, you 
cannot experience the feeling of Soham. ;Soham is the expression of divine oneness. "The 
Aathma and | are one." 


That Aathma is Brahma. That is love. That is Truth. That is Righteousness. 


Men have been concerned with the four goals of human life--the Purushaarthas----Dharma, 
Artha, Kaama and Moksha (Righteousness, wealth, sensuous desires and Liberation). But there is 
a fifth goal: Love. Only when love is achieved will the world become an earthly paradise. 


Where love prevails, there will be no room for hatred or envy. Love can have no truck with evil 
thoughts and actions. Love should be steadfast and unwavering. If one goes on hopping from one 
Svaami to another, from one form of worship to another, he will never experience love of the 
Divine. "One word, one path"----that should be the aim. 


Today thousands of people have gathered here. What has brought them together here? Love is 
the main cause. Without love few of you would have come from such distant places. How does 
this love express itself? It is a process of give and take. You have. to receive God's love. And 
you have to offer your love. But both are one and the same love. God's love is reflected in your 
bodies. That is the meaning of the Geetha declaration: "A fragment of mine is present in 
everyone in the cosmos." 


Use the Divine element for the benefit of others 


That Divine element in you should not be misused. It should be used for the benefit of others. 
The Divine principle of love is being treated with narrow ideas. From ancient times the sages 
welcomed this Principle with open arms. Naaradha declared: "Ya-labhdhvaa pumaan siddho 
bhavathi, amrutho bhavathi, thriptho bhavathi" (Having gained Divine love, Parama Prema, a 
person becomes perfect, immortal and contented). 


He considered Divine love as supreme over all things. Just as without sugar, no sweet will have 
sweetness, without love nothing in life can have any value. Your heart is inherently filled with 
love. But you are ignoring this plenitude and going after the trivial. Your real sustenance will 
come from this Divine love and not from other petty pleasures. 


Every cell in the human body is filled with love. It is this microcosmic love that fills the entire 
cosmos. 


Investment in devotion 


You have no need to go in search of love elsewhere. It is all within you. A man makes every 
effort to accumulate wealth. An equal effort is needed to acquire the wealth of love. Men today 
invest their assets of love in pitiful ventures. Instead they should invest all their love in the 
Divine bank of devotion. This deposit is not only safe but will yield you increasing returns in 
terms of bliss. Your heart is the bank where your love for God should be deposited. Deposits 
elsewhere are insecure. Deposits of money may be in danger of being lost. But the deposit in 
your heart is immune from any kind of theft or loss. Make your deposit safe by "insuring" it 
within your heart. It is totally safe, though it has no bolts, doors or locks. This love has been 
characterized as Amritha-svaruupa (the form of eternal nectar). Nectar pleases only the palate. 
But Divine love confers eternal bliss which is sweeter than nectar. Everyone should resolve to 
acquire this nectarine Love. 


Today your foremost duty is to enthrone thyaaga (sacrifice). Only when sacrifice reigns, love 
will come into its own. All your latent potentialities will then manifest themselves. You will 
succeed in all your legitimate undertakings. When love becomes the ruling principle, sorrow and 
disappointment will disappear. That was why the Vedhas declared that sacrifice alone is the key 
to immortal bliss. "God is love. How can you hope to realise God without love?" (Thelugu 
poem). 


How to manifest that love that is within you? You have to engage your hands in clapping as you 
chant the names of Raama, Krishna and others. Recite the names of the lord with your mouth. If 
you really desire to experience God-, you must remember the name of the Lord always like 


Prahlaadha: "Om namo Naraayaanaaya." Sing the praises of the Lord like Raadha and Meera. 
Worship the Lord like Jayadheva, Gauraanga and Thukaaraam. Shed tears in devotion before the 
figure of the lord like Raamakrishna Paramhamsa. Then you will experience the Lord. People 
shed tears over petty things, but do not shed a single tear for the Lord. There are two kinds of 
tears: tears of joy and tears of sorrow. What you have to shed for God are tears of joy. 


Power of the Lord's name 


When Krishna was being weighed in a balance, all the jewels of Sathyabhaama could not balance 
His weight. Rukmini then came and declared that the mere chanting of the name of Krishna 
would be equal to His weight. By the additional offer of a leaf, a flower or a little water, the 
scales will be tilted against Krishna. So saying she placed a thulasi leaf on the scale. And lo! it 
went down. The tulasi leaf carried the full weight of Rukmini's boundless love for Krishna. All 
the jewels of Sathyabhaama were of no avail. But Rukmini's invoking the name of Krishna and 
offering a thulasi leaf with a love-filled heart titled the scales against Krishna. Such is the power 
of the Lord's name and a love-filled offering to the Lord. The Lord is not swayed by wealth or 
scholarship, power or position. Love alone can move Him. 


If you wish to sway the lord, you must offer love and love alone. Today unfortunately love has 
become scarce. Even material love is disappearing. But God's love is boundless. In whatever 
manner you may love Him, He responds in equal measure. But without love, you have no right to 
seek His love. Filled with bad feelings and thoughts, if you pray to the pure and unsullied Lord, 
how do you expect to win His grace? If you remain pure at least in your shrine, you may acquire 
some fragment of divine love. 


There are any number of able exponents of spirituality. But of what use are their discourses if 
they do not practise what they preach? 


Manifest your love 


Embodiments of the Divine! If you are really filled with devotion, manifest your love for God 
who is the very embodiment of love. If you are genuinely hungering and thirsting for God, 
partake of Divine love to appease your hunger and quench your thirst. 


Divine love is the only panacea for all your troubles and miseries arising from insatiable desires 
and frustrated ambitions. God's love is like a lighthouse beacon. It shows you the right path. 
Divert the boat of your life towards the lighthouse of Divine love. You are then bound to gain the 
shore of bliss. 


You do not need any special type of penance or meditation. Meditate on love. Fill your mind 
with love. Even while attending to your daily chores, regard all of them as offerings to the 
Divine. God is omnipresent. See God in everything and every being. Let love grow in your 
hearts like the waxing moon. Divine love will not wane like the moon. Let such steadfast love be 
enshrined in your heart. As Thukaaraam said: Dhil me Raam, haath me kaam (Raam in the heart 
and work in the hand). 


The duty of everyone from today onwards is to cultivate true, unsullied love. With love of God 
you can secure anything. Without that love, you will only be steeped in misery. 


Do not divorce yourself from Nature 


Let the Buddhist prayer be your guide. First, take refuge in your intellect---Buddham Sharanam 
Gachchaami. Divert that intellect to the service of society--Sangham Sharanam Gachchaami. 
Then you will find refuge in Bliss--Aanandham Sharanam Gachchaami. 


Do not divorce yourself from Nature. "Sarvam Vishnumayam Jagath" (The cosmos is permeated 
by the Divine). Hence recognise the Divine even in your enemy. His heart is bound to change. 
When you love even the one who has harmed you, he is also bound to change. Do not allow your 
love to be affected in any way. 


When people pray to God, sometimes doubts may arise as to whether and how the Lord will 
respond. Such doubts arose even in the mind of Raadha..But all doubts disappeared when she 
realised that the whole universe was the mansion of God and there was no need to keep any door 
open or closed. All that was needed was complete surrender to God. The mystic significance of 
the songs of the saints and devotees like Raadha and Meera should be rightly understood. 
(Bhagavaan sang a Meera Bhajan, "Chalo re man" to explain the esoteric meaning of the song). 


Sing the glories of God 


God is moved by the devotee's heart-felt song. He becomes one with the devotee. No other form 
of worship has the same effect of God. It is enough if you do the singing within yourself. 
(Bhagavaan demonstrated by singing the opening lines of a song, "Raama nannu kaapaadu", how 
a melodious prayer can move the heart of anyone). Make music the passport to merger with the 
Divine. Music is the gift of God. Only the gifted ones can sing sweetly, appealingly and 
delightfully. We-.have here M.S. Subbalakshmi. From her early years, she dedicated herself to 
music, which filled her heart. This kind of soulful music cannot be acquired by anybody. It can 
come only through God's grace. 


When you sing in public you can give delight to many. But if you cannot do so, you can sing to 
yourself. It will delight your heart and sweeten it. Immerse yourself in all work with love. 
Whatever you do, consider it as gifts from God. When you have malaria, you have to take the 
bitter quinine mixture. But that is the medicine for your ailment. Likewise, when adversity 
confronts you, treat it as a kind of medicine for your good. God has to be melted and beaten to 
make a jewel. A diamond is cut to make it more brilliant. Likewise troubles in life serve to refine 
a person. Love should enable you to welcome even hardships as meant for your own good. 


Today this body enters on its seventy first year. This body is made up of the five elements and is 
essentially impermanent. Do not attach much importance to the body. Take to heart the Love 
Principle that is being conveyed to you. My entire life is filled with love. I have never put anyone 
at any time to any kind of suffering. I have never done any harm to anyone. I have hated no one. 
I have no aversion to anybody. What is the reason? It is my love that is transforming others. I am 
now 71. But no one can know what accounts for my condition. I may act as if I am angry on 
some occasions, but the anger does not stem from the heart but is confined to the tongue. From 
head to foot I am filled only with love. It is this love which has attracted the whole world. 


I do not desire anything. I have three P's. One is Purity. Second is Patience. Third is 
Perseverance. It is these three which have secured the world's regard. No invitations were issued 
to those who have gathered here. Svaami's love alone attracted them all like a magnet. Some may 
ask why they are not attracted to Svaami if that magnet is so powerful. The reason is that these 
persons are like rusted iron which no magnet can attract. Let them remove the rust and dust and 


they will be drawn to the magnet. Their hatred and desires, their envy and greed are the rust and 
dust covering them. If you cleanse yourselves of these, wherever you are, you will be mine and I 
will be yours. The hapless and the forlorn, wherever they may be, are the concern of Sai. 
Promote sacred love in your hearts. That love will not only redeem your lives but will promote 
the well-being of all around you. 


You need not offer anything except love. In Prashaanthi Nilayam no offerings are permitted. 
Only love is allowed entry. 


Discourse on 23-11-1996 in Sai Kulwant Mandap. 


53. Realise God through love 


ASTHIRAM Jeevitham loke (Life in the mundane world is impermanent). Life in this 
phenomenal world is not permanent. "Asthiram yauvvanam dhanam" (Youth and wealth are not 
lasting). They are like passing clouds. "Asthiram dhaara-puthraadhi" (Wife and children and 
other relatives are liable to vanish like white mist in a moment). "Dharmam Keerthi dhvayam 
sthiram" (Righteousness and fame endure forever). In human life, righteous living and a good 
reputation are the two that are everlasting. 


In the history of mankind several religions arose to promote the moral advancement, the 
prosperity and the welfare of humanity. 


Vaishnavites have esteemed Vishnu as the Supreme Shaivites have 
given the highest place to Shambhu 


The worshippers of Ganapathi accord the highest 
place for Ganesha; 

Saraswathi is adored as the Supreme 
by the seekers of knowledge; 

Muslims regard Allah as the Supreme Lord 

While Christians hail Jesus as the Saviour; 

Buddhists worship Buddha as the Supreme 
Enlightened One; 

Jains accord the highest place to Mahaveera; 

Paarsis adore Zoroaster 

Sikhs deem Naanak as the Supreme teacher 

Baba devotees adore Sai as the Supreme 

The wise regard all of them as equal. 

All religions should be revered equally 

Because God is one and the same God for all of them. 

God is Truth. He is Righteousness. 

He is peace. He is the embodiment of love. 

(Thelugu poem). 


Embodiments of Love! It is essential to realise and act on the basis that the purpose of religion is 
to promote unity in diversity, banish divisive tendencies and make human beings lead ideal lives. 


The common essence of all religions 


The essence of all religions, the message of all scriptures and the destination for all mankind is 
the same. But because of selfishness, narrow-mindedness and concern for self-interest, religion is 


used as a pretext for promoting differences and conflicts. "All religions teach only what is good 
if they are studied intelligently. If your mind is good, what religion can be bad?" says a Thelugu 
poem. Morality and integrity, righteousness and charity, truth and tradition, forbearance and non- 
violence are basic tenets of all religions. These basic truths are common to all religions. But over 
the years men have forgotten these truths and have fostered divisive tendencies in the 
place of unity. As a result, respect for human values has gone. It is essential to recognise the 
Divine unity that suffuses all the diversity in human existence. 


The life of Jesus 


(Bhagavaan gave a brief account of the Jewish concept of the creation, of the cosmos and 
referred to the birth of Jesus as the son of Mary and Joseph). As the name and fame of Jesus 
spread, opposition to him developed among a section of Jews. After his father's death, young 
Jesus considered it his duty to help his mother and revere her as divine. Jesus preached the 
primary obligation of everyone to show one's gratitude to the parents. Jesus came with his 
mother to Jerusalem when he was eleven years old. His mother was worried about the activities 
of Jesus. Jesus was critical of the ways of the Jews in the temple in Jerusalem. 


He came out against the harmful practices in the temple and preached the omnipresence of God 
in all living beings. He exhorted the people not to cause harm to anyone. 


What he preached was in accord with the basic teachings of all religions. He engaged himself in 
a mission of mercy to the sick and the poor. He offered food to the hungry. Seeing his acts of 
love and kindness, people declared that he was a "Messenger of God." Jesus constantly referred 
to God as the father. Later he declared: "I and my father are one." Jesus dedicated his life to the 
propagation of faith in one God who is common to all mankind. 


Men today celebrate the birthdays of great holy men but they do not follow the teachings of the 
masters. There is nothing great about the celebration of birthdays. People must resolve to uphold 
their ideals and act up to their teachings. 


A unique book 


There is a book compiled in Britain around 1530 A.D, containing all the information about Jesus 
gathered during the preceding centuries. The Russians condensed all this material in a small 
book which they preserved in a place on the Black Sea coast. (Svaami produced the little book 
by a circular wave of His band and held it before the audience). This is the book. You can see the 
cross on the cover page. The book was designed to demonstrate the common features of all 
religions. What is contained in this book is not to be found even in the Bible. It contains an 
entirely new account of the life of Jesus. 


It is not open to all to understand the ways of the Lord. To know about God one has to develop 
godly feelings. In this book, there are bookmark threads which distinguish every faith by a 
shloka relating to it. There is one page which contains the shloka from the Bhagavath Geetha in 
which Krishna exhorts Arjuna to give up all beliefs and take sole refuge in Him and assured 
Arjuna that thereafter he will absolve Arjuna of all the sins (Cheers). 


The essence of all creeds is one and the same thing. Man's primary duty is to surrender to God. 
"Surrender" means attaining the state in which the devotee feels he is one with God. This feeling 
arises out of the conviction that the same divinity is present in all. Bodies of human beings are 
varied like bulbs, but the current passing through them is the same. The colour of the bulbs or 
their wattage may vary. But the current activating them is the same. 


This book contains the Vedhic saying: "Ekoham bahushyaam." 
Follow the conscience 


The same God dwells in all beings. There is no justification for differences on the basis of 
religion. It is attachment to the body which accounts for religious differences. Do not regard the 
body as permanent. It is a water bubble. The mind is a mad monkey. Don't follow either of them. 
Follow the conscience. That is the main message contained in this little book. The culture of 
Bhaarath has experienced this truth in the concept of Sath-Chith-Aanandha (Being-Awareness- 
Bliss). 


Today people read all kinds of books and go after all sorts of "great persons." They do not 
enquire about what constitutes greatness. Realise that there is no one greater than each of you. 
But you have not discovered the real truth about yourself, like an elephant that does not know its 
own strength. A mahout with a goad is able to control it. 


Recognise the fact that the whole universe is within you. You have all the powers in you. They 
are derived from the Divine Spirit within you. It is the Divinity which endows you with a Free 
Will. Forgetting the supreme power of the Spirit, people place their reliance on the powers of the 
body, the mind and the intellect. 


Love binds all people 


Embodiments of Love! If you want to realise God, if you wish to experience the Divinity within 
you, if you want to know your true self, you have to develop pure, unsullied love. It is this that 
binds all people. It is described as the Prema-paasham (tether of love). 


Today there are numerous sects within Christianity all of which are engaged in propagating their 
respective doctrines. While this preaching goes on, there is very little of practice in daily life. 
Practice is most important. People may be entitled to propagate their creed. But that does not 
achieve anything lasting. Only practical example matters. When you practise what you preach, 
others will be inspired by your example. No one will care for the teaching of a person who does 
not practise what he preaches. 


I have often told the students that of all forms of knowledge, the one that is most beneficial is 
practical knowledge which is relevant to everyone. You have to act on the conviction that the 
same Divine Spirit dwells in one and all. 


Oblivious to this truth, man is immersed today in selfish pursuits. This selfishness is degrading 
man to the lowest levels. To develop true humanness, everyone has to foster the feeling of 
spiritual oneness. This sense of oneness constitutes true religion. Religion means "realisation" of 
your true self. 


Develop the love of God. All other forms of love are not love at all, but only fleeting and 
impermanent attachments. Man's biggest folly is forgetting his divinity. All should realise that 
they come "from God." All are children of God. Everyone should seek to get nearer and nearer to 
God. That is saadhana. You must feel that God is Hridhayavaasi (dwells in the heart). You must 
develop compassion in the heart, because without it the heart is only a stone. 


That is the message of Jesus--the message of love. Love is God. Live in love. Start the day with 
love. Spend the day with love. End the day with love. This is the way to God. Only the person 
who is filled with love will be dear to the Lord. 


God is your unfailing friend 


This book contains the declaration: "Yo madhbhakthah." "The devotee who is filled with love of 
God is dear to me," says the Lord in the Geetha. God is your unfailing friend in weal and woe. 
You must acquire His friendship. 


There are many devotees from overseas here today. They should be firm in their devotion 
whatever changes in the situation they may face. 


You may begin worshipping God with specific form and name (saakaara). But when you are 
faced with difficulties you experience God as a helper. When you have some desires, you pray to 
God for fulfilling them. You are then an artharthi (seeker of favours). In these different ways the 
devotee has to develop his relationship to God. 


To illustrate how God responds to the prayers of devotees, I would relate the story of a rich man 
with four wives, who expressed what they wanted him to get for them during a trip abroad. The 
first wife, who was spiritually enlightened, prayed for his safe return. The second wife wanted 
him to bring some sacred books. The third wife, who was ailing wanted him to get some 
medicines. The fourth wife, who was a "modern", asked him to get her sarees and jewellery. The 
merchant on his return gave the three wives what they wanted and stayed with the first wife 
because she had no other desire except to have him back. 


How God responds to devotees 


God responds to devotees in the same manner. To those who aspire for wealth, he gives wealth. 
Those who seek knowledge, He will help them to acquire it. Those who are ailing and who pray 
to God will get the relief they pray for. God builds hospitals for their treatment. Those who pray 
to God for oneness with Him, will realise Him. This is the way God responds to the four kinds of 
devotees. 


The devotees should consider God alone as important and not other mundane desires. If you have 
God with you, all other things are got easily. So, God is your real wealth. Real health is God. 


Men should strive for God-Realisation because they came from God and should go back to Him. 


Today there are devotees here from many countries--Germany, Japan and others. Whatever 
happiness you may have experienced here, you will have to go back to your countries when your 
money is exhausted or your visa expires. Your aim must be to acquire a permanent visa to stay 
here permanently. That is got by God's grace. You can get it through love and love alone. When 
you have that love, your proximity to God is ensured for ever. 


Embodiments of love! There is love in everyone of you. Develop that love. Share it with others. 
When you have this love there is no need for you to go in search of aashrams. There are some 
foolish, persons who go on hopping from one aashram to another. This is sheer folly. There is no 
need to go anywhere. The Divine is in your heart. Adhere to one belief firmly. Do not change 
your faith from day to day. Follow one path with firm faith. That is the Love principle. 


Discourse on 25-12-1996, in the Sai Kulwant Mandap. 


Grace takes away the malignity of the karma which you have to 
undergo; you know there are dated drugs, which are declared 
ineffective after a certain date; well, the eject of karma is rendered 


null, though the account of karma is there and has to be rendered 
or, the Lord can save a man completely from the consequences, as 
was done by Me to the bhaktha whose paralytic stroke and heart 
attacks I took over, some months ago, in the Gurupuurnima week! 


Baba 


