1. Perseverance--the key to achievement 


Verily the light that illumines all the hearts is Divine, 

The love that emanates from each call is Divine 

Break not the Divine command in your intellectual conceit 
For pride surely goeth before a fall. 

All education that is devoid of spiritual purity 

Is replete with hatred and envy, 

Like a dark dwelling infested with bats, 

Know this to be the truth. 


DEAR students, teachers and lovers of education. For the accomplishment of any aims in life 
man needs an unflinching mind, tireless endeavour and unshakable determination. Young boys 
and girls pursuing their studies have to cultivate these qualities if they wish to ensure for 
themselves a bright future and an honourable and worthy career. In facing different situations in 
life, students have to learn to practise equanimity and amiability. 


Equal-mindedness and a sense of oneness with all are the marks of a true human being. In this 
vast country, everyone has an important role to play Everyone as a citizen has a social 
responsibility. The world indeed. is one human family. The true student should be able to 
experience this oneness. Sports and games enable students to develop this feeling of oneness. 


Maintain physical fitness and mental purity 


Sports and games and physical exercise contribute directly to physical fitness and good health. 
But man is not merely the gross body alone. He has the subtle element in him, namely, the mind. 
It is only when man achieves purity of mind and develops unselfishness that he can acquire 
peace of mind and experience genuine happiness. Hence both physical fitness and mental purity 
is essential for man. 


Students should realise that the determination and perseverance they show in seeking to win 
laurels in sports and games are also equally necessary in other spheres of life, especially in those 
of morality and spirituality. 


The first quality that you have to cultivate is gratitude to the Divine. People are thankful for even 
small acts of service done to them. Is it not necessary to be grateful to the Divine who has 
provided us with 


so many essential benefits through Nature and the five elements? The air you breathe, the water 
you drink, the earth on which you walk are all gifts of God. How grateful are you to the sun, who 
provides light, which cannot be equalled by all the electric bulbs in the world? Can all the 
pumpsets in the world provide as much water as is offered in a single downpour of rain? Can all 
the fans in the world, provide as much breeze as you get when the wind blows? Without being 
grateful for these Divine gifts, man goes after the trivial and wastes his life. The great sages of 
yore who adored God in various ways considered devotion as a means of expressing gratitude to 
Providence. 


Virtues alone can elevate one in life 


The puranas have described the lives of the great exemplars of nine forms of Bhakti (devotion). 
They are Parikshit for Sravanam (listening to the glories of God), Narada for Keerthanam 
(singing the praises of God), Prahlada for Vishnunama smaranam (remembering the Lord's 
name), Prithu for Archanam (offering worship), Akrura for Vandanam (prostration), Hanuman 
for Seva (service), Arjuna for Sakhyam (friendship), Lakshmi for Padasevanam (worshiping the 
feet of the Lord) and Bali for Atamnivedanam (total surrender). 


Students should bear in mind that from the point of view of individual or the community, they 
have to cultivate good qualities along with the pursuit of their studies. Virtues alone can help one 
to elevate himself in life. A man without virtues and gratitude is bound to fail in life. 


During the war in Lanka, Rama saw one day a powerful effulgent figure before Him. Vibhishana 
told Rama that it was none other than Rama's enemy, Ravana. Seeing him, Rama felt that but for 
his bad qualities, Ravana, who was so powerful and great, would not have come to such a 
pitiable end. Whatever may be one's scholarship or intelligence, without the strength of character 
they are likely to dehumanise man. You must fortify yourself with the strength of character, 
along with the acquisition of knowledge. There is nothing that cannot be achieved by a righteous 
person. 


Self-confidence is the first requisite. You must cherish some ideals. To lead an ideal exemplary 
life, education is not essential. One seeks education for earning a living. But one cultivates 
virtues for sublimating life. It is only when education is combined with good qualities that you 
can experience the bliss of fullness. 


The example of Edison 


Students need both faith in God and deeksha (determination). There is the example of a great 
American scientist, Thomas Alva Edison. He was born in a poor family on February 11, 1847, in 
the state of Ohio. Although he made no progress in his studies, he became a great inventor, 
thanks to his supreme self-confidence and his perseverance and determination in the pursuits of 
his experiments. His early experiments had untoward results, which provoked his parents to 
punish him and ultimately to send him out of the home. For a time he earned a living by selling 
sweets in trains. 


Once, a guard slapped him for causing explosion in the closet of a train. His hearing was affected 
thereby. A benefactor came into his life after he had saved a child from being run over by a train. 
He got a job in a telegraph company and was free to carry on his experiments. From such 
beginnings, Edison became the greatest inventor of our times because of his tremendous 
perseverance and tireless experiments. The world owes to him the electric bulb, the gramophone, 
the telephone and many other inventions. If without any regular schooling, Edison could achieve 
all this, it: was because of his confidence in himself, his firm determination and tireless energy. 
In addition to their academic studies, these are the qualities a student should acquire. They 
should associate with right-minded persons, whose company will improve their mind and 
character. 


Swami expects you to be exemplary in life 


The advancements in science and technology have enabled man to roam in the sky like birds and 
move in the water' like fish. But he has not mastered the art of living well on earth. If man has 
not learnt how to lead a worthy human life, what is the value of his existence? Make your life 


meaningful by doing your duty to your parents and your Motherland. The man who is not proud 
of the land of his birth is worse than a corpse. Learn to love your country without any hatred for 
other countries. 


Get rid of differences based on community, creed or caste. Regard all mankind as one family. 
Give up feelings of hatred and aversion. As alumni of the Sri Sathya Sai Institute, you have to 
stand out as exemplars to the world. Your conduct should be ideal and exemplary in every 
respect. That is what I expect from you, and this is what will give Me joy. Even in your sports 
and games, you must strictly adhere to the rules and be good sportsmen. You must raise the 
standard of sport and develop team spirit. 


It is a good habit to get up early in the morning between 4 and 5 a.m. and complete your morning 
ablutions. That is described as Rishisnanam (the bath of the sages). Your mind gets purified 
when you take part in the suprabhatham in the morning. This may seem a little hard at first, but 
after some practice you will discover how good it is for you physically and spiritually The pre- 
dawn vibrations in the atmosphere will help to improve your memory power. Sports and games 
are designed to promote physical fitness. They should not be commercialised and turned into a 
form of business. Our Institute students have to take part in games and athletics for the sake of 
the joy to be derived from them and to develop their abilities and skills. There should be no trace 
of self-interest in them. Develop equal regard for everyone and promote mutual respect and 
affection. The concept of Divine love must become your watchword and goal in life. 


Discourse in the Institute Auditorium on 14-1-1989. 


Teacher and student together help to promote the welfare of the 
nation. Both of them should realise that their welfare is bound up 
with the well-being of the society as a whole. 


BABA 


2. Eschew envy : Uphold truth 


THE scriptures have declared that it is difficult to acquire a human body. Human life is the 
highest among all living beings in creation. With all these endowments if man lacks jnana 
(wisdom) he is no better than an animal. It is jnana that distinguishes man from other animals. 
Inspite of possessing a human body, with its sacred capacities, man pursues wrong paths and 
indulges in misdeeds, thereby degrading his precious heritage. One who ought to dedicate 
himself to the pursuit of the Divine--Nivrithi marga (the Inward Path)--and experience bliss, 
makes himself a slave of his senses and wastes his life in the pursuit of the external--Pravrithi 
marga. All his efforts are directed towards the cultivation of sensual pleasures instead of aiming 
at realisation of the power of the Spirit within him. Of what avail is the human form if one's 
actions and thoughts are not conducive to the realisation of his inherent divinity? By concerning 
himself only with the demands of the body, man today is forgetting his divine essence and is 
immersed in material, pursuits. It is this preoccupation with the mundane that is at the root of all 
the insecurity and unhappiness experienced by man. He is perennially filled with discontent and 
dissatisfaction. Discontentment affects man in two ways: One is lack of peace of mind. The other 
is unhappiness resulting from lack of peace. 


How to banish envy 


What is the root cause of discontentment? It is envy. This has been the besetting vice of man 
from the beginning of time. Only when envy is eradicated from the human heart will man have 
self-satisfaction. The contented man enjoys peace. How does envy arise? When one compares 
himself with those who are better off, or who hold higher offices, or score higher marks, or are 
more handsome and suffers from a consciousness of his own inferiority, envy arises. Discontent 
over what he lacks gives birth to envy. 


To get rid of this evil quality one has to look at those who are worse off than himself. For 
instance, when you look at those who have got lower marks, you can derive comfort from the 
fact that you have done better than others. Likewise, when one views the state of those holding 
lower jobs, he can feel satisfied with his own position. Thus, if envy has to be got rid of this sort 
of comparison with those who are worse off has to be undertaken. In due course one develops a 
sense of equal-mindedness both towards those who are better off and those who are worse. Such 
equal-mindedness is a Divine quality. There is nothing wrong in aspiring for higher positions. 
But one should not feel envious about those who are in such positions. It is a crime to entertain 
such feelings. 


The need for triple purity 


Students should bear in mind that for achieving anything worthwhile in life a healthy body and a 
healthy mind are necessary. To realise such a doubly healthy state, purity in thought, word and 
deed is essential. In Vedantic parlance this is described as "Trikarana suddhi" (purity of the three 
instruments of mind, speech and hands). 


The Vedas are divided into three Kandas (sections): the Karma Kanda, the Upasana Kanda and 
the Jnana Kanda. These are associated with three types of yoga: Karma yoga (the yoga of 
Action), Bhakti yoga (the yoga of Devotion) and Jnana yoga (the yoga of Knowledge or 
Wisdom). 


First there is Karma yoga. For performing any action you need hands. All the actions you do 
with your hands should be sacred, pure, helpful to others and purposeful. The hands become 
sanctified with such actions. Hence, the first step is to make the hands pure and holy. 


By pure actions the mind also gets purified. But mere purity of mind is not enough. The mind has 
to develop concentration. For cultivating concentration, Bhakti (devotion) is of great value. 
Bhakti means getting rid of the separation from Bhagavan. There must be the realisation that the 
Divine is omnipresent and that you cannot separate yourself from God. To remember the 
omnipresent Divine, to chant His glories and adore Him, you need the tongue (the power of 
speech). Jayadeva hailed the tongue as the God-given instrument for glorifying the Lord. This 
sacred instrument should not be misused in any way for speaking ill of others or causing 
unhappiness to them. As enjoined in the Gita, you should avoid unpleasant speech and use only 
words that are true, comforting and good. Harshness in speech should be avoided. Only when the 
tongue is used in this way can it become pure and sacred. When your speech is sanctified your 
life itself becomes sanctified. 


Uphold promise at any cost 


There is no Dharma higher than Truth. "Truth alone triumphs." The Emperor Bali asked: “Js 
there a greater sin than going back on your word?" Once you have given a promise, you should 
not go back on it in any circumstance. This was the truth demonstrated by Bali. When you take a 
pledge or give a promise, you uphold it even at the cost of your life. Once you give your word, 
you must make every effort to fulfil it. Nowadays there is little respect for the plighted word. 
Promises are made freely and broken freely. Pledges are made and buried from moment to 
moment. Such persons are no better than living corpses. 


Truth is the life-breath of speech 

An army is the life-breath of a fort 

Justice is the life-breath of society 

The signature is the life-breath of a pronote. 


You must remember that once you begin to treat your promises lightly, it will become a life-long 
habit. Harishchandra gave up his kingdom, his wife and son and even became a pitiable 
watchman in a cremation ground for the sake of upholding his plighted word. His supreme 
example as the votary of Truth shines like a beacon-light across the millennia of human history. 


If you wish to earn a name for truthfulness, you have to adhere to truth steadfastly. Among the 
attributes of God, Truth is foremost. God is hailed as Sathya-vaakpaalakaaya Namah (the 
Protector of Truth), the Propagator of Truth, the Embodiment of Truth. "Truth is God" goes the 
saying. Purity in speech is the second purity that has to be ensured. 


Students! This is a crucial period in your lives. It is the stage in which your divinity can blossom 
forth. It is the right time for you to strive to sublimate your speech and learn to honour your 
word. Most people are content to use words to suit the needs of the moment. They attach no 
lasting value to what they say and therefore do not live up to their words. 


Lord protects those who are devoted to Him 


In the Bhagvad Gita, the Lord gave a promise that He would take care of the yogakshemam of all 
those who are devoted to Him exclusively and without any other thought. What is this yoga? 


You can see for yourself what a sacred privilege you are enjoying, what extraordinary 
opportunities you are getting here. Every day innumerable persons are coming here from many 
remote countries, spending thousands of rupees. They wait for long periods just to hear one word 
from Swami, which is enough to fill them with bliss. There are lakhs of such devotees. Here you 
are receiving the blessing of Swami's company without any expenditure on your part, with no 
effort at all and without spending any time. How indifferent are you to this great opportunity? 
You are taking it all for granted and are unmindful of its infinite value. You have got this 
blessing thanks to merit earned in some previous lives. This itself you should regard as yoga. It is 
not the fruit of this birth. This is yoga and when you try to protect it you have yogakshemam. 
Kshemam means protection of what you have. Bhakta Mira prayed: "Oh Lord! I dived into the 
depths of the ocean and found a pearl, will you let me lose hold of it?" Mira and Sakkubai 
secured God's grace through many ordeals and difficulties and they prayed to the Lord to see that 
grace was not taken away. 


A golden opportunity to ensure your well-being 


It is by the stroke of supreme good fortune that you have come to the Lord. You must not let slip 
this opportunity. This is your chance for you to ensure your physical, mental and spiritual well- 
being. Not realising this, you are wasting a golden opportunity. It is easy to lose a precious thing. 
You are not aware of what is ahead of you, what the future holds for you. What pains Swami is 
the thought of the difficulties you will have to face in the future, of which Swami alone is aware. 
You may imagine that you can make whatever promises you like while you are here and pursue 
whatever courses you choose after going out from the Institute. This is a grievous mistake. 
Sooner or later you will have to reap the fruits of your decisions. You must see that these 
consequences are not untoward. What you regard today as a laughing matter may prove tragic 
later. 


Keep a strict watch over what you say. If the foot slips, you may suffer from a fall and sustain a 
temporary injury. But a slip of the tongue may cause lasting harm. Never go about criticising 
others. When you point to the mote in another's eye, you are forgetting the beam in your own 
eye. With plenty of faults in yourself, you have no right to point out the faults in others. It is a 
grievous sin to indulge in fault-finding. He alone is wise who is conscious of his defects. The one 
who is looking out for faults in others will acquire those faults himself by a process of reflex 
action. 


Churchill--the effective public speaker 


You have to learn from the example of Churchill, who though he did not fare well at school, 
through sheer self-confidence and self-education, became the Prime Minister of England. He 
enlisted in the army at a young age. When he later entered politics, he trained himself to become 
an effective public speaker. Before going to a meeting, he would practise before a mirror how he 
would address the meeting and what kind of impression would he make on the audience by his 
gestures and movements. By correcting himself in this way, he developed great self-confidence 
and acquired an impressive public personality. He became a master in the art of repartee. 


At an election meeting he was railing out the opposition without mincing words. A woman in the 
audience who was greatly provoked by Churchill's attack, got up and shouted: "Shut up." She 
remarked: "If I had been your wife I would have administered poison to put an end to your life." 
Churchill coolly replied: "If I had been your husband I would thrust the poison down your 
throat." The woman was put to shame and remained silent thereafter. 


On another occasion, an opposition MP was replying to Churchill's speech. Seeing that Churchill 
was keeping his eyes closed during the speech and appeared not to be listening to him, the 
Opposition member complained that Churchill was asleep while he was replying to Churchill's 
speech. He said that this was unparliamentary. Churchill immediately got up and said: "I would 
have been immensely happy if I had gone to sleep. It was because I could not get sleep, I had to 
endure the member's speech." That reply plunged the House in laughter. You have to practise the 
art of silencing criticism by humorous replies. 


After the hands and the tongue, you have to learn how to purify the mind. The mind is said to be 
constantly wavering and getting out of control. But when it is directed in the right way, it will be 
in the proper state. The rectification of the mind is Jnana Yoga. 


You have to aim at achieving the 7rikarana suddhi (triple purity). This will enable you to get rid 
of all evil qualities and make you unselfish. Today you seem to be self-centered even with regard 
to simple matters like looking at a group photo or seeing the examination results. You are 
concerned only with locating your picture in the group or your number in the results. You must 
develop a broader outlook and derive joy from the successes of others instead of being concerned 
only with your result. Our Institute students must learn to transcend such narrow attitudes and 
develop a wider outlook. 


Address to the students of Sri Sathya Sai Hostel, Prashaanthi Nilayam on 19-1-1989. 


3.Become ideal citizens 


IN ALL countries of the world there are good and bad men, scholars and illiterates, the affluent 
and the destitute. The one thing that is common to all of them is their inner essence--Sat-Chit- 
Ananda (Being-Awareness-Bliss). All the scriptures have described the Divine as Sat-Chit- 
Ananda. Every object, every being and every individual in the phenomenal world have these 
triune attributes. But, in the inert objects only the first two--Sat and Chit (Being and Awareness)- 
-can be recognised and not bliss. Only in animate beings can this quality be found manifest. This 
bliss however, is of a transient nature. 


There are two categories of bliss in the world' Sadhana-Janya Ananda (Acquired bliss) and 
Swatas-siddha Ananda (Self-generating bliss). Acquired bliss is associated with sensory objects. 
It arises and vanishes from time to time. It does not endure. For instance, when hunger is 
appeased, there is happiness for the moment. But it ceases after a time. This applies to all objects 
in the world. What is experienced when they are enjoyed is evanescent. This type of joy has been 
described as acquired or derived happiness. As it is got and lost by human effort, it is not true 
bliss. 


Man, however, seeks lasting Ananda (bliss). He is in fact filled with bliss and is the embodiment 
of bliss. Bliss constitutes his very nature and being. It exists sui generis in him. Why, then, does 
he not experience it? This is because, even though he is the embodiment of bliss, unaware of his 
true nature he is obsessed with the external world and fails to experience the bliss within him. He 
imagines that the source of joy lies in Nature (the phenomenal world). This is wrong. 


Experience the bliss within 


The bliss that is all-pervasive in the cosmos is also within man. But, as in the case of butter that 
is present in every drop of milk but which can be seen only after the milk is curdled and the 
buttermilk is churned, this inner bliss can be experienced only after the right effort is made. The 
mind is filled with various kinds of joy. It is only when the appropriate enquiry is made and one's 
true nature is ascertained that the Divine Sat-Chit-Ananda inherent in one will be manifest. 


Man today is conscious only of the Annamaya (physical) and Pranamaya (vital) principles 
relating to his existence. He has not developed even up to the stage of realising the significance 
of the mind. The body represents Annamaya. Activity and motion of the body are to the 
Pranamaya. The third element is Manomaya (the mental). The fourth is Vijnanamaya (Constant 
Integrated Awareness). Beyond this awareness is Ananda (the state of supreme bliss). In the 
great journey of life, man has passed, only two stations. He has not tried to go beyond them to 
the mental and other stages. It is only after passing the Vijnanamaya stage that man can 
experience Ananda (pure bliss). But because man goes after the impermanent pleasures of the 
phenomenal world, he is unable to experience the enduring bliss that is inherent in him. 


Exercise discrimination objectively 


The Upanishads have declared that immortality can be experienced only through Thyaga 
(renunciation or sacrifice). This renunciation does not mean giving up hearth and home, kith and 
kin. It means giving up the transient and impermanent things of the world. This calls for 
discrimination between what is permanent and what is perishable. This kind of discrimination is 
absent: among people today. Students, for instance, discriminate between what is convenient and 
what is unpleasant and choose the former. This element: of self-interest should go. 


Discrimination should be exercised objectively to determine what is permanent and what is 
transient, what is good and what is bad. Only then can man discover the Sat-Chit-Ananda (reality 
of the Bliss) that is within him. The failure to realise this arises from defective vision. The fault 
does not lie in the manifest universe. 


Students should recognise the value of good health. Mere age does not make a person young. 
The great Mahabharata warrior, Bhishma, fought on the battlefield when he was 116 years. 
Students should realise that good health alone confers lifelong happiness. Maintenance of 
physical fitness calls for mental discipline also. You have to control your desires. Even insects 
like ants-observe limits to their acquisitions. Only man exhibits unlimited greed. And because of 
this he sacrifices real happiness. There is no harm in aspiring for a good job or a position of 
honour and fame. But many ordeals have to be overcome to achieve them. One should not 
succumb to difficulties. One must develop the fortitude to face all challenges by strengthening 
one's faith in God. Be fearless. God is with you. Proceed on life's journey with courage. 


The royal road for every one 


Before completing your education and entering the vast stage of life, you have to learn certain 
basic things. First among them is control of the mind. Only then will senses be under control. 
Cultivate the feeling that the Divine is present in everyone and therefore you should not harm 
anyone. Love ever: Hurt never. This is the royal road for everyone. 


Students! Fill your minds with noble thoughts. Develop the convictions that you are the 
embodiments of the Divine: Sat-Chit-Ananda. The air around you is neither visible nor can be 
grasped. And yet, can you deny its presence? Can you survive for a moment without it? 
Likewise, the one who denies the existence of God is denying his very own existence. The 
Divine is omnipresent. Because you do not acquire the capacity to experience it, you are caught 
up in various troubles. You have to discover the unity that subsumes the diversity in the cosmos. 


What is this unity? It is Sat-Chit-Ananda. Sat is Being, 'that which exists. Chit is Awareness, the 
quality that enables cognition. If a thing did not exist it cannot be cognised. If it cannot be 
cognised, it cannot: be experienced or enjoyed. It is only when a thing is cognised or enjoyed 
that bliss is experienced. 


Relation between existence and experience 


Here is the cosmos. How do you know about its existence? You can see the things in it, hear the 
sounds, have impressions in the mind about them and be moved in your hearts by them. How can 
you deny their existence? 


You have to understand the relation between existence and experience. For instance, you feel 
hungry. You take food and the hunger is appeased. If food did not exist in the world, hunger 
would be out of place. If hunger did not exist food would be unnecessary. In this context it may 
be asked, which comes first: hunger or food? We may consider that hunger comes first. This is 
not correct. Food came into existence first, then hunger was caused. Man is able to protect his 
body because of the existence of food and hunger. It is said: food is for the protection of the 
body. Hence, you should regard food as necessary for living and not live for the sake of food. 
Education should be for leading a good life and not merely for earning a living. Birds and beasts 
are able to live without any education. Man has a higher destiny than mere living. 


There is an episode in the great Indian epic Ramayana in which Sri Rama reveals the truth about 
Himself and His mission in answer to sage Vasishta. When Rama was staying in Chitrakoota, 


Bharata and Satrughna, with all the royal paraphernalia, went to see Him and appeal to Him to 
return to Ayodhya as He alone, as the eldest son and the pre-eminent amongst them, was 
competent to rule the kingdom. Bharata declared that llama alone was fit to rule and not himself. 
In reply to Bharata's entreaties, Rama said: "Dear brother! The plighted word is most sacred. It is 
our very life. In the Ikshvaaku race, there has not been a single scion, who has gone back on his 
pledged word. Born in this great dynasty and being the eldest son I cannot brook the infamy of 
proving false to my pledge. I will joyfully give up My life rather than go back on My word." 


Rama's adherence to Truth 


The sage Jabali who was present there, was eager to persuade Rama to return to the kingdom 
even by using specious arguments and appearing as an atheist. He told Rama: "Ramachandra! 
You appear to me to be stubborn and irrational. Is there any meaning in your trying to act up to 
the words of an old king who was the victim of the viles of Kaikeyi? How can you say Dasaratha 
was a good man? He parted with the son for the sake of the wife. This is highly improper. 
Dasaratha is gone. Why do you wish to adhere to words of one who is no more?" Rama replied 
to the sage: "The body is perishable and may go at any time. But the promised word remains. 
Truth has no form. It is eternal and omnipresent. It stands unchanged in the past, the present and 
the future. I cannot be a party to the destruction of that Truth," declared Rama. 


Jabali returned to the argument again. He said: "Is it foolish to let go of the bird in the hand in 
the hope of getting two in the bush? You are concerned about the promises made by a dead man. 
Your concern must be to protect the truth of the living." 


The preceptor comes after the parents 


Realising the difficulty of carrying on the argument with Rama in this way, sage Vasishta 
intervened with the object of somehow inducing Rama to return to the kingdom. He said: 
"Ramachandra! There are three teachers for men--the mother, the father and the preceptor. You 
left for the forest on the words of your step-mother. I am your preceptor. Your preceptor is 
eminent because he practises what he teaches. You must: heed the words of the preceptor." To 
this Rama replied: "You have been the preceptor not only for my father, but for my ancestors and 
hence worthy of all honour and reverence. But the mother who bore me and nourished me and 
the father who reared me and made a man of me, take precedence over the preceptor, who comes 
later. If the mother had not given me my body and the father had not protected me, how could 
the preceptor figure in my life? Only after the mother and father have shaped the son can the 
preceptor illumine his mind with knowledge. Though the preceptor should be revered, the 
parents come first." 


At this stage Jabali came forward and uttered the mantras: "Maathru deco bhava! Pitru deco 
bhava! Acharya deco bhava!" (Regard the mother as God, the father as God and the preceptor as 
God). At that moment three deities appeared on the scene. Rama observed that the God who is 
present in all three is one and the same God and revealed His identity as the Divine in the human 
form. It was then that Vasishta declared: "Ramo Vigrahavaan Dharmah" (Rama is the very 
embodiment of Righteousness). "Oh Rama! You are Dharma itself that has taken human form. 
We have no words to argue with you." Jabali declared: “Pumsaam mohanaroopaaya" (the most 
alluring among men are You, Oh Rama). "You are the supreme upholder of Righteousness." 


Earn Divine grace by developing good character 


During your studies you have to learn how to lead a life of righteousness. You pursue your 
studies with diligence and devote your nights and days to acquire knowledge. But what efforts 
are you making to earn Divine love and grace? You feel sad about Swami not looking at you or 
talking to you but you do not try to find out why you are feeling this way. Are you enquiring into 
the purpose of education? Do you recognise the need for Self-realisation and control of the 
senses? Education should be for developing concentration of the mind and not collection of facts. 
Along with studies develop good character. Your conduct will determine your destiny. Have a 
wide-ranging mind. Narada was a master of 64 sciences. 


You have to make a distinction between knowledge and wisdom. When Valmiki was asked by 
Lava and Kusa why he described Ravana as murkha (a senseless man), although he was the 
master of all the Vedas and Sastras, while describing Rama as a high-souled person, he said: 
"Ravana was a well-versed scholar, but did not practise what he knew. Rama was a Jnani (a wise 
one) who lived up to what he had learnt. By controlling His senses, Rama led a life of truth and 
righteousness." Education that is used only for selfish ends is no education at all. Education 
should be used for promoting the welfare of others. Ravana sought only his own pleasure. Rama 
dedicated His life for the welfare of all. 


"Students are My life-breath" 


Dear students! You are doubtless on your best behaviour while you are here. Students are my 
lifebreath. You are My wealth. For your sake I am devoting all My time and energies so that you 
may sublimate your lives. Apart from setting you on the right path I have no other interest of my 
own. I want you to become ideal citizens of Bharat. You are not realising the magnitude of My 
love for you. There may be no connection between the studies you pursue here and the kinds of 
problems you may have to face in the outside world. The MBA students are taught 
"Communication." When you go out into the world communication acquires profound meaning. 
You have to deal with different kinds of people, workers, managers and the public. You have to 
know how to understand them and how to covey to them your ideas. Engage yourselves in your 
duties with faith in God. One of our MBA boys got a job in a Birla concern. Within two months 
he was able to earn a good name among the workers and the employees. This pleased Me 
immensely. It is enough for Me if you earn the approbation and regard of others. 


Students going out from the Sathya Sai Institute should earn a good name for themselves and the 
Institute. Already many employers have come forward to absorb our MBA students. If you live 
up to Swami's teachings you will be able to lead exemplary lives. Having spent many years in 
Prashaanthi Nilayam and imbibed the atmosphere and spirit of this sacred place, you must carry 
this atmosphere wherever your life may take you. Remember always that Swami is in you and 
you are in Swami wherever you may be. 


Discourse to the students of the Sri Sathya Sai Institute, in the Prashaanthi Mandir on 12-2- 
1989. 


It is inescapable destiny of every one to fulfill himself. Every living 
being has to attain fullness in the end. 


Each one is at present at a particular stage of this march, as a 
result of the activities engaged in during previous lives and the 
feelings he entertained in the past. The future is being built at 
present by the activities engaged in now and the feelings that urge 
and shape them. That is to say, what we do, feel or think about, at 
present--these are the basic reasons for the good fortune or bad 
fortune which is in store. 


BABA 


4. Live in the Divine 


THERE are five requisites for developing true devotion. The first is Dedication (offering 
everything to God). Egoism is the bar to developing the spirit of dedication. It manifests itself in 
various forms of pride - pride of physical strength, intellectual pride, the arrogance of wealth and 
the like. But as all these are impermanent and may be lost at any time, it is unwise to make the 
body, the mind or property the basis for one's conceit. Hence egoism should be renounced as the 
first offering to God. 


Next, devotion should be regarded as an expression of gratitude to all that one receives from 
Providence--the air that we breathe, the light and the heat that we get from the sun, the water we 
drink and the food we consume. All the essential necessaries of life are got by the grace of God. 
The expression of gratitude through devotion is a primary obligation. All that is done by the way 
of bhajans, japa, meditation and prayer must be done in the spirit of gratitude. 


The third requisite is discipline. In almost every action in life, the recognised limits and 
regulations have to be observed. This applies equally to the spiritual field. You must observe 
discipline in matters relating to dress, your general behaviour outside the mandir or during 
bhajans in the mandir, the way you speak and the food you eat. All your actions should be filled 
with sanctity and purity. 


Discrimination is the fourth requisite. Discrimination has to be used in every aspect of daily 
living--in what you see, what you listen to, what you speak and what you consume. Avoid eating 
all kinds of food in strange places. 


Last comes determination. Without firm determination no great thing can be achieved in life. It is 
all the more needed in the spiritual field so that you may face all difficulties and obstacles and 
overcome them. You must hold fast to what you consider as good, what you regard as sacred and 
what you recognise as the truth. That is real penance. 


End of wisdom is true freedom 


People in the West talk about freedom? Does it mean acting as you please, doing what you like? 
Not at all. True freedom consists in keeping the senses under control. A man wants to drink. But 
he gets tipsy after a drink. What happens to his freedom? He has lost the little sense he had. 
Freedom does not consist in indulgence. Real freedom comes from realisation of the Self. The 
end of wisdom is freedom. 


Of the different kinds of knowledge, that which really matters is the knowledge that is put into 
practice. All other knowledge is either verbal or pompous scholarship. When people are asked: 
"Where is God?" some give the reply: "He is everywhere." But these are mere words. No doubt 
the statement is correct. But how real is the answer to the persons concerned? Does it arise from 
their experience? The consciousness of the omnipresence of God should be based on the feeling 
that everything and every being is in God. You must feel the presence of God wherever you go, 
whatever you may do, whether you are eating or speaking or working. When you cultivate such 
an attitude that is the highest form of devotion. 


From confidence to Bliss 


Look upon the body as a moving temple. Wherever you go, God is with you. Do not indulge in 
debates over what is God and where is God. God has to be experienced through faith and 
confidence. Where there is confidence, there is Love. Where there is Love, there is Peace. Where 


there is Peace, there is Truth. Where there is Truth, there is Bliss. Where there is Bliss, there is 
God. 


Bliss is everywhere. The bliss that is in you is limited by your body-consciousness. You must 
extend that bliss and make it all-embracing. When a child is born, he is a lone individual. As he 
grows, he has wife and children. When the children get married the kinships get wider. This 
widening of relationships occurs in a single family. You have to widen your outlook to cover the 
entire human family. 


The Sai Family 


Here in Prashaanthi Nilayam there are people from many countries. You have Italians, 
Australians, Indonesians, Americans, Argentinians and people from scores of other countries. 
The countries from which they come are different. But they consider themselves as belonging to 
one family--the Sai family. This is an expression of unity in diversity Human beings may be 
diverse, but God is one. The concept of the Fatherhood of God and the Brotherhood of Man 
should inspire your daily life. 


You have all come from distant countries, at great expense and trouble. You do not seek any 
personal favours. You are not concerned even about your comforts. You are content if Swami 
talks to you or grants you an interview. Be steadfast in this attitude. Having come all the way, 
you must attend bhajans, whether you are able to follow their meaning or not. Avoid strolling 
outside the Nilayam. If the body wanders, mind also wanders. 


Consider what a great waste it would be to wander away from the sacred atmosphere of 
Prashaanthi Nilayam even for a moment. I am speaking out of concern for your good and well- 
being. Remember always that you have come here to experience sacred thoughts and to sanctify 
your lives. You should observe the discipline of this place. You have to behave with decency and 
respect towards everyone. Self-realisation can be attained only through sacrifice. But some are 
not prepared to give up smoking or non-vegetarian food. If you cannot give up even small things 
which are undesirable, how are you going to develop the spirit of sacrifice? 


When you go back to your respective countries, your conduct must be such that your countrymen 
have high regard for you. They should recognise the transformation wrought in you by your visit 
to Prashaanthi Nilayam and seek to follow your example. When you constantly remind 
yourselves, "I am God", you develop Godly behaviour. Listen to your Inner Voice---- the Voice 
of Conscience. Your conduct will then be spontaneously Godly. 


Do not waste money, food, time and energy 


It is because of your devotion and earnestness that you have come all the way here. You must 
make full use of your stay to realise your goal. Do not think only of the weeks and months you 
spend here. What matters is how you use your stay. Swami judges you not by quantity but by 
quality. To what extent you have transformed yourselves and advanced spiritually is all that 
matters. How far have you given up your old ways and practices? It may be cheaper to live in 
Puttaparthi than in your own country. But that does not mean that you should spend money as 
you please. Misuse of money is evil. Don't waste money. Don't waste food. Food is God. Don't 
waste time, because time wasted is life wasted. Don't waste energy. Energy is wasted in idle talk 
and meaningless wanderings. 


I know how deep is your devotion. Do not dissipate it by indulging in unbecoming activities. 
Conduct yourselves in such a way that it pleases Swami. When you are happy, I am happy. 


Remember your goal is nothing less than realising your inherent Divinity. It is difficult for any 
one to get; an opportunity like this. Among the billions of people in the world, how many can 
come here to experience the Divine? You are among the blessed and the fortunate few. Make the 
best use of this supreme good fortune and transform yourselves into godly persons and help to 
transform others. Be always happy. Share your joys with others. This is true spirituality. 
Remember, Love is God; live in Love. Truth is God; live in Truth. Bliss is God; live in Bliss. Be 
fearless. God is with you. When you go about with the conviction, "God is with me; I am in 
God," you will have no fear. I hope by acting in this way, you will spread peace and harmony in 
your respective countries. 


Discourse to the devotees from overseas countries in Prashaanthi Mandir, on 17-2-1989. 


So long as you are in Avidya, so long as you are untrained and 
ignorant, you cannot taste the Bliss; you cannot attain it. You are 
still bound by the three-corded rope--the black cord of Tamas, the 
red cord of Rajas and the white cord of Satwa. Hence regulate 
your life in such a way that you do not harm your inner nature. 


BABA 


5. From love : to love 


How can anyone conceive of a form 

for that Formless Divine? 
For One who has no hands or feet, 

What ornaments can one fashion? 
It is fanciful to attribute this or 

that name and form to that One; 
To ascribe the effulgence of a billion 

suns in a flight of imagination. 
How can anyone attempt to reveal 

the form of the Formless Absolute? 
The Atma is the Eternal Formless 


Illumining the entire Cosmos. 


Brahman is Love incarnate 

Love can be realised only through Love; 

If one holds fast to Love 

Oneness with the Divine can be experienced. 
PAVITRAATMASWAROOPULAARA! (Embodiments of the sacred Atma!) 


You have to note how you have secured this appellation. Pavithra is a word derived from the 
Latin root, ‘Vir’ which means 'man.' Hence man is the embodiment of Pavithra (sacredness). The 
Atma is associated with Divinity. 


After the rise of Christianity in Rome, the Romans gave a distinctive name to ,Jesus in 
recognition of His divinity. He was called "Persona," meaning one who is Divine. The English 
word "Person" is derived from "Persona." 


The Indian term Vyakti is related to the term "Person." Vyakti means the one that makes manifest 
the Unmanifested. What is it that is unmanifest? That is the Atma (the Cosmic Spirit). Man is 
described as Pavitraatmaswaroopa (the sacred embodiment of the Divine) because he manifests 
the divinity inherent in him. 


God is the very embodiment of Prema (Love). Man is the spark of the Divine. You may find a 
man without anger, without truth or without peace, but you cannot find anyone in the world 
devoid of love. Love is present equally in all human beings as the one effulgent divine quality. 
This love may be expressed in different ways, but its nature is the same. 


Man is thus an aspect of the Cosmic Consciousness. Unfortunately, however, because man 
directs his love towards worldly objects, he is unable to recognise his divinity. His mind gets 
polluted because of association with the external world. As a result:, even his love gets tainted 


and his mind becomes incapable of cherishing the beauteous form of the Lord. Only when he 
directs his love towards God will man be able to experience the Divine within him. 


The mind and Divinity 


On the disturbed surface of the pond, the reflection of the moon is wavy. But on a clear surface, 
the moon's reflection is clear and steady. In a muddy pond, the moon's reflection is muddy. 
Likewise in the lake of a man's life, if it is confused and fickle, his love also gets distorted. When 
the mind is pure, unselfish and unwavering, the Divine appears in all His purity and fullness. But 
because of the pollution of the mind through obsession with multifarious external objects, man 
today is unable to experience the Divine that is omnipresent and is equally in him. 


Many persons declare that God is present within them. This is wrong. This statement belittles the 
Divine. When I hold a flower within my palm, the flower is obviously smaller than my palm. If 
you say that God is within you, you suggest that you are bigger than God. The truth is: You are 
in the Divine and not the Divine in you. It is only when you have such a wide vision that you can 
experience the Divine. 


Firm faith is essential for realising the Self. Faith is the basis of self-confidence, without which 
nothing can be achieved. The word Manava (man) itself means one who has faith. When he acts 
upto his faith, he experiences peace and contentment. Love is the means through which faith is 
strengthened. 


People offer prayers to God. Prayers should not mean petitioning to God for favours. The object 
of prayer should be to establish God firmly in one's heart. Aim at linking yourself to God and not 
at seeking favours. Aspire for earning the love of God. That is real penance. That is why it is 
said: Looking ahead is Tapas (penance); looking backward is Tamas (ignorance). Tapas does not 
mean giving up hearth and home and retiring to a forest. It means giving up all bad qualities and 
striving to live ceaselessly for God's grace. 


True devotion is to feel closeness to God 


Love is the primary factor in this process. There is nothing greater than love on earth. Anything 
can be accomplished through love. Therefore, make every effort to promote love. 


True devotion consists in offering all your thoughts and actions to God and yearning for His 
grace. Bhakti has been described as the state of non-separation from God. Regardless of time, 
space or circumstance, one should feel closeness to God--that is true Bhakti. Nowadays devotion 
is confined to the brief spell spent in the puja room (shrine) or in a temple. During this period 
devotion appears to swell within you and you feel you are at peace. But once outside, the peace 
is lost and anger takes its place. This cannot be called devotion. True devotion transcends the 
limitations imposed by the daily routine and obligations of life. It should not be subject to 
changes in time, place and circumstance. Love for the Divine should be present in any situation. 
"Sathatham Yoginah" (Always remain as Yogis), it is said. You must strive to cultivate such love 
and experience the joy of sharing that love with others. 


Occasionally one's devotion cools off when one's desires are not fulfilled. This is not a sign of 
true devotion. Devotion should not be related to physical needs. It is concerned with the heart 
and should not be affected by vicissitudes relating to the body and the mind. Devotion transcends 
the concerns of the body. Such devotion has been described as Parama Bhakti (Supreme 
devotion). It may also be described as Ananya Bhakti (one-pointed devotion). Only such one- 
pointed devotion can get rooted in the heart. Our love should not vary from time to time. 


Embodiments of Love! People tend to sacrifice their true nature for the sake of others’ 
approbation. They should live up to the truth of their being. That is true devotion. A real devotee 
is eager to experience Divine love and does not seek pomp and show. 


Four different paths of spiritual practice 


People speak about Yoga, Jnana, Karma and Bhakti in relation to spiritual practice. These are 
inextricably inter-related. Among these, Bhakti deserves special mention. The first; among 
spiritual paths is Karma Marga (the Path of Action). The votary of this path performs many 
actions for the welfare of the world. He participates in yajnas and yagas (ritualistic sacrifices). 
He is engaged in service and charitable activities. All these forms of Karma are fraught with 
certain difficulties. To perform sacrifices one must be acquainted with the Vedic texts. This is not 
easy for laymen. 


The Jnana Marga (the Path of Knowledge) calls for knowledge of the scriptures and several 
other kinds of knowledge, which together lead to Atmajnana (Knowledge of the Self). Jnana has 
been defined as Advaita Darsanam (the awareness of the One Cosmic Consciousness). It means 
recognising unity in diversity. It is not easy to experience this unity. 


The path of Yoga, which is concerned with control of the mind, is equally difficult. It calls for 
rigorous control of the senses. One has to overcome many difficulties, trials and tribulations. 
Very few have the mental and spiritual strength to face these difficulties and ordeals. The path of 
Yoga is thus beset with many hurdles. 


Knowledge without practice is of no use 


Bhakti (the Path of Devotion) is the easiest path for all. It does not call for mastery of the 
scriptures. It does not enjoin performance of rituals and sacrifices. The elusive quest for unity in 
diversity is avoided. By cultivating love for God, the senses come under natural self-discipline. 
Those who are well-versed in the sastras are good scholars but they hardly practise what they 
preach. What matters is practice and not scholarship. Knowledge without action is useless 
lumber. One must strive to put into practice at least one or two things learnt in the spiritual field. 
The most important goal for man is to put into practice the doctrine of divine love. 


The Principle of Love is the greatest unifying force which unites all spiritual practices, all creeds, 
all the goals of life and all the scriptures. The foremost path for the spiritual aspirant is the path 
of complete surrender to the Lord for earning His love and grace. The devotee offers everything 
he has and does to the Lord in the same manner in which a bride renounces all that she had 
before her marriage in going to the home of her husband. God's love cannot be got: without such 
renunciation by the devotee. 


Appreciate the ways of the Divine 


On various occasions, the Lord subjects the devotees to different kinds of tests and trials with a 
view to raising them spiritually to a higher level. The Lord, who is the source of all wisdom, will 
confer illumination only on those who approach Him. Those who feel that Bhagavan has not 
seen them or spoken to them should ask themselves how close they are mentally to Bhagavan 
and how near they are to the Lord in their practices. Each one should engage himself in the 
process of self-enquiry. The Lord has neither agraha (anger) nor anugraha (benevolence). Even 
when He appears to be harsh, there is grace in that; harshness. When He appears to chastise, 
there is compassion in it. When He seems to be angry, there is love behind it. 


Only those who understand the nature of the Divinity can appreciate the ways of the Divine. The 
Divine resorts to certain kinds of punishments to make the devotee pursue the right path and 
enable him to lead an ideal life. Such punishments are for the devotee's good and well-being. 


Here is a story to illustrate the maxim, "No gains without pains." There was a gardener who used 
to water the plants in the garden carrying a pot on his head from dawn to dusk. One day while 
carrying the pot he got a headache and wanted to lay down the pot and go home. At that moment, 
the pot taught him a valuable lesson. The pot said: "Oh man! There can be no fruit without: 
labour, no pleasure without pain. Learn the lesson from my own story. I was just mere dust and 
mud, trodden upon by people. The potter gathered that mud, turned it into clay by pressing it 
under his feet, and made a pot from it by whirling the clay on his wheel. And finally I was placed 
in a kiln for firing. Whoever came to buy me, tapped on my sides with strength to test my 
hardness. It was because I went through all these ordeals that I earned the privilege of dancing on 
the heads of people. If I had not gone through all these trials, how could I have achieved this 
eminence? Likewise, only if you are prepared to go through trials and difficulties will you be 
able to raise yourself in life." 


Egoism, the disease has no medicine 


Hence, you should not succumb to difficulties and disappointments. You must strive to 
overcome them. For this purpose, you have to acquire the grace of God by developing faith. 
Every man is a prey to one evil quality, a kind of disease for which there is no medicine. That 
disease is Ahamkara (egoism). The egoism gets into a man's head and plays the devil with him. 
Egoism affects not human beings alone but even birds and beasts. For instance, a dog kept in a 
rich man's gate barks at every passerby to exhibit its authority. It is an example of egoism in an 
animal. The dog wants to show that it is the guardian of the house and that no one dare enter it. 
The dog assumes that "this is my house, I have to protect it," but it does not know what that "I" 
is. 


If today a man does not know what his "I" signifies, he is in the same position as the dog. Every 
moment a person talks about "My body, my mind, etc," but he does not ask: "Who am I?" He 
alone is a Jnani (a man of wisdom) who has discovered the truth about himself. One who goes 
on using the word "I," but does not know who he is, is an Ajnani (an ignorant person). 


People bandy the word Vedanta. When a scholar is asked, "What is Vedanta?" the answer is: 
"The Upanishads, which come at: the end of the Vedas, constitute Vedanta." That is not the real 
Vedanta. The ending of the "I" (the ego) is Vedanta. If you wish to know Me, you have to first 
know who you really are. Look into yourselves. Without understanding who you really are, how 
you can seek to understand Me? When your vision is concentrated on the external, how can you 
understand the inner being? 


Iswara's three forms 


Iswara is said to have three forms. One' Viraat-Swaroopa (the Cosmic form). Two' 
Hiranyagarbha (the subtle form). Third: Avyaakruta (the Causal entity). Viraat-Swaroopa is 
Viswa-roopa---the entire manifested Cosmos is His form. All the myriad forms and names in the 
universe are contained in His form. This is described as Jaagrata-Swaroopudu (the Cosmic form 
as experienced in the waking state). The second one is the Divine as experienced in the dream 
state Hiranyagarbha. In the waking state we use our limbs, see with our eyes and hear with our 
ears. In the dream state, we perform many actions. What are the hands which we use, what are 


the legs which we walk? What is the mouth that speaks in dreams? When all the organs and 
senses of the body are not functioning in the dream state, how do these experiences occur? That 
is the subtle form of Hiranyagarbha. 


Avyaakrutudu, the third form, is the Causal entity. It has no specific form and therefore is called 
Avyaakruta. But Ananda (Bliss) is present. There is consciousness of experience. The physical, 
the subtle and the causal are the three forms respectively of Viswaroopa, Hiranyagarbha and 
Avyaakruta. You are the same person experiencing the waking state, dreaming in the sleeping 
state and enjoying the bliss in the sushupti (deep sleep) state. The one entity existing in all three 
states is the Atma--in the body in the waking state, in the mind in the dream state and in the 
Chitta (Higher Consciousness) in the deep sleep state. The Iswara principle unifies all the three 
entities. 


Desire and hatred conceal the Divinity within 


Today we celebrate Siva Rathri. It means Auspicious Night. Who is this Siva and where is He to 
be found? All kinds of answers are given. Kailasa or other places that are mentioned are only 
"care of" addresses. The true answer is: “Jsaavaasyam idam sarvam" (All this is pervaded by 
Iswara). He is omnipresent. There is no place, object or being where God is not present. You 
have to correct your outlook and recognise the unity in the apparent diversity. 


When God is omnipresent, what need is there to go in search of God? The search is meaningless. 
If one gets rid of the attachment and the hatred in him, he will experience the Divinity inherent in 
him. This is the sadhana (spiritual exercise) one has to do today--to get rid of desire and hatred 
which conceal the Divinity within. 


Many people come to Swami and ask: "Swami! Show us the way." All that you have to do is to 
go back to the source from which you came. Where is the need for seeking the way? The 
Bhagavatha has declared that it is the natural destiny of every living being to go back to the 
place from which it came. 


Seek to know the purpose of life 


Embodiments of Divine Love! Consider for a moment, wherefrom the rain comes. It comes from 
clouds. The clouds have come from water vapour rising from the sea. The rain becomes a 
channel on the earth, then a rivulet and then a big river which joins the sea. A pot made out of 
clay, when it is broken, is cast on the ground, where, in course of time, it becomes clay again. 
Water from the sea joins the sea, clay from the earth goes back to the earth again, man alone 
forgets the source from which he came. 


Man must seek to know the purpose of life. With all his knowledge and intelligence, man should 
try to rise above the level of the animal to a realisation of his divinity. A great deal of time is 
being wasted on futile controversies. The educated boast about their scholarship. They should be 
more concerned about discovering their true nature and living according to it. 


The word Manava (man) means one who lives free from ignorance. What: is this ignorance? It is 
to regard himself as that which he is not. He is not the body. He is not the mind. When he acts as 
if he is the body and the mind, he is living in ignorance like Dhritarashtra. 


The besetting evil in man is the sense of Mamakaara (mine), the acquisitive and possessive 
feeling. This is the cause of all other evils. Man has to develop the consciousness that he is 


Divine. The breath which man inhales and exhales 21,600 times a day conveys the message of 
"So-ham" (I am He)--the truth about man's divine reality. 


We regard as Bhakti (devotion) a few minutes devoted for worship, or going to sacred shrines 
and the like. But true devotion is an expression of gratitude to God for all that He has given us-- 
the human body with its various capacities, the intelligence we are endowed with and the many 
natural amenities made available to us such as air, water and sunlight. A person without gratitude 
is worse than a wild animal. 


Develop love for God. There is nothing more powerful than Divine love. 


Discourse in the Poornachandra Auditorium on 6-3-1989. 


Change your vision and the world will appear accordingly. Let the 
eye be charged with the Divine, it will see all as God. It is foolish 
to try to shape the — world. Shape yourself 
as the embodiment of Peace, Love and Reverence. Then you will 
see all as Love, Compassion and Humility. 


BABA 


6. Live up to your role 


DIVINITY is present in everyone in an unmanifested form. All human beings are sparks of the 
Divine like the waves of the ocean. Every man is the embodiment of the Divine Sat-Chit-Ananda 
(Being-Awareness-Bliss). This has been described categorically in the Bhagavad Gita. 


As God is the embodiment of love, man is also an embodiment of love. But man today does not 
manifest it fully and properly because of his selfishness and self-centredness. 


Though humanity has advanced considerably in the material and scientific spheres, it has gone 
down grievously morally and spiritually. Selfishness is predominant in every action. Behind 
every thought, every word, self-interest is prominent. It is only when this selfishness is 
eradicated can Divinity reveal itself. 


In rendering Seva (service), there should be a recognition of the omnipresence of the Divine in 
all human beings. Men have not developed the spirit of Thyaga (sacrifice) or aversion to Bhoga 
(sensual pleasures). True service calls for a spirit of sacrifice. Sacrifice has been declared to be 
the only means to achieve immortality. 


Man has become prey to discontentment 


Men appear to be in quest of God. They do not realise that all that they see is permeated by God. 
All forms are Divine. But because man's vision is externalised, he is unable to have the inner 
vision of the Divine. 


Man craves for peace. Though the source of peace and bliss is within himself, he seeks them in 
the external like one pursuing a mirage. Owing to restless activity, endless worry and limitless 
desires, man has lost peace of mind and has become prey to discontent and misery. At the outset, 
peace has to be cultivated within ourselves. And then that peace has to be extended to the family. 
From the home it should be spread to our village. Thus, peace should begin with the individual 
and spread to the whole society. 


In the Sai organisation, efforts are made to propagate the values of Truth, Righteousness, Love, 
Peace and Non-violence. This is only propagation, but not practice (or demonstration). Mere 
preaching is of no avail. Truth must be practised. Truth and Righteousness are the highest values 
upheld by Bharatiya Culture. If people do not live up to Truth and Righteousness, their human- 
ness is worth nothing. 


Of all the virtues, love is the foremost. If love is fostered, all other qualifies flow from it. In 
every form of sadhana love has the first place. Love is the supreme mark of humanness. Love is 
God. Live in Love. Start the day with Love. Fill the day with Love. End the day with Love. You 
have to engage yourselves in Seva, eschewing every trace of Ahamkara (conceit). Our 
degradation is the result of forgetting God. When we remember God, our life will be filled with 
peace and happiness. 


Man has three kinds of Jchcha-sakthi (wishing abilities). One is: Swechcha (wishing freely). 
Two: Parechcha (carrying out the wishes of others). Three: Anichcha (without wishing). 
Swechcha does not mean freedom to act as you please, using your strength and possessions as 
you like, regardless of the rights of others. 


True meaning of the three wishing abilities 


True Swechcha (freedom to act as one wishes) consists in taking a decision with your own mind, 
carrying it out in action and accepting the consequences, for good or iti, wholeheartedly. This is 
true freedom of will. The freedom that you desire in doing what pleases you should imply that 
equally freely you accept the consequences flowing from its fulfilment. Parechcha refers to what 
one does at the prompting or bidding of others and laments the consequences resulting from such 
actions, casting the blame on others for what one suffers. Anichcha refers to fortuitous 
happenings that occur without one's own willing or as a result of actions prompted by others and 
are accepted as providential. 


Having got the precious human form, men must seek to live according to the true requirements 
of that form. It should be realised that man is not born to wallow in ignorance, poverty or sin. He 
is born for a higher destiny. He should live up to the role conferred on him. 


The king, the sanyasi and the dancer 


Once a sanyasi (renunciant) came to a Maharaja and expounded to him the sacred truths of the 
Vedanta. The king was pleased with his exposition and offered him a plate full o£ gold coins. 
The ascetic declined to accept it, saying it was not in keeping with the cowl he was wearing to 
accept any material gifts. "What need have I for these things when I have renounced every 
worldly thing?" he said. The king was pleased with the sanyasi's attitude. 


The next day the same person turned up in court in the guise of a danseuse. She danced superbly 
before the king. The king was pleased and offered to her a plate of gold coins. She declared that 
she was not willing to accept such a meagre guerdon and wanted more. The king realised at that 
moment that the person in the dancer's dress was the same person who had appeared as a sanyasi 
the previous day. The king told her: "Yesterday you declined to accept the gift at my hands and 
today you ask for more than I have offered. What is the inner meaning of this difference in 
attitude?" 


She pointed out that everyone has to act up to the role assumed by him. Wearing the sanyasi's 
robe it was the proper thing for the ascetic to reject any material gift. But in the dancer's role she 
was entitled to ask for as much as she thought fit. That day she was playing the role of the 
dancer. 


When the king heard her reply, he felt that he had learnt a good lesson from her. "Here I am, a 
king. I should conduct myself as a king and not behave in any way unbecoming of a person 
wearing regal robes." He appreciated the lesson which the woman had taught him. 


Today someone may wear the ochre robe, but his heart is filled with foulness. He has desires 
from which even a householder is free. The Bharatiya culture has been undermined with such 
double life. When you consider the pandits, many of them are well-versed in the scriptures and 
can recite them by rote. They may flaunt their rudraakshamaalas (necklace of the sacred beads 
used in japa). They may wear precious shawls. But their actions are not in accordance with their 
costumes and adornments. "Pandithaah samadarsinaah," declares the Gita---the true scholar 
looks at: everything with an equal eye. How can those who do not have this equal-minded vision 
be described as pandits? If one claiming to be a sanyasi has renounced all mundane things, but 
continues to entertain desires, how can he be regarded as a sanyasi? Today many who parade the 
knowledge of the scriptures are Bhogarajus (those who are revelling in luxury) or Rogarajus 
(glorying in disease) but are not becoming Thyagarajus (those who are masters of renunciation). 


Role of Sai sevaks 


You are the members of the Sathya Sai Seva Dal. As such you must strive to render service in 
keeping with your role. You are sevaks. Have the feeling that whomever you serve, you. are 
serving God. Remember in what spirit Hanuman, the monkey, served Sri Rama. You should not 
imagine that because he was a monkey he lacked intelligence or other qualities. He has been 
described as "tranquil, virtuous and strong." Such a person, when he was on a tree in the 
Asokavana in Lanka, was questioned by the Rakshasas as to who he was and wherefrom he had 
come. Hanuman replied: "Daasoham Kausalendrasya" ("I am the servant of Sri Rama, the Lord 
of Kosala"). He did not boast about his valour or knowledge. He was content to describe himself 
as the humble and devoted servant of Rama. 


Bear in mind the maxim "Without being a Ainkara (one who is ready to carry out the Lord's 
command), you cannot become a Sankara (the Divine)." 


You have to transform your life through service. You should give no room for arrogance or self- 
interest to the slightest extent in your service activities. Install in your heart the feeling that the 
service you render to anyone is service to God. Only then does service to man become service to 
Madhava (God). 


Dedicate all your actions to God 


Born in society, brought up in society, educated by society and deriving countless benefits from 
society, what are you doing for society? Social service should be regarded as an expression of 
gratitude to society for what it has done to us. Without society we cannot survive. The God-given 
body should be employed for practising Dharma. As Prahlada said: "Of what use is human birth 
if the various organs like hands, legs, mouth and ears are not engaged in the worship of the Lord? 
Such a man is a burden to the womb that bore him." Sankaracharya, exponent of the Jnana 
Marga, in the last reckoning commended the path of Bhakti in his "Bhaja Govindam." 


Women are given to excessive talking. They should treat even their daily chores as a form of 
concentrated work. If they are unable to attend a Satsang on account of household duties, they 
should not feel miserable on that account. Discharge of duties at home is as sacred as attending a 
satsang. Only if you do your duties at home properly will you be able to render proper service 
outside. In whatever work you do at home, whether sweeping the floor or making chappthis, 
convert it into a form of spiritual exercise. Infuse every action with love of the Divine and 
dedicate it to God. 


Discourse to a large gathering of active workers and other devotees at "Abbotsbury", Madras, 
on 23-3-1989. 


Live in the constant contemplation of your kinship with others and 
with the Universe. Do good to others, treat all nature kindly, speak 
soft and sweet, become a child devoid of envy, hate and greed; 
When your ego crosses the threshold of your family or group and 
takes kindly to those beyond, you have taken the first step to cross 
the threshold of Maya. 


BABA 


7. Let practice prevail 


EMBODIMENTS of Divine love! Today the world is replete with great intellectuals, learned 
scholars who excel in logomachy, professional politicians and sanyasis who flaunt the ochre 
robe. But the divinity that is inherent in humanity is not to be seen at all. People have forgotten 
their Divine essence. Humanity has to discover its basic human qualifies. 


Whatever learning one may acquire, whatever positions one may occupy, however great a 
scientist one may be, if he lacks human values, he is no human being at all. What is humanness? 
Essentially it means unity in thought, word and deed. When what one thinks differs from what he 
says and what he does, he ceases to be human. He becomes a demon. Today what men have to 
cultivate is unity and purity in thought, word and deed. True human qualities can grow only in a 
heart filled with spiritual aspirations, like a seed sown in a fertile soil and not on a piece of rock. 
Hence, to develop these qualities, men will have to develop compassion and equanimity amidst 
the vicissitudes of life. 


Man today is caught up in meaningless worries, endless desires and unattainable ambitions and 
has no peace of mind. To one who is groping in the darkness of ignorance and peacelessness, it is 
spiritual illumination alone that can reveal the right path. Today cynicism and apathy are 
rampant. People are not interested in religious discourses. The reason is that these discourses are 
confined to the platform. There is no earnest enquiry into the value of these teachings, nor is 
there practice of the precepts. The foremost need today is to live the life of the Spirit. 


The world needs good people 


For the progress of the world, it is not some factory or industry that is needed. The world needs 
good students and good men and women. Only then the nation will progress. 


Men do not realise that as their desires increase, their happiness diminishes. There is no limit to 
desires. They multiply like ants in an anthill. There is no sense of satisfaction, however much 
one may possess or enjoy. Animals and birds have contentment. They have neither the selfish 
propensity to hoard nor the sinful quality of exploiting others. Man alone is prone to acquisitive 
hoarding and exploitation. 


To realise one's divinity, there is no need to embark on a long quest. Divinity is all-pervading 
and is present in and outside every being. Every man is an embodiment of the Divine. 


God is the embodiment of love. Man who has emerged from God, is also an embodiment of love. 
But, because he expresses his love towards external objects, he is forgetting the truth about his 
inner being. Instead of limiting his love within narrow confines, man should extend it to all and 
thereby make his life purposeful and worthy. 


Same Divine is present in every one 


Today love is disappearing even between mother and children, father and son, husband and wife 
and between friends. Narrow-minded attachments are divisive in their nature. These should give 
place to a broad feeling of love and regard for all on the basis that the same Divine is present in 
everyone. 


There is an example from the Mahabharata to illustrate this situation. Because of Sri Krishna's 
grace, all the Pandava brothers survived the Kurukshetra war. All the hundred Kaurava brothers 
died in the war. Seeing the plight of Gandhari, not one of whose sons had survived the war, 


people blamed Krishna for such a calamity. Krishna went to Gandhari to console her. On seeing 
Krishna, she burst out in anger: "Krishna! Being Divine, should you exhibit such favouritism? 
Could you not have saved at least one of my sons?" Smilingly Krishna replied: "Mother! Did you 
set your eyes on even one of your sons? When you yourself did not choose to cast your eyes on 
your sons, how do you expect God to look at them?" (Gandhari had blindfolded herself from the 
time of her marriage to her blind husband, Dhritarashtra, and had never removed the bandage out 
of devotion to her husband). You have to earn the mother's love. There is nothing greater than 
one's mother and Motherland. 


Man is beset today with many problems and difficulties. He alone is a true human being who 
faces these difficulties with fortitude and overcomes them. For this, what is required is strength 
of the Spirit. Without spiritual strength, all other things are valueless. Karna had physical 
strength and material wealth. But he lacked Divine grace and hence he fell in the battle. 


Embodiments of Divine Love! Remember always that God permeates everything in the cosmos. 
Everything you experience is Divine. What all you see is Divine. What you eat is Divine. The air 
you breathe is Divine. You cannot see the air, nor can you grasp it. Likewise you cannot grasp 
God. The eyes cannot see Him. He can only be experienced in the heart. He is beyond the mind. 


Promote world unity through love 


The human birth is precious. Sanctify it by leading righteous lives. Do not fritter it away. 
Whatever spiritual discipline you may practise or not, cultivate love for all. Offer that love as a 
divine offering to all. Only through love can world unity be promoted. It is because of the 
absence of love that all kinds of differences arise. Love is God. Live in Love. Make this the 
ruling principle of your life. Be considerate to everyone. 


Today speeches are made on Sathya, Dharma, Santhi and Prema (Truth, Righteousness, Peace 
and Love) and exhibitions are organised to propagate these values. But there is no attempt to 
exemplify these values by practical living. Of what avail are speeches and exhibitions if these 
values are not practised? The world will not be reformed by propaganda. It is only when there 
are living examples of these ideals that they become meaningful and inspiring. 


All the Chaos in the world is due to the fact that people lead double lives. They say one thing and 
act differently. There should be unity in thought, word and deed. True spirituality consists in 
promoting human unity through harmonious living and sharing the joy with one and all. Bhajans 
and all forms of worship are only good actions, but are spiritually not important. 


Devotion consists in expressing love towards all. You cannot effect a change of heart by 
speeches. They often lead to confusion and conflict. Better than speeches is practice of love, with 
faith in the Divine. Follow the path of love and redeem your lives. 


Discourse at "Sivam," Hyderabad, on 24-3-1989. 


Do not use the study of sastras and scriptures for increasing your 
egoism; let it make you humble, though at the same time, more 
resistant to temptation. Your nature is divine; what has happened 
is that delusion has covered it with dirt. The washerman does not 
make your clothes white; it is white already; what he does is to 


manifest its whiteness by removing the dirt that has hidden the 
genuine native colour, white. 


BABA 


8. Make every moment holy 


ALL HOLY festivals in Bharat are invested with profound inner significance. Today is Yugadi 
day. It is commonly believed that this marks the beginning of a new year. No. It is really a 
beginning of a ywga (aeon). The Lord is the beginning and the end of every aeon. Hence, He is 
called Yugaadikrit (the creator of yuga). God is not only the creator of each aeon, but He is also 
described as a sustainer of the yuga. 


In sustaining the yuga, the Lord is all-powerful. He is omnicompetent. Hence, He has the 
appellation "Yugadhara" (the supporter of yuga). He is also known as Yugaandhara. 


Divinity is the power behind the creation, sustenance and dissolution of every aeon. Yugadi is 
also celebrated as Samvatsaraadi (the festival of the new year). What is the meaning of 
Samvatsara? Samvatsara means God, the One who dwells in everything. For Samvatsara (the 
year), the underlying spirit is Atma. Another name for Samvatsara is Kaala (Time). Because 
Time is subsumed by the Spirit, God is known as Kaala Atma (the Time Spirit). Yugadi, 
therefore, represents the form of the Divine. The Cosmos itself is the form of the Divine 
(Vishnu). "Sarvam khalu idam Brahmam," declares the Upanishad. The four yugas (aeons)-- 
Krita, Treta, Dwapara and Kali--are permeated with Divinity. Hence, God has also the name 
Chaturatmaka (the Fourfold Spirit). 


This fourfold Spirit is manifested in four forms with distinctive attributes though their powers are 
one and the same. They are' Vasudeva, Sankarshana, Aniruddha and Pradyumna. All the four 
are combined in the Avatara (the incarnation of the Divine in human form). 


God should not be regarded as some separate power or entity. Time is a manifestation of God. 
Hence, God is adored as Kaala (Time), Kaalakaala (the Master of Time, the Controller of Time), 
Kaalaatheetha (One who transcends Time), etc. God is also known as Vatsara as the Divine 
indweller in all beings. 


Vasudeva-the first form of fourfold Spirit 


Of the four forms of the Lord regarded as Chaturatmaka, the first is Vasudeva. This name 
signifies that the Lord is immanent in everything in creation and bears within Himself everything 
in the Cosmos. He is omnipotent. He is resplendent. He remains unmoved in any condition, in 
any circumstance, while being present in every limb and every cell. He is known also as 
Angirasa--the One who is present in every Anga (limb) in the form of the circulating blood and 
imparts vitality to it. As the rasa (vital essence), He is described as Raso vai Sah (the elan vital). 
Thus, everything is permeated by God and there is nothing outside Him. 


Sankarshana, Aniruddha and Pradyumna 


The second name is Sankarshana. Sankarshana is the One, who at the time of Pralaya (the Great 
Dissolution), absorbs within Himself the entire Cosmos. He is the One who ends all sorrow and 
confers all happiness. The Sankarshana principle is the one which removes misery and confers 
joy. Shankarshana should not be regarded merely as Balarama, the son of Revathi (the elder wife 
of Vasudeva). Sankarshana represents the Divine attribute of eliminating grief and giving 
happiness, removing mental agitation and conferring peace, destroying weakness of spirit and 
instilling fortitude. This is no ordinary attribute. It is a Divine quality which is present in every 
human being. 


Aniruddha, the third, refers to one who has a unique quality. He confers this guality--Sampada 
(wealth) on whoever prays to Him. He is the Lord who confers both material and spiritual 
benefits on those who adore Him. In this aspect, He shines through His effulgence. This 
illumination is not derived from outside. He Himself is the source of His light and also the light 
that illumines everything. This principle of Aniruddha is essential for every human being. 


The fourth name is Pradyumna. He represents the invincible Divine power, which cannot be 
overcome by anyone. He has no equal. He is His own example. He is His own law. There is no 
one below Him or above Him because He is even in those below Him. The Pradyumna principle 
is all-pervading and omnipresent. 


Union of all four principles is humanness 


It is the combination of all these four principles which constitute humanness. God is not different 
from man. Vasudeva is Paramatma (the Omni-Self). Sankarshana is Jivatma (the individual 
Soul). Pradyumna is the mind. Aniruddha is Aham (the ego). The union of these four is 
Manavatva (humanness). 


If any one of these four constituents is absent, man cannot live in the world. If it is asked whether 
Ahamkara (egoism) is also essential, the answer is: Aham (the ego) should be present but not 
Aham-kara (the feeling of egoism, the sense of separate identity associated with the body 
consciousness). Aham means "J." The "I" should not be identified with the physical form. "Aham 
Brahmaasmi" (1 am the Brahman). "Aham na Dehaasmi" (I am not the body). "Na Aham 
Jivaasmi" (I am not the jiva--the individual soul). "Aham Aham" (I am I). This Aham is the 
essence of everything. In the Sanskrit alphabet, the first letter is "A" and the last letter is “Ha.” 
When the two letters are combined, you have "Aha." All the sounds in the language are 
comprised within these two letters. Aham means the principle which is present in everything in 
the cosmos, from the atom to Brahmam. 


This is the significance of the Vedic pronouncements: "Aham Brahmaasmi," "Prajnanam 
Brahma" (Prajnana Constant Integrated Awareness--is Brahmam), "Thath-thwam-Asi" (That 
thou art). Failing to recognise the truth of these pronouncements and regarding the body as real 
and permanent, man is becoming a prey to sorrow. 


Bhagavan is the unified form of these four principles. Most people do not seek to understand the 
meaning of the word Bhagavan. Bhag means Sambhartha. A second meaning is Bhartha 
(master). Sambhartha means the One who creates the Cosmos on the basis of Nature. Combining 
clay and water, the potter makes pots. Without either clay or water, it is not possible to make 
pots. So, for the pot, the basic materials are clay and water. Only when the two of the five basic 
elements (earth, water, fire, air and ether) are available can pots be made. Even these two 
elements are forms of the Divine. 


How wonderful is this creation! Air has the power to blow out a flame. A lamp is endowed with 
the power to spread illumination. But the same air is needed to keep the flame of the lamp 
burning. Thus air has the God-given power to both extinguish a flame or keep it burning. How 
does the same element have both these contradictory powers? This is the mystery of the powers 
of the Divine. 


Bhagavan is the Creator and Protector 


Bhaga (in the term Bhagavan) refers to the creative powers of God. Hence, He is called 
Sambhartha. Bhartha is the One who protects what exists. So, Bhagavan is the creator and the 
protector of the Cosmos. The term also means one who illumines everything in the universe. 
Without this all-pervading Divine light, we will not be able to live for a moment: This means that 
if the Cosmos, which is constituted by the five basic elements, and the human body, which is 
made up of the same five elements, are to be sustained well, they need the sustaining power of 
the Divine. 


Yugadi should not be treated merely as a holy festive occasion. It must be regarded as a day 
dedicated to the Divine. All festivals observed by the Bharatiyas have a marvellous inner 
meaning. But men in general view them only in terms of external observances and celebrate. 
them with feasts and frolic. These festivals were really intended to be used for the exclusive 
worship of the Divine, enjoy the bliss of that devotion and overcome pain and sorrow. These 
holy days were instituted for getting rid of the ignorance and cultivating right knowledge, the 
higher wisdom and cosmic consciousness. Man has been endowed with intelligence together 
with the human form. Along with these, man has also been given temporary existence. Man has, 
therefore, to use the life-span allotted to him for leading a purposeful existence by the use of his 
intelligence. Man unfortunately misuses his intelligence and gambles away his precious life. 


Be grateful to the society 


Man should strive to use every talent and skill given to him not only for his own benefit but also 
for the good of the world. Man owes everything to society and should be grateful to society for 
all that he receives from it. Expressing this gratitude is man's foremost duty. This gratitude has 
been described as Bhakti (devotion). Chanting the names of the Lord is one of the ways of 
expressing this gratitude. All the nine forms of worship are different ways in which this gratitude 
is expressed. 


The Yugadi celebration is an annual reminder of man's obligation to express his gratitude to the 
Divine for all the benefits received from God. 


Sanctify every minute 


We hail the new year as Samvatsara because it signifies the omnipresence (in time and space) of 
the Divine. Samvatsara does not merely mean period (of the year) made up of minutes, hours, 
days and months. Every moment is Samvatsara, because without seconds, minutes, etc. there 
cannot be a year. If the year is to be sanctified, every moment is to be sanctified. Every second 
constitutes a year. It is not the new year that matters. Every new second is significant. 


Hence, you should fill every moment with sacred thoughts, with pure feelings and pure actions. 
Every moment you should try to get rid of bad thoughts and fill the mind with good thoughts. 


Embodiments of the Divine Atma! From ancient times Bharat has been holding forth to the world 
great ideals and the highest wisdom. It has been concerned not only with the physical and 
material welfare of man but has laid stress on Divinity that permeates the universe. Men should 
recognise this Divinity and respect every being as the embodiment of the Divine. Forms may 
vary but the Indwelling Spirit is one and the same in all. Hence, you should bear no ill-will 
towards any one. Control of speech is most important. Excessive talk should be avoided. Speech 
should be sweet and well intentioned. 


Vyasa summed up the essence of his eighteen puranas in two maxims: It is meritorious to help 
others, sinful to cause them harm. "Help ever: hurt never." The damage done by a bad word may 
cause more lasting injury than any harm done to the body. Bear in mind that India has been in the 
past an exemplar to the world. It has been the birthplace of great sages and scholars, valiant 
heroes, renowned artists and poets and many who have excelled in all the arts. Having been born 
in such a country, it is the duty of all devotees to uphold the sacred Dharma of Bharat. People 
ceaselessly talk about Bhakti (devotion). But what is this devotion? What are you doing for the 
land of your birth? Gratitude to your native land is the real index of devotion. Your Deha (body) 
and your Desa (nation) are one. Therefore, the welfare of the nation is your welfare. Remember 
this always. 


After the fall of Ravana in Lanka, when all around him appealed to Rama to take over the 
lordship of Lanka and rule over it, Rama replied that the mother and the motherland are greater 
than Heaven itself and he would not give up his motherland, whatever might be the attractions of 
Lanka. 


Develop intense love for the motherland 


Today, whatever might be the plight of Bharat, we should not give it up, because it is our 
motherland. Young people should develop an intense love for the motherland. The sense of 
attachment to the nation, regarding it as "My Country, my people," is conspicuously absent 
today. Born in Bharat, breathing its sacred air, drinking the sacred water of the Ganga, inheriting 
the hoary culture of the country, people are still going after alien manners and customs. This is 
nothing less than treason to the nation. In no circumstance should you forget Bharat, whatever its 
defects. 


You must love the country and strive ceaselessly to promote its progress. The one who cannot 
proclaim, "This is the land of my birth, its language is my mother tongue, its culture is my 
religion," is as good as dead. No other country can boast of such a long line of great men in 
every sphere as Bharat. India has been the beacon-light to the world in the spiritual field. It has 
held out to the world such ideal rulers as Harishchandra, Nala, Maandhaata and Sri Rama. Their 
fame abides, though their empires have gone. Today's rulers should realise that their rule will be 
temporary and they should conduct themselves in such a way that their names are remembered 
for their integrity and devotion to righteousness. 


Earn God's love 


The only wealth one can carry with him after death is the love of the Lord. One should strive to 
earn that wealth during his life. This can be done only by selfless devotion and love. To earn 
God's love, one has to dedicate one's time, body and actions to the service of the Lord. This was 
the realisation that came to Arjuna after listening to the message of Sri Krishna. He declared: 
“Karishye vachanam thava" (1 shall carry out whatever you say). Arjuna, who was an 
exceptionally intelligent person, came to this conclusion only after every kind of argument with 
Krishna. 


Today, men argue in various ways, forgetting that the source of the reasoning power is itself 
God. Men should depend not on their physical or intellectual strength, but on the power of God. 
Only the man who relies solely on the power of God can experience true peace and bliss. Such a 
person need not mind the criticisms of others. He can defy the opinions of a multitude of persons 
and stand up for what he ‘holds to be true. Unmindful of praise or censure, you have to cultivate 


firm faith in God. Do not worry about the world; concentrate on God. This was the attitude of the 
Gopikas, who were unmindful of what others said regarding their total absorption in the 
contemplation of Krishna. They exemplified pure and unwavering devotion. One must hold fast 
to one's belief, whatever may happen. 


A true devotee will not give up his faith, whatever may befall him. The basis of that faith is not 
reason but instinctive conviction like the child's love for its mother. Students and young men 
who profess devotion to God, must be prepared to declare openly that they adore and love 
Bhagavan for no reason except that He is God. "My experience is the basis of my faith," should 
be their answer. For devotion to God, only two things are needed’ faith and experience. Both 
these are rooted in love. 


Embodiments of the Divine! Do not forget God, who is the embodiment of the Yuga. He is the 
Lord of Time. Kaala means one who is the giver of all happiness. If you take refuge in the Lord 
of Time, no one can cause you any harm. Make the best use of time chanting the name of the 
Lord or engaging yourselves in sacred activities. 


Discourse at the Kalyana Mandap, Brindavan on Yugadi day, 7-4-1989. 


9. The name that redeems 


THERE is no Bharatiya who has not heard the story of Rama, nor is there a village in Bharat 
without a Rama temple. From time immemorial, every individual in Bharat has regarded Sri 
Rama's life as an ideal and has sought to sanctify every moment of his life by living up to it. 
Bharat has always considered the life of anyone devoid of spirituality as utterly valueless. 


Sri Ramachandra was born on a day when the planet Sukra (Venus) enters Meena (Pisces). The 
month of His advent marks the beginning of Vasantha ritu (Spring). It is the time when the sun 
enters Mesha Rasi (Aries). Sri Rama's incarnation as a human being was for the purpose of 
promoting peace and happiness in the world. "Ramo vigrahavaan Dharmah" ("Rama is the very 
embodiment of Righteousness"). It was as if Righteousness itself had incarnated on earth. 
Dharma and Rama are inseparable. 


Rama's life falls in two parts: the earlier and the later. In the earlier part, Rama figures as the 
heroic warrior who vanquished powerful persons like Parasurama, Vali and Ravana. Rama 
excelled not only in physical strength but also in intelligence and character. It is impossible to 
describe all the virtues of Rama. 


Every Avatar has six types of powers: all-encompassing Prosperity, Righteousness, Fame, 
Wealth, Wisdom and Renunciation (or non-attachment). God is the possessor of these six 
attributes. Sri Rama had all these six attributes in equal measure. Every Avatar of God in every 
age and every place has these six attributes. 


Importance of Truth and Righteousness 


In the Ramayana Sathya (Truth) and Dharma (Righteousness) are the most important concepts. 
The Vedas, which are regarded as their very life-breath by Bharatiyas, have proclaimed: 
"Sathvam Vada; Dharmam Chara" ("Speak the Truth; Act Righteously"). In order to honour the 
plighted word of his father, Rama elected to go to the forest leaving Ayodhya. Truth is the 
foundation for all righteousness. There is no greater religion than truth. Rama stood out as an 
upholder of Truth to fulfil the promise of his father, to maintain the traditions of his /kshvaku 
dynasty, to protect his country and for the sake of the welfare of the world. Everyone who calls 
himself a human being should stand up for truth in the same manner. It is said of Mahatmas 
(high-souled men) that what they speak, what they think and what they do are in perfect accord. 
In the case of the wicked, their thoughts, words and deeds are at a variance with each other. By 
these definitions Rama was a Mahatma (a high-souled one) and Ravana was a Duraatma (an 
evil-souled being). 


Three women symbolising the three gunas 


In the first twelve years of Rama's life, He encountered three types of women. When he went 
with the sage Vishwamitra to protect his sacrifice, he encountered the ogress Thataki. He put an 
end to her without any compunction or aversion. After Vishwamitra's sacrifice was. completed, 
Rama went with the sage to Mithila. On the way, he came across Ahalya, who had been 
transformed into a stone. He gave her life, absolved her of sin through penitence and restored her 
to her husband. At Mithila, he encountered Sita. He accepted Sita without any hesitation. What is 
the inner meaning of these three incidents? They show that even from his boyhood Rama 
displayed extraordinary qualities and stood out as an example to the world. Thataki, the first 
woman he encountered symbolises the Tamas quality. He destroyed the Tamasic quality. Ahalya 


represents the Rajo guna. He taught the right lesson to Ahalya, purified her and sent her safely to 
her place. He took to himself Sita who represented the Satwic quality. Bhagavan approves of and 
accepts only that which is Satwic. He values the Satwic quality. He protects and fosters it. 


Today all the three gunas----Tamas, Rajas and Satwa--are present in man in varying proportions. 
What does the presence of the Jamo guna signify? It is natural for the Tamasic person to regard 
untruth as truth, wrong as right, evil as good. Although the phenomenal world is impermanent 
and illusory, the Tamasic minded person regards it as permanent and real. 


The Rajasic person lacks the power of discrimination and yielding to likes and dislikes behaves 
without restraint. Impulsive action is characteristic of persons in whom the Rajo guna is 
predominant. Because of hasty and impulsive action, they are subject to all kinds of difficulties. 
In the process, they waste their lives. People should try to avoid acting in haste. "Haste makes 
waste, waste makes worry. So do not be in a hurry." In the quest for the Divine, there should be 
no hurry. Purity and serenity are required for God-realisation. There can be no happiness for the 
man who lacks peace. 


Saint Thyagaraja said in one of his songs: "Without peace, there is no happiness." Thyagaraja 
was a great devotee of Rama. As a devotee, he had numerous experiences which he conveyed for 
the world through his songs. 


Triple power of the name Rama 


What are the inner meanings of the name Rama? The' three syllables 'R', 'A' and 'Ma' indicate the 
three causes for human birth, namely Papamu (the sins one has committed), Thapamu (the 
troubles one experiences) and Ajnanamu (one's ignorance). "Ra" represents the root letter for 
Agni. "Aa" represents the letter for the moon. "Ma" represents the root letter for the sun. What 
does Agni signify? It destroys everything and reduces it to ashes. The letter "R" has the power to 
destroy all the sins committed by man. The letter "Aa" (symbolising the moon) has the powers of 
cooling the fevers man suffers from and conferring peace on him. "Ma" represents the sun who 
dispels the darkness of ignorance and confers illumination of wisdom. Hence, the word Rama 
has the right triple power of destroying sins, conferring peace and dispelling ignorance. 


When you utter the word "Ram", you first open the mouth with the sound "Ra." All your sins go 
out when your mouth is open. When you utter "M" by closing the mouth, the entry is barred 
against the sins that have gone out. Everyone should recognise the sweetness, the sacredness and 
the divinity enshrined in the name "Rama." It was for this reason that Thyagaraja sang: "Oh 
mind! Contemplate on the name of Rama with full awareness of its power." It is good to utter the 
name Rama with full understanding of all that it signifies. But even without that understanding 
the chanting of the name has the power to destroy all sins. 


The glory of spring 


We must learn to chant the sweet name of Rama with a pure, unsullied heart, in a spirit of 
selfless devotion. In the mind of man dwell the deities representing the moon and the sun. 
Intelligence is endowed by the sun. However two kinds of birds have got into the mind. One bird 
fosters the sense "I" and "Mine" and fills the mind with ego. This is a destructive force. The 
second bird fosters the feeling of freedom from attachment and hatred. It signifies the power of 
the sun in the mind. Rama who belongs to the solar race, adhered to the latter path. 


There is a significant connection between the Rama principle and the Vasantha Ritu (season of 
spring). In the spring, the trees put forth new leaves and flowers and fill the world with gladness. 


When the sun's rays fall on the fresh leaves, they acquire a golden hue. The whole world puts on 
a glorious new look in spring. The beginning of the new year is celebrated in various regions by 
preparation of special edibles from a mixture of flowers and fruits of the neem and mango trees. 
In consuming these edibles, people are reminded that life is a mixture of pleasure and pain, profit 
and loss and both are to be treated with equal-mindedness. 


In the Spring season, the air is redolent with the fragrance of the mango blossoms and the song 
of the kokila (cuckoo). There is joy in the air your breathe. The cuckoo calls are never so sweet 
as in the Vasantha (Spring). The kokila's song is sweet to the ears. If a crow sits on our roof, we 
wish to drive it away, but we welcome the kokila's song. Why this difference? The crow seeks 
nothing from us. The kokila has not given us a crown. The difference lies in their voice. The 
crow's cawing jars on the ears. The kokila's song is music to the ears. When the speech is sweet, 
the speaker becomes endearing. 


God resides in the heart of all devotees 


Hence men should learn to speak sweetly and pleasingly. Sweet speech confers peace. It is the 
means to Self-realisation. It is in the heart of the man who. is sweet-spoken that Sri Rama loves 
to dwell. 


Once the sage Narada appeared before Lord Vishnu and said: "Oh Lord! I move about in the 
three worlds and I know the past, the present and the future. If I want to convey to you any 
special information, to what address should I send it? I do not want your temporary address. 
What is your permanent address?" Vishnu replied: "Narada! Take down my permanent address: 
Madbhaktaah yathra gaayanthi thathra thhishtaami, Narada (Wherever my devotees sing my 
glories, I reside there)." People ascribe various abodes for the Lord: Vaikunta, Kailasa, 
Badrinath, Kedarnath and so on. All these are only "care of" addresses. The direct address is only 
the heart of the devotee. As the Gita says: “The Lord dwells in the heart region of all beings." As 
the Lord is omnipresent, He is equally in the heart of everyone. Hence the heart is described as 
"Atma-Rama"--one who delights the Atma (the heart) by His presence. 


Offer your heart to the Divine 


Whatever you do, do it not for pleasing others, but for pleasing the Indweller in your heart, for 
your inner satisfaction. This means acting according to the dictates of your conscience. Every 
such act will please the Divine. - To derive self-satisfaction from your actions, you have 


to cultivate faith. When there is satisfaction, there is readiness for sacrifice. Through sacrifice, 
the Divine is realised. Your faith should be unwavering like that of the Pandavas in Sri Krishna. 


All spiritual aspirants and devotees like Thyagaraja have had to experience many trials and 
tribulations. Even Pothana, the author of the Telugu Bhagvatham, was subjected to many 
pressures and ordeals to compel him to dedicate his work to a local chieftain. Pothana stood firm 
because of his strong faith in Sri Rama. Rather than dedicate his works to a mere mortal, he was 
prepared to offer his heart and soul to Rama. Pothana totally surrendered to Sri Rama. He 
declared: "All that I have is yours. Whatever I receive or offer comes from you. I cannot claim 
anything that is mine own." 


Men go on pilgrimages to various holy places. When they are in Benares they offer the Ganga 
water to the Ganga uttering the names of the Lord. What is the special value of such an offering? 
You must offer the Lord the heart that He has given you. This is true surrender. Lakshmana is the 
supreme exemplar of the doctrine of saranaagathi (surrender). "I offer my wealth, family and 


everything to you, Oh Rama! Protect me, who has taken refuge in you." It was this total 
surrender which impelled Rama to observe, when Lakshmana lay stricken in the battlefield in 
Lanka: “Wives and kinsmen can be got in any country. But where can one get a brother born 
from the same loins?" Rama thus exemplified the depth of fraternal attachment. The mutual love 
between Rama and Lakshmana was of the highest order. 


After the fall of Ravana, Sugriva, Vibhishana and others approached Rama and appealed to him 
to rule over Lanka, which was a richly endowed land. Rama turned down the request saying that 
he could not give up his mother or his Motherland. Rama serves as an example to humanity. 


Face troubles with faith in God 


Today everybody utters "Ram," "Ram." But very few follow the example set by Rama. They are 
not true devotees of Rama. At best they may be described as "part-time devotees." True devotion 
means perpetual remembrance of the name of the Lord and constant meditation on that name, 
cherishing the figure of Rama in the heart. 


You should be prepared to face the vicissitudes of life with firm faith in God. It is during times 
of difficulties that God is remembered. To confront difficulties with faith is itself a spiritual 
discipline. Although Rama was the son of the Emperor Dasaratha and son-in-law of King Janaka, 
he had to face many ordeals in life for the sake of upholding Dharma. The Pandavas went 
through many difficulties for the sake of adhering to righteousness and hence their name and 
fame remain forever. You should pray to the Lord to give you the strength to bear all troubles 
and face all difficulties. If you have even an atom of Grace of the Lord, a mountain of troubles 
can be overcome. Chaitanya declared: "If a fraction of the time that is spent in worrying about 
wealth, provisions, wife, children, friends and business is devoted to contemplation on the feet of 
the Divine, one can face the messengers of death without fear and cross the Ocean of Samsara!" 


It is not necessary to devote many hours to prayer. It is enough if one thinks of God with all his 
heart and offers himself even for a few moments. A single match stick when it is struck can 
dispel the darkness in a room that has remained closed for years. Mountains of cotton can be 
burnt down by a single spark. Likewise, wholehearted chanting of the name of Rama even once 
can destroy mountains of sins. But the chanting should not be done mechanically like playing a 
gramophone record. It should emanate from the depths of the heart. Having been born in this 
sacred land of Bharat, having before you the ideal example of Rama avatar, you must seek to 
redeem your lives, by living up to Rama's ideals and proclaiming them to the world. Remember 
the name of Rama with love. God can be realised only through love and by no other means. 


Discourse at "Sai Sruti", Kodaikanal, on Sri Rama Navami Day, 14-4-1989. 


10. Vidya and Samskara 


Anglicised education has gained prominence, 
Spiritual studies have taken a back seat, 
How, then, can purity of the mind 

The essence of education--be developed? 


TEACHERS! Students and Lovers of education! The entire visible universe is a cosmic 
university. In it, every human being has to learn how to eat, to walk, to speak and do many other 
things. So, Nature is the first teacher. At birth, man is like an animal. The parents teach' the child 
how to develop its human faculties. If the parents did not undertake this task, the child would 
remain an animal. Thus, the second category of teachers for a man are his parents. The ancient 
sages felt that it was not enough to develop the human qualities in the child and therefore 
envisaged a system of .Samskaras (cultural training) for the spiritual development of the child. 
The Samskaras are intended not only to develop further the human qualities but also to eliminate 
all remnants of animal nature in man. 


What is meant by Samskara? It is a system of practices by which the bad tendencies in man are 
got rid of and good tendencies are inculcated. They are intended to turn the Pravritti (outward- 
looking) tendencies of man towards the cultivation of the Nivritti (internal). 


Samskara is applicable to all objects 


The process of Samskara (refinement) is not confined to specific things; it is applicable to every 
object in the universe. No object can be enjoyed by man without its going through a process of 
transformation. For example, take the case of paddy. The paddy that is grown and harvested 
cannot be consumed as such. It has to be converted into rice. In the process of transformation, the 
original paddy has considerably increased in its value as rice. The transformation process thus 
makes an object more useful and valuable. 


Take another example, that of cotton. Cotton in its primary form has very little utility. But, when 
it is spun into thread and made into cloth, it becomes usable by man. There is a wide gap 
between the value of cotton and that of cloth into which it is converted. The same rule applies to 
gold. There is a big difference between the value of the ore that is extracted from a mine and the 
gold that is got from the ore after processing. 


It is clear from these examples that all objects in the world, unless they go through various 
processes of transformation, cannot acquire much value. If that is the case with regard to 
ordinary objects, how much more is it necessary for man, who is more important than all of 
them, to go through this transformation? Man is the most precious object in creation. Men are 
more valuable than all the things in the world. It is man who imparts value to all objects. Today 
we are failing to give proper value to man. 


Man loses his powers due to lack of self-control 


What is the reason? It is because man is attracted towards the visible objects of the world 
experienced by the senses and is unaware of the Atma (the Spirit) within him. The powers that 
man is endowed with are limited. By appropriate practices he can make good use of them. But by 
involving himself in sensuous pleasures, man is losing his powers. The main reason for the loss 


of the powers given to man is his lack of self-control. This accounts for the premature onset of 
old age among many people. 


For accomplishing anything in the world, three things are essential: one, mastery over the senses; 
two, control over the mind; three, maintaining perfect bodily health. It is only when all these 
three requisites are present, that man can achieve his aims. If today man fails to achieve even 
petty objects, it is because he is deficient in all these. 


To acquire these three, man has to practise Dharma, as laid down by the sages. The Veda 
declares- "Yatho abhyudaya nissreyas siddhih saa Dharmah" (that which is conducive to one's 
well-being here and the hereafter is Dharma). This means that in this world that which gives 
happiness and relieves sorrow here and the hereafter is Dharma. This calls for unity in thought, 
word and deed. This is true righteousness. Where there is no accord between what one thinks, 
says and does, his life is meaningless. It is by the harmony of thought, speech and action, that the 
true worth of man is manifested. 


The three H's which are needed most 


The mere human form is of no use to the world. It is by his thoughts and actions that one's 
humanness is revealed. Hence, all the studies that are pursued should be related to the body, the 
mind and the Spirit. Today's education stops with the concern for the body and does not proceed 
upto the heart. People speak about Education in Human Values (EHV). In my view, what is 
needed is not EHV but 3HV---education which embraces Head, Heart and Hand. 


Students should reflect on the human values. One who pursues knowledge in the world may be a 
student or a scholar. But he cannot become thereby a jnani (a man of wisdom). There is a big 
difference between the scholar and the jnani. Ravana has mastered 64 categories of knowledge 
while Sri Rama had studied only 34 categories. Although Ravana had studied more subjects than 
Sri Rama, Valmiki described Ravana as a murkha (an irrational person). Why was Ravana 
dubbed as murkha ? Because despite his mastery of all skills and arts, he was a slave of his 
senses. The one who is a slave of his senses is a fool who has lost his reason. Rama was not 
dominated by his senses. He was their sovereign. 


The difference between Rama and Ravana can be seen in three aspects: Sarva loka hithe Ratah 
(one who rejoices in the welfare of the whole world); Jnana sampannah (endowed with all 
wisdom); Sarve Samudita Gunaihi (one who is filled with all the virtues). Rama promoted the 
welfare of the world by adhering to Truth and setting an example in righteous conduct. Hence, 
the supreme importance of upholding truth should be recognised. Everyone should try to keep 
his promise and live upto what he says. The simple motto: "Truth is vital to speech", contains a 
profound message. All of you tend to speak a great deal. How much truth is there in your 
speech? This is the first lesson students have to learn. Without truth, what you speak has no 
value. Moreover, truth has to be spoken for the welfare of the world. 


Learn to lead a worthy life 


The educated persons of today are concerned solely about the well-being of themselves and their 
families and have no interest in the welfare of the world. Education should aim at making a 
person take pleasure in promoting the well-being of all people. After birth, as a person grows, he 
develops associations with relations, friends, teachers and many others. It is through these 
numerous relationships that one's human qualities develop. Without; these associations the lone 
individual would remain at the animal level. One's human nature is developed by society and 


contacts with kinsmen, friends and others. You have to show your gratitude to all of them by 
striving for their well-being. 


From this, you have to proceed to the acquisition of a wide range of knowledge. This is what is 
meant by the statement "Awareness is life." Confining your interests to a few subjects will result 
in narrow-mindedness. To acquire a wide outlook and have comprehensive knowledge of men 
and things, you have to cultivate many good qualities. Teachers today confine their teaching to 
imparting knowledge and skills useful for earning a livelihood. But they do not teach anything 
about life itself, how it. should be lived and the basic goals of life. Learning to earn an income is 
not a great thing. Learning how to live worthily as a human being is what is essential. Teachers 
also should concern themselves about the essential meaning of life and teach the students about 
the basic truths about life. 


Students today are seeking education not for the sake of knowledge but as a means to earning 
money or wielding power. This is not true education. It is the discovery of one's spiritual essence 
that constitutes real education. All the evils that we witness in the world today stem from a 
perverted system of education. The so-called educated persons have no control over their senses. 


Self-control is the only means to real bliss 


The primary need is for the development of self-control among students. They must be able to 
remain firm in their minds and unwavering in their outlook in any circumstance. This can be 
achieved only through spiritual discipline, which is also the means to real bliss. The world is in 
sore need of spiritual discipline. Spirituality is essential even in the pursuit of science. If you 
look at the orderly movements of the stars and planets in their respective spheres, you can see 
that; only a divine power can ensure such order in the Cosmos. 


The gravitational pull of the earth is evident when an object falls, but the force of gravity is not 
visible. Likewise there are innumerable invisible divine forces operating in the universe. Because 
they cannot be seen, their existence cannot be denied. 


Another fact to be noted is the way in which balance is maintained in Nature. If this balance is 
upset, there will be many untoward consequences. During the last World War, millions of men 
died in battle. After the war, the babies that were born were nearly all males. The reason is that 
the balance in the sex ratio has to be maintained in the Divine scheme .of things. The Divine 
operates in this manner to preserve the Cosmic order. When this order is disturbed the world is in 
peril. Forgetting the role of the Divine and losing himself in the worldly pursuits, man is 
forfeiting his basic human estate. 


Divinity underlies all creation 


It should be realised that it is the power of the Divine that enables one to see, to speak, to move 
and to think. All the powers of the sense organs are derived from the Divine. Man in his conceit 
may imagine that he is the doer. This is the result of ignorance and folly. You have to ascertain 
what it is that underlies all creation, which is responsible for their existence. The answer is 
Divinity. Without faith in the Divine nothing can be achieved. There is no need to seek a reason 
for this faith. It has no reason or season. It is beyond reason, like the love of a child for its 
mother. The child loves the mother for the only reason that she is the mother. When one is asked 
why he has faith in God, his reply should be: "Because he is my God." You should develop such 
confidence. Only with such firm faith can you realise God. And that firm faith can considerably 
enhance your strength. 


There are elements today who undermine whatever little confidence the students have. The 
students are innocent; their hearts and minds are unpolluted; they are selfless. But some 
interested persons infuse doubts in their minds. Some parents and some teachers are to be 
blamed. When teachers address the students, they must try to strengthen the faith of the students 
by their example. When a teacher's conduct is at variance with what he teaches, how can he serve 
as an example? When teachers call for discipline among the students, they themselves should 
adhere to discipline. If the teachers conduct themselves well, all will be well with the students. 


Improve your mental balance as you grow 


An ironic aspect of education today is that as a boy advances in education, his character goes on 
declining. Children in the primary school observe perfect discipline and are well behaved. As 
they progress towards the secondary school their purity and discipline suffer. By the time they 
reach the university, every thing becomes topsy-turvy. As they grow in years, they lose self- 
control. What is the reason? As they grow in years, their mental balance is upset and they lose 
steadiness of mind and self-control. The older boys have a harmful influence on the younger 
ones. Hence, it is most important that the senior students should correct themselves and set a 
good example to others. 


Everyone should bear in mind that all the regulations and discipline that have been prescribed for 
the students are conceived solely in their own interest. Only those who are prepared to abide by 
these rules and regulations deserve to be here. 


The role of teachers and parents 


Then, there are the teachers. They become parents of children in due course. But that is not 
important in itself. They should become ideal parents. If teachers fail to bring up their own 
children in an exemplary manner, how are they going to mould the other children who come 
under their care? The children of teachers have been found to behave improperly. 


Many parents spoil the children when they come home for the holidays. Whatever discipline the 
students had cultivated at school or college is undermined at home. Many parents tend to pamper 
their children and spoil them as Dhritarashtra did. Parents may commend what is good in their 
children, but they should not hesitate to chastise them when they go astray. It is because of the 
excessive indulgence shown by parents that many students are spoilt. Nor is that all. When a boy 
comes home and keeps up his spiritual practices, the parents rebuke him for his devotion and tell 
him that there is time enough for him to observe such practices in his old age. Parents of this type 
who undermine the seeds of devotion in their children are modern versions of Hiranyakasipu 
(Prahlada's father). 


Parents should see that the children are kept on the right path at all times. The students, for their 
part, should make it clear to their parents that they will not give up on any account the good 
things they have imbibed in their educational institution. When the children recite at home a 
prayer, before taking food, as they do in their hostel, they are sometimes ridiculed for observing 
such a practice. The boys should have the courage to tell their parents that the prayer is being 
said as an expression of gratitude to the Divine who is the provider of all things. You should not 
give up the practice, if you cannot persuade your parents to do so. Students should develop into 
such exemplary persons. Be respectful towards your parents, but do not hesitate to tell them what 
you feel to be right in all humility and reverence. 


Mere book knowledge does not constitute education. Nor does it mean the ability to juggle with 
words. Education means broadening the heart. It implies development of control over the senses. 
It should make one seek to promote the good of the world. It should serve to instill all good 
qualities in the student. An education that is devoid of such qualities is worthless. 


Excessive talk is responsible for students losing self-control and failing to acquire good qualities. 
Even the power to discriminate between what is transient and what is permanent is lost thereby. 
One does not know how to behave towards elders and strangers. 


Restraint in speech develops mental agility 


The effect of excessive speech on the behaviour and mental faculties of people was the subject of 
research in the Columbia University. The experiment was conducted in a primary school for 
twenty five years. The students were grouped separately in batches of ten. Those students who 
spoke the least were offered prizes. Tests were conducted on students indulging in excessive talk 
and those observing silence or reticence. It was found over the years that the intellectual abilities 
of students observing restraint in speech were of a high order. There was purity in their speech. 
They had a broad outlook. They developed enquiring minds. They had a high degree of 
discrimination. 


In the case of students indulging in excessive speech, it was found that their memory power was 
weak. They were narrow-minded. They lacked discriminating power. 


The result of the experiment testified to the wisdom of the ancient rishis who betook themselves 
to the forest for silent contemplation. Everyone of the practices of the ancient sages was designed 
to lead men to the highest stage. Remember that through restraint in speech you can develop 
mental agility. 


Maintain uniformity in behaviour 


Wherever you may be, whether in the college, or the hostel, or outside in your homes, you have 
to observe the same discipline and the same correct behaviour. That alone is genuine discipline. 
To behave in one way in the presence of Swami and in a different: way when away from Swami 
is utterly unbecoming. Maintain uniformity in behaviour wherever you are. 


Study well, but see to it that you make good use of knowledge you have gained. Realise the 
distinction between the scholar and jnani (man of wisdom). When you practise what you have 
learnt, the joy you derive from it is much greater than what you got from the study. The man who 
practises what he has learnt is a jnani (a wise man). The man who merely shows off his book 
knowledge is a pedant. You must become wise men as well as scholars. Then you become fit for 
realising the bliss of the Spirit ("Jnaanath evatu kaivalyam"). 


Consider well why you have chosen to come to this Institute when there are so many other 
Universities. Here we have in addition to academic education the accent on Samskara (spiritual 
discipline). Elsewhere there is education but not refinement of the Spirit. 


Refinement should follow education 


Only the combination of education and spiritual refinement can bring out all the qualities in a 
human being. Samskara means getting rid of all the bad qualities, bad habits and bad thoughts 
and developing good qualities, good thoughts and good actions. You should aim at goodness and 
not greatness. You may show respect towards the great. But you must revere and love with all 
your heart the good. The good are adored and loved wherever they may go. The great may be 


shown deference. Don't be concerned about greatness. Cultivate love. Become the very em- 
bodiment of love. Then you can share that love with one and all. 


Students! The Vice-Chancellor spoke about the importance of discipline. Whether you like it or 
not, you have to observe discipline. In due course it becomes a righteous habit. A child in the 
beginning does not like cooked food. But as feeding goes on, the child gets used to the food and 
even relishes it. Likewise, by regular practice, you get used to a life of discipline and even enjoy 
it. It: is through regular practice that you achieve tranquillity. 


In the pursuit of your studies, do not confine yourselves to the prescribed subjects. In addition to 
these special subjects, you have to acquire general knowledge and common sense. 


Develop firm faith in God. All the ills afflicting the world today are due to the loss of faith in 
God. Why has man lost peace of mind? The reason is two-fold' One, indifference to what he has; 
two, craving for what he does not have. Man does not make proper use of what he has. Why 
should he hanker after what he lacks? One should be content with what he has got and should not 
worry about things he does not have. Then alone he can be happy. This is true education. 


Inaugural address to the students and teachers of Sri Sathya Sai Institute, at the Institute 
Auditorium, Prashaanthi Nilayam on 15-6-1989. 


God has four qualities and it is only when you cultivate them that 
you can understand Him. They are: Love, Beauty, Sweetness and 
Splendour. The development of Love is enough to add unto you the 
other three. When you are full of Love for the Divine in all 
creation, that stage is Beauty; when you are immersed in the sea of 
Universal Love, you reach the acme of Sweetness; when your mind 
loses its identity and merges with the Universal Mind, then there is 
Splendour indescribable. 


BABA 


11. God's response 


DEAR students! The sandalwood tree without any feeling of bitterness, imparts its fragrance 
even to the axe that fells it. Divinity responds in the same manner. Some persons, blinded by 
their ignorance, arrogance and folly, may say all sorts of things about God. They may even 
imagine thereby that they have assailed God. But God remains totally unaffected. Even to such 
bad and evil-minded persons, He offers His blessings and benediction. 


Good and bad are obverse and reverse of every object. The citizens of Ayodhya had great love 
and devotion for Sri Rama. However, despite all their entreaties, appealing to him to stay in 
Ayodhya, Rama decided to leave for the forest. When Rama did not respond to their appeals, all 
their love and devotion turned into bitterness and resentment. "We used to think that Rama's 
heart was sweet as nectar. We felt that this heart was soft as butter. We could never bring 
ourselves to think that he would be so hard-hearted." Such were the bitter feelings of the citizens 
of Ayodhya. This was the reverse of what they had felt about Rama earlier. 


Good and bad exist in every object 


Every object carries with it good and bad, gain and loss, the praiseworthy and unworthy and 
similar pairs of opposites. Separation and association are both causes of sorrow for the devout. 
Separation from good persons causes sorrow. Association with bad people is distressing to them. 
The most important sadhana for man is to seek the company of the good and eschew association 
with the evil-minded. 


Men today seek the fruits of good deeds without engaging themselves in good actions. They wish 
to avoid the consequences of sinful actions while indulging in such actions. If you want to avoid 
the results of bad deeds, you should avoid such actions. If you desire the fruits of meritorious 
deeds, you must do meritorious acts. 


Man should develop the qualities of love and forbearance. Love grows by giving and forgiving. 
Selfishness grows by getting and forgetting. Students! You should realise even at this tender age 
the infinite preciousness of life. There are innumerable things which you have to learn in life. 
You must make good use of every minute of your time. See that your hearts remain pure and 
unsullied. 


Lord Dakshinamurthy conveyed His message through silence. He seldom resorted to speech. By 
mere sight He could impart the profoundest truths about the universe and the Divine. On one 
occasion, in the course of his travels, He reached the shore of the ocean. He was delighted to 
listen to the Omkara vibrations coming from the ocean. The ocean represents the Sabda 
Brahmam (primal divine sound). It symbolises the grandeur and majesty of the Divine. 


Dakshinamurthy drew a lesson from the endless waves reaching the shore from the ocean. He 
noticed that as soon as some rubbish fell on the ocean, it threw it out on the shore by a series of 
waves without retaining it even for a brief moment. Dakshinamurthy questioned the ocean: 
"How selfish you are! You are boundless and fathomless. Can't you make some room for this 
poor stuff?. It is highly selfish on your part not to tolerate this poor thing despite your vastness." 
The ocean gave a fitting answer: "Lord! There is nothing unknown to you. If today I allow this 
piece of dirt to remain with me, ere long I will be filled with flotsam and jetsam and my entire 
form will be changed. Hence from the very beginning I have to cast off anything that is dirty and 
polluting. Only then I can remain pure." 


Stand up for truth 


Likewise every person should keep out even the smallest bad thought the moment it seeks to 
enter the mind. To treat it as small and inconsiderable would mean allowing such things to enter 
the mind and in due course fill it entirely. In the process, the entire nature of the person is 
changed. His human essence is undermined. Hence every effort must be made to keep out all bad 
thoughts and feelings and promote human qualities as much as possible. 


Through very small effort great things can be accomplished. A huge serpent can be destroyed by 
a large number of small ants. Do not consider yourself small. Seek to acquire the strength and 
determination to carry out your duties. In the world, difficulties crop up from time to time. 
Jealousy towards one's betters is quite common. Crows have animus against the. cuckoo. Cranes 
jeer at swans. But neither the cuckoo nor the swan is worried. The world has many such envious 
beings. Do not allow yourself to be overwhelmed by such experiences. You have to confront 
them boldly and stand up for truth. 


Discourse to the students at Prashaanthi Mandir on 18.6.1989 as Chancellor of Sri Sathya Sai 
Institute of Higher Learning. 


Young people do not realise the value of health and strength they 
enjoy during their years of youth. They should learn to lead 
purposeful, unselfish lives even while they have the benefits of 
youth and health, instead of dissipating all their energies and 
talents in the pursuit of sensuous objects and evil desires. 


BABA 


12. Experiencing the Omnipresence 


THE SPRING that has gone, will come again. The waning moon will wax again. But one's youth 
and the flowing water in a river will not come back. It is essential for students in the precious 
period of their youth to cultivate pure thoughts and good habits. Among the gifts of God, time is 
the most important. Only when time is properly utilised in sacred acts will the body and the 
deeds get sanctified. 


At present, half a life-time of man is spent in eating and sleeping. Much of the remainder is 
wasted in useless talk and simian pranks or in back-biting and slanderous gossip. Little time is 
devoted to thinking about how he can improve himself or serve others. No attempt is made to 
understand the purpose of life, despite the preciousness and sacredness of human birth. Man has 
to discover, as enjoined in the Bhagavatam, how he can get back to the source from which he 
came. This is the natural destiny of all beings. The secret of human existence is to know how to 
make the best use of time to realise one's Divine destiny. 


Modern man has no idea of sense-control. He has no conception of self restraint. He leads the 
life of a libertine. This kind of licentious living can only result in degradation and ruin. 


The aim of sense-control is to achieve one-pointed concentration. It helps also to steady the 
mind. Without mental steadiness man gets dehumanised. 


Three things are essential for every one recognition of the goal, understanding the truth (about 
human life) and realising the Eternal. Today, students should realise the importance of the goal 
they have to aim at. Ignoring the goal students are leading aimless lives without achieving peace 
or joy. In spite of being near to the Divine, they are forgetting the Divine and taking to wrong 
paths. However many years they may have studied here, there is no change in their thoughts and 
behaviour. 


The Lord and Maya are twins 


This is because they have not really understood spirituality, though they profess to know all 
about it. It is because they are completely wrapped up in the body-consciousness, they cannot 
grasp the nature of divinity. The body consciousness is the product of Maya (illusion) or 
ignorance. It is not easy to get rid of this Maya. 


There is a story to illustrate the hold of Maya. Once, Bhagavan summoned Maya and told her! 
"Maya! I am acquiring a great deal of bad name on account of you. Every man blames God as 
Mayopadhi (wearing the disguise of Maya). I am getting into disrepute because you are always 
following me. Hence do not any longer remain with me. Get away from me." In all humility, 
Maya bowed to the Lord and said: "Oh Lord! I shall certainly carry out your command. But, 
please tell me any place where you are not present and I shall go there." The Lord had a hearty 
laugh and said: "There is no place where I am not present. You and I are twins. I put you this 
poser only to get your reply." 


Every individual today declares that God is omnipresent. But no one conducts himself as having 
realised the truth of this omnipresence. It is not clear whether they are using this word with any 
understanding of its meaning or experience of its truth or out of ignorance. Every student 
similarly speaks breezily about Swami's omnipresence and omniscience. It may be based on 
book-knowledge. 


Omnipresence and self-control 


God's omnipresence is certainly true. But one gets the right to speak about it only when he has 
experienced it at least to a small extent. Even if a few drops of nectar are swallowed, a modicum 
of purity may be achieved. Of what use are potfuls of nectar which remain untouched? Hence, 
one should strive, in however small measure, to experience the omnipresence of God. Merely 
talking about it would amount to practising a deception on God. It is a grievous sin. 


Some high-souled beings have striven to experience the omnipresence of the Divine. But the 
prevailing educational system cannot enable any student to get this experience. This is because 
they have lost the capacity to control the senses, which is the prerequisite for experiencing the 
Divine. The first step is control of desires. There must be unity in word and deed. You have also 
to enquire by what means you can experience the omnipresence of the Divine. 


Take the example of a tree. One fruit cannot nourish another. All fruits are nourished by the tree. 
The tree is sustained by its roots. It is only when you look after the roots, you will have the tree 
and its fruits. When you nourish the roots by supplying manure and water, the tree comes up 
well. Likewise, it is only when you realise that the entire cosmos is sustained by the Divine that 
you can experience the omnipresence of the Divine. 


The three spiritual giants 


In the Andhra country, there were three "Rajus"--Potharaju, Thyagaraju and Goparaju. All the 
three were spiritual giants. Potharaju is Pothana, the great author of the Telugu Bhagavatam. 
Seeing the extreme poverty of Pothana, his brother-in-law, Srinadha, appealed to him to dedicate 
his Bhagavatam to some ruler who will reward him with material riches. Srinadha said that by 
dedicating his work to Sri Rama, Pothana was getting no visible benefit and was steeped in 
poverty. Pothana felt that rather than seek material rewards from petty earthly rulers, it was far 
better to dedicate his work to God even if it meant living a life of penury. He declared that he 
would not choose to live on the largesse of proud and unrighteous rulers. He preferred to lead a 
godly life as a farmer living on the fruits of his toil. Because Pothana chose to dedicate his work 
to the Lord, his Bhagavatam has earned undying fame. From the moment he started composing 
the Bhagavatam, Pothana recognised that it was entirely the work of Sri Rama and should be 
dedicated to Him as a pious offering. He regarded Rama as the inspirer, the writer and enjoyer of 
the poem. Pothana told Srinadha that God was the Lord of everything in creation--the creator, the 
protector and destroyer. "Instead of offering the work to the Supreme Lord, it is not fitting to 
dedicate it to worldly men clothed in pomp and pride," he said. 


Coming to Thyagaraja: Seeing the plight of the saint-composer, the Raja of Tanjore sent him 
many valuables in a palanquin. Looking at these presents, Thyagaraja smiled and prayed to his 
mind to declare truly whether these treasures would bring him real happiness or the constant 
vision of Sri Rama. He felt that proximity to Rama was his greatest wealth and turned back the 
presents sent by the Raja. Thyagaraja lived upto his name by renouncing all worldly things. He 
declared that God alone was all that he needed and he sought nothing from anybody. 


God is the supreme protector of all 


The third devotee is Goparaju, who worshipped Sri Rama installed in the Bhadrachalam temple. 
He offered all his earnings and possessions to Sri Rama. He devoted even the dues collected by 
him as a revenue official to constructing the temple for Rama and making ornaments for the 


deities in the temple. When the Thanisha harassed him he declared that he had offered everything 
to Rama and nourished no desires of his own. "I have surrendered to Rama totally," he declared. 


These three saints had recognised the omnipresence of God. They firmly believed that God is the 
supreme protector of all. They are verily Bhagavathas----devotees of God. Many who claim to be 
devotees today are not real devotees at all. 'The so-called devotees are only seeking external 
security--security from the authorities, from marauders, and similar external dangers. These are 
mercenary devotees and not genuine devotees. 


The Bhagavathas of the old days lived a care-free life, placing their full trust in God as the 
supreme protector. Because of this faith, they were fully competent to declare that God is 
omnipresent. Those who use that epithet today are simply mouthing what seems expedient for 
the occasion. You can find God everywhere today, but you can find few true devotees of God. 
Today's devotees are not devotees who have totally surrendered to God. 


A sinner's corpse 


Once a traveller going on his journey approached an ashram near which there was a cemetery. 
He sought shelter in the ashram from the heat of the day. The Guru of the ashram was giving a 
talk to his disciples. The traveller welcomed the opportunity to listen to a sacred discourse. At 
sunset the Guru and the disciples came out of the ashram. They saw a strange spectacle and the 
disciples asked the Guru what was happening. The Guru smilingly said that what they were 
seeing was a corpse which jackals and dogs were trying to carry off. They had dug up the body 
that was buried in the morning and were trying to make a meal of it. 


Just then a big jackal came there and conveyed some message to the other jackals. Immediately 
all the jackals abandoned the body and retired into the jungle. 


The disciples asked the Guru why the jackals abandoned the body that had come their way. The 
Guru meditated for a time and then explained to the disciples the reason 


for the strange phenomenon. The Guru said: "The life-story of this corpse is a remarkable one. 
This man during his entire lifetime had not listened to the words of elders or the name of God. 
Even if he heard something, he never cared to follow them. He never did any good deed in his 
life. His eyes never turned towards anything holy. His hands were never used for anything 
sacred. He was greedy after other people's wealth, but never once fed a hungry man in his life. 
His feet never went to a temple or any holy shrine. The elder jackal which came to the cemetery 
told the other animals that the dead body of such a person was unfit for consumption even by 
animals. The sins of the dead man would infect them also if they touched the body of such a 
sinner. The jackals abandoned the body on. getting this warning." The moral of this stow is that 
we should not think that it does not matter what happens to the body after death. Even the body 
should be sanctified and for that purpose good deeds should be done during one's lifetime. Every 
limb of the body should be devoted to sacred purposes. A body that has not been sanctified in 
this way will be despised even by jackals. Remember the preciousness of the human body that 
has been given to you. Use it for rendering service to others. See that every organ in the body is 
utilised for doing sacred acts. 


Duty of senior students 


There is an appropriate time for doing anything. Krishna chose Kurukshetra battlefield for 
imparting the message of the Gita to Arjuna, though they had been moving together closely for 
many decades. Remember that Swami knows all that is happening though He may appear as if he 


knew nothing. Recognise the difference between the Divine and the human. Divinity, although 
all-knowing and all-powerful, acts as if, It does not know anything. The human being, though he 
is totally ignorant and incompetent, pretends to be all-knowing and all-powerful. 


Students should realise that Swami knows all about their misbehaviour. Because individual 
warnings in the past have had no effect, Swami has chosen to reprove them in public. Most of the 
students are well-behaved. It is the few undisciplined spoilt ones who are setting a bad example 
to the rest. If they do not reform themselves, they have no place in this Institute. We are not 
concerned about numbers. We are content, even if we have a few good students. 


Aim of Sai Institute 


This Institute has been established for rejuvenating the nation and promoting the Dharmic way of 
life in the country through a generation of righteously educated students. It has no commercial 
aims. You must see that the good name of the Institute is preserved. Each one should examine 
himself. The senior students should be exemplary in their behaviour. If all of you behaved well, 
what a change would there be in the world! 


I am devoting 75 percent of my time to the students and giving only 25 percent to the devotees 
from all parts of the world. Realise how much love I am lavishing on you. If you waste this 
sacred opportunity, you will not get it again. Conduct yourselves as the children of one mother. 
The elder students should be an inspiration to the younger ones. Be more concerned about 
acquiring good character than getting degrees. When parents and teachers are indifferent to their 
responsibilities, Swami cannot evade His obligation to highlight your lapses and to correct you. 
The good students will be helped in every way. But the bad ones will be given no quarter. 
Always bear in mind that the Sathya Sai Institute is a sacred institution. It has been set up for 
promoting the welfare of the world. Only good students can serve to improve the nation. We will 
be content even if we have a handful of them. 


Discourse in the Prashaanthi Mandir on 19-6-1989, in the course of a series of discourses 
delivered to the students of the Sathya Sai Institute of Higher Learning. 


No one who is filled with pride and conceit is fit to wield power. It 
is only the person who is imbued with humility and appears to be 
not very knowledgeable that is fittest to wield authority. Hanuman 
is an example of such a person. Although he was endowed with 
enormous prowess, he appeared as a simple person. This humility 
enabled him to leap over the ocean. Socrates, who was hailed as 
the wisest man among the Greeks, always professed that he knew 
nothing. 


BABA 


13. The four qualities 


IN BHARATIYA culture, the four goals of human existence--- Purusharthas--have been 
declared to be: Dharma (Righteousness), Artha (earning of wealth), Kama (fulfilment of desires) 
and Moksha (Liberation). It: may not be possible for all human beings to achieve these four 
goals. 


There are four qualities which man has to develop if he is to pursue properly the four 
Purusharthas. These are very necessary for students today. It is the failure to understand these 
four requisites properly that has been the cause of many grave consequences. These four are: 
Maitri, Karuna, Muditha and Upeksha. These are four important qualities required by everyone. 


The characteristics of each of these qualities have not been rightly understood or explained. For 
instance, Maitri (friendship) is regarded as mere friendliness. What is friendship? Whom should 
you befriend? How is one to be friendly? These aspects have to be understood. One should not 
cultivate friendship with all and sundry. Friendship should be cultivated only towards those who 
are one's equals in age, status, culture, etc. Friendship with those above or below one should be 
avoided. This is the true meaning of friendship. When you try to befriend those above you in 
status etc., they may try to patronise you. When you do not like to be lorded over, the friendship 
will break. When you develop friendship with those below you, you may attempt to boss ever 
them. When they do not acquiesce in this, the friendship will break up. Therefore friendship will 
be enduring only when it is as between equals in age, wealth, status, etc. 


Karuna, Muditha and Upeksha 


Karuna (kindness or compassion) Kindness should be shown towards those who are in a lower 
position than ourselves in respect; of age, wealth, health, status, education, and the like. Only 
then compassion becomes meaningful and valuable. Kindness justifies itself in such cases. 


Muditha (appreciation)' This quality relates 'to the attitude to be shown towards those who are 
better off than you. You should feel happy when you see such persons. They may look wealthier 
than you or better placed than you in position and possessions. You should feel happy on seeing 
them. You should rejoice at the sight of persons holding higher positions or scoring higher 
marks. Muditha means freedom from envy and feeling happy over the better fortunes of others. 


Upeksha: There are two terms Apeksha (liking) and Upeksha (dislike or disinterestedness). We 
should have no liking for those who indulge in bad deeds or entertain bad thoughts. They should 
be kept at arm's length. Keep away from all those who are filled with bad thoughts, indulge in 
bad talk and bad actions. This is Upeksha. 


If you cultivate these four qualities, you do not need any other goals in life. Friendship with 
equals, compassion towards the lowly, rejoicing in the good fortune of those who are better off 
and keeping away from the wicked--these are the true objectives to be pursued in life. It is 
because of the failure to observe these directives that the quality of life has deteriorated. 


Maintain two-fold purity 


Everyone has to observe purity in body, dress and manners. This is external purity. This is not 
enough. The mind also has to be kept pure. The thoughts should be clean. It is necessary to 
maintain both external and internal cleanliness. How is internal purity to be achieved? It is easy 
to maintain external cleanliness by washing and removing the dirt. How is one to recognise 


internal impurity and try to remove it? There is only one way. That is to recognise that in all 
beings, from the smallest insect to the highest, there is God. This awareness will make the mind 
pure. You must have the conviction that the Divine permeates everything and is present 
everywhere. The infinite, universal Spirit is omnipresent. No one can determine what is good and 
what is bad in this all-pervading Cosmic spirit, because it is one without a second. Only a person 
with body consciousness can make such distinctions out of ignorance. For Divinity there are no 
such distinctions and no one can attribute such qualities to the Divine. 


The containers and the contained 


Here is an example: There are a number of pots made of clay, wood, copper, brass, silver and 
gold. They are filled with water. The reflections of the sun can be seen in the water in all the 
pots. Is it possible to say that the reflection of the sun in one pot is good and that in another is 
bad? The value of the pots may vary. But can any value be given to the sun's reflection in each of 
them? The pots are products of nature. The sun is transcendental. The pots can vary in quality. 
But the sun is incomparably pure. He symbolises the Infinite Spirit. Every living being is an 
image of the Supreme. Without a vessel, water cannot be contained. Without water the sun's 
image cannot be seen. 


In a human being, the mind represents water. The body is the container (Vessel). The Atma 
(Spirit:) that dwells in the body corresponds to the reflection of the sun. The Atma that is present 
in all beings is one and the same. The differences between them relate to the bodies (the 
containers). Enquiring in this way, it will be found that defects in quality relate to the-bodies and 
the mind and not to the Spirit. The water in one vessel may be muddy, in another it may be 
turbulent and in yet another it may be pure and still. The reflection in the water in the first may 
be regarded as Tamasic, that in the second as Rajasic and the one in the third as Satwic. 


What, then, is it that has to be kept pure? It is the mind, which has to be purified by the removal 
of Tamasic and Rajasic qualities. How is this to be done? By getting rid of two bad tendencies. 
One, trying to cover up one's faults; two, searching for the faults in others. The mind can become 
pure only if these two traits are got rid of. Only those who are conscious of their own defects and 
who seek to recognise the good in others can make their mind pure and steady. 


Students should realise that the relations between Swami and the students will depend on the 
intensity and sincerity of the students devotion. Here is an example. As you go along a road, you 
find on one side a tree rich in foliage and in full bloom. Across the road, on the other side, you 
notice a paddy field in which the crop is withering. What is the reason for this difference? In the 
case of the tree, the roots have gone deep in the ground and they can supply water to sustain the 
tree. In the case of the paddy crop, the field has not been watered for two days and the crop has 
withered because the roots have not gone deep and have not received any water. 


The one who is filled with deep devotion for God will experience great bliss. The one whose 
devotion is surface-deep will have no contentment. Each of you should examine how deep and 
sincere is your devotion to Swami. 


Discourse at Prashaanthi Mandir to the students of Sri Sathya Sai Institute of Higher Learning 
on 20-6-1989. 


14. The One and the Many 


MUSIC, which is invisible, is one, but the ragas (melodies) are many. Each raga has a unique 
form of its own. Likewise, rasa (taste) is one, but has a variety of forms. In Indian musicology, 
64 different ragas are listed. They are called Chatusshashti (64). However great a musician may 
be, even if he be Narada or Tumburu, the celestial singers, if he were to sing a single tune for 
long, his music will pall on the audience. Hence a variety of ragas are required. 


God, who is the embodiment of sweetness, manifests Himself in many forms. The Upanishads 
have declared: “Raso vai Sah" (He is sweetness itself). He invests that sweetness with infinite 
variety. Prakriti (Nature), which is made up of the three gunas (qualities) . 


Satwa, Rajas and Tamas--is one only. All the myriad colours, sounds, smells and tastes that we 
witness have emanated from Nature alone. 


How can God, whose manifestations are infinite, be described? The Vedas have declared: "From 
which speech and mind turn back unable to grasp It (the Supreme)." To realise the Divine, the 
only (easy) method is chanting the Name. There are, of course, many great ones who chant the 
name of the Lord incessantly. There are many others who recite the Name for days, months and 
years, but this effects no change in them. What is the reason for this?All their sense organs 
function with the feeling: "I am the body." Those who utter the name of the Lord while being 
immersed in the body consciousness cannot realise the Divine, however long their penance may 
last. 


One actor: many roles 


People belonging to different faiths and cultures pursue various spiritual practices according to 
their different backgrounds. When they find that these practices have not produced the results 
they expected, out of frustration or disappointment they go after a different form of worship or a 
different faith. Spiritual change cannot come merely by chanting a different name or even 
adopting a different creed. Divine grace is not secured by a change of faith. It is the mathi (mind) 
that has to undergo a change, not one's matham (religion). By merely changing the garments you 
wear, you cannot acquire divine qualities. Virtues have to be cultivated. Only the person who 
transforms his character can sublimate himself. 


Here is a simple example' In a play one actor appears in the first scene as a beggar in tattered 
clothes. In another scene he appears in the robes of a king. Later he appears as a minister. The 
people in the audience may think that the beggar was a different person from the one in the role 
of the king and that of the minister. What is the reason? They go by the costumes worn by the 
actors. A person is judged by his dress and his actions. But see how a dog behaves in relation to 
its master. The dog recognises its master irrespective of the dress he wears. It acts on the basis of 
the voice of the master. It would seem that a dog has a better sense of recognition than human 
beings who judge men by external appearances. 


Names and forms are artificial 


Men today act on the basis of names and forms. These names and forms are artificial. Sound has 
the quality of permanence. If the name of the Lord is chanted with due regard to the sound, the 
name acquires spiritual power. The Chinmaya (higher consciousness) can be experienced in the 
utterance of the Divine Name. 


Man is the embodiment of divine consciousness. Only when he is pure, he can experience that 
consciousness. Through attachment to worldly pleasures man gets bound to the physical and 
becomes oblivious to his essential divinity. 


Man knows that God is the very embodiment of love. Only through the cord of love can God be 
bound. But it is only when love is for love's sake that this cord can bind God to man. If love is 
motivated by desire for worldly objects, God will be beyond our reach. You must become 
embodiments of love. If you are merely loving, your love will be confined to a few. Only when 
you become the embodiment of love can your love comprehend all. Only then will you realise 
that it is the same God who is the Indweller in all beings. 


Krishna defines the role of a leader 


During Krishna's boyhood days he wanted to go to the forest with other cowherd boys to lead the 
cows and calves for grazing. His mother said that he needed sandals for going to the forest when 
he would have to walk over thorns and stones. Krishna said that the cattle had no shoes and he as 
their protector should wear no shoes. He pointed out that the cows were selfless in giving their 
milk to others and love of the cows and calves towards him was not equalled even by Yasoda's 
love for him. Krishna set an example as to how a leader should behave in relation to those under 
his charge. 


Krishna considered himself as the leader and protector of the cows. You may be a class leader, a 
room leader, a party leader or a social leader, but a leader of any sort should set an example to 
his followers and serve as an ideal to them. 


In fact, every individual should aim at being an ideal person. Only then would his life be 
purposeful and self-satisfying. Take the example of a farmer. Before growing a crop on his land, 
he has to prepare the field, plough it, manure it, sow the seeds. When the seeds sprout, he has to 
remove the weeds and protect the crop from birds and other depredators, only then can he reap 
the harvest. 


A similar exercise has to be done in the cultivation of the heart by everyone. The heart is like a 
field. It has to be cultivated properly. It should be filled with the water of love- It should be tilled 
by the process of vichara (enquiry). Then the seed of the Divine Name has to be planted in it. 
You must erect the fence of vigilance to guard it. You must protect the crop of devotion by 
weeding out egoism. Only then you will reap the fruit of love for the Divine. 


In the tree of every human life, there is the fruit of love. To enjoy this fruit, you have to remove 
the outer rind so that you can get at the juice within. Take, for instance, an orange. To enjoy the 
fruit, you have to remove the outer skin first. Then you have also to take out the seeds in the fruit 
and the fibrous parts. You should consume only the juice. You should realise that life has been 
given to you by the Divine so that you may enjoy this fruit of love. Get rid of ostentation and 
pride. Remove the seeds of bad thoughts and bad feelings. Throw out the mamakara (acquisitive 
impulse). Then you will taste the juice of love. 


Realise your true potential 


This is the type of sadhana which everyone should undertake. Each is a kind of cultivator. Every 
heart is a field. This divine gift should not go to waste. What use is there in possessing land if 
you do not cultivate it properly? This is a sacred land. But if it is allowed to lie fallow, it 
becomes barren and nothing can be grown on it. Here is a boundless field, but you are failing to 
grow the kind of crop that should be raised on it. 


Your foremost duty today is to cultivate properly the precious and boundless land that has been 
given to you. You do have the abilities required for this purpose. Some students pray to Swami 
to give them the strength to live up to Swami's ideals. When they pray like this, they imagine that 
they do not have the strength at present. There is no need to give them this strength. It is already 
there. You are failing to make good use of it, because you are not concentrating your attention on 
it. If you realise your potential, you will know how to make the right use of it. 


Discourse in the Prashaanthi Mandir on 21-6-1989. 


The Grace of God cannot be won through the gymnastics of 
reason, the contortions of Yoga or the denials of asceticism. Love 
alone can win it, Love that needs no requital, Love that knows no 
bargaining, Love that is paid gladly, as tribute to the All Loving, 
Love that is unwavering. Love alone can overcome obstacles 
however many and mighty. There is no strength more effective than 
Purity, no bliss more satisfying than Love, no joy more restoring 
than Bhakti, no triumph more praiseworthy than Surrender. 


BABA 


15. Power of the Lord's name 


ALL RELIGIONS have laid stress on purity of heart. They have also declared that without a 
pure heart all spiritual exercises are valueless. How can purity of heart be realised if the mind is 
filled with egoism? The body can be cleaned by water. But the heart can be cleaned only by 
chanting the Lord's name. 


Prahlada, who was the son of an Asura, Jatayu, a bird, and an animal like Gajendra, the Lord of 
the Elephants, redeemed themselves by relying on the Lord's name. As long as one is filled with 
ego and relies on his own strength, the benefit of the Lord's grace will not come to him. It is only 
when Gajendra declared that he knew no one other than God who could save him here or in the 
hereafter that the Lord rushed to his rescue. 


When Draupadi was being humiliated by the Kauravas, who went to her rescue? All the prowess 
of her husbands could not protect her. She prayed to Krishna as her sole protector, as no relations 
or others could come to her aid. Men may help to relieve ordinary difficulties in life. But in times 
of grave crisis only Madhava (God) can save man. Believing in this, Draupadi prayed to Krishna 
for succour. The faith in the Lord's name saved her. 


Tulsidas hailed Rama as the protector of the universe and declared that the very name Ra-aa-ma 
represented the three powerful deities, Agni, Surya and Chandra (the Fire-God, the Sun-God and 
the Moon-God). 


Valmiki, who was a hunter in his early life, became a sage and the author of the immortal 
Ramayana by meditating on the name Rama, taught to him by the Seven Sages. Association with 
the saintly persons and the chanting of Rama's name made him the Adikavi (the first poet). 


The Lord's name is like a boat for a man crossing the ocean of life. It is supremely important in 
the Kali Age. It has been declared that there is nothing greater than the name of Hari in the Kali 
Age. By no other spiritual or religious practices can peace be attained in this age. 


The Divine name can turn poison into nectar. It can revive a lifeless thing. It is surcharged with 
infinite power. 


Mira was so deeply immersed in chanting the name of Krishna that she was totally unmindful of 
where she was going and what others thought about her. Those who have firm faith in God 
should not bother about what others thought or said about them. They should adhere to their 
practices regardless of what others felt. 


This applies to students when they go to their homes for the holidays, when some persons might 
comment about their uttering prayers before they took their meals. They should have the courage 
to practise what they knew to be right. They must be afraid to commit sin, but have no fear at all 
in chanting the name of God. The Lord's name will protect them upto the end of their lives even 
when all others desert them. You must practise chanting God's name from now on because no 
one can say when the end will come. 


Discourse at Prashaanthi Mandir on 22-6-1989. 


The deepest yearning of man is to experience the One, the Basis, 
the Being that has Become. From east and west, from south and 
north, you have come in thousands and are now One in this 
Poorna Chandra Auditorium, feeling a blissful spiritual Unity. Be 
aware of the One which manifests as the many. That is Divine Life. 
Aspire for such a life, not simply for long life. Aspire for the Bliss 
that the awareness of the Atma can confer, not for the pleasure the 
objects of the world can give. 


BABA 


16. Arare opportunity 


MAN'S life is like a garland, with birth at one end and death at the other. Between the two ends 
are strung together flowers of all kinds--troubles, worries, joys, sorrows and dreams. Few men 
are aware of the string that runs through all the flowers. Without the string there can be no 
garland. Only the person who recognises the string can become a real man. This string is called 
Sutra or Brahma-Sutra (The Divine String). The Divine Atma principle is the string which is 
found in all human beings and which is the source of all the potencies in them. 


Bharat, which was the home of spirituality and a treasure-house of supreme wisdom, is today in 
the grip of demonic forces revelling in falsehood, chicanery, violence and wickedness. Out of the 
conviction that, in this crisis, only students can help to bring about peace, integrity and goodwill, 
we established educational institutions. 


Students! You must realise 'that those whom you regard as eiders, leaders, persons holding 
positions and people worthy of respect, were once students like yourselves. Today's students will 
be tomorrow's citizens, administrators and respected leaders. Having regard to your future role, 
you must use the present opportunity after assessing the merits and defects of the older 
generation. 


Spirituality and morality are like two eyes 


You make intense efforts to acquire your degrees. You should make much greater efforts to 
develop your character and integrity. Human life will be meaningless without morality and 
goodness. You students should remember that Sai-Matha (Bhagavan) feels a thousand times 
more distressed when you fall back in spirituality and morality than what: your parents feel when 
you do not fare well in your academic and scientific studies. Look upon spirituality and morality 
as the two eyes of human existence. 


Despite the striking progress in the fields of science and technology, there has been deterioration 
in morals and social behaviour because of the growth of selfishness. Self-interest is predominant 
in every action. If one's entire life is governed by selfishness, what happens to society? Every 
individual has a responsibility to society, from which he derives so many benefits. Society is 
based on the principle of mutual give and take. Your primary duty is to show your gratitude to 
your parents, your kith and kin, your friends, teachers and others who have helped you in various 
ways to make you what you are. 


You must also realise that the source of true joy is within yourself and not in the objects of the 
external world. When Sita was a prisoner in Ravana's Asoka Vana, none of the beautiful things 
in the garden could give here any joy. But the sight of Hanuman, as a messenger from her Lord 
Rama, gave her great joy because all her thoughts were centered on Rama and Hanuman sang the 
glories of Rama and described how he came to adore Rama. 


This shows that man cannot derive joy merely from things that are beautiful or from individuals 
who are beautiful. Man derives joy from the objects he loves and not from other things. It is the 
love that lends beauty to the object. Hence joy is equated with beauty and the sweetness of 
honey. Anyone who seeks joy should not go after things of beauty. The fountain-source of joy is 
within himself. To bring forth that joy man should cultivate the inward vision. 


Manifest the divine power within 


Students! There is a divine power that is inherent in every human being. You must strive to 
manifest it. Recognise that: all the knowledge you have been able to acquire is because of this 
divine power within you. You must cherish and foster that power. Most people make use of this 
power for selfish purposes to promote the well-being of themselves and their families. It should 
really be utilised for the good of the whole world. You should live upto the Gita ideal: 
"Saravaloka hithe ratah" ("Rejoicing in the well-being of all"). Recognise the divinity in you 
and share that experience with all. Use the divine power in you to cultivate virtues, which 
constitute the essence of education. Lead a life which will earn for you the love of the people 
more than their respect. 


Discourse in the Prashaanthi Mandir on 24-6-1989. 


Reduce the luggage you carry about, when on the journey of life. 
Remember, all that is not 'you' is luggage! You are not the body. 
So, the body is an item of luggage. The mind, the senses, the 
intelligence, the imagination, the desires, the plans, the prejudices, 
the discontent, the distress all, all are items of luggage. Jettison 
them, soon, to make your travel lighter, safer and more 
comfortable. Learn this lesson watching the great, who are humble 
and simple. They are the elders whom you should admire and 
follow. They are the people who bring forth your tears when they 
pass away, there are others who bring forth your tears, when they 
Pass your way! 


They are to be avoided. 
BABA 


17. The One in the many 


WHATEVER man seeks to achieve, he has to rely on Nature. Nature is not anyone's private 
property. It belongs to God. Without the grace of the Lord no one can enjoy the benefits of 
Nature. Not realising this truth, some people embark on the exploitation of Nature, out of 
arrogance and self-conceit. This is highly misconceived. 


Without the sanction of the Lord, man cannot achieve anything in the world. The Divine is the 
basis for everything. Man, however, is filled with the conceit that he is the one who is doing 
everything. This pride is the cause of his ruin. It is the cause of his frustration and 
disappointment. Man today is basing his life on reliance on Nature, forgetting God. This is a 
grievous mistake. You must place your faith in God, who is the prime supporter of Nature, and 
enjoy what Nature provides. Faith in God is the primary requisite for man. 


But how should devotion to God express itself?. Not in ostentatious external forms like smearing 
vibhuti, wearing a special dress or flaunting a japamala. Devotees make a distinction between 
personal duties and service to the Divine. They. look upon worship, meditation and the like as 
Divine service and what they do for their families and friends as personal duties. This kind of 
division amounts to practising a deception on God. God is omnipresent and subsumes all things. 
Hence there is no meaning in making a distinction between one kind of work and another. 


Consider all acts as an offering to God 


A policeman on duty wears his uniform and when he is off duty he is in his own plain clothes. 
He makes a distinction between his official dress and his "own" clothes. This is all right from the 
worldly point of view. But devotees should not make such a distinction. Whatever work they do, 
whether in their office or elsewhere, they should consider it as an offering to God. In any 
business in which you engage yourself, treat it also as God's work. This is known as Bhaava- 
Advaita (Advaitic attitude or attitude of oneness). 


Next, you have the instance of people in different bodies, with different forms and names. But, 
irrespective of these differences, they are basically made up of the same five elements--earth, 
water, fire, air and ether. These elements are aspects of the Paramatma (the OverSoul). Why, 
then, should any distinctions be made in our activities between different persons constituted by 
the same common elements? Hence, together with Bhaava-Advaita, you should have Kriya- 
Advaita (the unitary attitude to work). This means that whatever work you do should be 
dedicated to God. All such actions become thereby sanctified and divinised, they acquire the 
unifying quality of holiness. 


The next one is Padaartha-Advaita (non-dualism relating to objects). When you begin to enquire 
into the fundamental basis of all objects, you find that it is only one. For instance, a cloth is made 
up of threads, which are made from cotton. The common factor is cotton. Distinctions are made 
when the underlying basic unitary substance is forgotten. When Bhaava-Advaita, Kriya-Advaita 
and Padaartha-Advaita are properly understood, we can have a vision of the basic Reality. Then 
the omnipresence of the Divine can be experienced. 


Yearn for the love of the Lord 


Look at the modern attempts to understand God by concentrating on exploring the secrets of 
Nature. This is a wrong approach. The effort should be to realise that Nature has come from God. 
Only then God can be experienced. You have to turn your mind from the mundane to the Divine, 


from Nature to Nature's God. By getting immersed in evanescent and impermanent worldly 
concerns, people are polluting their lives. Admittedly the phenomenal world presented by Nature 
is true. The Spirit is also truth. Man's journey is not from untruth to Truth but from a lesser truth 
to a higher Truth. Truth is only one. That truth is God. 


God can be realised only through love. Your devotion must be such that God seeks you. Like a 
child crying ceaselessly till the mother rushes to pacify it, like a calf calling for its mother-cow, 
like a forlorn wife praying for the return of her husband, the devotee should feel the yearning for 
His coming. Udhdhava declared that only such yearning was true devotion. 


Students! Bhajans and japas do not constitute Bhakti (devotion). You must yearn for the love of 
the Lord. Along with your studies, cultivate devotion and spiritual discipline. Spirituality is the 
summum bonum of education. 


Discourse in the Prashaanthi Mandir on 25-6-1989. 


God is omnipresent. So do not act differently when you are away 
from my presence. Be always and everywhere conscious of the 
Presence. Be vigilant, even while engaged in little tasks. Maintain 
silence, in the recesses of the heart, as well as outside. The Gita 
says, God's hands and feet are everywhere. You can hear His foot- 
fall only when no other sound hinders. Develop the awareness of 
God, see Him and serve Him in every living being. 


BABA 


18. Man and the cosmos 


BHARTRUHARI was a great devotee, a very wise person, a poet and an ideal example to all 
spiritual aspirants. Once he embarked on an enquiry into his failings. He observed: "When I was 
a man of little wisdom, I behaved like one who felt there was no one equal to me and acted 
recklessly. But thanks to association with sages and listening to their wise teachings, I was able 
to realise the truth about myself." Just as a specific medicine serves to cure a particular malady, 
the teachings of wise sages enable one to bring under control the vagaries of the mind. 


Why should anyone feel conceited? What are you in this vast universe? In the boundless 
firmament, the sun is a small star. The earth is a small planet, of which Asia is a small part. In it, 
Bharat is a small country and Anantapur is a district in it. You are in a small room in Prashaanthi 
Nilayam. In relation to the cosmos, is there any reason for anyone to feel proud about himself?. 
Such pride can only be the result of delusion born of ignorance. 


If you explore in depth the true nature of the human condition, you will recognise the various 
aspects of its impermanence and mutability. In the vast universe with its millions of stars, what is 
the reason for divinity manifesting itself in the human form? Very few care to recognise the truth 
behind this. The highest wisdom is required for securing this understanding. 


Three kinds of knowledge 


In the world today, knowledge about the universe falls into three categories. (1) In terms of daily 
life, there is factual knowledge based on perception. To treat facts as truth and fiction as untruth 
is practical knowledge. (2) In the second category are those who regard the phenomenal world as 
real and treat all that cannot be seen or heard as unreal or non-existent. They regard Nature as 
real and God as non-existent. (3) The third category consists of those who make no distinction 
between one thing and another and hold the view that the whole universe is a projection of the 
Divine and is permeated by the Divine. This is spiritual knowledge. 


Doubtless, knowledge of the phenomenal world is necessary. But one should go beyond it to 
know the Eternal and Unchanging Reality. Once Nehru asked Gandhiji why he was looking so 
worried and depressed. Gandhiji answered that he was finding that the education the young 
people were receiving was making them hard-hearted. "What good can such hard-hearted 
persons do to the world? This is what worries me," said Gandhiji. 


Modem education makes a man pursue what appeals to his mind and not what is good for his 
mind and soul. Even the heart which is soft and sweet by nature is turned into a hard and 
unfeeling organ. The sharpest intellect gets blunted. 


Parents of children are anxious to see their children become scholars rather than men of 
character. Only those parents are worthy of esteem who desire that their children develop good 
qualities even more than academic distinctions. Education is not the be-all and end-all of life. It 
is only a part of life. Virtues are the backbone of life. The spiritual path is the only means of 
cultivating virtues. 


The real meaning of freedom 


In pursuing the spiritual path, one should not get disinterested or indifferent at any stage. 
Devotion does not admit of rest or revulsion. Steadfastness is the sign of true devotion. Students 
should cultivate such devotion because they do not have sufficient control over their senses. 


Students are inclined to regard freedom to act as they like as their primary goal. But this is not 
real freedom. Unrestrained freedom is enjoyed by the animals. But how should a man, an 
educated being, conduct himself?. Swechcha (freedom of will) consists of the two words Swa 
and Ichcha. Swa refers to the Atma and Swechcha means acting according to the dictates of the 
Spirit and not of the body. One must use one's discriminating power to decide whether a thing is 
right or wrong and act according to the dictates of one's conscience. That is true freedom of will. 
Only then can one have self-confidence. 


Gratitude is a cardinal virtue 


Students must strive to acquire good qualities even more than academic knowledge. To 
understand the nature of divinity, devotion is essential. Once there is firm faith in God one can 
face with ease all the vicissitudes of life. Every devotee has to have as his aides firm faith in God 
on one side and purity of character on the other. 


Students! Gratitude is a cardinal virtue. You must be grateful to all those who have helped you in 
your lives. You may earn money by your efforts. There is nothing wrong. But it must be spent in 
righteous ways. Today one sees everywhere the worshippers of Siri (wealth) but few 
worshippers of Hari. This is the irony of devotion today. Spiritual wealth alone is true wealth. It 
is not dependent on anyone's favour. Fire cannot burn it. Thieves cannot steal it. It will protect 
you like your life-breath. It leads you on the right path, Strive to acquire this spiritual wealth. 
Then Bharat will become the moral leader of the world. 


Discourse in the Prashaanthi Mandir on 26-6-1989. 


Welcome disappointments for they toughen you and test your 
fortitude. 


BABA 


19. Prema and Bhakti 


DEAR STUDENTS! God is the embodiment of Love. The Cosmos is permeated by the Divine. 
Hence, the Cosmos is enveloped in love. Men in their narrow-mindedness are unable to 
recognise the nature of this infinite, all-embracing Love principle. 


Man views love from three stand-points and experiences it in three ways. (1) Love relating to the 
body; (2) Love in relation to the mind; (3) Spiritual love. 


Love assumes three forms according to the three qualities, Tamas, Rajas and Satwa. All the 
attachments and differences arising in the world, and the processes of birth, growth and 
dissolution, are based on love. 


When you examine the nature of love, while coming together or experiencing separation, or in 
happiness and sorrow, the need for cultivating equal-mindedness in the different situation 
becomes apparent. 


Love based on physical relation is considered by the sastras as Tamasic and as the lowest of the 
three types of love. It manifests itself as attachment to one's own kith and kin or possessions and 
is confined to a narrow circle. 


The second category of love combines self-centered love with love for others for the purpose of 
gaining one's ends. These persons pretend to have love for their superiors or people in power and 
thereby seek to achieve their aims. They adore men of affluence or power and by their 
obsequious service to them they try to win favours from them. This is Rajoguna prema (love that 
is prompted by self-centred urges.) 


People with Satwic love are fearless 


The third category is pure Satwic love. In contemporary conditions, this type of love is rare. 
People filled with satwic love recognise that the same Divine is present in all beings, and 
consider that without love towards all beings life is meaningless. By their universal love, they 
proclaim the truth about the omnipresence of the Divine. Their vision is spiritual, as they see the 
Divine in all beings. Such persons are fearless like lions, which roam about without any 
apprehensions of danger from any source. The person with bodily vision behaves like sheep, 
steeped in fear. The one who has acquired the spiritual vision has all his senses, mind and 
intellect under the control of the Atma. There is no harm in pursuing one's worldly duties while 
having Self-realisation as the goal of life. Young people must cultivate this spiritual attitude from 
their student days. 


In the pursuit of the spiritual, one should not have any rewards in view. One who has mercenary 
motives becomes a wage-earner. He cannot be a master. One who works for wages will not have 
a deep interest in the work and what he does will not be pure or perfect. He will only be a clock- 
watcher. He considers himself an outsider in relation to his job. On the other hand, in his own 
house see how his wife and children work. They receive no wages. Their work is filled with love, 
purity and earnestness. They are masters of themselves and work in freedom. One who prays to 
God for something in return is like a wage-labourer. The devotee who regards God as his own 
kinsman and serves the Lord is like a master of the household. Conduct yourselves as masters 
and not as mercenary employees. 


Three paths of discipline 


To develop this kind of devotion, three kinds of disciplines have been indicated. They are' (1) 
The Matsya (fish) path. (2)The Mriga (animal) path. (3)The Kurma (tortoise) path. The fish can 
live only in water. It cannot survive on land. The animal can live only on land and cannot survive 
in water. The tortoise is an amphibian and can survive both in water and on land. The devotee 
following the fish path practises his sadhana with concentration for the sake of himself and his 
family. The devotee adhering to the animal path can practise his sadhana in solitude and not in a 
crowd. One individual, for instance, who had a large family, sat down for meditation in his 
home. As one child or another was disturbing him, he locked himself in a room and started 
meditation. But he was disturbed by frequent knocks on the door by some one or other. He 
betook himself to a forest and began meditating under a tree. But his meditation was disturbed by 
the dropping from the birds on the tree. Disgusted with the disturbances at home and in the forest 
he felt: that: the best thing was to end his existence. He was unable to realise that God was 
present in everything and cultivate forbearance. He exemplifies the devotee with the Rajoguna 
predominant. 


To be able to concentrate wherever one may be is the mark of the devotee with satwic quality. 
Whether in the midst: of a crowd or alone, he is able to practise concentration. If anyone disturbs 
his meditation, he looks upon the disturbance as coming from God and accepts it. 


It is necessary to understand the deeper meanings of Vedantic injunctions. Today people tend to 
go by the letter of the scriptures. The words of the scriptures should be interpreted and 
understood in the context of the prevailing time and circumstances. Then their real meaning will 
be clear. 


Precept and practice should go together 


For instance, persons who take a pledge to observe certain disciplines in all circumstances, fail to 
do so when the circumstances are not congenial. 


There is a story to illustrate this. Once all the deer in a forest held a conference. They argued as 
follows: "Do the dogs have as much strength as we have? If we use our antlers against the dogs, 
they can be disembowelled. If we kick them with our legs, they will collapse. We are more fleet- 
footed than the dogs. While running we can jump over ditches and obstacles, which they cannot. 
We are in every way superior to the dogs. Why, then, should we be afraid of them? Henceforth 
we should not be afraid of dogs. We should face them courageously." All the deer came to this 
decision. 


Hardly had they come to this resolution when the distant bark of a dog was heard. Immediately, 
not one of the deer stayed on the spot. All of them took to their heels and fled. 


What was their resolution at their conference and what was their action later? The behaviour of 
those who preach Vedanta these days is very much on a par with that of the deer in the stow. No 
one adheres to what he says or preaches. More than listening to spiritual discourses, one must try 
to practise at least a part of .what one learns. Vedanta is being expounded at many places, not to 
speak of the discourses on the Gita. But how many understand the real spirit of the Gita and act 
up to its message? 


Maintain unity in thought, word and deed 


There was a pandit who was expounding the Gita to a king. When the pandit was explaining the 
sloka in the Gita in which Sri Krishna says that He will look after the welfare, both here and in 
the hereafter, of those who worship Him with one-pointed devotion, the king found that the 
pandit did not behave as if he believed in the assurance given by Krishna. He was expounding 
the Gita to the king to secure a reward from him and not out of conviction in the teachings of the 
Gita. When the pandit realised this he stopped going to the king. 


Many scholars wax eloquent about what is said in the Gita, but how many of them practise the 
teachings of the Gita seriously? It is because of this dichotomy between preaching and practice 
that spiritual teachings have got into bad odour and are being treated with little regard. Only 
when the feelings emanating from the heart, the words coming out of the mouth and the actions 
one performs are all in perfect harmony will one's life be based on truth. 


Cultivate lasting bliss of Divine love 


Students! You need not make much effort to grow grass. But to grow a useful crop you have to 
labour hard. Likewise, it: is no great achievement to experience the trivial and transient pleasures 
of mundane existence. It is like growing grass. You must strive to cultivate the nectarine, lasting 
bliss of Divine love. Those who aspire for such love are not easy to find. All appear as devotees. 
But one who has experienced the Divine Principle will not go after sensuous pleasures. Devotion 
these days appears more as a way of spending one's time rather than as the royal road to the 
eternal mansion of the divine. 


Education is no doubt necessary for living in the world. But you should be concerned about the 
basic purpose of life. Education is not for earning a living alone but to acquire a way of life. 
Whatever you may learn, you should try to put into practice at least some part of what you have 
learnt. Treating life as righteous journey, you should devote at least a few minutes every day to 
thoughts on the true aims of life. Many hours in a day are wasted on selfish pursuits, but not even 
a few minutes are devoted to contemplation of God. Alas! What misfortune is this! 


In the Bhagavad Gita, Krishna called upon Arjuna to regard himself as an instrument of the 
Divine. Every human being is indeed an instrument. As such, he should carry out his duties, 
leaving the results to God. Men have to do their duties; success or failure is determined by the 
Divine. Do not esteem yourself as the doer. Develop the conviction that the Indwelling Spirit in 
you is directing you and enabling you to act. 


Discourse in the Prashaanthi Mandir on 27-6-1989. 


Bhakti is Prema, unsullied by. any tinge of desire for the benefit 
that flows from it or the fruit or consequence of that love. It is love 
that knows no particular reason for its manifestation. 


It is of the nature of the love of the soul for the Oversoul; the river 


for the Sea; the creeper for the tree, the star for the sky, the spring 
for the cliff down which it flows. 


It is sweet, in bad times as well as good. It is not like pepper or salt 
with which you savour your dishes; it is the very bread and butter, 
the essential substance itself. It is not the pickle, which only lends a 


twang to the tongue and helps you to consume a little more of the 


food. 
BABA 


20. Brahmamayam Jagath 


SARVAM Brahmamayam Jagath (The Cosmos is saturated with Brahmam). There is nothing in 
the universe unconnected with Brahmam (the Omni-Self). While the Divine is thus all-pervasive, 
the ability to recognise this truth is not present in all. 


The fact is well known that fire is latent in wood. But on that basis, if one attempts to cook rice 
in a vessel, placing it on a lorry load of wood, can the rice be cooked? Fire has two states' the 
inner and the outer. The fire that is invisible and latent is inner fire. This fire, though it is present, 
cannot burn anything. The external fire manifests its true form and can burn anything and reduce 
it to ashes. Likewise, the power to experience the omnipresent Divine and envision it internally 
is possessed by each one, while only some have the capacity to demonstrate it externally. 


The Cosmos is rooted in Consciousness. Every object in the universe has emanated from the 
Divine. From a blade of grass to a mountain, from a drop of water to a mighty river, from the 
atom to the Parabrahmam (Supreme Spirit), all are permeated by the One Divine principle. It is 
not easy for all to realise the oneness of this all-pervading Divinity It is only when the rays of 
Divine love unite with the devotion of the individual that the Vision of Divinity is experienced. 


The theist and the atheist 


The fire of spirituality burns equally in the theist, who declares constantly that God exists, and in 
the atheist, who repeatedly denies the existence of God. The feelings of love' are present in the 
heart of the atheist, no less than in the heart of the believer. But, the feelings of love of the theist 
are directed towards God. The atheist's love is turned towards Prakriti (Nature). Because of his 
love for the objects of the world the latter gets bound. When he directs that love towards God, he 
will become the instrument of his own liberation. Love is the impelling force for both bondage 
and liberation. That love is a manifestation of the divine. 


Love can be experienced only by love and by no other means. The Bhagavatam expounds the 
union of love with love. In this context, some doubts may arise. It may be asked how in the 
Bhagavatam not only theists, who are lovers of God, figure in the work, but also avowed 
enemies of God. When you have accounts of wicked men like Hiranyakasipu, Hiranyaksha,. 
Kamsa, Sisupala, Dantavakra and others in the Bhagavatam, can the Bhagavatam be regarded as 
a work which deals only with the intimate relationship between God and devotees? The answer 
to this query may be made clear by a simple illustration. If, supposing, someone comes to your 
house asking for water to quench his thirst you have to offer him some water, buttermilk or some 
drink. To offer this drink, you need a container. This may be made of silver, brass or other 
material. The material of the container is not important. What is important is the drink. Likewise, 
Hiranyakasipu and others are a kind of containers for serving the drink of devotion. What is 
significant is the transformation of the contents of the vessel into the Divine substance. 


Demons teach devotees the Divine power 


In your eyes, Hiranyakasipu and others may appear to be demons. But in the view of the Divine 
they may appear as persons who help the devotees to affirm their faith in God. The Lord makes 
an example of the demons to teach the devotees the truth of the Spirit. The good is wedged in 
between two bad things. Pleasure is an interval between two pains. Indeed, if there had been no 
Hiranyaksha and Hiranyakasipu, there would have been no occasion for the advent of the 
Narasimha Avatar to bless Prahlada. Without hatred on the one side, the power of faith on the 


other cannot be demonstrated. Although Prahlada's father, Hiranyakasipu, subjected his son, a 
great devotee of God, to numerous ordeals, Prahlada emerged from them as an ideal lover of 
God, who acquired undying glory. Hiranyakasipu was the instrument for revealing the greatness 
of Prahlada. The Lord creates hostile forces to demonstrate the power of faith in the Divine and 
to confer peace and plenty on the believers. 


When two sticks are rubbed against each other fire emerges. The fire that is latent in the wood 
becomes manifest thereby. But this happens only when the sticks are rubbed continuously and 
not in leisurely stages. Likewise, when the Lord's name is chanted without intermission the fire 
of Divine wisdom manifests itself in the devotee. To bring peace and joy to devotees, there must 
be some wicked elements present in the world. Just as a mother provides toys and sweets to a 
child for its pleasure, though they are of no use to her, God creates certain things for the sake of 
the devotee, to bring out the depth of his devotion. 


Confront the hostile elements 


Take another example. The sugar cane's fibre is essential for preserving its juice. What we have 
to consume is the juice. But the juice is contained in the fibre, which is useless for us. It is only 
by squeezing the fibre that the juice can be got. Likewise, only by confronting the hostile 
elements can the benevolence of the Divine be experienced. Even in small matters, we find that 
their true nature is discovered by experiencing the elements opposed to them. For instance, if one 
wants to develop physical strength, he has to subject the body to severe gymnastic exercises. Can 
jaggery be got by seeking favour from sugar cane? Can it be got without crushing the cane and 
boiling the juice? Even a diamond requires to be cut and polished to enhance its brilliance and 
value. 


Likewise, although Divinity resides in everyone, only in some persons it manifests itself 
externally. The reason for this external manifestation is the combining of the devotional feelings 
of the individual with the grace of God. Who is responsible for the appearance of Lord 
Narasimha before Prahlada? Is it Prahlada or Hiranyakasipu? Both are responsible. 
Hiranyakasipu's doubts and Prahlada's faith came together. Hiranyakasipu asked: "Where is 
God?" Prahlada replied: "There is no need to entertain doubts as to whether He is in one place 
and not in another. He is everywhere." Hiranyakasipu then asked: "Is He in this pillar?" Prahlada 
replied: "Yes." Hiranyakasipu hit the pillar. Then Narasimha emerged from it. It is the 
combination of the opposing elements in Hiranyakasipu and Prahlada which accounts for the 
emergence of Narasimha Avatar. God is present in one from in Hiranyakasipu and in another 
form in Prahlada. God is the doubter and God is the believer. He is the one who adores and also 
the one who derides. He is the giver and the recipient. When this Omnipresent oneness of the 
Divine is comprehended, then the significance of the statement, “Sarvam Vishnumayam Jagath" 
(the Cosmos is permeated by the Divine) will be understood. 


Same entity is present in all the three states 


The same entity is present in all the three states of waking, dream and deep sleep. In the waking 
state, you are listening to the discourse in this hall. In the dream state, you experience certain 
incidents. You feel there is no relation between the body and the dream state experiences. In the 
Sushupti (deep sleep) state you experience a sense of bliss. In that state you think that neither the 
body nor the mind exists. Who, then, is the experiencer? It is the same entity that has 
experienced the bliss in sushupti, the dreams in the dream state and the sensations in the waking 
state. In the waking state, it is through the senses that the experience is had. In the dream state it 


is through the mind in the sukshma sareera (subtle body). The experience in the deep sleep state 
is by the divine power which transcends the body and the mind. The states are different, but the 
experiencer is one. It is difficult to understand the workings of the Divine. But one who seeks to 
understand them with devotion and persistence, will find it easy. 


How the Divine functions 


From time to time this Divine power assumes numerous forms. In devotees it shines as the 
Jnana-Agni (fire of wisdom). In non-devotees it bums as Krodha-Agni (the fire of hatred) or the 
Kama-Agni (fire of desire). Fire is a dreadful power. Even when it is at a distance, it evokes a 
sense of fear and danger. But man today has this fire (of hatred, etc) in his heart and has become 
a victim of fear and delusions. The fires of lust, anger, hatred and jealousy can do a lot of havoc 
to man. All other types of fire subside in due course. But these fires (of hatred, etc.) never 
completely cease. They may flare up at any moment. How, then, are these fires to be 
extinguished once for all? What do you need for putting them out? Vairagya (detachment) and 
Prema (love) are the two requisites to extinguish these fires. 


It is only through prema (love) that man can acquire peace. Although man today has a surfeit of 
comforts and amenities, he is steeped in fear and worry. Despite all his attempts to ensure 
security, the fear remains. All the amenities he enjoys do not confer peace of mind on him. Why 
is he haunted by this fear and lack of peace? It is because he entertains in his heart the fires of 
hatred, jealously and the like. 


Only pure thoughts can confer peace. An innocent and pure person is always at peace. It is the 
guilty man who lacks peace. It is only when a man rids himself of evil that he can be free from 
fear. How is one to get rid of evil? Men imagine that they lack the capacity to distinguish 
between right and wrong, good and bad. Of all beings in this world, man alone has the highest 
capacity to determine what is right and what is wrong. Despite being aware of this capacity, he 
indulges in wrong deeds. Knowing what is wrong, he commits wrongs. Consequently he 
becomes a victim of fear and anxiety. He would not suffer from these, if he did anything wrong 
out of ignorance. There are insane persons who are not conscious of right and wrong, because 
they have no discriminating power. They act without any sense of fear because they are not 
conscious of the character of their actions. It is the person who indulges in wrong actions 
deliberately who is haunted by fear and worry. 


One fire, different uses 


The discriminating power has to be used in the right way. You should follow the dictates of your 
conscience and act according to the promptings of the Atma (the Indwelling Spirit). You are 
filled with fear when you do something against the injunctions of your conscience. To get rid of 
fear, you have to perform all actions in a spirit of dedication to the Divine. Remember that fire is 
present in your body even as it is latent in wood. Use this fire properly. Although fire is one, in 
its use it can be good or bad. The fire that is used for burning a body in the burning ghat is fire. 
But will any one use it for cooking purpose? No, because it is not: pure. Consider the fire 
burning in a Yajna Kundam, in which offerings are made to the deities with sacred mantras. That 
is also fire, but it is sacred fire, surcharged with divinity. It is worshipped as divine. Then, you 
have fire used for cooking, in the kitchen. That fire is confined to the purpose of cooking. Will 
anyone offer worship to the fire in a cigarette? But when a joss-stick is burnt, it acquires sanctity 
as an offering to the Divine. Thus fire may be one, but it can be used in different ways. 


The aim of sadhana 


Divinity is one, but manifests itself in many forms. Sat-Chit-Ananda (Being-Awareness-Bliss) is 
one, but its manifestations assume many names and forms. In every object, there are three 
attributes' Sat-Chit-Ananda. These three qualities are present in this table and this mike. You can 
recognise "Sat" and "Chit", but not "Ananda". 


"Sat" means, "It is there" (it exists); "Chit" means you can perceive it. Both these are true. But 
we cannot know whether it is experiencing "Ananda" (bliss). Such objects are described as Jada 
(inert). Now look at that person there. He is both "Sat" and "Chit" (He has both a form and a 
name). But we can also notice that he is experiencing "Ananda." He is deriving joy from 
Swami's discourse. It is only in man that "Ananda" (bliss) is recognisable. In all other objects 
"Sat" and "Chit" are cognisable. It is evident that in every padartha (thing) the Divine is present. 


The aim of sadhana is to convert Padaartha (the physical object) into Paraartha (Divinity). This 
Divinity should be regarded as embodying the Love Principle. Without Love, you cannot 
comprehend Divinity at all. 


This love should not be chasing after ever-new objects. It should be concentrated on the One. 
Only then you can have the right relationship with God. For instance, when a stranger comes to 
your house, you treat him with special respect. But when an old friend comes, you welcome him 
freely with familiarity and love. That is the freedom you should have in relation to God. How is 
that freedom acquired? Through complete dedication. "Mine" and "Thine" should be totally, 
eschewed. The Vedanta has declared that the elimination of "I-ness" (the ego sense) is Self- 
realisation. You must reach the state of "All-is-you" from the state of "I". You must see the 
Divine in everything in the universe. "You (the Divine) are everything---the seen and the 
unseen." This conviction must come to you. 


Turn on the switch of Divine Love 


When you switch off the current, the light does not burn. Because you cannot see the light, you 
cannot say there is no current. The light will appear when you turn on the switch. Hence the 
presence or absence of light (current) is related to your behaviour. It: does not affect God's 
omnipresence. In your ignorance, you do not put on the switch and complain that there is no 
light. This is one reason for the absence of light. There may be another reason also. There is a 
main switch which governs all other switches. If the main switch is off, all the rooms will be in 
darkness and if the individual switches are put on, the bulbs will not burn. What is that main 
switch in man? It is Divine Love. When this switch of Divine love is turned on, love will 
manifest itself in every limb and part of the body. Your words will be filled with love. Your 
actions will be saturated with love. Your eyes will gleam with love. You will be listening to 
loving words with your ears. The light of love will shine in every limb. Without that love, if you 
are steeped in selfishness and self-centred actions, every limb will be plunged in darkness. 


The gopikas prayer 


Therefore, Love is Supreme. Develop love in your hearts. Let love flow through every part of 
your body. Make love the reigning principle of your life. Develop love through love. This was 
the prayer that went forth from the hearts of Gopikas: "Oh Krishna, play on your flute so that our 
parched hearts may be flooded with your nectarine love and we may be filled with love in all that 
we think and do. Plant the seeds of love in our arid hearts so that the saplings of love may sprout 
and grow." 


It is when one is filled with joy that music flows spontaneously from him. Krishna was filled 
with joy always. Hence, whether He was on a village green or on a battle-field, His words turned 
into song. 


To experience this joy, you have to have firm faith in God and shed all fear. Cultivate Divine 
Love and experience this joy. Sanctify your lives by dedicating it to the Divine. 


Discourse in the Prashaanthi Mandir, on 28-6-1989. 


Prayer must emanate from the heart, where God resides and not 
from the head where doctrines and doubts clash. 


BABA 


21. Self-control and Self-realisation 


DEAR STUDENTS! All things in the cosmos are the gifts of God. They are manifestations of 
His Will. Some of them, however, have to be used carefully. When they are used intelligently 
after due enquiry, they can serve as boon-companions and give us happiness. Indiscriminate and 
reckless use of these things may turn them into our worst enemies. 


For example, there are objects like fire, a knife and electric current. It is only when they are used 
in the right way that you can benefit from them. If fire is not handled properly, it can cause great 
harm. A knife is helpful only when it is used carefully. Electricity serves us in many ways--by 
lighting bulbs, running fans, etc. Because of its multifarious uses, if one tries to be friendly 
towards it by touching a live wire he will get a shock. In the same manner, man's sense organs 
have to be used extremely carefully When the senses are used on right lines, they are of immense 
help. But if they are used in the wrong way, they can cause great harm. 


Control of two functions of the tongue 


Among the senses, the tongue is a very important organ. Each sense organ has a specific function 
to perform. But the tongue has two functions: speech and taste. Jayadeva praised the tongue as 
the author of all sweetness and declared that he would use it only to chant the names of the Lord: 
"Govinda, Damodara, Madhava," and not misuse it for any unholy purposes. "I will use the 
tongue only for speaking the truth and the good," he said. In the Gita also it has been laid down 
that whatever is spoken should be soft, truthful and well-meaning. The tongue is thus endowed 
with sacred qualities. You have to be ever vigilant in the use of the tongue. It can be the means of 
liberation or bondage. Hence it has been accorded pride of place among the sense organs. 


The ancient sages attached great importance to control of the senses and evolved various 
practices to achieve this. For instance, the tongue should not be allowed to have its way with 
regard to food. If it is pampered by being given whatever it desires, ultimately it will swallow up 
the man himself. 


To control the palate, the ancient sages prescribed various regulations. Chief among them is the 
"Chaaturmaasya vrata" (ritual observance for four months). The purpose of this vrata is to 
impose severe discipline on the tongue. This vrata is observed each year for four months 
commencing from the month of Ashada. There is another reason for this observance. As the next 
three months are a season of heavy rains, it will be difficult for sanyasins (renunciants) to move 
from place to place. Hence they are enjoined to stay in one place and devote themselves to 
meditation for four months. Living in a forest for these four months, they had to live on fruits 
and roots. Thereby the tongue was brought under control. 


At the present time, because of perversions of the Kali Age, this ancient four-month ritual of 
austerity has become an ostentatious observance. The sanyasins ask for tasty edibles. While 
staying in a village, they expect each devotee by turns to provide a feast. This is done in the 
name of "bhiksha"---- pious offering by a devotee. With the change in the character of the 
religious observance, people's conduct also changes. 


The real purpose of vrata 


The sanyasins of today should realise that the real purpose of these observances is to achieve- 
control over the palate. How can they expect to realise the Divine without achieving mastery of 
the senses? If your house is on fire, you may try to escape by running out of it. But if your sense 


organs are on fire, how can you hope to escape from it? Today what is happening in the case of 
spiritual aspirants is their sense organs are on fire. Today's sanyasins and sadhaks are allowing 
their sense organs to burn like a blazing fire. 


In a temple in Jerusalem, pigeons were being sold. Jesus entered the temple and objected to the 
traffic in birds in a sacred temple. The priests jointly questioned Jesus about his authority to raise 
such an objection. Jesus then related the following parable: A farmer had two sons. He ordered 
the elder son to go and keep watch over the crops in the field. He said he could not go. The 
younger son was asked to go and he agreed to go to keep watch at the field. The elder son, 
though he had at first declined to go, felt it was not right to disobey his father and so went to the 
field. The second son, despite his promise, did not go to the field. Jesus asked the priests: "As 
between these two sons, who do you think obeyed the father's command?" They replied, "The 
elder son. He acted upto his father's command. The second son promised to go but did not go." 


"Priests and teachers are proclaiming that they are adhering to the injunctions of the scripture, 
but in actual practice are not following them. All of you are acting in the same manner," declared 
Jesus. 


The priests got angry and levelled a number of charges against Jesus that he was preaching 
against the established creed and promoting disaffection against the authorities. 


Truth is not always pleasant 


There is an old saying, "Truth creates enemies. Falsehood pleases many." Truth is not always 
pleasant and hence provokes enmity. Lies and falsehood appear attractive and pleasing. 
Nevertheless, people must adhere to truth for its own sake. To say one thing and act differently is 
destructive of the Self. It is opposed to the scriptures. One should try to practise at least one or 
two of the precepts one professes. 


The ancient sages betook themselves to the forest for practising yoga. Can self-realisation be got 
through yoga? No. The rishis practised yoga for the sake of acquiring control over the senses. 
Patanjali declared: "Yogah chittavritti nirodhah" (Yoga is control of the movements of the 
mind). It is believed that by controlling the senses life can be prolonged. Who should live 
longer? Good persons, righteous persons, kind-hearted persons, if they live long, the world will 
benefit. The world will only suffer more if the wicked and evil-minded live longer. For this 
reason, the ancients laid down that only selfless and dedicated persons should practise yoga for 
living long. Society benefits immensely from their longevity. They prescribed disciplines for this 
purpose. Students should take note of these disciplines. 


Breathing and longevity are related 


The physical body is subject to certain limitations. For instance, there is the continuous process 
of inhaling and exhaling air. It has been found that by slowing down the time taken for inhaling 
and exhaling, life can be prolonged. The faster the process of respiration, the shorter becomes the 
life span. There are examples of how this rule operates. Elephants and men inhale and exhale 12- 
13 times a minute. By adhering to this time-scale man can expect to live for 100 years. Snakes 
and tortoises breathe at the rate of 7-8 times per minute. Consequently their average life-span 
extends to 200-300 years. Monkeys, dogs and cats breathe at the rate of 30-40 times per minute. 
Hence their average life does not last beyond 12-13 years. The rabbit breathes at the rate of 40- 
50 times per minute. Its life-span is barely 5-6 years. 


The faster the rate of respiration, the shorter is the life-span and vice versa. How is breathing to 
be regulated? Breathing should be so slow that if soft powder is kept near the nostrils the powder 
will not be disturbed. 


The practice of yoga helps to slow down the rate of breathing in this manner. 


Dharana, dhyana, samadhi 


How is meditation to be done? The first step is Dharana. Twelve Dharanas amount to one 
Dhyana. Twelve Dhyanas equal one Samadhi. Dharana is steady concentrated viewing of any 
object for twelve seconds. You have to look at any object, a flame, a picture or an idol for twelve 
seconds only with total concentration, without winking the eyelids. This is Dharana. 


Practising Dharana is a preparation for Dhyana. The duration of Dhyana is twelve Dharanas. 
This means Dhyana should last 12 x 12 =144 seconds, that is, two minutes and twenty four 
seconds. Dhyana does not call for sitting in "meditation" for hours. Proper Dhyana need not last 
more than 2 minutes 24 seconds. It is only after Dharana has been practised well that one can do 
Dhyana (meditation) well. 


Twelve Dhyanas equal one Samadhi. This means 144 x 12 seconds, that is, 28 minutes and 48 
seconds--very much less than an hour. If Samadhi is prolonged, it may prove fatal. 


These are the disciplines the yogis practised. These disciplines are not explained in any of the 
sastras. If you want to proceed correctly in the practice of these disciplines, you have to begin 
with Dharana. Start practising Dharana for 12 seconds a day from now on. This is very 
important for students. In the past, yogis like Aurobindo and Ramana Maharishi practised these 
disciplines. Ramana Maharishi used to go up to the terrace and concentrate on a particular star 
for twelve seconds. In that state, the mind also was still and steady. 


By continuing this practice of Dharana, you develop the capacity to perform Dhyana for 2 min. 
24 seconds. Continuing the practice of Dhyana in this way, you develop the capacity to be in a 
state of Samadhi for 28 minutes and 48 seconds. 


Equanimity is the real fruit of meditation 


What is the inner meaning of Samadhi ? It is not a state of unconsciousness or some other kind 
of consciousness. It is nothing of the kind. The correct meaning of Samadhi is "Sama-Dhi" -the 
state in which the intellect has achieved equanimity. Whether in pleasure or pain, in praise or 
blame, in gain or loss, in heat or cold, to be able to maintain an equal mind is Samadhi. That is 
the real fruit of "meditation." 


This is a sacred day on which you can begin this yogic practice. This will enable you to sharpen 
your minds and develop the keenness of your intellect. I have not revealed all this to anyone 
hitherto. 


Likewise, Dhyana is an extremely easy process. Samadhi is even more easy. But because of 
improper understanding of the methods, aspirants get involved in difficulties. Many imagine that 
all that Dhyana (meditation) calls for is sitting in the padmasana (lotus pose). But one does not 
know where his mind is wandering at the time. The concentration is disturbed by a mosquito 
sitting on the nose. When the mosquito repeats its attacks, the man loses his patience and the 
entire purpose of the meditation is defeated. 


To maintain one's calmness and concentration during meditation, unaffected by any disturbing 
elements, Dharana has to be practised. Through Dharana, control of the senses is also achieved. 
Purity of mind is also secured. Through mental purity, the Divine is experienced. 


Students! Practise Dharana and Dhyana and experience the results. Your joy, your purity and 
your brightness will be enhanced beyond measure. Now, you look sickly because of all sorts of 
impurities in you. There is no shine on your faces. It is purity that imparts effulgence to the face. 
When there is purity in you, your face shines brightly. I am now 64 years. (The clock in the 
Mandir chimed the hours and Swami remarked, "It is saying yes, yes, yes.") Look at Me and 
look at yourselves, who are in your teens. You look worn out. You lose your brightness because 
of impure thoughts. The more you develop your purity, the more youthful you will be. No illness 
will affect you. This is what you should aim at. And it should be achieved through love. 


Dhyana means absorption in thought 


Meditation in these days is often confined to the puja room. As soon as one emerges from the 
shrine, one is filled with all sorts of mental agitations. Hence, it has been declared: "Sathatham 
yoginah" (Be established in yoga all the time). This does not mean giving up all worldly affairs. 
Pursue your studies. Fulfill your duties. But in all these activities, use your Dharana power (the 
power of concentration). In the process, you develop your powers of Dhyana (meditation). 
Dhyana means single-pointed contemplation. Even in daily life, when one is in a reflective 
mood, he is asked: “What is the Dhyana you are doing?" Dhyana means absorption in thought. It 
should be centred on only one specific subject. This is described in Vedantic parlance as 
Saalokyam. This means concentrating your thought on what you desire, whatever is the object or 
the subject. If it is a person, your thought is centred on the person. "Saa" comprehends every 
aspect of Divinity. Saalokya means absorption in the thoughts of Divinity. 


Through Dhyana you have to achieve the sense of oneness with the Divine. The various types of 
meditation practised today are concerned with the trivial. Through these methods the Divine 
cannot be realized. The very first requisite is control of the vagaries of the mind. Only then 
meditation can be effective. 


Creeds may vary, but spiritual process is one 


Students must first practise Dharana. They may choose any object for the purpose of 
concentrating on it---a picture or a physical object. There is also an internal method of practising 
Dharana. When you close your eyes, a small dark spot appears before the inner eye. You may 
concentrate on this spot for 12 seconds without letting it move. By this practice, the power of 
meditation can be developed. 


The practice of meditation leads to Sameepyam (proximity to the Lord). This leads to the next 
stage ----Saroopyam (experience of the Vision of the Lord). This may be compared to the arrival 
of a river to merge in the ocean. At first the ocean repels the advance of the river. After repeated 
attempts of the river to merge in the ocean, the latter allows the river to pass under its waves. 
Spiritually, this process of merger of the jivatma with the Paramatma is described as Saayujyam 
(mergence in the Divine). 


The first stage in the process is Salokyam--continuous contemplation of the Divine. Think about 
the Lord in whatever action you do. Then you achieve 


Sameepyam--nearness to the Lord. Coming nearer, develop closer relations with the Divine. In 
due course, the state of Saroopyam is attained. The realisation that "you and I are one" dawns. 
Then Sayujyam is experienced--complete oneness with the Divine. 


This fourfold approach to the Divine is to be found in any philosophy or religion. The creeds 
may vary, but the spiritual process is one. 


Discourse in the Prashaanthi Mandir on 29-6-1989. 


Bhakti is not to be calculated on the basis of the institutions one 
has started or helped, the temples one has built or renovated, the 
donations one has given away, nor does it depend on the number 
of times one has written the Name of the Lord or on the time and 
energy one has spent in the worship of the Lord. These are not 
vital at all, no, not even secondary. Bhakti is Prema, unsullied by 
any tinge of desire for the benefit that flows from it or the fruit or 
consequence of that love. 


BABA 


22. Power of the spirit 


ON THE vast ocean, countless waves are continually forming and disappearing. Each wave has 
its own form and shines in many colours. But none of them is separate from the ocean. Likewise, 
all the myriad beings in the world have their different names and forms but are all tiny droplets 
from the infinite ocean of Sat-Chit-Ananda (The Cosmic Being-Awareness-Bliss). 


All beings are manifestations of the Divine. "Atmavaath Sarva Bhoothaanaam" (All beings are 
akin to the Atma) declare the Bharatiya scriptures. They have affirmed that the Atma principle is 
immanent in all beings as sparks of the Divine. They have shown that the Spirit is One in all 
beings. Our sense organs are not the Atma (Spirit). Through the senses, things can be seen or 
touched. But Atma is separate from the senses. The eyes can only see. The ear has only the 
power of hearing. The tongue has only the power of taste. Each sense has a distinctive power of 
its own. It cannot discharge any other function. The eyes cannot hear, nor the ears see. Only the 
divine Spirit possesses all the potencies of the senses. 


The unity of Sathyam, Sivam, Sundaram 


The Atma is infinite. It has been described as "“Sathyam, Sivam, Sundaram" Truth, Goodness and 
Beauty. From a worldly point of view, these three qualities appear to be different from each 
other. But there can be no Sivam (Goodness) without Sathyam (Truth). Without Sathyam (Truth) 
there is no Sundaram (Beauty). Beauty imparts effulgence to an object. Truth reveals its real 
nature. Thereby its Sivam or usefulness is brought out. The unity of these three aspects reveals 
the Divinity of the Atma. Like cloth and thread, which have their basis in cotton, the Atma is the 
basis for all three. Truth dons the mantle of Sivam and appears as Sundaram. The three terms are 
descriptive but refer to the same object. 


There are four words: Prema (Love), Soundarya (Beauty), Maadhurya (Sweetness) and Sobha 
(Brilliance). They are descriptive terms. When the heart melts, love flows from it. When love 
matures, it turns into beauty. When the taste of Beauty ripens, it is sweetness. In that experience 
of sweetness everything appears brilliant and shining. The whole process may be likened to what 
happens when a flower ultimately becomes a ripe, sweet fruit. Ripeness is all. The Spirit is all 
sweetness. 


Hence, the devotee sang: 
Your eyes are sweet 
Your words are sweet All is sweet, 
Oh Lord of Mathura Sweetness, 
sweetness everywhere. 


It is this Divine sweetness that illumines the world. This Beauty, Sweetness and Bliss are all 
within you. When you turn your mind to God, the whole universe will wear a new aspect. 
Without this internal change, all changes in the external physical world are of no avail. Only 
when the individual changes, the world will change. 


Sages gave right advice to the rulers 


It is because of the spiritual life led by sages in the past that in olden times the country was 
blessed with timely rains and all people enjoyed peace and prosperity. The people led righteous 
lives and were happy and contented. 


It is because people have strayed from the path of righteousness that today they are beset with 
discontent, disorder and misery. The kings in ancient times had for their counsellors great sages, 
men of virtue and wisdom, who gave the right advice to the rulers. These sages were totally 
selfless and had only the public well-being in view. 


The sages were adepts in the practice of mantras and yantras. Pursuing Brahma-Vidya (the 
knowledge of the Spirit), they acquired great powers through mantras. They were endowed with 
these powers because they knew how to use them for righteous purposes. The yantras (weapons) 
which they wielded were surcharged with the potency of mantras and hence had tremendous 
power. These weapons were used only for the good of the world and not for selfish purposes. 


There were two kinds of education in those days. (1) Education for promoting the well-being of 
all people in the world. (2) Education for causing harm to others. The first type of knowledge 
was known as Brahma Vidya. The second type was known as Rakshasa Vidya (demonic 
knowledge). 


In today's education, as long as selfishness and self-interest are dominant, education will be of no 
good to the people. Along with academic education, there should be tapas (spiritual discipline). 
The. ancient sages held that knowledge and penance should go together. All actions done as 
dedication to the Divine become tapas (spiritual austerity). All selfish actions are Tamasic (evil- 
minded). 


The Universe is an echo of God 


A student had stated that there were three kinds of love: Physical, mental and spiritual. In fact, 
there are no three types. Love is only one. But according to the object of one's love, it appears to 
be different. When this love is directed towards God bliss is experienced and it achieves 
fulfilment. When love is prompted by selfish feelings, joy and sorrow inevitably follow. Hence 
all actions should be done as an offering to God. 


Scholars have expressed different views regarding the sthoola, sukshma and kaarana sareeras 
(gross, the subtle and the causal bodies). In my view the gross and subtle bodies are like twins, 
resembling sound and its echo, an object and its image. In certain places, when you raise a cry 
you hear the echo. In other places it is present but not audible. The whole universe is an echo of 
God. It is like a mirror which reflects the image of God. 


Just as your own voice is reflected back by the echo, your actions return to you as reactions. 
Hence, you should learn not to abuse anyone or harm anyone. Good and bad are nothing but 
reflections of your own inner being. It is on the basis of this truth that I advise, people to be 
good, see good and do good as the way to God. 


Right use of knowledge 


Today great advances have been made in science and technology. But human character and 
morality have not made corresponding progress. Knowledge without discrimination is 
dangerous. Atomic power is being harnessed for destructive purposes. How much could be done 
for improving production and raising the condition of the people if all this energy could be used 


for peaceful and productive purposes. Knowledge should promote people's well-being and not 
cause harm to them. 


Students should realise the differences between one nation and another. Each country has its own 
special features and its own problems. The same system or remedy will not suit all countries. 
Four persons may go to a doctor complaining of trouble in the stomach. Each case has to be 
diagnosed individually and the treatment should vary according to the needs of each person. It 
may be a pill for one person, an injection for another and an operation for a third. Likewise, each 
country's problems should be solved with reference to its conditions and needs. The same 
prescription should not be applied to all. 


You must remember that the acquisition of academic education does not make you great in 
anyway. Today there are many people all over the world steeped in poverty and squalor. You 
should not be content with satisfying your own wants. You must strive to relieve the poverty and 
misery of your fellowmen. 


Through knowledge, you acquire humility. Through humility you become worthy of 
responsibility. Through responsible positions you get wealth. Through wealth you must practice 
righteousness. Righteousness ensures your well-being in this world and the one beyond it. 


Discourse in the Prashaanthi Mandir on 2-7-1989. 


The world is now living apart, in compartments, on the basis of 
race, religion, colour, creed, caste, convictions, etc. Those who 
question the validity and value of these compartments are 
themselves in a compartment by themselves. Metal pieces heaped 
together are still pieces; they have not become one. The world has 
become united only in the form of heap; it has not been melted in 
the crucible of love and moulded in the image of God. 


The hearts of all men must be purged of hate. Speeches and 
writings cannot bring about the unity of man. 


BABA 


23. Love all : Serve all 


EMBODIMENTS of Divine Love! The trees provide cool shade and sweet fruit equally to all, 
whether they have fostered them or harmed them. They teach man this lesson of equal 
mindedness. The mountains, by bearing heat and cold, wind and rain alike, teach man not to care 
too much for the body The birds take no thought for the morrow and are content to live on what 
they can get. They teach man the lesson of contentment and indifference to the future. 


The departed convey the message of the impermanence of life and its pleasures. Nature thus 
teaches man in many ways to give up ideas of "I" and "mine" and look upon God as the supreme 
preceptor. Although Nature has been teaching these lessons from the beginning of time, man has 
not learnt to give up the ideas of "my people" and "others" and to develop the sense of oneness 
and equality of mankind and realise his divinity. 


Trees are foremost among teachers. By attachment to the body and developing self-conceit, man 
forgets the lessons of Nature and wallows in selfishness. The mountains, by their indifference to 
cold or heat, are teaching man that he should bear joy or grief with an equal mind and strive to 
realise God. Pleasure and pain relate only to the body. The Atma is unaffected. This is the lesson 
to be learnt from the mountains. 


We are seeing people being born and people dying. In spite of all that is seen, or heard or 
experienced, man is unable to get rid of the delusions relating to the body. Hence he is caught up 
in the coils of bodily attachments. He does not learn the lesson of the impermanence and fleeting 
nature of physical existence. 


The Cosmos is a University 


Prakriti (Nature), which is constantly teaching these lessons, is the true preceptor. The cosmos is 
a University. God is the Cause. The cosmos is the result. God pervades the entire Universe. 
Nothing can exist in the world without the power of the Divine. The Universe is a manifestation 
of the Divine. 


In the invocation to the Guru, he is described as Brahma, Vishnu, Maheswara and Parabrahma. 
Brahma who is hailed as the Guru, is the creator of the universe. The One who creates, sustains 
and dissolves the universe is the Parabrahma (the Omni-Will). The Vedas have described the 
Divine as the One enveloping the Cosmos and existing beyond it. Brahma, Vishnu and 
Maheswara are aspects of the manifestation of Nature. Nature is made up of the three gunas--- 
Satwa, Rajas, Tamas--in their myriad combinations. 


The three forms of Advaita 


What we must seek to experience today is Ekatvam (unity in diversity). Advaita (Oneness) is 
expressed in three forms: Bhaava-Advaita (oneness in mental attitude); Kriya-Advaita (oneness 
expressed in action); Padaartha-Advaita (oneness as seen in all objects). Only when oneness is 
experienced in all these forms can Divinity be understood. In Bhaava-Advaita, the unity of the 
basic substance constituting the cosmos is perceived as the underlying Reality. In Kriya-Advaita, 
every action is regarded as an offering to the Divine and is thereby divinised. Padaartha-Advaita 
implies recognising that every being or every object in the universe is composed of the same five 
elements (ether, air, fire, water and earth)which are divine in their origin. In every individual, 
Akasa (ether) exists as Sabda (Sound). Breathing is based on air. The heat in the body is derived 
from the fire element. Sweat, urine and other fluids in the body indicate the presence of water. 


The body itself is based on earthy matter. As every being is constituted by these five elements, 
all beings are essentially one, though having different forms and names. Human equality is based 
on the oneness of the Divine essence of all human beings. 


The ancient sages indicated in the Upanishads and the Brahma Sutras, how this Oneness of the 
Divine is to be realised. Unfortunately, these texts came to be interpreted in contradictory and 
confusing terms, with the result that their basic truth has been forgotten. 


Oneness must express itself in universal love. Those who speak about love do not practice it. It is 
the divorce between thought, word and deed which is at the root of all the troubles in the world 
today. It is also the cause of the rise of atheism in this sacred land of ours. 


Harmony in thought, word and deed is the highest human value. Sathya, Dharma, Santhi and 
Prema (Truth, Righteousness, Peace and Love) are not mere words. They are fundamental values 
to be practised in thought, word and deed as far as possible. Only then can divinity be realised. 


It is not necessary to undertake all kinds of sadhanas (spiritual exercises) to recognise the 
Divine. If the happenings in daily life are properly enquired into, the Atma principle can be 
recognised easily. Hethu (cause) is one of the names of the Divine. This means He is the cause of 
creation. He is both the cause of and the means used in creation. Another name for God is 
Vikshara (Imperishable). All objects in creation are liable to decay and destruction. God alone is 
beyond change and decay. 


Nature is like a clean mirror 


God's love is unbounded. It knows no growth or diminution. Worldly love is momentary and 
fickle. Divine love is unchanging and eternal. God is the embodiment of love. His infinite love is 
offered to all in equal measure. Some may feel that they had experienced God's love for a time 
and had been deprived of it later. This reflects only their own feelings and not the attitude of the 
Lord. 


Nature is like a clean mirror which reflects your feelings and attitudes. It is your own actions and 
thoughts, whether 'good or bad, which are reflected back to you. The Lord's love remains the 
same always. 


Pleasure and sorrow are not inherent in the nature of man. They are products of the mind. Bliss is 
the true nature of man. But it can be realised only when the love of God is experienced. The 
sense of "my-ness" has to be totally eradicated. You must strive for the welfare of all. This is 
Bharat's message from times of yore. Fill your hearts with this sacred feeling. Banish from your 
minds all thoughts of hatred and envy. 


Transform mind to attain the Lord 


Once, to remove the doubts entertained by Dharmaja (eldest of the Pandavas), Krishna explained 
why He allowed the souls of the vile-minded Sisupala and Danthavakra to merge in Him after he 
had killed them. Krishna said: "Dharmaja! Your doubts are from your delusion. Praise or blame, 
good or bad, relate to the body and not to the Atma. Because of identification with the body one 
experiences troubles. As the body-consciousness grows, the Atma-consciousness declines. Only 
the mind is responsible for hatred and attachment, for joy and grief. If the mind is transformed, 
anyone (regardless of his past) can attain me." 


It is the inevitable destiny of everything ultimately to go back to the source from which it came. 
The body, arising from matter, goes back to matter. The Atma (Spirit) issuing the Divine, goes 


back to the Divine. The Spirit is pure Consciousness. It ever remains as Consciousness. It is 
embodiment of Love and Light. 


Embodiments of Love! Do not make any distinctions between one person and another on the 
basis of caste or colour. All are children of one God. Do the trees make any distinction between 
one or another seeking their shade? Man behaves worse than trees today. Everyone should 
realise that the Divine is equally present in all. 


The Sai name is proclaimed by trees when they wave their heads. The birds in their chirping call 
upon men to remember Sai's name. The flowers in spreading their fragrance declare the glory of 
Sai. The bees when they hum announce the bliss in Sai's name. "Sai!" is the sound that 
reverberates from the sky and earth. Sai can be experienced everywhere. "Sai" is not one's name. 
"Sai" is the Indweller reclining in the heart of everyone. 


Today is Vyasapurnima day. Vyasa was a great rishi. He is described as an incarnation of Lord 
Narayana. He set down in writing the Vedas which previously were known only in the form of 
sound. He was the great-grandson of Arundhati (the wife of Vasishta). He codified the Vedas. As 
he was born on the full moon day in the month of Aashada, this day is celebrated as Vyasapur- 
nima. Vyasa glorified the Divinity that is equally present in all human beings and propagated this 
truth to the world. After writing the 18 puranas, he summed up their message in one line: 
"Paropakaarah punyaaya; paapaaya parapeedanam". (Helping others is meritorious; harming 
others is sinful). "Help ever; hurt never. 


God is the Supreme Guru 


Vyasa was the great teacher who gave many profound and sacred truths to man-kind. Hence his 
birthday is celebrated as Gurupurnima (the Full moon day dedicated to the preceptor). Guru is 
one who dispels the darkness of ignorance. Those who teach mundane subjects can only be 
called teachers or scholars, but they cannot be called gurus. Even those who profess to impart 
Upadesa (spiritual messages) cannot be regarded as gurus. God is the Supreme Guru--the Guru 
of gurus. 


To offer fruits, dakshina and other things to a teacher on Gurupurnima day is not the right way 
of worshipping the guru. Those who accept such gifts are worldly preceptors. Real gurus are to 
be worshipped by pradakshina, by revering them with heart and soul. The only true guru is God. 
He manifests Himself in Nature, which serves as the Cosmic teacher. Nature is the best teacher. 


Recognise the Divinity that is manifested in the cosmos. All things in Nature observe their laws 
with undeviating regularity. The sun, the moon, the seasons observe their respective laws. Man 
alone violates the laws of his being. Animals obey their instincts and have their seasons for 
regulating their lives. Man is the exception. He needs to be taught the rules of right living. He 
has to cultivate morality and integrity. There is only one way by which this can be done. It is by 
pursuing the spiritual path. Without: spirituality man cannot discover the Light within him. 


It is sin to ignore one's duties 


The most important thing to be noted today is that the body has been given to man for the 
performance of right action. Every person has to discharge his duties in life. It is a sin to ignore 
one's duties. 


When everyone performs his duties, the nation will prosper. Perform your duties, without regard 
to what others say or do. Engage yourselves in service activity. Consider social service as service 


to God. To earn the love of God, this is the easiest way. The best way to love God is to love all 
and serve all. Your entire life will be sanctified thereby. A large number of people are coming to 
Prashaanthi Nilayam regularly No one should remain idle here. Each one should render whatever 
service he or she can. This is not a place for mere eating and sleeping. Those who are not active 
in service have no place here. 


From this Gurupurnima, you have to dedicate yourselves to service. There is so much to be done 
by way of service to the people. It is through service life can be made meaningful. The nation is 
in the doldrums today because men who have not learnt how to serve are in the seats of power. 
Only through service can one qualify oneself for leadership. 


The spirit of service eradicates egoism 


One should not feel proud about the position one occupies. The strength derived from wealth or 
position is undependable. Morality and purity alone can confer real strength. To develop these 
qualities, one has to take up selfless service. The spirit of service eradicates egoism and 
selfishness. In the process, not only is your life sublimated, but the nation also gains through the 
example of a dedicated servant of the public. 


Remember that you must live up to whatever you say. You must practise what advice you give to 
others. This is what I am doing. Hence I have the right to advise others. I call upon devotees to 
show love towards all. I love all. I am always engaged in work from morning to night. You 
cannot know how blissful I am always. Happiness is My form. I am always happy. I do not 
worry about anything because I have no desires. That is the reason for My happiness. As your 
desires increase, your happiness diminishes. 


Embodiments of Divine Love! Realising that the Atma in everyone is the same, extend your love 
to all. It does not matter if you do not practise any sadhana. Your love to others will raise you to 
the highest level of spirituality. Bear no ill-will towards anyone. When you harm anyone, realise 
you are doing harm to God. When you develop this kind of universal love, it will be the basis for 
unity. 


In whatever you do, remember the name of God. It is a panacea for all human ills. Do not waste 
time, because Time is Divine. With faith in God, consecrate your life. 


Discourse in the Poornachandra Auditorium on 18- 7-1989. 


Be simple and sincere. It is sheer waste of money to burden the 
pictures and idols in the shrines and altars of your homes with the 
weight of garlands and to parade costly utensils and vessels and 
offerings to show off your devotion. This is deception; it demeans 
Divinity, imputing to it the desire for pomp and publicity. I ask 
only for purity of heart to shower Grace. 


BABA 


24. Religions and morals 


DEAR STUDENTS! The truth proclaimed by all religions is one and the same. The ultimate goal 
of all religions is the same. The primary object of religion is to cure man of his follies and make 
him a real human being. Equally, religion aims at promoting righteous conduct by transforming 
the mental attitude of man. Religion is concerned with developing in man faith in the Spirit, 
besides his preoccupation with the needs of the body. For all religions the foundation is morality. 
If morality declines, humanness will decline together with the eclipse of religion. 


Morality is the basis of right conduct. Whether it is the State, the society or the individual, the 
basis for all of them is morality. When morality goes, all the three will be undermined. All 
prosperity and happiness are based on moral strength. It is to make man realise the value of the 
ethical life that religions came into being. 


Religion aims at: promoting the harmony of body, intellect and mind through righteous conduct. 
Right conduct in its totality represents morality. It is otherwise known as Dharma 
(Righteousness). Dharma also means that which is priyvam (pleasing). It also refers to what is 
real value in life. When one leads a life governed by moral values, he achieves the most precious 
things including name, fame and prosperity. Material objects have their value, but Dharma is 
invaluable. No price can be set on it. 


Dharma and human values 


Dharma is otherwise known as neethi (morality). Morality is equated with selfless love. 
Religions were instituted to foster the well-being of society through the promotion of love. The 
ancient sages laid down certain rules and precepts in accordance with the times, the place and the 
circumstances of the country. These were intended to foster human values and were based on the 
scriptures and the Vedas. No one can determine the precise date, place or authorship of these 
regulations. The sages believed that these disciplines were conducive to the promotion of the 
highest human qualities and were divinely ordained to help mankind. With the efflux of time and 
because of the predilections of different sages, these rules got divided into saakhas and 
upasaakhas (branches and sub-branches), with the names of the respective sages attached to 
them. The names of sages like Vasishta, Gauthama, Paraasara, Viswamitra are associated with 
these saakhas (branches). They were all designed to promote social well-being. No one can fix 
the date or the name of the founder of the religion of the Bharatiyas. The fountain source of all 
the sects is the Veda. 


The origin of post-Vedic religions 


Apart from the Vedic religion, some other religions came into existence 2000-2500 years ago. 
The founders of these religions took note of the prevailing social conditions and sought to 
promote unity among the various sections through their teachings. There was basically no 
conflict between these different faiths. Unfortunately, the differences among the individual 
followers of these faiths resulted in the growth of narrow loyalties and credal conflicts. In each 
religion there were some virus elements which promoted hatred of other faiths. In truth, there is 
no conflict between one religion and another. The religion of the Bharatiyas is the most ancient 
in origin. Having regard to its Vedic basis, it has been described as Hinduism. The essence of this 
faith is its universality as expressed in the saying: "Lokaas samasthaas sukhino bhavanthu" (May 
all the peoples everywhere be happy). The Bharatiya faith laid stress on the happiness of 
everyone. 


The objective of Islam, the religion of the Muslims, is also the same. In Persian, "Islam" means 
"surrender" or "peace". The inner meaning of this term is that man should surrender to God and 
live in peace with his fellow men. The holy book of Islam, the Quran, contains many sacred 
precepts. "Salaath" is one such precept. It enjoins one to worship God with steady faith. Another 
precept is "Zakaath", which enjoins the believer to practise charity for relieving fellow-beings in 
need or in distress. In the scriptures of the Bharatiyas, a similar duty has been laid down in the 
saying: "Paropakaarah punyaaya paapaaya parapeedanam" (It is meritorious to help others and 
it is sinful to cause harm to others). It is by practising such precepts that people professing 
different faiths lived in harmony. Truth, peace, love, forbearance and compassion were regarded 
as the five life-breaths of their religion by the Bharatiyas. 


Religious differences should never arise 


Even the Quran declared that in discussing matters of religion and the teachings of different 
religions, acrimony should not be imported into the debate and the differences should be 
considered without bitterness. This is affirmed by every religion. But the followers of each faith, 
forgetting this fundamental truth, raised barriers based on credal differences which were really 
verbal and not fundamental. 


Today various kinds of differences are arising among religions. This is not a good thing. 
Everyone should base his life on the divinely ordained morals and verities and endeavour to 
foster them. Morality should serve as the beacon light for everyone. Without that light human 
life will be plunged in darkness. 


The ancient sages made known to the world that by their earnest quest for God, they had been 
able to experience the Divine. "We have seen that sacred effulgent Purusha (Lord) in our hearts." 
"We have seen Him beyond the tamas (darkness) of ignorance," they declared. But the purpose 
of human life is not merely to secure a vision of the Divine or to experience the bliss of that 
vision. Those who love sugar, must seek to become sugar itself. "Brahmavid Brahmaiva 
Bhavathi" (The knower of Brahman becomes Brahman Itself). Religion aims at bringing about 
such a transformation. Making him a man to begin with, it seeks to transform him to Madhava 
(Divinity itself). Religion, which has such a sublime purpose, is being degraded to serve petty 
ends. 


Why Hinduism stands out as a religion 


The Veda is dualistic. We have in India the followers of Sankara, Ramanuja and Madhvacharya, 
representing three schools of philosophy. These sects are the products of individuals, but Hindu 
religion itself is not the creation of any individual. The basic Hindu faith is not for Indians alone 
but is for all mankind. The word "Hindu" is composed of the two syllables “Him,” meaning 
Himsa (violence) and "Du" meaning, "distant." Hinduism is the faith that makes violence distant. 
That is the reason why Hinduism alone stands out as a religion that strives for the well-being of 
all peoples, in all countries, at all times. Hence the appellation, "Sanathana," meaning ancient or 
timeless. No one knows when it was revealed and who was its founder. Other religions have their 
chronology. The Hindu religion knows no growth or decline. It belongs to all countries. It is 
acceptable to all people. 


Though people may call themselves Muslims, Christians, Hindus and the like, there should be no 
differences between them. Students should be completely free from sectarian differences. They 


should respect all religions because what you cherish in your religion is found in other religions 
also. If you adhere to your own religion, you need not worry yourself about other religions. 


In all religions, people have faith in certain beliefs. But they do not make any efforts, by enquiry 
or otherwise, to experience what they believe. Students!-Don't entertain religious differences. 
The God that is worshipped in all religions is one and the same. With that conviction, respect all 
religions. Realise that the essence of all religions is one. Don't enter into futile controversies or 
criticise other religions. It is fraught with danger. When you attack another religion, you are 
really guilty of assailing your own religion. Therefore, show your reverence to everyone. 
"Whatever deity you adore, the worship reaches the One Supreme Lord." 


Discourse in the Prashaanthi Mandir on 23- 7-1989. 


It is only by the cultivation of detachment, by denying the senses 
the thrills they thirst for, it is only by diving deeper into the depths 
of one's being, by believing that you have some depths that will 
reward exploration, that one can capture the exhilaration of that 
tranquillity. This is the highest morality, for when this is done, man 
is saturated with love and has no trace any more of malice or hate 
or greed or lust. The vision is purified by the ideal of the unity of 
all in One and the proliferation of One as all. 


BABA 


25. Krishna's Prema Tathwa 


EMBODIMENTS of Divine Love! Love is God. Everything is filled with love. This love can be 
experienced only through love. There is no other way than love to realise the One Who is the 
embodiment of love. This (Divine) Love is not something which grows in one moment and falls 
off in another. 


This Love dwells in man as Atma (the Spirit). The body has been described as the temple of God. 
In this temple Love is enshrined as Atma. Such sacred and pure Love can dwell only in a pure 
heart. 


Fear and anxiety get entrenched in a heart devoid of love. A heart filled with love of the Divine 
will enjoy peace and be totally free from fear. True love is not a momentary feeling. In the 
eternal Spirit of man love shines as pure and eternally effulgent flame. In this context, it would 
be more appropriate to describe God as Love itself rather than as an embodiment of love. 


Pure, unsullied Atma and the fickle mind 


Recognising the Divine as Love, spiritual aspirants have been worshipping it as the Supreme 
Spirit. Because love is Divine the body is considered a temple. It is also regarded as a mansion. 
"Nirdosho nirmalo naathah: sadosho chanchalo vadhuh" (The master or husband is immaculate 
and pure; the wife is fickle and prone to go astray). A husband who is pure and a wife who is 
fickle are residing in this body. When a pure husband and a fickle wife live together, how can 
there be peace in such a home? To ensure peace and happiness in such a home, either the 
husband has to follow the wife or the wife has to follow the husband. When these alternatives are 
examined it will be seen that it is not proper for a pure and immaculate husband to follow the 
dictates of a fickle and wayward wife. The natural course is for such a wife to follow the ways of 
the husband. In this instance, who is the husband and who is the wife? It is the Atma, pure, 
unsullied and steadfast, that is the husband. The mind is the fickle, wavering and wayward wife. 
The effort to make the mind follow the pure, unsullied Atma is Bhakti (devotion.) 


Many names are attributed to this devotion. The Bhagavatha equates devotion with service to the 
Lord. "Bhaja Sevaayaam"(Adore Service as worship). "Hrishikesa sevanam Bhaktiruchyathe" 
(Service to Hrishikesa, the Lord of the senses, is termed Bhakti). In other words, devotion means 
directing the mind towards God. Leading a life with the vision of the Divine in view is Bhakti. 
Leading a life with the body-consciousness is moha (delusion). Hence, the lovers of Vishnu, the 
worshippers of the Lord, are devotees; the lovers and adorers of the world and worldly objects 
are mere humans. 


How to experience God 


The gopikas were worshippers of Krishna. They always yearned for Him and were devotees in 
the highest sense. Those who hanker after worldly things are ordinary jivis (beings). For jivis to 
get divinised they have to develop the spiritual vision. The gopikas sanctified and redeemed their 
lives by constant contemplation of Krishna. 


It may be asked in what form the Lord appears to man and how is man to experience God. God 
has the following six attributes or characteristics: Aiswarya (Divine sovereignty); Dharma (the 
source of all Righteousness); Yasas (fame); Sampada (wealth); Jnana (wisdom) and Vairagya 
(non-attachment). He has another name called Vishatkaara (One who has six forms of wealth). 
He is also known as Vibhuh (One with matchless splendour). He is the Master of the past, the 


present and the future. For this reason He is called Bhaavah. He is the One that abides in all the 
three aspects of Time. Another meaning for the word Bhaavah is that of creator of the universe. 
He illumines all the stars, suns and planets in the universe and hence is called Bhaavah. He is the 
prime cause of the process of creation, growth and dissolution. 


What is the proof for the existence of such an omnipresent God? A simple illustration will 
suffice. If you seek to know where God is, the answer is that He is present wherever you have air 
and water. Both air and water have come from the Atma. Air and water are essential for life. 
They represent the spiritual principle of the Atma. 


Thus, while there is clear evidence of the omnipresence of the Divine, man is not able to 
recognise this. God is subtler than the subtlest atom and raster than the vastest. He dwells in the 
human body in the form of Atma. This Atma, however, is present in every being. The Upanishad 
declares: "Pervading everything, everywhere, inside and outside, the Lord Narayana is 
omnipresent." 


Understand the promptings of the heart 


Man has two important organs: the head and the heart:. The head is ever engaged in seeking 
external objects. It desires only transient and mundane objects and the things and beings of the 
phenomenal world. Its chief characteristic is Pravrithi (preoccupation with the external). All 
thoughts arise out of contact with the external. Qualities like truth, love, kindness, forbearance 
and compassion, which are signs of inner vision, emanate from the heart. Man becomes pure 
only when he concentrates on the heart. Hence the Vedanta has enjoined cultivation of the 
Antardrishti (inner vision). The first is the Pravrithi marga (path of the external), the second is 
the Nivrithi marga (path of the internal). One who is absorbed in the Pravrithi marga cannot 
understand the Nivrithi marga. One who regards enjoyment of worldly objects and transient 
sensory pleasures as the summum bonum of life and continually strives for securing them 
cannot: understand the promptings of the heart and cannot experience its ecstasies. Although the 
heart is inside the body, the body is unable to grasp the unique significance of the heart. Can the 
tree know the sweetness of the juice of the fruit which it bears? Can the creeper know the 
fragrance of the flowers that bloom on it? Can the sweetness of a poem be experienced by the 
book in which it is printed? Can a scholar preoccupied with knowledge of the external be aware 
of the joy arising from the experience of the internal? 


Heart is a like a fruit in the tree of body 


The juice is in the fruit of the tree, but the tree cannot taste its sweetness. Our body is like a tree. 
In it the heart is like a fruit. The love flowing in the heart is the juice. The physical body can 
have no understanding of the sweetness of the love that fills the heart. Nor can it experience or 
share the joy of that love. It is because of this that man is a prey to sorrows, disappointments and 
despair. 


As long as one is unable to understand the principle of love, one can never be free from fear and 
anxiety. The moment love awakens, fear flees. For instance, a railway passenger, who has a 
ticket, even while travelling by second class, is free from fear. But a ticketless traveller, even if 
he has got into a first class compartment, is haunted by fear of being caught and punished. 
Likewise, if a person has the ticket of divine love in his heart, he has no fear of anything in the 
world. 


Life is one long journey. In this journey if you have the pure selfless love of God within you, you 
can go anywhere free from fear and worry of any kind. 


Today every man is harried by some kind of fear or other. Fear follows him in whatever he 
undertakes, because he lacks the love of God. If you have the love of God, you can accomplish 
anything. However great one may be as a scholar, whatever riches and comforts he may 
command, if he has no faith in the Self he will be haunted by fear. Self-confidence is the prime 
requisite. Without it you cannot succeed in any enterprise; you cannot enjoy anything. 


By filling the mind with all kinds of desires, you become subject to worry. Wherever you turn 
you see only worshippers of Mammon ("siri" or wealth) and not devotees of God (Hari). In 
whatever one says or does, self-interest is predominant. How can enduring bliss be derived from 
this? 


Love of the Divine is the first requirement in the march towards the realisation of one's 
humanness. You must have one-pointedness and strength of mind. The mind must be 
unwavering and the heart must be pure and unpolluted. You must fill your life with unselfish 
deeds. 


Uddhava and the gopikas 


Once, Uddhava went to Gokulam with a message from Krishna to the gopikas. Uddhava told 
them: "I have brought for you a remedy for the pain you are suffering as a result of separation 
from Krishna. You must take this medicine. Through this yoga you will be relieved of the roga 
(the ailment) from which you are suffering." 


The gopikas replied: "Oh, Great One! We do not suffer from any malady. Hence we don't need 
any yoga. It is enough if we know the yoga by which we can back Krishna." Uddhava asked: 
"What is this yoga?" A gopika replied: "The ordeal we enjoy on account; of thyaga 
(renunciation) is itself a kind of yoga." Uddhava observed: "How can there be anything common 
between renunciation and enjoyment? The renunciant does not seek enjoyment. The one who 
enjoys is not concerned about renunciation. As the two are irreconcilable, how can you regard 
the enjoyment of separation as form of yoga?” 


The gopika said: "You simpleton! Is this all you have learnt from your nearness to Krishna? 
When a person gives up egoism in his doings and attachment to the enjoyment of their fruits, 
then Thyaga (sacrifice), Yoga (spiritual austerity) and Bhoga (enjoyment) become one. First get 
rid of the conceit that Iam the doer. Then free yourself from the desire to enjoy the fruits of your 
actions. When you have no attachment to the fruits of your actions and have no sense of ego in 
what you do, then there is no difference between Yoga and Bhoga." 


Only firm faith in God secures His blessing 


In the world, you have rains and rivers, which enable crops to grow. The sun and the moon 
illumine the sky. For whom does all this happen? All this is not for the sake of any single 
individual. It is for the benefit of all mankind. Everyone is entitled to benefit from these 
phenomena. All beings in the natural state are entitled to enjoy the benefits provided by Nature. 
But only a few can acquire the competence to experience the Divine. Only those who have firm 
faith in God can secure this blessing. 


Uddhava asked the gopikas, "If you are not prepared even to listen to Krishna's message, what 
sort of devotion do you have towards Krishna? What is the form of your devotion?" The gopikas 


gave the essence of yoga in the following words: "Uddhava! We have only one mind. That mind 
is no longer with us. It has gone to Mathura along with Krishna. As we have no mind of our own 
and have become totally mindless, how can we receive your message? If we had ten different 
minds like you, we could listen to your message, think about Krishna, attend to the commands of 
our mothers-in-law and husbands and do other things." 


The essence of all the sastras can be declared in one sentence: "We have to believe firmly that 
the same Divinity dwells in all beings." The mind is the cause of all worries. Even the yearning 
for God is through the mind. Man is pursued by worries from birth to death, all through his life. 
There is only one means by which all worries can be banished and that is Prema (love). 


God transcends Kaala, Desa and Vasthu 


In this love there is no room for any kind of difference. The Divine presence is recognisable in 
everything. Divinity is omnipresent. God transcends the categories of kaala (time), desa (space) 
and vasthu (matter). No one can say God is present in one country and not in another. It is not 
possible to declare that He is present in one thing and not in another. This means that God cannot 
be assigned to any particular place, time or object. The term "Bhagavan" means One who 
pervades everything. That being so, can any particular place be assigned to Him? He is 
immanent everywhere. It can be firmly asserted that God is everywhere. Again with regard to 
time, it cannot be said that God was present at one time and did not exist: at another time. How 
can one, who has no beginning, middle or end and who is present in all the three categories of 
time, be limited by time? Because of His omnipresence and all-pervasiveness, God is described 
as "Sarvaathmaka" (the Spirit present in all things). Every term that is used to describe God is 
pregnant with significance. 


God is not a vyakti swaroopa (specific definable entity). He is the Indwelling Spirit in all. The 
Atma Principle that permeates the universe is One only. That Atma principle assumes a form 
from time to time for the sake of redeeming the world and establishing righteousness. 


The gopikas experienced the presence of Krishna in everything. What joy can be had when God's 
omnipresence is experienced can be known only to those who have had the experience. Many 
have treated the gopikas as deluded simpletons carried away by their own fancies. This is a 
grievous mistake. Their hearts were pure and filled with selfless love. Mundane love believes 
only in receiving and not in giving. God's love revels in giving and not receiving. This is the 
difference between worldly love and Divine love. The gopikas were able to experience the 
Divine by pure selfless love. For them there was no difference between Krishna's words, 
Krishna's music and Krishna's form. 


Body is a temple when filled with thoughts of God 


The body has been described as a temple. But when does it become a temple? Only when it is 
filled with thoughts of God. When there is no thought of God, it becomes a mere bhavanam 
(dwelling place) and in due course becomes a vanam (jungle). There is no need to go elsewhere 
in quest of a temple. When the name of the Lord dances on your tongue, your body itself 
becomes a temple. Once you regard your body as a temple you will have to keep it pure and 
unpolluted to be worthy of God's residence. 


This is precisely how the gopikas considered themselves. They were totally indifferent to gold 
and other worldly goods. For them God was everything. They were totally immersed in Krishna 
Consciousness and were oblivious to everything else. They were aware that Krishna was the 


omnipresent Divine. But still they were devoted to the particular form of Krishna. This is true of 
other devotees of God. Mirabai adored the Lord as "Giridhara Gopala." Sakkubai worshipped 
the Lord as "Ranga! Panduranga!" and was devoted to that particular name and form. Other than 
"Gopala" Yasoda was not interested in any other appellation of Krishna. That name alone was 
sweet and dear to her. 


The gopikas, though they knew that Krishna was the omnipresent Lord, adored Him only in the 
form of the flute-playing Krishna. The gopikas alone fully understood the Krishna Principle 
because of their intense and unqualified faith in His divinity. 


Krishna Tathwa as understood by Gopikas 


What sort of personality is Krishna? Although He moved amongst all kinds of persons, sported 
and played with all, He was not attached to anyone. He was ever content, ever blissful. He 
transcended all qualities. He was free from egoism. He was a sovereign without a crown. 


Though he conquered many kingdoms, He did not rule over any of them. He enjoyed witnessing 
others rule over the kingdoms. He was totally free from all desires. Whatever He sought was for 
the sake of others. In this way He revealed His divinity. Like the rays emanating from the sun 
and the trees growing out of the earth, love sprouts from the heart. The nature of Divinity can be 
properly understood only when the Love Principle arising from the heart is rightly understood. 
Making selfless love as the basis and treating the phenomenal world as the superstructure, you 
have to lead a life of purity which unifies both love and the world. Love is the impelling cause 
and the world is the instrument. Love is related to the Divine. The world is associated with 
Nature. 


Divine is eternal in the changing world 


Take, for example, this silver tumbler. Silver is the basic material. The silversmith was 
instrumental in making the tumbler from the silver. The creator of the silver was none other than 
God. The person who made the tumbler is a human being. What is a tumbler now, can be remade 
into a cup or plate or something else. Whatever the change in the form, the silver remains as 
silver. That is the basic factor. From this it should be understood that the Divine is unchanging 
while the phenomenal world would be subject to change. In this changing world, there is the 
Divine that is eternal and unchanging. The universe is the combination of both. 


The need for an unchanging basis for a changing world will be clear from the example of a car 
going on a road. The road is firm and steady and because of that the car is able to move on it. It 
would be hazardous if the car had to travel on an unsteady and unstable road. 


This relationship between the changeless Divine and the ever-changing phenomenal world is not 
properly understood. Very few, in fact, care to seek the truth. If the true nature of Divinity is 
grasped, one will not be affected by all the vicissitudes in the phenomenal world. He will have 
no fear regarding the ups and downs of life. It has been well said that one who knows how to 
swim need have no fear of the depth of the water in which he is plunged. Likewise, if you have 
earned the love of God, you need have no fear regarding the difficulties you may have to face in 
the world. It was the privilege of the gopikas to have earned such love. 


You are celebrating the birthdays of Rama and Krishna as festive occasions. What is the use of 
celebrating such festivals? You should put into practice the teachings of those whom you 


worship as God. All the worship you offer is of no use if you do not practise the teachings of the 
Lord in daily life. At best, they can only be regarded as pious actions. 


The different aspects of Krishna 


Among: all the Avatars, the Avatar of Krishna is the most attractive incarnation. The very word 
"Krishna" means one who attracts--"Karshatiti Krishna" (Krishna is one who attracts). 
"Krishyatiti Krishna" (Krishna is one who cultivates) is another derivation for the name. In the 
case of the Avatar, this means that Krishna is the Lord who cultivates the heart of the devotee by 
removing the weeds, sowing the seed of good qualities and growing the crop of love. "“Kushyatiti 
Krishna" (Krishna is one who gives delight). Krishna thus means the one who cultivates our 
hearts and raises in them the crop of bliss. 


The difference between the Kauravas and the Pandavas was this: the Kauravas had no faith in the 
Divine and turned away from Krishna. They believed only in worldly pleasures. The Pandavas 
had implicit and unwavering faith in Krishna and did not care for anything else. In the conflict 
between the Kauravas and the Pandavas, the Kauravas were utterly destroyed, while the 
Pandavas were victorious. The Mahabharata reveals the difference between the Kauravas and the 
Pandavas in their attitude to Krishna and what reliance on Krishna as the Divine means for 
believers. 


The Pandavas placed God first, the world next, and "I" (themselves) last. The Kauravas placed 
"I" (self-interest) first, the world next and God last. Whoever places God first and foremost is 
bound to be successful in life. This was the lesson which Sanjaya gave to Dhritarashtra at the end 
of the Bhagavad Gita. 


Prema Tathwa--message of life of Krishna 


Faith in God is the guarantee of victory. Thyagaraja said: "Oh Rama, if I have the benefit of your 
anugraha (grace) all the navagrahas (the nine planets) will be subject to me." Hence, if we 
acquire God's love we can achieve anything in life. Love is the one all-pervading element. 
Everyone has to strive to make that love the basis of his life. 


The supreme message of the life of Krishna is the uniqueness of the Prema tathwa (Love 
Principle). This message is all that the world needs. Krishna is the embodiment of Love. This 
love can be understood only through love. This love is strong, brilliant and unbreakable like 
diamond. It is extremely precious. If you want to secure such divine love, your love (for God) 
must be equally strong. You can cut diamond only with diamond. If there is any defect in your 
love, it should be removed only through love. Love begets love. Hatred can only beget hatred, 
not love. Jealously begets jealousy. Anger breeds anger. Therefore, if you want to foster love, 
you have to get rid of hatred, jealousy and anger. 


To attain Krishna, the very embodiment of love, love is the only way. 


Discourse on Krishna Jayanthi day, in the Poornachandra Auditorium on 24-8-1989. 


The Gita says, you must be without hatred to all beings-- 
"adweshtaa sarva bhoothaanaam"; but, that is not enough. A wall 
has no hatred towards any being! But is that the ideal? No, you 


must positively Love all beings, actively Love, actively engage 
yourself in acts of Love. That alone wins the Grace you crave for. 


BABA 


26. Disciplines of the spirit 


WHATEVER one's scholarship, position or affluence, all of them will be of no use if one has not 
acquired the capacity to face the vicissitudes of life with fortitude and equanimity. The perennial 
message of the hoary culture of Bharat should be adapted to the needs of the present as part of 
the educational process. Students tend to go astray because they have not properly imbibed 
human values during their academic career. The significance of human values can be grasped 
only if the concepts of Yama and Niyama are properly understood. 


Yama includes the following practices' Ahimsa (non-violence); Sathya (truth); Astheyam (non- 
stealing); Brahmacharya (continence and studentship) and Aparigraha (not receiving anything 
from others). 


Ahimsa: This means avoiding causing harm to anyone by thought, word or deed. Out of 
selfishness and self-interest, men do not practise this estimable virtue. All evils arise from the 
sense of "I" and "mine." This trait can be eliminated only by developing purity in thought, word 
and deed. 


Sathya: Truth relates not only to what is factually correct, but what is true for all time. 
Moreover, truthful speech must be both pleasing and beneficial to the person concerned. It 
should not excite passion or promote ill-will. You should not indulge in faisehood to please 
others. 


Astheyam: In any circumstance and under any kind of compulsion one should not steal another's 
property. 

Brahmacharya: In everyday life, this may not be easy to observe. Brahmacharya calls for the 
complete eschewing of all bad actions and living constantly in Brahmam (the contemplation of 
the Absolute). In practical life, this means dedicating all thoughts, all speech and all actions to 
the Divine. Doing everything as an offering to Brahmam is Brahmacharya. Study of the Vedas, 
Upanishads and other scriptures also constitutes Brahmacharya. 


Brahmacharya is the foundation for the other stages in life: Grihstha (householder), 
Vaanaprastha (recluse) and Sanyasa (renunciant). 


Aparigraha: The Upanishads have regarded Parigraha (acquiring things from others) as sinful. 
Whatever help we may render to others, we should' do it with no expectation of any return. The 
scriptures declare that it is natural for human beings to reap the fruits of their actions. One is 
entitled to receive benefits from one's father, mother, teacher and God, but not from others. As 
God is the creator, sustainer and protector, you can claim anything from God. From your parents 
you can receive what they are in a position to give according to their capacity. But you should 
not seek more than that from them. From the preceptor you. must receive only knowledge. From 
the preceptor, who teaches you what promotes your well-being, you have to seek ways of 
satisfying him and not any other benefits. Students today lack these qualities. The result is they 
become indebted to others in various ways. No one can tell what sort: of births they will have to 
take to discharge these debts in future lives. Limits should be observed even in accepting the 
hospitality of friends. It is wrong to overstay even in the houses of friends, who themselves 
might be dependent on their parents. Hence, the cultivation of restraint in accepting offerings 
from others is essential. You should be ready to offer a fruit, flower, water or other simple thing 
to a guest, but you should be wary in accepting anything from others. 


Disciplines covered by Niyama 


The second set of disciplines is covered by the term Nivama. It consists of five practices: 
Soucham (purity); Tapas (austerity); Santhosham (contentment); Swaadhyaayam (study of 
scriptures); Easwara Pranidhaanam (offering to the Lord). 


Soucham: This is of two kinds--external and internal. External purity is achieved by the use of 
water and cleaning agents. But apart from bodily cleanliness, in daily life we have to ensure 
purity of the clothes we wear, the food we consume, the places where we live, the books we read, 
and the like. All organs of the body have to be kept completely pure. This is essential not only 
for maintaining perfect health, but also to enjoy a state of bliss. The environment around you 
should also be kept pure. 


As regards internal purity, it should be noted that the mind is polluted by bad thoughts and bad 
desires, by attachments and aversions. You must strive to fill the mind with good and sacred 
thoughts. Qualities like love, kindness, compassion, forbearance and sympathy have to be 
developed to get rid of negative and bad thoughts. 


Tapas: Tapas does not mean merely meditating in certain postures. Real penance consists in 
striving for the realisation of one's higher aims by maintaining purity in thought, word and deed 
and pursuing the aims with one-pointed concentration. "Sathatham yoginah" (Always be 
established in Yoga), it is said. You must yearn for the realisation of the Formless Absolute. That 
yearning turns into penance in due course. Merely going. to a forest and living on roots and 
leaves does not constitute penance. To get rid of evil thoughts and passions and to fill the mind 
with sacred feelings is real penance. 


Santhosham: Man can experience joy and happiness only when he has contentment. As desires 
grow, discontent grows and worries multiply. You must learn to be content with your condition. 
He who has got much satisfaction is the richest man. 


Swaadhyaayam: This does not mean merely study of the Vedas. All the basic triple scriptures-- 
the Upanishads, the Brahma Sutras and the Bhagavad Gita--should also be studied. One must be 
acquainted with all sacred literature. Thereby one gets rid of impurities in the mind. 


Easwara Pranidhaanam: All actions that we do should be pleasing to the Lord. In whatever 
action we perform, the question must be asked, "Will this please the Lord or not?" God means in 
effect your conscience. You should not do anything which does not give you self-satisfaction. 
Whatever you do that pleases God will be holy When Yama and Niyama are practised in this 
manner, you will be simultaneously pursuing the four Purusharthas (goals in life) Dharma 
(Righteousness), Artha (earning wealth, etc.) Kama (right desires) and Moksha (liberation) and 
observing the spiritual disciplines of sama and dama. 


Sama means control of the senses, the mind and the intellect and ensuring that they do not go 
astray. It is only when the internal sense organs are controlled that the external organs like eyes, 
ears, etc., can be controlled with ease. 


Dama refers to the control of the jnanendriyas (organs of perception) and the karmendriyas 
(organs of action). The spiritual transformation of man calls for the control of the sense organs. 


Vighneswara is the deity presiding over the intelligence and he endows devotees with purity of 
intellect and the power of discrimination between right and wrong and between the permanent 
and the transient. Mundane pleasures are momentary and fleeting. Your aim must be to seek that 


spiritual bliss which is enduring and unchanging and which transcends the pleasures of the earth 
and heaven. Keeping this ultimate aim in view, one should do one's duties in this world and lead 
a life of righteousness. 


Discourse in the Prashaanthi Mandir in connection with Ganesh Chaturthi celebrations on 3-9- 
1989. 


27. The Ganesa Principle 


THE world has many exemplary leaders, but none like Vinayaka. He is also called Vigneswara, 
because he is regarded as the presiding deity for obstacles. Even as Yama is the presiding deity 
for births and deaths, the grace of Ganapathi removes all obstacles. Ganapathi means the Lord of 
Ganas. He is the Lord of Sound and has the form of Om (Pranava). 


What is the esoteric meaning of Ganesa's elephant head? The elephant is noted for its acute 
intelligence. Ganesa's elephant head symbolises sharpness of intellect and the highest power of 
discrimination. 


Because of the purity of his intellect, Vinayaka is also called the giver of Buddhi (intellect). He 
responds to the prayers of devotees and hence he is known as Siddhi Vinayaka (the Vinayaka 
who grants what is sought). 


Once Vyasa embarked upon writing the Mahabharata. Because of immensity of the task of 
writing down millions of verses, Vyasa sought the help of Brihaspati, the preceptor of the Devas, 
for a suitable scribe. Brihaspati told Vyasa that none but Vinayaka could carry out the work. 
Vyasa appealed to Vinayaka for aid. Vyasa stipulated that everything that was written should be 
understood by the scribe. Ganesa, in his turn, laid down a condition that Vyasa should not pause 
in dictating the verses so that the stylus with which he would be inscribing the verses on the palm 
leaves should have no rest. Vinayaka could write down the entire Mahabharata because he was 
the embodiment of all knowledge. Vyasa could accomplish his prodigious task with Ganesa's 
aid. 


Significance of placing Vinayaka in forefront 


The mouse is Ganesa's vehicle. The mouse is a clever and lively creature. As a symbol it: means 
that we should be clever and diligent in our actions. 


There is special significance in placing Vigneswara in the forefront before embarking on any 
undertaking. In a forest, when an elephant moves through the jungle, it clears the way for others 
to follow. Likewise, by invoking Ganesa, the path is cleared for our undertakings. The elephant's 
foot is so large that when it moves it can stamp out the footprints of any other animal. Here, 
again, the symbolic meaning is that all obstacles in the way will be removed when Ganesa is 
accorded the place of honour. The journey of life is made smoother and happier by the grace of 
Ganesa. 


On Vinayaka Chaturthi day, students place books in front of the Ganesa idol and offer worship. 
They pray to the deity to illumine their minds. Hence Ganesa is known as "Buddhi Pradayaka", 
one who grants intelligence. No one should regard Ganesa as uncouth because of his elephant 
head and his immense belly. Vinayaka is a deity who encompasses the universe within himself. 
He is a deity of infinite potency. 


Vigneswara is described as one wearing a white cloth. His body is ash-grey. He is depicted as 
having four arms and a cheerful countenance. The white cloth signifies purity of mind and heart. 
By worshipping Him, you must endeavour to achieve similar purity. Vinayaka always appears 
serene and calm. By his grace, the devotee must seek to achieve similar equanimity, whatever 
may be the ups and downs in life. 


Address in the Sathya Sai Institute Hostel, on 4-9-1989. 


Between the hill of individual life and the region of the Universal, 
there is the flooded river of Nature, with all its confusions and 
complexities. It is difficult to discover where it comes from, how it 
accumulates all that uproar and where it ultimately ends. But 
fortunately, we have in every human community bridge-builders, 
who help people to cross. 


BABA 


28. Experience oneness with the Divine 


EMBODIMENTS of Divine Love! Devotion means seeking unity with the Divine through purity 
in thought, word and deed and concentrating on the oneness of the Godhead. Devotion aims at 
acquiring friendship with God through this triple purity. 


Devotion is of three kinds: Saamaanya Bhakti (Ordinary devotion); Ekantha Bhakthi (Devotion 
in Solitude) and Ananya Bhakti (Exclusive, one-pointed devotion). 


Saamaanya Bhakti has nine forms: Sravanam (listening to the glories of God); Kirthanam 
(Chanting the praise of God); Vishnu Smaranam (ever remembering the name of the Lord); 
Paada Sevanam (Worshipping the Lord's feet); Vandanam (Prostration); Archanam 
(Worshipping the figure of the Lord); Daasyam (Service); Sneham (friendship); Atmanivedanam 
(Self-surrender). 


Of these nine forms of devotional worship Parikshit exemplifies the first one, Sravanam. 
Destined to live for only one week on account of a sage's curse, the emperor Parikshit attained 
salvation by listening to the glories of the Lord as related by Sage Suka. 


The triple process that leads to God realisation 


The devotee should not be content with merely listening. He should reflect on what he has heard 
and put into practice the teachings. These are called manana and nididhyasa. The triple process 
of listening, reflection and practising leads to God realisation. 


Narada is the supreme example to the world of one who realised the Divine by continuously 
singing the glories of God in all circumstances and at all times. Narada, who was born out of the 
mind of Brahma, demonstrated to the world the supreme spiritual efficacy of singing the Lord's 
glories. 


Prahlada demonstrated the power of constant remembrance of the name of the Lord, whatever 
the ordeals one had to face. He chanted the names of Vishnu without fear or anguish when the 
demons thrust their javelins at him at the bidding of Hiranyakasipu (Prahlada's father). Prahlada 
was an unflinching devotee of Vishnu, whom his father hated as an enemy. 


The Goddess Lakshmi is the supreme example of one who earned unique distinction by devoted 
service to the feet of the Lord. Though she was the Goddess of wealth and presided over all 
prosperity, she showed to the world that serving the Lord's feet was greater than all the treasures 
on earth. Today's devotees worship Siri (wealth) more than Hari (the Lord). They do not realise 
that by worshipping the Lord's feet, even wealth can be got. What foolishness is it to go after 
money, forgetting the lotus feet of the Lord, which are the fountain source of all prosperity! 


Worshipping the Lord by constant prostration was the form of devotion exemplified by Akrura, a 
devotee of Krishna. Namaskar (the act of worshipping the Lord with folded palms) signified the 
total offering of the body and the senses to the Divine as a mark of complete surrender to the 
Divine. It signifies the elimination of the ego and seeking merger in the Lord wholeheartedly. 


Anga-Archanam for worshipping the Lord 


Archanam was the method adopted by the emperor Prithu to worship the Lord. By offering 
sixteen kinds of service to the image of the Lord every day with deep devotion, he earned the 
grace of the Lord. In this form of worship, Prithu demonstrated the unique significance of Anga 


Archana, using every sense organ in worshipping the Lord. "Netra kamalam samarpayami" (I 
offer my lotus eyes to the Lord). "Srotra kamalam samarpayami" (I offer the lotus ears to the 
Lord). "Hridaya kamalam samarpayami" (1 offer the lotus of my heart to the Lord). In this 
manner Prithu regarded every organ as the lotus to be offered to the Lord in worship. 


Today, unfortunately, when this type of worship is performed, there is no genuine feeling of 
dedication of the organs to the Lord. When the mantra "Netra kamalam samarpayami" is uttered, 
the real meaning is that the eyes are dedicated entirely to having visions of the Lord and nothing 
else. Likewise, when the devotee says, "Srotra pushpam samarpayami" he should realise that he 
is dedicating his ears solely to the Lord and will not listen to anything bad or evil. The ears 
should be used only for listening to stories about the Divine and spiritual teachings. This should 
be the feeling with which the offering is made. This was the spirit in which emperor Prithu 
performed Anga Puja and attained God-realisation. He demonstrated thereby the efficacy of this 
form of worship. 


Hanuman is the supreme example of a devotee who practised service as the form of worship to 
realise God. His great acts in the service of Rama show how he was completely free from ego 
and how deep was his devotion to Rama at all times. 


Arjuna exemplifies how devotion can be developed by cultivating the friendship of the Lord 
through complete faith and loyalty. Friendship implies also love. Arjuna's love was totally 
concentrated on Krishna. He acquired all powers by the grace of Krishna. 


Emperor Bali's Atmanivedanam 


Emperor Bali is the example of Atmanivedanam complete self-surrender in the devotion to the 
Lord. "I offer to you, Oh Lord! all my wealth and possessions, as well as my entire self. I take 
refuge in you, protect me, Oh Lord!" This was the sense of abnegation with which Bali offered 
himself to Lord Vamana. Bali welcomed Vamana with open arms and promised to him that he 
would offer the young Brahmin lad whatever he desired. He offered to wash the feet of Vamana 
and sanctify himself by sprinkling .that water on his own head. Bali's preceptor, Sukracharya was 
an all-knowing counsellor. Aware that Vamana was an incarnation of Vishnu, he advised Bali to 
go back on his offer to Vamana. But Bali's magnanimity and greatness may be seen in the fact 
that he refused to accept his preceptor's advice. Bali said, "When the Lord Himself has come to 
me with out-stretched hands asking for a gift, what greater good fortune can I have than making 
the gift from my humble hands? I am prepared to give away everything regardless of what 
happens to me." 


The Vedas have declared that in observing Dharma and doing one's duty by the Divine, the 
opposing words of no one--father, mother, preceptor or anybody else should be heeded. Bharata, 
Prahlada, Meera and others are examples of those who went against the injunctions of mother, 
father, husband respectively in adhering to their devotion to the Lord. No one is' entitled to be a 
barrier between the devotee and the Lord, whatever is his relationship with the devotee. 


Kerala is the Land of three Avatars 


Bali was a great devotee. He identified his well-being with the welfare of his subjects and was an 
exemplary ruler. He considered the people as limbs of his own body. The people also regarded 
him as the heart of the body of citizenry. In Bali's realm poverty and want were unknown. The 
country enjoyed prosperity through timely rains and good harvests. Even today Kerala is a land 


of luscious vegetation enjoying the bounties of nature. Because it was such a sacred region, it 
witnessed three Avatars of the Divine: the Varaha Avatar (in which Lord took the form of a boar 
to destroy Hiranyaksha), the Narasimha Avatar (for the protection of Prahlada) and the Vamana 
Avatar (for conferring immortal glory on Bali). It is significant that all the three avatars were 
concerned with redeeming members belonging to the same lineage: Hiranyaksha, Hiranyakasipu, 
Prahlada and Bali (Prahlada's grandson). 


Hiranyaksha and Hiranyakasipu were brothers who were originally the gate-keepers of Vishnu--- 
Jaya and Vijaya. They were born as demons as a result of a curse by sages whom they had 
offended. They had been filled with pride because of their constant nearness to God and the 
service they were rendering’ In their pride they slighted even the sages and consequently they 
had to take birth as demons. No room should be given to self-conceit which is an incurable 
disease. Because of their conceit even the great ones are made to be born as demons. This was 
the fate of Jaya and Vijaya, the guardians of the Lord's abode--Vaikunta. 


The mystery of Lord's creation 


Prahlada was the son of Hiranyakasipu. The father was the avowed enemy of Hari. The son was 
the steadfast devotee of Hari. Virochana was the son of Prahlada. To a great devotee like 
Prahlada, a wicked son like Virochana was born. Bali was the son of Virochana. Bali was a great 
devotee of the Lord. Such is the mystery of the Lord's creation, its inexplicable wonders. The 
stories of the Lord are filled with a myriad marvels, which are as indescribable as they are 
countless. A wicked man having a virtuous son and a virtuous person giving birth to a wicked 
son are phenomena which are not without reason, though the explanation may not be apparent. In 
the Divine plan nothing happens without 


a proper reason. The universe cannot function for a moment without the impulse of the Divine. 
Sri Krishna declared in the Gita "Oh Arjuna! there is nothing in the world that I need. But 
nevertheless I am active." If the Lord is not active, the cosmos will perish. Not understanding 
this truth, the ignorant indulge in futile speculation and controversy. 


Spiritual significance of Onam festival 


The story of Bali is full of significance spiritually and otherwise. The mutual love and regard that 
prevailed between the ruler and the ruled made them a composite whole. Out of his love for the 
people Bali gave a promise to the people, after he had given away everything he had to Vamana, 
that: once a year he would appear amongst them to give them the joy of his presence. The Onam 
celebration marks the fulfilment of that promise. The people of Kerala believe that every year on 
Onam day, Bali appears in spirit and otherwise in their midst. It is not easy for people to 
understand the inner significance and sacredness of this celebration. It can be understood only by 
those who have full faith in the power of the omnipotent: Lord. 


Although the nine forms of devotion described above have been grouped under "Saamaanya 
Bhakti" (ordinary form of devotion), they are indeed not so. They embrace every aspect of 
devotion. They envisage all forms of the Divine. Every devotee who achieved God-realisation 
has pursued one or other of these forms of devotion. 


Ananya Bhakthi refers to that kind of devotion which is based on the conviction that there is 
nothing in the universe other than God and that everything in creation is a manifestation of God. 
God is immanent in the subtlest particle in the universe. The devotee sees God in everything, 
experiences God in every action. Nothing exists for him apart from the Divine. Wherever he 


goes, it is a pilgrimage. Every action is dedicated to the Divine. Such devotees have attained 
God-realisation by this type of one-pointed devotion. 


This form of devotion cannot be practised easily by all. It is easy to say that God is all-pervasive. 
But it: is not so easy to experience that truth. There are countless persons who profess to be 
devotees of Rama. But few can be found who have earned the love of Rama. The word "Rama" 
consists of the two letters "Ra" and "Ma." "Ra" means "Atma" and "Ma" means "jiva” (the indi- 
vidual soul). The Rama principle signifies the unity of the Atma and the jiva (the Universal 
Spirit: and the individual spirit). The oneness of the Supreme Omni Self and the Jiva-Atma 
(individual Self) is indicated by the term "Rama." This inner truth is not understood by many. 


A true devotee is one who acts on the convictions he professes. This is what is implied in the 
concept of Trikarana suddhi (purity in thought, word and deed). The Ananya Bhaktha is one who 
continually acts on the basis of his belief that the Lord is omnipresent, omniscient and 
omnipotent. 


Seeing the Lord within is Ekantha Bhakti 


Ekantha Bhakti is the form of devotion in which the devotee believes that the Lord, who 
pervades the external and the internal, is residing within him. He individualises the Divine that is 
immanent in everything. The distinction between the particular and the collective should be 
properly understood. One tree does not make a forest. There can be no forest without trees. This 
is the relationship between the vyakti (particular) and the samashti (collective). The same 
relationship may be seen between the vyakti (individual) and sama jam (society). The Divine in 
its universal cosmic form is Paramatma (the Omni-Self). The Ekantha Bhaktha individualises 
the Divine and worships him in a particular form. The Divine is present in myriad forms with 
myriad names. 


There is nothing sweeter in the world than the Divine name. The Name and the Form go 
together. The inextricable connection between name and form has to be rightly understood. The 
name is a form of wealth. The form is an object to be purchased. Once you have money you can 
buy whatever you want. Likewise with wealth of the Lord's Name in your hands, you can obtain 
whatever you desire. Therefore every devotee has to acquire the wealth of the Name. This can be 
through bhajans and meditation on the Name of the Lord. In this context, devotees have to 
develop four types of spiritual discipline Maitri (friendliness), Karuna (compassion), Muditha 
(rejoicing) and Upeksha (freedom from attachment and aversion). These appear to be simple 
terms, but they embody all human values. Each quality has to be cultivated in a spirit of devotion 
and dedication to the Divine. 


Onam at Prashaanthi Nilayam 


Today the Onam festival is celebrated in every part of Kerala. However, only the Onam that is 
celebrated in Prashaanthi Nilayam is the true Onam festival. The reason is in Kerala the festival 
is celebrated and enjoyed in each home privately. You cannot witness there the coming together 
of all Keralites in such large numbers for the celebration. The kith and kin may come together to 
observe the festival. Here you have a prodigious gathering of Keralites for the celebration. This 
is uniquely fortunate occasion because so many have gathered to celebrate it: in one home and as 
one family as it were. This is the greatness of this occasion. This type of mass observance cannot 
be seen anywhere in Kerala. This is an occasion when the Divine Presence can be experienced 


and the sense of oneness with the Divine can be promoted. Cherish this celebration as a glorious 
event. Install in your hearts the Divine that is the Indweller in everyone. 


I bless you all with the assurance that you will make the Lord's name the means for sanctifying 
your lives and living righteously. 


Discourse in the Poornachandra Auditorium, on Onam day, 12-9-1989. 


Sacrifice is the highest step. One who has the true spirit of 
sacrifice gives to others without any hesitation or reservation, 
smilingly and gladly, even his dearest and highest possession. 
Surrendering the fruit of action to the Lord is real sacrifice. 


BABA 


29. Message of the Vedas 


EMBODIMENTS of Divine Love! The Vedas are the recordings of sages to whom the mantras 
were revealed. They proclaim the transcendental Truth which is not changed by time or place. 
They indicate the means to prosperity and security for the denizens of the three worlds. 


Veda is derived from the root "Vid", which means "to know". The Veda teaches how to achieve 
purity of heart, getting rid of impurities. 


The Vedas have been declared to be infinite and hence beyond the comprehension of common 
people. In the beginning there was only one Veda. To study it considerable time and effort were 
needed. Vyasa divided it into different parts to enable people to study as well as practise the 
teachings of the Veda. Out of the countless number of hymns, Vyasa gathered some Rks and 
compiled them in the Rg Veda, collected some yajus to form the Yajur Veda and some Samans to 
make up the Sama Veda. 


The Rg Veda is mainly devoted to hymns in praise of various deities. The Yajur Veda consists of 
mantras for worshipping the deities. The mantras of the Yajur Veda are used in the performance 
of yagas and yajnas and in doing acts of charity. Each Veda has three sections' Brahmanas, 
Aranyakas and Upanishads. 


The purpose of Vedic mantras 


The Vedic mantras were utilised in yagas and yajnas (ritual sacrifices) for promoting the well- 
being of society and the world. They were intended to secure timely rains so that the crops may 
be good and there may be prosperity all round. The mantras which form part of the Karma 
Kanda (the path of rituals), were regarded as conducive to the promotion of general well-being 
and happiness. 


The Yajur Veda is devoted entirely to the worship of the deities. It consists of two divisions-- 
Krishna Yajur Veda and Sukla Yajur Veda--which are based on two traditional distinctions. Sukla 
Yajur Veda belongs to the Brahma sampradaya (Brahmic tradition) and. the Krishna Yajur Veda 
to the Aditya sampradaya. Adherents of the Sukla Yajur Veda are largely confined to North 
India, while Krishna Yajur Veda has its adherents mainly in South India. 


The Vedas developed under nine heads: (1) Sruti; (2) Anuswara; (3) Trayee; (4) Aamnaayam; 
(5) Samaamnayam; (6)Chandas; (7)Swaadhyayam; (8)Gama; and (9)Aagama. 


Sruti refers to the process of learning, the Vedas from a preceptor by practising the precise 
manner of chanting the mantras and thereby acquiring proficiency in the recitation of the Vedas. 
The sounds have to be reproduced exactly as taught by the preceptor by listening to him with 
intense earnestness. The Vedic mantras are thus learnt entirely by listening. 


Anuswara tefers to the practice of repeating the mantras learnt from the preceptor, contemplating 
on them and preserving them in their purity by constant recitation. 


Trayee: Originally only three Vedas-Rg, Yajur and Sama Vedas--were considered Apourusheya, 
without a human origin (that is, emanating from the Divine). The Atharvana Veda comprises 
hymns taken from the Yajur Veda. Because of their Divine origin, the first three Vedas were 
called "Trayee" (the Triad). 


Aamnaaya refers to constant contemplation of the root syllable "Na." Acquiring knowledge of 
the Vedas by this practice has been described as Aamnaaya and Samaamnaaya . 


One meaning of Chandas is that it is knowledge which should be guarded in secret and 
propagated with care. The Vedas are also described as Chandas. The entire Sama Veda consists 
of Chandas. 


Swaadhyaayam refers to the process by which the Vedas have come down from generation to 
generation, through father to son, in genealogical succession. Acquisition of Vedic knowledge 
was not through books. It was transmitted from preceptor to disciple over the years. It is because 
this knowledge was handed down directly from preceptor to pupil, it has been described as 
Swaadhyaaya. 


Gama and Aagama are the names given to the inhaling and exhaling of the Lord's breath which 
were the origin of the Vedas. All in all, the Vedas represent the emanations from the breath of the 
Lord. 


The great sages who listened to these mantras as revelations from the Divine found the key to 
them in eight basic letters. All the Vedic mantras with their musical rendering were remembered 
by reflecting on the eight letters: "A, Ka, Cha, Ta, Tha, Pa, Ya, Sa." The great seers fostered the 
Vedas by the use of these letters. 


Neglect of Vedas is cause for spiritual decline 


Each of the Vedas had several saakhas (branches) and upasaakhas (sub-branches). Out of the 20 
branches and 21 sub-branches of the Rg Veda, only three have survived today. Likewise out of 
96 branches of Yajur Veda only two have survived the ravages of time. Sama Veda, which had 
1000 branches, retains today only three branches. If so much of spiritual treasure is contained in 
the few branches of the Vedas that have survived, how much greater would have been the 
spiritual heritage of the Bharatiyas if the Vedas had survived in their entirety! It is because of the 
neglect of the Vedas that the spiritual and scientific knowledge of Bharatiyas experienced a 
steady decline. As a consequence they developed a narrow outlook. Broadness of vision suffered 
an eclipse. Today the numbers of those who have no love or respect for the Vedas are on the 
increase. Even among the Brahmins interest and concern for the Vedas have declined. 


Who are Brahmins? Brahman means the embodiment of mantra. Only those who constantly 
recited the mantras embodying the Brahman were called Brahmins. Today Brahmins have 
forgotten these mantras. Owing to the impact of modern education, the greed for money and the 
growth of narrow-minded interests, they have forgotten their inherent divinity. As a 
consequence, peace and security have become casualties. 


What is meant by Veda? One meaning is eruka (awareness). Another is thelivi (intelligence). A 
third meaning is viveka (discrimination). All those who wish to develop discrimination should be 
deeply interested in the Vedas. 


Today intelligence is being developed and used only for acquiring positions and possessions, for 
securing comforts and conveniences and not for developing good qualities and becoming good 
men engaged in Godly pursuits. All their intellectual abilities are being misused for trivial 
purposes. 


The universal outlook of the Vedas 


The Vedas have emphasised that man will be truly human only when he lives upto human values 
and practises the good life. Many who chant the Vedas these days have difficulty in 
understanding their purport. When they fully understand the meaning and chant the mantras, 


they will derive greater joy. Only then they will experience the full sacredness and potency of the 
Vedas. 


The Vedas have a universal outlook, embracing all that is noble and sacred. They have taught the 
principle of samatwa (equality) in respect of everything. They have proclaimed the concept of 
oneness. They taught men to face joy and sorrow with equal serenity. 


Those who utter the mantras today do not grasp their inner meaning. Even if the full meaning of 
a single mantra is understood, it will be sufficient. Every day, the santhi mantra is recited: “Om 
Sahanavavathu; sahanau bhunaktu; sahaviryam karavaavahai." What does this signify? "Let us 
move together in unison. Let us live in harmony in communion with each other." What a wide 
vision is present in this mantra! 


Even such broad-minded mantras have been interpreted in a narrow sense in later years. Hence 
you do not find today even a thousandth of the sense of equality and amity which prevailed in 
those times. It is because men's attitudes and feelings have declined below the human level that 
so many divisive forces have cropped up. 


Significance of Yajnas 


Thirty-three deities are mentioned in the Rg Veda. Of them, the Sun-God is the most: important 
deity. His power is felt all over the world. In this Yajna, the Sun is called Ritwik. His other names 
are: Hota and Brahma. It is the Sun God who carries to the deities concerned the offerings made 
in the yajna. Agni, the God of fire, is an image of the Sun. Agni has a form of his own. Agni has 
parents. This morning, before the yajna began, two priests churned two aranis (sticks) to 
produce fire for the yajna. The Fire-God is said to have consumed his parents immediately after 
his birth. The lower Avani is the mother and the stick on the top is father. The fire produced by 
churning them burns away the sticks. The flames arising from the fire are the tongues of the Fire- 
God. The rays coming from the fire are so many heads of the deity. The Agni-Principle is 
immanent in every person. The inner significance of this is that every person is inherently divine. 


When the mantras are chanted and offerings are made in the fire to the Lord, the grace of the 
Lord is showered on the people in the form of peace and plenty. There is a saying: "As is the fire, 
so is the smoke." As is the smoke, so are the clouds. As are the clouds, so is the rain. As is the 
rain, so are the crops. As are the crops, so is the food. As is the food, so is the intellect. As the 
clouds these days are not formed by the smoke coming from yajnas, the food consumed by the 
people is not conducive to the growth of intelligence. When the smoke going up from the yajna- 
kunda enters the clouds, you have sacred rain, which helps to purify the crops and sanctify the 
food that is consumed. As a result, the people are sanctified. 


The Bliss derived from sacrifice 


But today if people are filled with bad thoughts and evil intentions it is because these sacred 
yajnas and yagas are not performed. Many persons ask in a carping spirit "Of what use is the 
expending of so much ghee and other materials as offerings in the fire of the yajnas and yagas?" 
The purpose will be clear only to those in the know of the inner truth. A farmer tills his field and 
scatters over it a bag of paddy seeds. To the ignorant observer this may appear a waste of 
precious grain. But the farmer knows that in due course he will reap a harvest of hundred bags of 
paddy. Likewise the offering of ghee and other precious things in the yajna with mantras will 
result in countless benefits in good time. People may notice only what is being offered. But they 
have no idea of the benefits that will follow. 


It should be realised that only today's Thyaga (sacrifice) can lead to tomorrow's bhoga 
(enjoyment). When the sacrifice is made with a full heart, the returns will also be equally 
abundant. 


Unfortunately, man today does not even dream of making any sacrifice. When a presence of 
sacrifice is made, it is only a concession to fashion. Very few have any idea of what real sacrifice 
is. As a consequence, the wealthy, in spite of their riches, have neither peace nor security. The 
affluent do not care even to give a little food to the destitute at their gate. But these misers drop 
bagful of money in the hundi in a temple. These foolish persons fail to see the divinity in fellow- 
human beings and make offerings to an inanimate object. 


Do not bargain with the Lord 


Does God, who is the source of all wealth, need your petty offerings? You must use your wealth 
for righteous purposes. Help the indigent and the needy. There is selfish motive even in making 
offerings to the deity. Something small is offered expectation of a big return from the deity. A 
man prays to the Lord: "Oh Lord! If I win ten lakhs of rupees in a lottery I shall offer ten 
thousand rupees to you." What kind of bargain is this? It is a pity that such silly ideas are 
rampant today. 


The reason is the people have forgotten the secret of the Vedas. They offer a molehill and crave 
for a mountain. This is a complete caricature of devotion. It is such pseudo-devotees who are on 
the increase today. They are all the time seeking to enter into petty deals with the Divine. Every 
prayer, every sadhana is replete with selfishness and self-interest. 


Everyone seeks benefits, but is not prepared to make any sacrifice. What is the sacrifice that is to 
be made to God? First of all, your bad qualities. Acquire good qualities. Shed your narrow 
outlook. Cultivate a broad vision. Today the foremost need is to develop the spirit of sacrifice. 
You are not expected to give away all your wealth and possessions. What is required is a sense 
of compassion at the sight of a suffering being. When the heart melts, that itself becomes 
sacrifice. What we witness today is not the melting of hearts but their hardening. 


You will not carry your wealth with you when you leave the world. Even while life remains, 
render help to .those who need as much as you can. The quintessence of the Vedas is the 
glorification of sacrifice as the supreme virtue. 


Of what avail is all your study or listening if there is no change in the way you live and you have 
not understood your true nature? The highest knowledge is understanding the value of sacrifice. 
It is a source of limitless joy. It leads to immortality. 


The greatest means to realise the Divine 


The lesson to be learnt from the performance of yajnas is that sacrifice is the greatest means to 
realise the Divine. The essential meaning of the Veda is that to secure enduring bliss, the spirit of 
sacrifice has to be cultivated, the significance of yaga has to be understood and we must lead a 
Godly life. 


The Vedas have been mainly concerned with the Pravritti Marga (the Path of Action). All the 
different branches of knowledge--physics, chemistry, botany, economics, music, etc.--are 
covered by the Vedas. These are concerned with the external world. Hence the Vedas have been 
considered dualistic. Only the Upanishads have taught the Nirvritti Marga (the Path of 
Knowledge) by going within oneself. This means that, of the four Purusharthas, the four main 


goals of man. Dharma, Artha, Kama and Moksha--the Vedas have been concerned with only the 
first three. 


The Upanishads declared that the nature of the Supreme can be grasped only by the Path of 
Knowledge. Knowledge is of two kinds: Para Vidya and Apara Vidya (the Higher Knowledge 
and the Lower Knowledge). All that is learnt by the educational process today falls in the 
category of Apara Vidya (Lower Knowledge). Knowledge relating to Dharma, Artha and Kama 
also comes in this category. Only knowledge relating to Moksha (Liberation) constitutes Para 
Vidya (the Supreme Knowledge). We have to acquire that Para Vidya. That knowledge is found 
in Vedanta. The Upanishads come at the end of the Vedas. The essence of all the Vedas is to be 
found in them. 


While Veda is dualistic, Vedanta is Advaita (non-dualistic). Non-dualism is the means to 
experience Ananda (Bliss). The ego ("I") principle is predominant in the Vedas. Vedanta has 
declared that the elimination of the ego ("I" and "Mine") alone can lead to Realisation. The "I" 
has to be rooted out. As long as you adhere to the "I", you are bound to the phenomenal world. 
You cannot attain the Higher Knowledge. You have, therefore, to understand the distinction 
between the Vedas and the Upanishads. 


It is only when you understand the essence of the Vedas as expounded in the Upanishads and put 
into practice the message of the Vedanta, you will realise the true meaning of Advaita (Non- 
dualism). 


Discourse in the Poornachandra Auditorium on 3-10-1989. 


30. Karma, Upasana and Jnana 


EMBODIMENTS of Divine Atma/Most people in the world do not understand the purpose of life. 
They do not even try to enquire why they are unable to understand the meaning of life. One in a 
million undertakes such an enquiry. This is the first step in the process of discovering the basic 
reality about life. The vast majority are content to regard eating, earning, acquiring property and 
rearing a family as the aims of life. This is not so. All this is merely the routine of ordinary 
living. Doubtless, this is necessary. But obsessed with the pursuit of external objects, men do not 
strive to explore the internal life of the Atma. 


Standing on the seashore, one can see only the waves on the surface and not the pearls lying deep 
below. Only the brave man who can dive deep into the ocean will be able to gather the pearls and 
not others. Likewise knowledge of the Atma--Atmajnana--can be got only by those who turn 
away from the exploration of the phenomenal world to probe internally for the truth of the Spirit. 
Spiritual knowledge is not easy to get. 


Divine vibrations emanate from Mantras 


Why is it that, in spite of the fact that over the years there were many who recited the Vedas and 
carried on Vedic practices, no commensurate results were achieved? It is because, though many 
were proficient in reciting the Vedic mantras, few of them understood their inner meaning 
properly, or their sacredness and potency. It may be that the sacredness of the Vedas is such that 
even mere uttering the mantras without understanding their full meaning or merely listening to 
them will have some sanctifying effect. The potency of the Divine vibrations emanating from the 
mantras is such that they confer unique blissful experience on the listeners. Among the eight 
Divine potencies attributed to Vedic mantras, sravanam (listening) is considered the foremost. 


Likewise, among the nine forms of devotion, sravanam (listening to the glories of God) has been 
accorded the first place. It is unfortunate that in Bharat there are many who do not choose even 
to listen to the Lord's glories. There are others who, even when they have opportunities to listen, 
run away from them. Many others listen indifferently to the chanting of mantras and deny 
themselves the benefit of their sacred power. 


The human body is subject to afflictions from three sources: Vaatha (the wind element in the 
body), Pitta (bile) and Sleshma (phlegm). Hundred and two types of ailments arise from vaatha. 
Forty two kinds of diseases are caused by bile disorders. Phlegm disorders account for as many 
as 242 different kinds of ailments. Altogether the body is a sink for hundreds of ailments. In his 
attachment to the body and the fleeting pleasures derived from the senses, man is forgetting the 
lasting bliss that can be got from the Atma within him. 


Just as the body is subject to ills arising from vaatha, pitta and sleshma, the mind also is liable to 
ailments from three sources: mala, vikshepa and aavarana. It is because of these ailments that 
man is unable to develop his spiritual nature and acquire knowledge of the Atma. On account of 
ignorance of his spiritual nature, he regards his mundane existence as the only reality. 


The three paths laid down by the Vedas 


Mala is also known by the term Avidya, meaning ignorance. Ignorance can be removed by 
karmas (prescribed actions). Aavarana can be removed by Upasana (worship). Vikshepa 
(delusion) is removed by developing the power of discrimination. Hence, to deal with the 


maladies of mala, aavarana and vikshepa, you need karma, upasana and jnana. These three 
paths have been laid down by the Vedas. Through Karma (prescribed duties) purity of mind is 
achieved. Through Upasana (devotional worship) one-pointed concentration of mind is 
promoted. And through Jnana, moksha (liberation) is attained. 


The primary cause of sorrow for man is birth itself. Poorva Karma (past actions) is the cause of 
birth. Desire is the impelling cause for all actions. Desire is prompted by attachment, which 
proceeds from lack of understanding. Ego is the cause of this ignorance. When ignorance goes, 
the ego subsides. Absence of egoism leads to right understanding. The desires abate. With the 
decline of desires, actions get sanctified. Then life becomes meaningful. Thus ignorance is called 
aavarana (that which covers or envelopes an object). 


Mala is a stage anterior to aavarana. It is a state of the mind in which the body, made up of the 
five elements and the senses of perception and action, is regarded as the real self. Because of this 
mental condition, man has delusions regarding the body which are false and unreal. What 'mala' 
means in Vedantic parlance can be understood from the use of the term in daily life. The passing 
of excreta and urine is described as 'malavisarjanam' (getting rid of filthy things from the body). 
‘Mala’ means that which is impure. As a state of mind ‘mala' refers to the condition in which one 
regards the impermanence, the false and the unsacred as permanent, true and holy. 


Satkarmas purify the mind 


The Vedas have shown the different means by which this mental state can be changed. They 
declare: "Perform Satkarmas" (good and righteous deeds). What are these righteous actions? 
They include Yagas and Yajnas and charitable undertakings. All actions done as an offering to 
God can be regarded as Satkarmas. Through such actions, the mind is purified. This means the 
elimination of the accumulated impurities in the mind resulting from impure thoughts and 
actions in the past. The purpose of the Karmakanda of the Vedas is to indicate the kind of actions 
and rituals that will serve to purify the mind. 


Aavarna: Aavarana means enveloping or covering something. The six vices-- lust, anger, greed, 
pride, delusion and envy--have enveloped man. Attachment and aversion have gripped him. 
Because of this man has forgotten his real nature and filled himself with pride of all sorts. Losing 
his Vichakshana-jnana (power of discrimination) he indulges in all kinds of misbehaviour 
towards his betters. The Vedas prescribed Upasana (devotional worship) as a means of getting 
rid of these bad qualities. As a lighted joss stick removes by its fragrance the bad odour in a 
place, devotional repetition of the name of God drives away the impurities of the mind. 


Essential qualities to develop devotion 


Devotion means friendship with God. It means establishing close relations with God through 
love. Service to God is the essence of devotion. Hence sage Narada declared' Hrishikesa 
Sevanam Bhakthiruchyathe" (Service to Hrishikesa is called devotion). When devotion is 
developed in this manner, Karuna (compassion) arises spontaneously. When compassion grows, 
man experiences Divine bliss, free from ill-will or attachment towards anyone. 


The company of the good is essential for developing devotion. It serves to nourish the seed of 
love in the heart. Bhakti reaches its consummation in one-pointed concentration on the Divine. 
Satkarma (right action) results in purity of mind and devotion promotes concentration. 


The third stage is jnana (knowledge). There are different kinds of knowledge. One is worldly 
knowledge. Another is general knowledge. What is implied by the Vedic term Jnana is 
knowledge of Atma. It is not concerned with the physical, sensory or worldly knowledge. 
Atmajnana (knowledge of the Atma) can be got only by enquiring into the nature of the Atma and 
not by any other means. It cannot be taught by preceptors or learnt by studying texts. It cannot be 
received from any one or offered to any one. It has to emerge from the inner consciousness. 
Preceptors and texts can only help to some extent. But the aspirant who seeks Atma-Jnana has to 
embark on self-enquiry to experience this Self-awareness. He should explore and investigate the 
whole gamut of spiritual experience and arrive at the ultimate Reality. Just as a child learns to 
speak by watching the mother's words, the spiritual aspirant has to make the effort himself while 
listening to the preceptor or studying scriptural texts. 


Who can be called a Jnani? 


Jnana in Vedantic parlance has been defined as "Advaita Darsanam" (recognising the One 
without a second). That is to see the One in the many Unity in diversity. Here in this assembly 
are present many thousands of persons. Their names and forms are multifarious. But you have to 
recognise that the Atma Principle in all of them is one and the same. It is not enough to say this 
in words. You must make it a living experience. Only then can one experience enduring Ananda 
(bliss). Such a person alone can be called a Jnani (a Knower of the Supreme). 


To reach the stage of a Jnani the first steps are Karma and Upasana (righteous action and 
worship). Without following the paths of Karma and Upasana and succeeding in them one can 
never become a Jnani, just as a student cannot acquire a degree without passing the School Final 
and Intermediate examinations. To reach manhood one has to pass through childhood and 
boyhood. There can be no fruit unless there has been a bud and a green fruit. It is idle for any one 
to claim that he is a Jnani unless he has gone through the prior disciplines. The mark of a Jnani 
is perennial joy. It is for this reason that the Veda has placed the Karma Kanda, the Upasana 
Kanda and Jnana Kanda in that order of succession. To realise the oneness of divinity these 
three paths of action, worship and knowledge have been laid down. 


The first step to become a Jnani 


The world today abounds in Vedantins who go about claiming that they are jnanis. Among 
myriad such claimants not one can be regarded as a real Jnani (a fully Self-realised person). To 
become a Jnani, the first step is to start with the Karma Marga (path of Action). The sacred 
duties laid down in this discipline have to be practised. All actions have to be performed as 
dedicatory offerings to God. Without doing the prescribed rites, merely declaring the actions one 
performs as offerings to God is futile. Set aside your likes and dislikes. Perform right actions 
with discrimination after due enquiry. If you are unable to ascertain what actions the Vedas 
prescribe, act according to the dictates of your conscience. Thereby your actions get sanctified. It 
is not necessary to study the scriptural texts. Any action done with a pure heart becomes holy. 


Mantra means that which is established in the manas (mind) by a process of trana (rumination). 
This applies only to what is godly. Man is the embodiment of Mantra, Tantra and Yantra. Man's 
form is the basis for these three. The body is a yantra (a machine or instrument). The process of 
So-ham (breathing in and out) is the mantra. The heart, which is the power house from which the 
body and the breathing process receive their energies, is the tantra. You may see from this what 
sacredness is embodied in man. 


Attachments are fetters which bind man 


Unfortunately on account of mala, aavarana and vikshepa man is forgetting his inherent divinity. 
Supporting these three undesirable traits, there are three vasanas (predisposing tendencies). One 
is the Loka Vasana (tendencies associated with the world). The second one is Deha Vasana 
(tendencies associated with the body). Third is Sastra Vasana (tendencies arising out of 
scriptural scholarship). 


Loka Vasana (attachment to the world) prompts one to achieve name and fame, seek power over 
others and aspire for honours and distinctions. As a result, one develops a narrow egoistic 
outlook and fails to realise the impermanence and transient nature of all worldly pleasures and 
possessions. 


Deha Vasana (attachment to the body) impels one to seek physical strength and health and an 
attractive physique. All the efforts to make up one's face will not serve to alter the natural 
features of persons. Only that which has been given by the Lord will be enduring. You must be 
content with that. While taking as much care of the body as is essential, you should not have 
excessive attachment to that which is inherently perishable and temporary. The body must be 
taken care of only for realising the Divinity within. The time spent on costumes and make-up is a 
sheer waste. It is no doubt necessary to maintain good health as long as one lives, but obsessive 
concern for the body is misconceived. 


Sastra Vasana (attachment to book-lore and scriptural scholarship) can be a source of sorrow 
even to a great scholar. He feels miserable when he forgets something or when he encounters 
someone with greater scholarship. The real meaning of "Sastra" is acting according to what has 
been laid down. Hence without acting according to the injunctions of the texts, verbal knowledge 
of the books has no value. 


By the combination of mala, aavarana and vikshepa with the three vasanas man has degraded 
himself further. What is the use of attachment to worldly goods when man knows that he came 
with nothing into the world and will leave it empty-handed? What is the destination of man? 
Attachments are fetters which bind man. He must get rid of them to discover the Divine. 


The message of Vedas and Vedantas 


The Vedas have taught the means to make life in the world pure and meaningful. They have 
declared: "Na karmanaana prajayaa dhanena, thyaagenaike amrutatwamaanasush" (not through 
rituals, progeny or wealth, but only through sacrifice can immortality be achieved). Apart from 
emphasising the importance of Thyaga (sacrifice), the Vedas have not gone further. They have 
indicated the means for experiencing many temporary pleasures. For instance, to appease hunger 
you are enjoined to take food. The satisfaction derived from consuming food lasts for barely two 
hours. The Veda lays down what kind of food should be taken and in what manner. 


The Vedanta has shown how by a process of elimination---Neti (Not this) you arrive at what 
remains, namely, the Atma. When you find out that what you call the "I" is different from what 
you describe as your body, your mind etc., what remains is the "I" which is the Self. You have to 
strive to recognise the Atma Principle in you. This is the message of Vedanta. 


To begin with, engage yourselves in as many Satkarmas (good deeds) as possible. Render as 
much service as you can to others. Involve yourselves in social service. And have God's name on 
your lips. Whatever you do, do it with love and not as a mechanical routine. Don't render service 


with a sense of compulsion from others. Service should be done with spontaneous feeling from 
the heart. Not force but the Source (the Divine) should inspire you. 


Discourse in the Poornachandra Auditorium, on 4-10-1989. 


A Thyagi does not hesitate even to give up his body, regarding it as 

worthless straw. Sacrifice means something more than giving up of 
wealth, gold and material objects. Evil qualities like hatred, 

jealousy, wrath and malice which have become ingrained in man 

over many life-times should be discarded. 


BABA 


31. The quest for God 


IN HIS life-long quest for happiness man forgets that he can secure enduring bliss only by 
pursuing the spiritual path. Towards the end of his life, when all other sources have failed, he 
turns towards God. Man cannot secure real happiness by relying on worldly objects. Only by 
turning towards the Spirit can he secure bliss. 


In the quest for bliss, the Vedas have pronounced a caveat. God is incomparable. He cannot be 
comprehended by logical proofs. All kinds of proofs are of no avail for recognising God. He is 
beyond the reach of mind and speech. 


There are three types of proofs for arriving at the truth. One is Pratyaksha Pramaanam (direct 
perception). Today every man relies on this kind of proof. For everything he seeks evidence of 
direct perception or experience. He is not prepared to accept anything which is not amenable to 
the proof of direct perception. This is really a sign of ignorance. Direct perception is associated 
with many afflictions. For instance, when the eye is free from any disease it recognises the 
different colours in their true forms. This is the basis for the authority of direct perception. What 
happens when the eye is affected by jaundice? Everything appears yellowish. No other colour 
can be perceived. How, then, can one trust the evidence of his eyes? All evidence based on the 
perceptions of the sense organs is vitiated by this defect. When the sense organs themselves are 
subject to change, how can they be regarded as infallible indicators of absolute truth? Senses 
which are liable to change cannot be the means of arriving at the unchanging Reality. 


Veda is revealed Truth 


The second of type proof is based on anumaanam (inference). You infer the presence of fire on a 
hill when you see smoke going up from it. But you cannot be sure whether it is smoke from a fire 
or a cloud of water vapour. Without seeing the fire, to infer its existence from smoke is likely to 
be wrong. Conclusions based on inference cannot bear the stamp of certainty. 


The third type of proof is Sabda Pramaana (the authority of the spoken word). This type of proof 
relates to what a person, who has had a direct experience of something, says about it. The 
authority of the Veda is based on this concept. Veda is revealed Truth. It; has to be accepted as 
such. Sabda Pramaana (or proof based on spoken word) is of two kinds: Vaidika Pramaana and 
Loukika Pramaana. Loukika Pramaana (mundane testimony) is not concerned with spiritual 
truth. It cannot explain God. Only Vaidika Pramaana (Vedic Testimony) seeks to describe God. 
The Brahma Sutra declares: "Sastra yonitvaath" (the Divine can be known only on the authority 
of the scriptures). What is the meaning of Sastra (scripture)? Sastra is that which conveys to the 
ear what is not audible otherwise. It brings back to the memory what has been forgotten. 


The different kinds of Dharma 


Such scriptural authority is the basis for Dharma (the principles of right conduct). Dharma is of 
many kinds. Jaathi Dharma (the code of conduct for a species or race), Desa Dharma (national 
code), Kula Dharma (code of conduct for one's caste), Gana Dharma (the code for a gana or 
sect) and Aapad Dharma (the code of conduct during dangers). All these five kinds of codes of 
righteous conduct emphasise compassion towards all living beings. Kindness has been regarded 
as the highest virtue. To please every being is to please God. One who is lacking in love for 
fellow beings will not secure God's love. Without love for God, one will not have fear of sin. In 
the absence of both of these, a man will have no sangha neethi (social morality). Neethi means 


right conduct. It implies right behaviour in harmony with the conditions of the particular time, 
place and society. You have to subordinate yourself to the mores of the community. You should 
not violate the norms of society. Hence the Veda enjoined observance of social disciplines. 


Discourse in the Poornachandra Auditorium, on 5-10-1989. 


32.From the animal to the Divine 


WHAT is the reason for the prevalence of animal qualities in man even after reaching the human 
level? It should be noted that it is after passing through many lives in other species of beings that 
one gets a human birth. Because of this fact, animal qualities appear in human beings. One 
person may be found leading an unsteady life, with his mind wavering all the time. He may make 
many efforts to achieve steadiness. But his fickleness and unsteadiness continue to grow. When 
you enquire into the reason for this, the answer is provided by the Veda. The man concerned had 
been a monkey in a previous birth and has inherited some of the simian qualities of fickleness 
and hopping from one thing to another from his past life. Similarly, when you find in some 
persons qualities such as lying, stealing, cowardice, or stupidity, they should be considered as 
hangovers from their previous animal lives. The means to get rid of such tendencies is to offer all 
one's actions to the Divine. The tendency to steal is present in many persons. Stealing is natural 
quality of the cat. Mental instability is a characteristic trait of the monkey. Stupidity is a trait of 
sheep. Obstinacy is a quality of the buffalo. These traits of the different animals are reflected in 
the actions of humans who have emerged from the respective animal state. 


The external and internal Yajnas 


There are two kinds of yajnas (ritual sacrifices) one relates to external observances; the other is 
internal. For the external yajnas you need a sacrificial site, purohits, materials for making 
offerings and the like. 


Offerings are made to the sacrificial fire to the accompaniment of Swaaha (mantras). This form 
of yajna is an image of the internal yajna. Few people care to enquire into the nature of the inner 
yajna. The inner meaning of yajna is to recognise one's inherent divinity and offer all one's bad 
qualities as a sacrificial offering at the sacred site of one's mind. Yajnas have been prescribed for 
the purpose of enabling people to make a sacrifice of all their bad thoughts and actions. 


Fickleness, hatred, stealing and foolish stubbornness are not natural traits for man. The presence 
of these traits in man must be attributed to the legacy from previous births. The sacrifice which 
everyone has to make is the giving up of all bad qualities in him. 


The Veda laid the greatest emphasis on action. Hence the Karma kanda (the section of Veda 
devoted to the performance of prescribed rites) of the Veda is its most important part. 


Dasaratha should not be regarded as merely the emperor of Ayodhya. Allegorically, the name 
symbolises the human body, endowed with the five sense organs and the five organs of action. 
Rama, Lakshmana, Bharatha and Satrughna represent the four Vedas. Rama, who is the 
embodiment of Dharma, represents Yajur Veda. Lakshmana, who revels in reciting the name of 
Rama, represents the Rg Veda. Bharata, who rejoices in singing the name of Rama at all times, 
represents Sama Veda. Subduing the internal and external enemies and carrying out the 
commands of his three elder brothers, Satrughna symbolises Atharvana Veda. 


"All of you are embodiments of Rama" 


Rama and his brothers are said to belong to the Surya Vamsa (solar race). The sun exists as an 
objective physical phenomenon. The moon and the earth are there. The earth has come from the 
sun. The moon has come from the earth. Both the earth and the moon have come from the sun. 
They are fragments of the sun. When you enquire deeply, you will realise that without the sun 
the world cannot exist; there can be no birth or death. Nothing can exist without the sun. This 


was the reason why the ancients worshipped the sun as Divine. Elements of the sun are present in 
every human being. Everyone has originated from the rays of the sun. The light within each one 
is derived from the sun. As his light is present within us, we are a fragment of the sun. 


Each human being, because he is a product of the sun, can claim to belong to the solar race. 
When Rama is said to belong to the solar race, it should be realised that the Principle of Atma 
Rama (the Indwelling Rama) present in every human being entitles him to claim lineage from the 
sun. Therefore, all of you are embodiments of Rama. Each one of you carries the imprint of the 
sun within you. Realising this truth and bearing in mind the fact that each of you belongs to the 
solar race like Rama, you should try to destroy your bad qualities and develop your virtues even 
as Rama destroyed the wicked and protected the good. 


This is the yajna (sacrifice)which every man has to do every moment of his life. Yajna does not 
mean merely performing a ritual sacrifice with priests and offering oblations in the fire. The evil 
tendencies in man are the result of differences based on physical distinctions. Once these 
differences are ignored, the divinity that is present in everyone will be recognised. 


The unchanging Spirit in the transient body 


It is not realised that the eternal, unchanging Spirit dwells in the transient, perishable human 
body The Kshetrajna (Knower of the Field) dwells in the Field (the Kshetra or body). Without 
the Knower, the Field has no value. Today people attach value to the body and not to the Spirit 
within. It is like placing the cart before the horse. Likewise, man is carrying on life's journey 
placing the body in the forefront and giving a backseat to the Spirit. The result is he is missing 
his destination. 


Hence, through the Vedas men have to understand the sacredness of the human birth. Veda is the 
embodiment of knowledge. It is the essence of all that has to be known. The Veda enjoins 
harmony in thought, word and deed. It is this triune unity that has to be offered to God. When the 
Gita mentions that God is satisfied even with the offering of a leaf, a flower, a fruit or water, 
what do these four signify? Leaf symbolises the body. The flower represents the heart. The fruit 
refers to the mind. And the water represents the tears of joy. Man is enjoined to offer these four 
to the Divine. You have today in the world men of wealth, of strength, of scholarship and virtue. 
But there are few who have realised the Self. Ignoring the Self, of what avail are all other 
possessions, which are temporary and passing? 


Make faith your life-breath 


Embodiments of Divine Love! What you consider as real is unreal. What you think is unreal is the 
only Reality. God alone is the one eternal Reality. Do not forget this wholesome truth. What you 
regard as real in the waking state does not exist in the dream state. What you experience in the 
dream state has no reality in the waking state. If there can be such differences in two-states of 
consciousness in a single day, it ill-befits man to hug the ever-changing impermanent 
phenomenal existence, ignoring the eternal Reality. 


Experiments are being conducted even in respect of small matters in the field of science. What is 
the gain from these experiments in the physical sciences? You may get some degrees or jobs. 
You may earn money and enjoy some comforts. But should you be content with these as the 
summum bonum of life? What is the inner purpose of life? Each one should put this question to 
himself. This sort of enquiry is not made. One is interested in gathering news about every 
country in the world, but is not anxious to find out what is happening within himself. Of what 


use is knowledge about the world, when you are not aware of yourself?. That is why Vedanta 
called upon each one to discover the truth about himself. Self-knowledge is the key to all knowl- 
edge. For this, you must approach the proper person to teach you the means to discover your true 
Self. If you are not prepared to undertake this self-enquiry, cultivate faith, if not in God, at least 
in your own Self. The man who has no faith in himself can have no faith in anybody. He cannot 
have faith in God. Make viswasa (faith) your life breath. The man without faith is a living 
corpse. Therefore, worship Govinda (Bhaja Govindam). Nothing else will save you when the last 
moment comes. Remember always the Divine name. It is your saviour; all else binds you. 


Discourse in the Poornachandra Auditorium, on 6-10-1989. 


Do not shape your conduct with an eye on the opinion of others. 
Instead, follow bravely, gladly and steadily, the sweet and pleasant 
promptings of your own Satwic Manas, your own Awakened 
Conscience, your own Inner Self. Associate yourself with those 
who are richly endowed with Truth. 


BABA 


33. Knower of the Brahman 


IN the Tretha Yuga, the Emperor Janaka performed a great Yajna (sacrificial rite) to make known 
to the world the value of yajnas and yagas, japa and tapas and arouse in men the consciousness 
of their divinity. He invited many sages, seers, yogis and scholars to attend the yajna. The yajna 
was performed successfully. 


On the last day, Janaka organised a grand assemblage of sages and savants. He invited whoever 
was a Brahmavetha (Knower of Brahman) to come forward. Among the sages and scholars 
present several doubts cropped up. Yajnavalkya alone came forward without any doubt or 
hesitation. 


Janaka had arranged for a thousand richly caparisoned cows to be presented to the Knower of 
Brahman. Yajnavalkya directed his disciples to lead all the cows to his ashram. At that stage, the 
high priest of the sacrifice, Aswala, got up and said: “Yajnavalkya! It is only after demonstrating 
that you are Knower of the Brahman will you be entitled to take the cows to your ashram." 


Responding to this challenge, Yajnavalkya started putting a volley of questions to the assembled 
sages and scholars. None of them could give proper answers to his questions. 


There is no greater power than Agni 


When the assembly was plunged in silence, Aswala got up and asked Yajnavalkya: "What is the 
way to conquer death?" Yajnavalkya replied: "Vaak (Speech). Vaak is Agni (the fire God). With 
the help of this fire, death can be conquered." He also said that this is mukti (liberation), 
Athimukti (supreme liberation). Aswala asked him to explain his answer. Yajnavalkya replied: 
"When a person is born, his mother's womb is a Agni-Kunda (fire-place). All his limbs are 
formed within the womb. This is the Garbha-Agni (Womb of Fire). When he dies, his body is 
cremated in the chitagni (funeral pyre) and is reduced to ashes. Fire is the cause of the body and 
fire is the destroyer of the body. There is no greater power in the world than Agni." 


Many others present in the assembly put questions to Yajnavalkya to justify his claim to be a 
Knower of Brahman. Uddalaka got up and asked him whether he could give the number of the 
planets. Today we call the planets by the names Rahu, Kethu, etc. In those days these names did 
not: exist. Yajnavalkya said there were the following eight planets: Prana (life-breath), Vaak 
(speech), Jihva (the tongue), the eye, the ear, the hands, the mind, the skin. Uddalaka resumed 
his seat. 


Yajnavalkya's intelligent answers 


Another sage got up and put a series of questions: “Yajnavalkya! Can you say how many deities 
are there?" Unhesitatingly, the sage answered: 33013. The next question was: "Can you reduce 
the number to 33?" Yajnavalkya said there were 8 Vasus, 11 Rudras, 12 Adityas, Indra and 
Prajapathi, making up in all 33. Yajnavalkya was asked further whether he could bring down the 
number to six. The sage said: "Agni (the fire God), Vayu (the wind-God), Aditya (the Sun-God), 
Aditvamandala (the solar system) and the trilokas (three worlds)." Not content with this answer, 
the questioner asked the sage further, "Can you reduce this number further to three?" 
Yajnavalkya replied' "The three worlds are embodiments of the Trinity." The three worlds are' 
Devaloka (the realm of the gods), Maanavaloka (the world of human beings) and Daithyaloka 
(the world of Asuras and Demons). For Devaloka the deity is Dama (self-control). For the world 


of men, it is Dharma (Righteousness) and for the world of demons, it is Daya (compassion). 
These are the respective deities for the three worlds, he said. 


The sage went on to ask whether the number could be reduced to two. Yajnavalkya replied’ 
Prana (the Life-Principle) and Annam (food). He then put an intriguing question. "Can you 
reduce this to one and a half?." All the scholars and sages present: wondered at such a question. 
However, Yajnavalkya replied: "It is Vayu" (the wind-god). The sage asked how Vayu, who is a 
single deity, and be regarded as one-and-a-half God? Yajnavalkya said: Vayu is present in all 
substances and has got the name Adhyaardham, which also means one-and-a-half. He then 
asked, "Can you reduce it to one?" Yajnavalkya replied' "That is Prana (the Life-Principle)." 


The sage was satisfied with Yajnavalkya's answers and declared that he was a knower of the 
Brahman and was entitled to be an honoured member of Emperor Janaka's assembly of sages. 


Basis of love is primarily self-motivation 


Thereafter, Yajnavalkya addressed the assembly thus to give them an insight into spiritual truths: 
The mother loves the child; the child loves the mother. The wife loves the husband and the 
husband loves the wife. Some love wealth, others love possessions and some others love 
knowledge. For whose sake do they love them? Whom are they loving? The husband loves the 
wife not for her sake. The mother loves the child not for its sake. Each loves the other for his or 
her own sake and not for the sake of the other. All these expressions of love are associated with 
atmanuragam (self-love) and not associated with the body. One loves an object. Is he loving it 
for its sake? He is loving it for his sake. Likewise, if people love various objects in the world, it 
is not for the sake of the objects that they love them but for their own sake. Thus the love is 
primarily self-motivated. 


What is this self? The self is a composite of Vaak (speech), Manas (mind) and Prana (the life- 
principle). Wherefrom has prana emerged? Wherefrom has the mind come? Yajnavalkya 
explained that out of the food consumed by man, the gross part comes out as excreta and the 
subtle part becomes mind. Out of the water consumed by man, the gross element comes out as 
urine 


and the subtle part becomes prana (life-force). Vaak represents the Tejas (splendrous element in 
man). Speech, mind and the life-force together constitute the Atma (Self). 


On hearing this, Gargi, who was a profound scholar and supremely virtuous lady, asked the 
question how the Atma, which is one, could be made up 6f three constituents. Yajnavalkya 
replied that three colours are inherent: in Agni (fire): White, red and black. They are not 
different: Fire appears reddish, assumes the form of whiteness and when it subsides, it appears 
black. Black is the sign of night. Red is the sign of day. The sun is the one common factor in all 
the three. Likewise, the Atma, which is one and the same, assumes at different times different 
forms. Yajnavalkya affirmed that no one can determine the specific characteristics of Atma. 


The four types of people in the world 


Not satisfied with this answer, Gargi asked the sage how many types of people there were in the 
world. Yajnavalkya replied that there were four types: One, man-Divine; two, man-human; three, 
man-demon; four, man-animal. The world contained these four types of human beings. The 
Brahmajnas or Knowers of the Brahman, are the human-divine type. ("Sathya Dharma 
rathomarthyah"). The human-man type is the one who is wedded to Sathya and Dharma. 
"Suraapaano daithya samaanah"--those who are addicted to drink belong to the man-demon 


category. The people lacking in wisdom belong to the animal-man category. The Brahmajna is 
one who is ever immersed in the contemplation of the Supreme, is totally free from selfishness 
and is conscious of the presence of the Divine in everyone. 


The human-man is one who adheres to Truth and Righteousness, respects human values, leads a 
sacred life, performs his duties, indulges in charitable acts and lives in harmony with his fellow- 
beings, causing no harm to others and bearing love towards all. 


Addicted to alcoholic drinks, forgetting his true nature, having no self-control, talking ill of 
others and causing harm to them, and always immersed in selfish pursuits--such persons belong 
to the human-demon category (demons in human form). 


The human-animal is the type of human being who is concerned only with eating, drinking and 
sleeping, who takes no interest in the affairs of the world, lacks the power of discrimination and 
is immersed in sensuous pleasures. 


In this manner, Yajnavalkya expounded to that assemblage the inner truths about the human birth 
and its divine potential. 


The spirit of sacrifice yields peace 


In essence, the yagas and yajnas of ancient times were performed to lead man to divinity and not 
for any inferior purposes. Unfortunately, by the efflux of time, these sacrifices lost their 
sacredness. Self-interest became the dominant motive in every action. The spirit of sacrifice is 
not to be seen. Those who perform yajnas today are making them a sort of business. This 
practice should go. Any sacred act should be performed in a selfless spirit. The man who has no 
spirit of sacrifice can have no peace. Do not give room for any kind of ostentation or show. 
Render service in a spirit of sacrifice. That itself is a great yajna. It is Karma Yajna. What is done 
internally is Brahma Yajna. Karma Yajna is a reflection of Brahma Yajna. 


The Vedas, which are the embodiment of Brahman, have become unfortunately mere 
vaangmayam (verbal expressions) today. People are not practising the Vedic life. There should 
be complete accord between thought, word and deed. That is the mark of a truly great soul. 
Divergence between thought, speech and action signifies that one is worse than a demon. 


Consider every action as a divine injunction. The Divine is totally free from self-interest. Every 
action of the Divine is for promoting the welfare of the world. When you conduct yourself on the 
basis of this truth, your life will be sanctified. Even a small act done with a pure and unselfish 
heart will develop into a great yajna. 


Whatever the number of discourses you may listen to, you should not be content with mere 
listening and forget their import after going away. You must make an enquiry as to how far you 
have been transformed by attending these discourses. You must try to put into practice at least 
one or two of the teachings, get rid of worldly attachments gradually and make your journey 
towards the Divine. In due course divinity will blossom in your hearts. If, on the contrary, you go 
on expanding your worldly concerns and multiplying your desires, you will go down to the 
animal level. 


You must be content with what you have. Even a loss of something must be considered a form of 
sacrifice. Rejoice in what you have, make good use of that and develop faith in God. The yajnas 
performed by rulers like Janaka were intended to promote general welfare and direct the people's 
minds towards God. 


Discourse in the Poornachandra Auditorium, on 7-10-1989. 


34. Yearn for God alone 


THE man who is filled with love has great peace of mind, is pure at heart and is unruffled by any 
adverse circumstances, failures or losses. This fortitude is derived from love of the Lord, which 
endows him with self-confidence. Self-confidence generates an immense internal power. 
Everyone has to develop this power. Everyone has to develop this self-confidence so that the 
Atma-Ananda (bliss of the Self) may be experienced. 


Love should be free from feelings of expectation of any return or reward. Love which arises out 
of a desire for something in return is not true love. Utterly selfless and motiveless love should be 
developed., This is the bounden duty of man. 


You should not pray to God seeking this favour or that. The reason is no one can know what 
immensely precious, Divine and magnificent treasures lie in the treasure-house of Divine Grace. 
No one can know what God intends or desires to give to a devotee. In such a situation by asking 
for trivial and petty things, man is demeaning his Divine estate. 


No one can understand what; valuable, sacred and Divine favour-God chooses to confer on a 
deserving devotee. Hence man should not seek from God, nor desire, nor pray for some petty 
trifles. More precious and desirable than anything else is God's love. 


If you wish to ask for anything from God pray to Him thus' "Oh Lord! Let me have you alone." 
Once you have secured the Lord, you can get anything you want. That was why Mira sang: "Oh 
heart, drink the nectar of Divine love." When you can have Divine love, to crave for anything 
else is like asking for coffee powder from the Kalpataru! (Wish-fulfilling Tree). 


Avoid excessive praise of God 


What you have to seek from God is God Himself and not any small and worthless benefits. Even 
while praying to God for His grace, you should not indulge in extravagant praise and flattery to 
win His approbation and seek His favours. "Oh Lord! You are the Ocean of Compassion! Your 
mercy is boundless! You are the refuge of the distressed and the protector of the abandoned!" 
Addressing the Lord in this manner palls on Him. 


Such praise for securing favours has a commercial tinge. Even the favours got through such 
praise are not proper at all. It is because the rishis and the yogis in the past resorted to such praise 
that they had to perform penance for hundreds of years to get a vision of the Lord. 


Consider God as friend 


God has a partiality for the human form. "Daivam maanusha rupena," it is said. (God has to be 
experienced in the human form). It is only when God is regarded as friend and a companion that 
He is pleased most. By addressing Him as: "Oh, my dearest friend! My beloved one! The darling 
of my heart," you can give Him the greatest joy. Instead of that, if He is described as one who is 
beyond praise by Brahma and other gods, who is not accessible to mind and speech, whose 
glories are beyond description, who prevailed over the God of Death, who was born as the son of 
Devaki and Vasudeva, who went to the rescue of Draupadi, who protected the Pandavas, and so 
on, and then He is entreated to confer His grace on you, there is an element of the ludicrous in 
the comparisons made. Such praise even savours of envy. When you say, "Oh Lord! You have 
talked to them and given them so much! Why don't you come to my help?" the comparison 
seems to stem from jealousy. 


It is only when God is approached as a loving friend who has the power to come to our aid that 
our desires will be fulfilled. We use words of praise towards an unfamiliar person to show him 
respect and regard as a stranger. But we welcome an old friend with easy familiarity and 
intimacy. 


Thyagaraja performed sadhana over many years to obtain a vision of the Lord. By that sadhana 
he established intimate relationship with Sri Rama. Because of this, he could greet Rama with 
friendly familiarity and welcome Him to his house as a companion in the song: "Raara maa 
intidaaka" (Rama, come to our house!). Because of his intimacy, Thyagaraja could address 
Rama in the second person singular. 


In the context of the Navarathri celebrations, on this Purnaahuti day, we must learn to recognise 
the Divine in this intimate manner. Reduce your desires. Don't pray for trifles. Don't go to a 
shrine with the intention to seek fulfilment of some petty desires. It is an unfortunate sign of the 
Kali age that everyone goes to a temple or pilgrim centre only to get some trivial benefits. 


If you can win over the Lord Himself, what is it that: is beyond your reach? Thyagaraja declared: 
"Rama! If only I have your anugraha (grace) all grahas (planets) will be in my palm." 


Pandavas' unwavering faith on Krishna 


It is essential to please God and win His grace by regarding Him as a friend and not indulging in 
excessive praise. For this, supreme Love is the primary means. This love should be firm and 
unchanging, unaffected by trials and tribulations and the vicissitudes of life. The Pandavas are 
the supreme examples of such unwavering love (for Krishna). When Draupadi was being 
humiliated in Duryodhana's assembly hall, when Abhimanyu was attacked and slain by the 
Kauravas, when Aswathama massacred the Upapandavas (the infant children of the Pandavas), 
or when they performed the glorious Rajasuya sacrifice at the height of their power, or when 
they were in exile in the forest, without succumbing to the difficulties and troubles they were 
subjected to, they adhered firmly to the name of Krishna, with unwavering faith in Him. They 
relied only on Krishna's love. 


Difficulties and troubles are passing clouds which come and go. Do we remember all the kith 
and kin with whom we were related in our previous lives? While all these relationships have 
changed, only the relationship with God remains unchanged. We should attach ourselves to this 
unchanging love and not cling to other ever-changing relationships. 


Yajna is the quest for discovering the One 


Yajnas are designed to lead you to the One who is unchanging and eternal. Ya+Jna is Yajna. Ya 
refers to the one who is the basis of the entire Cosmos. Jna refers to the quest for knowing that 
one. Yajna, therefore, is the quest for discovering the One who sustains the Cosmos. How is this 
search to be made? The Veda has declared: "Permeating everything inside and outside is the 
Lord Narayana." Where can you search for the Lord who is omnipresent? Why search at all? 


The sages performed severe penances to get the ultimate Reality. Finally they declared: 
"Vedaaham etham Purusham mahaantham Aadityavarnam tamasahparastaat" (We have known 
the Supreme Purusha, who is effulgent like the sun and is beyond the outer darkness). They 
declared that the Supreme Lord is beyond Tamas. This means that the Lord is beyond the Tamo- 
guna and to experience the Lord we have to get rid of our Zamo-guna (the darkness of 


ignorance). The Lord is beyond the veil of Tamas. When the veil is removed, the Lord can be 
seen. When one is filled with Tamo-guna from head to foot, how can one experience God? 


One is not prepared to make any sacrifice. With a mountain of desires in his heart, a devotee 
offers a petty coconut to the Lord! This is not the way to pray to the Lord. This is not devotion. 
This is not Love. To seek a favour is not prayer at all. Only a selfless person can engage himself 
in service to society. Only such a person is entitled to serve God. The first pre-requisite is the 
spirit: of sacrifice. This can be developed only through love. The person filled with love is ready 
to make any sacrifice. The person without love will not be willing to make any sacrifice. 


God does not dwell in any particular place. You are God. When you get rid of the body- 
consciousness, you will realise your divinity. 


The experiences of the Physical world 


In the waking state, you have various kinds of experiences relating to the phenomenal world. All 
the experiences are through 19 agencies---the five Karmendriyas (organs of action), the five 
Jnanedriyas (senses of perception), the Panchapranas (five life breaths) and the mind, the 
Buddhi (intellect), the Chitta (Will) and the Ahamkara (Ego). It is only when all these 19 are 
present that you. can enjoy the experiences of the physical world in the waking state. The Atma 
principle that is conscious in the waking state is called Viraataswaroopa---the Cosmic Form. The 
Cosmos is the form of the Viraata Purusha. In this form the Divine is called Viswa. As the 
universe has emerged from Viswa, it is called Viswam. Another name for Viswa is viraaja 
Swaroopa--one who confers joy and stands out as an ideal to the world and is the embodiment of 
Sat-Chit-Ananda (Being-Awareness-Bliss). 


When you go on to the sleeping state, you have dreams. Even in the dream state the 19 agencies 
are present, but in a subtle form. Wherefrom have the dreams arisen? They are created by the 
dreamer himself and he is also the experiencer. The Divine Principle in the dream state is called 
Thaijasa (the Effulgent). He is called Hiranyagarbha (The Golden-wombed One). This 
appellation means that he is the one who contains all within himself and projects them from 
himself. The third state is Sushupti (deep sleep state). What is it that is experienced in deep 
sleep? Forgetting himself, in an unconscious condition, he experiences bliss. In that state only 
Prajna (Constant Integrated Awareness) exists. “Prajnaanam Brahma" declares the Upanishad. 
This state of awareness is equated with Brahmam. The Divine Principle that one is aware in this 
state is called Praajna. 


Experience the Divine present in everyone 


The Viswa present in the waking state, the Taijasa present in the dream state, and the Praajna 
present in the deep sleep state, all three are one only. When the states of consciousness are 
dispensed with, we have only one experiencer present in all of them. That is the unity of the 
Divine indicated by the dictum: "Tat-Twam-Asi" (That Thou Art). 


Every person has this Divine Principle in him. There is no need to search for the Divine 
elsewhere. He is everywhere, omnipresent. Forgetting one's inherent divinity, man is searching 
for the Divine in the external world. Even in this search the primary requisite is pure, selfless 
love. 


Chant the name of the Lord with that love. God loves the human form. That is the reason why 
avatars come in human form. You can experience the vision of God by following the path of 
karma (prescribed actions). The Lord has declared in the Gita: "You are qualified only to 


perform actions." A scriptural text says, "Only through the body can you pursue Dharma." All 
living beings are bound by karma in this world. 


The Divine is being worshipped as a decorated idol or image, with an artificial form. The Lord 
should be experienced in His natural form, in a natural way. All the ornamentation the devotee 
resorts to does not please God. It may please the heart of the devotees, but God's heart is not 
moved thereby. Only through love can God's heart be moved and softened. The devotee has that 
power. Without resorting to extravagant adulation of God, not seeking petty favours from God, 
yearn for God alone and you will get everything. Endeavour to make God your intimate friend. 


Discouse in the Poornachandra Auditorium on the Poornahuti day of Veda Purusha Jnana 
Yajna, 9-10-1989. 


There is no happiness greater than that obtained from sacrifice. 
Only those who sacrifice are the children of immortality because 
they live for ever. 


BABA 


35. The Divine and the Demon 


What is the reason for all the 
Violence in the world? 

With the decline of selfless service 
irrational desires have grown. 

The pursuit of mundane desires without 
fear of sin 

Has led to a waning of the 
Love for God 

Men have lost their humanness — 

As a consequence peace in the world 


has been shattered. 


"Tam in the light; I am the light. 

The light is in me. The light is me." 
The Wise One who realises this truth 
Becomes one with the Supreme. 


EMBODIMENTS of Love! God is the One who manifests Himself in the cosmos with a myriad 
heads, a myriad eyes and a myriad feet. When this eternal Divinity is so near us (by His 
omnipresence) we are searching for Him all over the universe. This is as foolish as the person 
who goes abegging to his neighbour for milk while the wish-fulfilling Kamadhenu is in his 
backyard. It is sheer senselessness on the part of man to search for God outside him when the 
Divine is within him. 

No one can comprehend or describe the glory and mystery of Prakriti (Nature). Nature is a 
reflection of the sport of the Divine. It is animated by the three gunas, which are manifestations 
of the trinity (Brahma, Vishnu and Siva). God is nourishing and promoting Nature by using the 
three gunas in multifarious combinations and forms. The purpose of life is to experience the 
sacredness of nature as a projection of the Divine. 


Realise the value of Time 


Time is supremely precious. It waits for no one. Everyone has to submit himself to Time. It is 
not subject to any one. It is only when Time is utilised properly through right actions that the 
human can rise to the level of the Divine. Man's foremost duty is to make the right use of Time 
through the bodily vesture given to him. Man is bound by actions in this phenomenal world. 
While the Divine is all-pervasive, man is failing to recognise it. He is unable to see the light that 
is within him. The Reality which you are seeking everywhere in the outside world is within you. 
The Supreme Lord is present inside and outside, everywhere in the cosmos. Man today looks 
only at the outside world like any animal. To look inward is the mark of the true human being. 


Obsessed with the external and losing the internal vision, man has forfeited his power of 
discrimination. 


Significance of Dipavali festival 


When we enquire into the significance of the Dipavali festival which we are celebrating today, 
we find that traditionally it is a joyous festival to celebrate the destruction of the demon 
Narakasura by Sri Krishna. It is only when we first understand the meaning of the Krishna 
Principle will we be able to understand the significance of the Naraka principle. Krishna is the 
embodiment of the Five Elements ---ether, air, fire, water and earth. He is also the embodiment 
of five life breaths--Prana, Apana, Samana, Udana and Vyana. "Kleem-Krishnaaya- 
Govindaaya- Gopijanavallabhaaya-Swaah." This mantra contains the essence of the 
Bhagavatha. The five names represent the Five Pranas (vital airs). Kleem refers to the earth. 
Krishnaaya refers to water. Govindaaya refers to Agni (the Fire-God). Gopijanavallabhaaya 
refers to Vayu (Air). Swaah refers to ether. 


When we recognise that the Divine is immanent in the five elements, we will realise that there is 
no place in the cosmos where these five are not present. The human body is composed of the five 
elements. These elements, because' they constitute the body, can affect only the body but cannot 
affect the Atma in any way. 


In commenting on the Krishna story in the Bhagavatha, many writers have indulged in all kinds 
of misinterpretations. One such misinterpretation relates to Krishna's wives. 


Misinterpretation of Bhagavatham 


In the human body, there are what are called Shadchakras--six spiritual centres. Of these, the two 
most important are: the Hridayachakra (the Heart Centre) and the Sahasraara (the thousand 
petalled centre). The Hridayachakra is also known as the Hridayakamala (Lotus of the Heart) 
and the Sahasraara is called the Thousand-Petalled Lotus. The lotus of the heart has eight petals. 
These eight petals symbolise the eight worlds, the eight directions, the eight guardians of the 
world, the eight bhutas (spirits) and the eight parts of the earth. Because Krishna was the lord of 
these eight petals, He was described as the husband of eight queens. The master is called Pathi 
and those under him are described as wives. This is a symbolic relationship and not a husband- 
wife relationship in the worldly sense. It is because the esoteric significance of these 
relationships was not properly understood, the Bhagavatham came in for misinterpretation. 


It is also stated that Krishna was wedded to 116000 gopikas. Who are these gopikas? They are 
not cowherdesses in physical form. In the human head there is a lotus with a thousand petals. 
The Lord is described as the embodiment of the 16 kalas. As the Lord of the Sahasraara 
(thousand-petalled lotus), He presides over the 16,000 kalas which are present in this lotus. The 
Kundalini Sakti, which starts at the bottom of the spinal column (Mooladhaara), rises and 
merges with the 16,000 entities in the Sahasraara. This is the esoteric significance and the 
meaning of the role of the Divine within the body. Oblivious to this inner meaning, people 
indulge in misinterpretations and perverse expositions. 


Krishna's encounter with the demon Naraka has to be understood against this background. 
"Naraka" means one who is opposed to the Atma. Naraka does not mean a demon. It is the name 
of the satellite which revolved round the earth. When people were filled with apprehension about 


the threat to the earth from this satellite, when it seemed to be approaching the earth, Krishna 
removed their fear by destroying the satellite. 


Dipavali commemorates Krishna's victory 


Dangers from the planets are apprehended from time to time. For instance, some years ago, 
people expected great danger to the world from the combination of the "Ashtagraha" (eight 
planets). Five thousand years ago people dreaded the approach of a planet near to the earth. To 
allay their fears, Krishna came to their rescue and averted the impending danger. The celebration 
of Dipavali as the day of deliverance from Narakasura commemorates Krishna's victory. The day 
is observed as an occasion when the Divine leads mankind from darkness to light. 


The legendary version of the Narakasura episode describes the demon as master of 
Praagiyothishapura. The symbolic meaning of Praagjyothishapura is that it is a place which has 
forgotten the Atma. The inner meaning of this is that demonic forces dwell in any place where 
the Atma is forgotten. All the chaos and evil in the world today are due to the fact that men have 
forgotten the Atma (the Supreme Spirit). Every man. is conscious of the body and of the 
individual soul, but is not conscious of the Paramatma (Divinity) within him. 


From sheath of food to sheath of Bliss 


Man is encased in five kosas (sheaths): Annamaya, Pranamaya, Manomaya, Vijnanamaya and 
Anandamaya kosas. The physical body is the Annamaya kosa (the sheath based on food). Man 
takes good care of the body. Man also takes care of the Pranamaya kosa as he cannot: exist 
without the life-breath. Without the Manomaya kosa (the mental sheath), man cannot accomplish 
any of his desires. Man today has progressed upto the stage of caring for the first three sheaths. 
Upto this stage his vision is turned towards the external. The Vijnanamaya kosa calls for internal 
vision. It leads to the understanding of the Anandamaya kosa (the sheath of Supreme Bliss). 


Starting from the sheath of food man should progress towards the sheath of Bliss and not get 
stuck up midway in the mental sheath. This is the reason for man getting filled with demonic 
qualities, which can only lead him to Naraka (hell). The demonic qualities (symbolised by 
Narakasura) have to be destroyed to avoid being thrust into Naraka (hell). By taking refuge in 
Krishna, the destroyer of Narakasura, man can get rid of the demonic qualities in him. 


On Dipavali day, we light numerous lamps with one candle. The light with which other lamps 
are lit is a symbol of the Divine. The other lamps are Jivana jyothis (individual lamps). They 
derive their light from the One Supreme Light. It is to teach this truth to men that the Festival of 
Lights is observed. 


Thus every festival has an inner meaning and purpose. Forgetting this, the holy days are 
observed only as occasions for feats and fun. Holy days in Bharat are all full of spiritual 
significance. Forgetting this, people are lost in meaningless observances. 


According to the legend, Krishna killed Narakasura with the help of Sathyabhama. What does 
this signify? Each of us has to fight and destroy the demonic forces within each by resorting to 
Sathya (Truth). "Sathyameva Jayathe" declares the Upanishad (Truth alone triumphs). "Speak 
the Truth" is a Vedic injunction. Once the Goddess of the Earth went to Vishnu and lamented 
that she can bear any kind of burden but not the burden of carrying those indulging in falsehood. 
One must be prepared to make any kind of sacrifice for upholding Truth. That is the lesson 


taught by Harischandra, who sacrificed his kingdom, wife and son, for the sake of the pledged 
word. He stands out as the supreme upholder of Truth. 


Everyone should endeavour to adhere to Truth. Truth is God. With faith in God and adherence to 
Truth, all demonic forces can be vanquished. 


Discourse at Brindavan on Dipavali day, 28-10-1989. 


Your beliefs and actions must be expressions of Faith. They must 
have holiness as their core. They must be so full of Love and 
compassion that they attract on you the Grace of God. 


BABA 


36. Students, parents and the Nation 


DEAR students, teachers and lovers of education! Bharatiyas were wedded to Truth and 
Righteousness. Justice was their sheet-anchor. Students should safeguard today not the nation but 
Truth and Righteousness. Only students who are broad-minded and have a wide outlook can 
uphold Truth and Righteousness. 


The world is based on Truth and Right Conduct. These two sustain the world. If they are 
protected, the world will be happy and prosperous. Victory will come in the wake of Truth and 
Righteousness. No other form of strength, including armed might, will ensure victory. Hence, 
students should consider themselves the guardians of Truth and Righteousness and equip 
themselves for this role. 


Education is the formal expression of Truth, which is the basis of social harmony. The divine 
qualities of man can be seen in education as in a mirror. Today's educational system makes the 
student hard-hearted. He lacks the feelings of kindness and sympathy. Tolerance and compassion 
are totally absent. Those who should seek to serve the poor and the needy are wrapped up in their 
own selfish pursuits. Selfishness and self-centredness should be rooted out. Service to society 
should be regarded as the primary purpose of education. 


Decline of moral values 


Bharatiya culture is a sublime one. It is incomparably great. But the advance of modern 
technology has shaken the traditional institutions like a powerful cyclone. It is true that 
materially, scientifically and economically, great progress has been made. But morally, 
spiritually and socially man has fallen a great deal. Moral values have been shattered. In trying to 
make life more comfortable with the help of machines, men have become slaves of the machine. 
It is, therefore, incumbent on students to see that science and technology are used on right lines 
for the good o£ mankind. Unfortunately, even those who profess to be leaders of society and who 
claim to be interested in promoting the well-being of the people, are not acting along right lines 
to set a good example to the students. 


Education when it gets linked with egoism, loses its wider perspective. It becomes supremely 
purposeful only when it is related to spirituality. Hence students should rid themselves of egoism 
and strive to promote the welfare of society, through the knowledge acquired by them, with faith 
and self-confidence. 


Education is not mere verbal knowledge. It should enable one to manifest his inherent divinity. It 
should promote the practice of Truth and Right Conduct. Unfortunately educational institutions 
today have become merely workshops manufacturing degree-holders. The acquisition of degrees 
cannot constitute education. Education must promote ethical behaviour. It must: foster self- 
control. This is the essential function of education. 


Parents should possess exemplary character 


If students are to conduct themselves properly, the parents have to set the right example. 
Unfortunately, even though many of the parents might be educated, wealthy and interested in 
Bharatiya culture, their practical conduct is not exemplary. This is the reason why most students 
go astray. All parents want their children to get a good education, good jobs and earn high 
incomes. But few of them want that they should grow into ideal citizens. In some instances, 
where the students have developed some spiritual interests, the parents try to discourage them. 


There are parents who behave like Hiranyakasipu and take their children to task for their interest 
in spiritual practices at such an early age. Nor is that all. Some of them even try to cover up the 
bad behaviour of their children by pretending that they are well behaved. They make no effort to 
correct the children and turn them towards the right: path. Because of this attitude of the parents, 
the students are taking to bad ways and are spoilt like Dhritarashtra's children (the Kauravas). 
The students are not to blame. It is the parents who are responsible for the students: 
misbehaviour, which is reflected in indiscipline in educational institutions. 


Students must be made to feel proud about their country, their people and their culture. They 
should realise that wealth and strength, are of no value without character. Of what avail was all 
his wealth to Dhritarashtra? Because of the wickedness of his sons, he lost everything in the end. 


Education today develops knowledge and skills but not character. Right education should 
promote good qualities. There is no need to seek a new system of education or effect reforms in 
society. It is enough if we have young men and women of good character and integrity. They 
will make the country great and prosperous. 


Students! You have to realise the importance of mental transformation. All kinds of political and 
economic reforms are taking place. But little is being done to promote the sacred Bharatiya 
culture. What we need is spiritual transformation. It is the absence of spirituality that accounts 
for all the chaos, conflict and disorder in the world. 


The two-maxims of Hindu tradition 


The Hindu tradition laid stress on two maxims: Speak the Truth; Follow Righteousness. These 
two vital principles have been obliterated today. Mammon reigns supreme. Wealth is worshipped 
as God. Malpractices are the offerings made to this deity. Humanness has been sacrificed. There 
must be a return to human values. Education must aim at promoting these values. Planting 


the seed of love and fostering the tree of tolerance, students should seek to offer the fruit of 
peace to society. This should be their primary duty. 


Students! You do not become educated merely by getting degrees. You will be truly educated 
only when you render services to the people. Engage yourselves in service to the people. True 
education is that which equips one for service and not merely for earning wealth. Fill your beards 
with compassion. A compassionate heart is the seat of the Divine. 


Role of Sai Institutions in shaping students 


It is asked: who is to blame for the present state of education--the students or the teachers? It 
must be remembered that today's teachers were themselves students once. Today's students will 
be tomorrow's teachers. Hence students should train themselves properly for their future roles. It 
was with this object in view that the Sathya Sai educational institutions were started. Today's 
students are the future nation-builders. Only when the students learn to conduct themselves with 
integrity and fairness will they be able to restore the nation's ancient values and cultural heritage. 
The ancients achieved name and fame by their adherence to values. Students in those days were 
exemplars of tolerance and compassion. They were wedded to Truth and Righteousness. 
Consequently they lived long lives. Unfortunately such attitudes are not to be seen among 
students now. They have no trace of selflessness in them. They have installed conceit and 
ostentation at the altar of education. These traits are alien to true education and should be totally 
eradicated. Humility and obedience, which are the insignia of the educated man, should be 
promoted. Students today are failing to show reverence even to their parents, much less to elders. 


To flaunt one's degrees is not a sign of true education, but only an aberration. The truly educated 
person should cultivate the virtues of truth and righteous conduct and lead an ideal life in the 
service of society. Only such persons can contribute to the greatness and glory of Bharat. 


Cultivate respect for Bharat's ancient culture 


Bharat stood as a beacon-light to the world in ancient times because of its spiritual ideals. This 
sacred land is the land of Thyaga (sacrifice), of Yoga, and of Karma (Righteous action). Today's 
education tends to make it a bhogabhumi (land of indulgence). With the result that all kinds of 
roga (maladies) are present in educational institutions. 


You must cultivate respect for Bharat's ancient culture, follow its ideals and experience the joy to 
be derived therefrom. Society today suffers from lack of peace. Evil forces are rampant owing to 
the unchecked growth of selfishness and self-interest. These tendencies have to be rooted out. 
This can be done only by taking to the spiritual path. It is the duty of parents to sow the seeds of 
spirituality in the children from their early years. They should not think that parental 
responsibilities end with sending the children to school or college. They have a duty to see that 
the children grow into worthy citizens of the country. Great men like Sankaracharya, 
Vivekananda and Mahatma Gandhi became ideal men because of the example set by their 
parents in their daily lives. When the parents lead upright lives, the children will follow them. 
Hence, parents as well as teachers should serve as ideal examples to the students. 


From all the enquiries I have made, I have found it is the parents who are spoiling the children. 
Their affection for the children is totally misconceived. They should realise that those good 
qualities which are instilled in the children when they are young, alone will stand them in good 
stead all their lives. 


Dear embodiments of Love! Together with your studies, cultivate humility and reverence, and 
learn to conduct yourselves in an exemplary manner. Without morality, society will be ruined. 
Hence, by leading moral lives, foster the well-being of the nation. This is the sacrifice you have 
to perform. Do not lead a life of selfishness. Money comes and goes. Morality comes and grows. 
The path of righteousness may be strewn with obstacles. Do not bother about them. Act 
according to your conscience in all circumstances. 


Dharmaja's adherance to Dharma 


In the Mahabharata, there was an occasion during the time the Pandavas were living in exile, 
when Draupadi addressed Dharmaja as follows-"Dharmaja! There is no greater votary of 
Dharma than you. You adhered to Dharma as your life-breath even in the smallest action. Inspite 
of this, you have had to go through inconceivable ordeals. How has your Dharma protected 
you?" Smilingly Dharmaja replied: "Draupadi! Despite all the trials and tribulations I have gone 
through, I have not given up adherence to Dharma. That is my greatness. We should not 
succumb to difficulties and give up Dharma. Dharma should be upheld even during difficulties. 
That is the mark of greatness." 


Students! This life is not for experiencing happiness or sorrow. Both have their good and bad 
results. They are transient and impermanent. You should rise above them to uphold 
righteousness in service to society and serve as an example to the nation. 


Address on the 8th Convocation of the Sathya Sai Institute of Higher learning at Poornachandra 
Auditorium on 22-11-1989. 


It is essential to inquire into the credentials one has, before one 
formulates one's prayer. That inquiry will reveal whether one's 
thoughts and resolutions, hopes and desires arise from Faith or 
not. How to test and discover the truth? People take a piece of gold 
and draw with it a line on a piece of stone; then they examine that 
streak and assess the quality. The test which will reveal the quality 
of your Faith is whether you are practising sincere ly the 
injunctions laid down by God. 


BABA 


37. The Cosmic Indweller 


In the centre of the earth is a 
Place called Puttaparthi 
The embodiment of the Atma 
made its advent. 
While mankind was seeking 
knowledge of science 
A University came into existence here. 
People of all nations gathered here 
to experience peace and joy. 
Millions of virtuous aspirants and adepts 
have filled this place. 
The Sai Lord has come to teach 
the world love and the truth of all religions. 
Sathya Sai has incarnated as 
embodied Love to shower joy on all. 


EMBODIMENTS of Love! "Yatho imaani bhoothaani jaayanthe" (That from which these beings 
are born). The entire creation comes from the Paramatma (the Supreme Godhead), is sustained 
by Him and ultimately merges in Him. Likewise, man takes birth on account of desires, lives on 
desires and dissolves in desires. As is the intention, so is the conduct. As is the conduct, so is the 
fruit. As is the fruit, so is the goal. Hence every man should have sublime desires, experience 
sublime fruits and ultimately attain a sublime end. 


The phenomenal jagat (world) is visible to the eye, is audible to the ear, is experienced by the 
body, cognised by the mind and enjoyed by the heart. This world of perception is known as 
Viswam. Viswa means that which pervades. The principle which accounts for pervasiveness is 
called Viswam. Vishnu is the One who pervades the cosmos. The cosmos is the effect, Vishnu is 
the cause. Cause and effect are expressions of a single divine principle. 


The Cosmic principle is also known by other names such as Viraat, Vaiswaanara and 
Vairagasutha. Vaiswaanara is the Divine Principle that produces the consciousness of "I-ness" 
in every being. The cosmos is thus a manifestation of Vishnu, who pervades everything. 


Six qualities are attributed to the Divine. They are: Aiswarya (Wealth), Dharma (Righteousness), 
Yasas (Fame), Sampada (Prosperity), Jnana (Supreme Wisdom), and Variragya (non- 
attachment). Wealth has myriad forms--material wealth, physical wealth, the wealth of 
knowledge and so on. The Divine possesses every conceivable form of wealth. 


Swadharma really refers to Atma-Dharma 


Dharma (Righteousness) as an attribute of the Divine comprehends every kind of Dharma--- 
worldly dharma, vaideeka dharma, national dharma, community dharma and so on. Of these, 
two are important. One is Para Dharma, the other is Swadharma. Swadharma is often treated as 
Dharma relating to one's caste or creed. Thus, separate codes of Dharma are ascribed to 
Kshatriyas, Vaisyas and others. This is not a correct interpretation. 


Swa-Dharma really refers to Atma-Dharma (the Dharma relating to the Spirit:). Man's duty is to 
observe this spiritual code of conduct. Para Dharma relates to the body. It embraces the code of 
conduct that is observed in daily life for earning one's livelihood and leading his life in society 
Para Dharma is fraught with fear and delusions. There is the fear of success or defeat or the fear 
of facing blame and censure. In observing this mundane code of conduct man is haunted by fears 
and doubts of various kinds. In adhering to Swa-Dharma (the Spiritual code) there is no room for 
any such fears. Therefore, man should follow Atma Dharma. 


As the Divine attributes are found in man also, it is clear that the Divine dwells in all human 
beings. "Eko vasi sarva-bhootha-antaraatma" (He is the One Indweller in the hearts of all 
beings). God cannot be seen in any one place or at any particular time. He is present in 
everything but is not attached to anything. 


How can One who permeates everything and is present everywhere be subject to any kind of 
proof or test? That is the reason why God has been described as Aprameya--the Transcendental 
One. As one who is the source of all knowledge and intelligence, God has been called Manu. As 
He is the supreme creator, He is also called Prajaapathi. He is also called Atma or Brahman. 
Brahman is the Chaitanya (consciousness) that is present in all living beings. Atma and 
Brahman, are not different. The Divine has also been termed Aham (the "I"). This does not refer 
to the individual ego. It refers to the effulgence that illumines everything and dispels all darkness 
totally. Another meaning of Aham is Saakshi (Witness). 


Sat-Chit-Ananda is present in all objects 


The Paramatma (Supreme Atma) who is the witness to everything, is called Aham. He is the 
Lord of all that has gone before, all that is and all that is yet to be born. He is the eternal, 
unchanging Being who is the master of the past, the present and the future. Hence he is described 
as "Bhootha-Bhavya-Bhavath Prabhuh" (The Lord of the past, the present and .the future). 


He is also described as Bhavah, the effulgent. He is omnipresent. Hence the appellation 
Mahanubhava is applicable only to God, though the term is loosely applied to describe some 
extraordinary persons. It refers to One who is present in the subtlest atom and the vastest object 
in the cosmos. 


In every object in the universe, Sat (Being) Chit (Awareness) and Ananda (Bliss) are present in a 
subtle form. There are two other characteristics of every object: name and form. Sat, Chit and 
Ananda are derived from the Divine. Name and form, which are subject to constant change, are 
related to Nature. Even name and form are comprehended by Sat, Chit and Ananda. Man is the 
embodiment of these three. Forgetting these basic truths about: his permanent Reality, man is 
leading a life related to names and forms. 


Every human being is a manifestation of God. Every object manifests the divine. There is 
nothing in the world which is not a manifestation of God. Do not have any doubt: that the 


cosmos is permeated by Hari (God) and everything is contained in HIM. There is not an atom in 
the universe which is not permeated by the Divine. 


Prasad asked for an exposition of the nature of God. Some say "It is not" and some say "It is" and 
some others say, "It is and it is not". Those who say "It is" do not know what It is. Those who 
deny its existence also do not know what it is that they deny. Those who affirm and deny are 
ignorant of both the things. 


Believers and non-believers of God 


From early times those who believed in the existence of God were called Asthikas (theists), those 
who denied God's existence were called Nasthikas (atheists) and the third category were called 
Asthika-Nasthikas (theist-atheists). Theists and atheists are really one though they have contrary 
names. Atheists are like buds of flowers and theists are like the flowers that have blossomed. The 
flower that has blossomed offers its fragrance to many. The unopened bud retains its fragrance 
within itself. Some day the bud may blossom or is likely to drop away before blossoming. Those 
who spread the bliss of divinity in the world were described as theists and those 


who did not do so were regarded as atheists. Those who say "God does not exist" must have 
some prior idea of God before they can deny His existence. In twilight, a rope may be mistaken 
for a snake, but the moment light is brought the rope is recognised for what it is. Likewise the 
Jnani (man of wisdom) recognises God when he is free from maya (delusion). 


The mind and heart are like lock and key 


All the myriad differences that one sees in the world are only variations in form of the one basic 
entity--the Brahman. A man who seeks to enjoy the fruit of a tree cannot be content with 
nourishing only the flowers. He has to nourish the roots, the trunk, the branches and the leaves 
and the flowers. Likewise the man who seeks the highest Jnana (wisdom) has to nourish the 
body, the senses, the feelings appropriately. For this purpose the nine forms of devotion have 
been prescribed for seekers. 


The mind, it has been said, is the cause of bondage or liberation. The mind is like a lock and the 
heart is the key. When the key is turned towards God, there is detachment. When it is turned 
towards the world there is attachment. Thus the mind is the cause of either liberation or bondage. 
Therefore the mind has to be directed towards what is holy and pure. Then you will lead a free, 
joyous, blissful life. The man who has developed such an attitude will be in a permanent state of 
bliss. He will be the embodiment of bliss. 


When I came down to the Mandir this morning, the children greeted me with the words, "Happy 
Birthday!" I told them, "I am always happy, it is you who are unhappy, who should get 
happiness." It is only when each one realises his inherent divinity and leads a Godly life that all 
will be happy Divinity is not confined to any specific place or form. Each one should realise that 
this all-pervading, all-powerful Divinity is within him. There must be realisation that the 
Principle that is Omnipresent in the subtlest form and in the grossest form is the Atma or 
Brahman. God is the eternal Reality, without birth, growth or death, without beginning, middle 
or end, and who is immutable. It is only the bodies that are subject to change. Making use of the 
body that is mutable, the immutable Divine has to be experienced. 


Embodiments of love! In whatever manner you seek to understand the Divine, you have to 
remember that the Divine is the universal, all-pervading Chaithanyam (Consciousness). Only the 
unchanging Divine can confer on you permanent bliss. This does not mean giving up worldly 


concerns. What you have to do is to make worldly life the basis for the realisation of the Divine. 
Every action should be regarded as an offering to the Divine. You must strive to reach the state 
where, recognising that God is omnipresent, you realize your own Divinity To begin with you 
have to do good deeds, based on good thoughts. People today devote hardly five minutes to the 
thought of God. How can they hope to have joy and peace when the bulk of their time is devoted 
to selfish pursuits? 


Dedicate yourself to the service of society Engage yourself in sacred actions. Always remember 
the Divine name. Chanting the name of the Lord, performing sacred actions, experience' bliss in 
your heart. 


Birthday message at Poornachandra Auditorium, on 23-11-1989. 


38. Where to find God 


EMBODIMENTS of Divine Love! God is complete love incarnate. This love shines equally in 
every human being. The fragrance of a flower remains the same whether it is held in the right 
hand or the left. Likewise God has no distinctions such as the favoured and the excluded. 
Different persons, proceeding from their own likes and dislikes, attribute to the Divine the 
differences existing in their own minds. God has no feelings of difference such as the good and 
the bad, the likable and the unwanted, the wicked and the virtuous. The sandalwood tree imparts 
its fragrance even to the axe that fells it. Likewise God is ever prepared to love, foster and 
protect equally everyone without any distinction. But narrow-minded persons cannot easily grasp 
the Divine's equal-mindedness. Indeed, how can a fishmonger know the value of diamonds? 
Everyone apprehends God's powers and attributes according to his own limited conceptions and 
experiences. 


The reason for man's narrow outlook 


To get rid of such narrow ideas, the first requisite is the cultivation of love. How is love to be 
promoted? By "giving and forgiving" man develops love within himself. In relation to God, this 
implies that you should always have the attitude of offering your heart to God. Today, far from 
having such a sacred attitude what we witness is the habit of "getting and forgetting." 


Today man receives the love, the blessings, and the grace of God, but shows no gratitude and is 
immersed in his own selfish pursuits. This accounts for his narrow outlook. 


Sanjaya declared at the end of the Gita that where Krishna, the Lord of Yoga, and Partha, the 
valiant archer, stand together, there is victory. Man makes various efforts to achieve prosperity, 
success and bliss. But the means of achieving them is for man to take his stand by the side of 
Bhagavan. Partha means the son of the Prithvi (Earth). It applies to every man. Sanjaya's 
declaration means that victory is assured when either man is by the side of God or God is beside 
man. Neither of these happens today. Man leads a life remote from God. 


To start with, man has to recognise what is the goal of life. Seekers in all countries and followers 
of different religions have enquired into this question of the purpose life. As a result of these 
enquiries, different religions arose. Jesus is the founder of the Christian faith. For centuries 
before Christ , Judaism existed as the religion of the Jews. The Jews believed in the coming of 
the Messiah to protect the people of Israel. 


When Jesus was born, three kings came from the east to bless the infant in Bethlehem. The first 
king, seeing the child, declared that he would be a great lover of God. The second one declared 
that God would immensely, love the child. The third one declared that Jesus is God and God is 
Jesus. What is the inner meaning of these statements? The first statement implies that all who 
love God are messengers of God. When God loves a person, he becomes a son of God. When a 
person gives up the sense of dualism and merges his consciousness in the Divine he becomes one 
with the Divine. 


Jesus's life and mission 


When Jesus was a child, during a visit to Jerusalem, he was lost in the crowd. After a frantic 
search Mary found him in a temple listening intently to the speech of a priest. When Mary told 
Jesus about the trouble they had gone through in searching for him, Jesus said: "Mother! When I 
am safe with my Father in His home, why should you worry about me? This is the temple of 


God. It is my Father's mansion. Nothing will be lacking here. In this eternal and sacred home I 
am perfectly safe as well protected." This shows that even by his twelfth year, Jesus was full of 
Divine qualities and was imparting the Divine message to those around him. Christ declared to 
the world three important things: (1) God is one. (2) He is omnipotent. (3) Do not hurt anyone. 
God is the indweller in every being. Christ embarked on his mission and went about calling upon 
people to earn the love of God by developing love towards God. 


People professing different faiths worship God under different names: Vishnu, Siva, Ganesa, 
Allah, Christ, and others. The truth is there is only one God. People today try to find God in 
religions. But God is to be found not in mathamu (religions) but in the mathi (mind). It is only 
when the mind is controlled and purified that God will be recognised. 


The Lord dwells within man 


People claim to make offerings to God without knowing where He is. There is a pretence of 
offering everything to Brahman, but they do not know where Brahman dwells. The Lord has 
declared: "I am residing within you in the form of Vaisvanara and am consuming all the 
offerings you are making. I am digesting everything and providing the sustenance for your 
body." 


While the Lord is ever by the side of man, he is searching for God all over the world. By 
exploring the external, you can never purify the internal. It is essential to transform the 
consciousness. You have to rectify your conduct and actions, because everything depends on 
your actions. Adhering to the righteous path, with a pure heart, you have to divinise your life. All 
spiritual disciplines have been designed only for this purpose. All the prayers, japas and pujas 
that are offered are intended only to purify the heart. 


All those who have achieved greatness in any field--education, science, etc.--have been able to 
do so solely because of their conduct. Neither physical strength nor wealth, nor even intellectual 
ability, can make one respected and honoured. It is the way one lives that: confers honour and 
dignity on him. Therefore, it is only through our actions that we should strive to realise the 
Divine. Without right conduct, all other spiritual practices are of no avail. Hence, all devotees 
should acquire good and sacred qualities in furtherance of their striving to realise God. 


You all are in the Kingdom of Sai! 
You all are in Sai's Home! 
You all are in Sai's Light! 
You all are in Sai's Heart! 
I will bless you, I will bless you in 
This Holy Night This is your right. 


If you entertain proper thoughts, you will realise that all of you are in God's home. The whole 
universe is the mansion of the Lord. Once you recognise this truth, how can any differences 
arise? 


Understand the ways of the Divine 


People imagine that God is angry, or indifferent. Such persons have no understanding of 
Divinity. If there is a tumour in the stomach, the surgeon uses a knife to remove it. Is the 


operation done out of ill-will towards the patient? Not at all. It is for his own good that the 
operation is done to make him well again. Likewise, when a person has. developed some bad 
qualities, a surgical operation has to be done to rid him of his vices. When this is done by the 
Divine, God is said to be angry or displeased. This is the mark of a petty mind. Those who have 
understood the Divine's love principle will not make such a mistake. 


Today is the birthday of the founder of a great religion. Christians revere Jesus as a Messenger of 
God and the Son of God. On this sacred day, the old students of the Sathya Sai College for 
Women at Anantapur, who have formed an association called Messengers of Sathya Sai, 
celebrate their annual day. "How shall we show our gratitude to the Institution which has 
educated us and done so much good to us?" was the question put by an old student, who is the 
President of the association. "How shall we show our gratitude to Bhagavan?" she asked. 


Serve the society with dedication 


Dear old students! Wherever you may be, go into the society and render social service in all 
possible ways, with faith in God and in a selfless spirit. As she said, it is true that after getting 
married, the girls have to put up with various restraints imposed by their in-laws and husbands. 
Admittedly, the Bharatiya culture and tradition circumscribe the freedom of women. On the 
other hand, boys enjoy greater freedom and liberty to act as they please. Whatever job they take 
up or business they may carry on, whatever country they may go to, they have considerable 
freedom. There will be none to restrain them. If they want to do social service, they can do a 
great deal. Unfortunately, they are not filled with such noble urges. Women who have those 
sacred impulses to serve society suffer from handicaps and restraints. At least from today, I 
desire that young men and women, who have studied in the Sai educational institutions, will 
show their gratitude to their alma mater by engaging themselves in social service and stand forth 
as ideals for others by their dedicated lives. By merely acquiring degrees, you do not become 
educated persons. 


Using education only for securing a mess of pottage is puerile. You must use your knowledge for 
bettering the lives of others. Of what use is a mountain of book knowledge, if you cannot secure 
real happiness as a human being? Will not God take care of man if he places his faith in the 
Divine? What is it that is achieved by ceaseless preoccupation with earning a living, for 
forgetting the all-pervading Lord? 


Everybody clamours for peace, saying "I want peace." But can peace be found in the external 
world, which is only filled with pieces? Peace has to be found within oneself by getting rid of the 
"I" and desire. Peace is being destroyed by the ego and by insatiable desires. Restrain your 
desires. Man is haunted by endless worries of many kinds. Only by turning his mind towards 
God can he get rid of the worries. Men have to reduce desires and cultivate vairagya 
(detachment) so that they can have real peace of mind. 


What is it that students, who have spent ten or twelve years in Sai educational .institutions, can 
show as evidence of their having benefited from their education? It should be evident to some 
extent from their conduct and practices. If this is not present, what is the use of their studies? If 
they have not learnt during this precious period in their lives to practise self-control and self- 
discipline, they will be guilty of having wasted their great opportunities. The essence of 
education consists in the cultivation of good qualities and the development of right values for 
meaningful living. 


I bless you all students in the hope that you will dedicate yourselves to the service of the people 
and thereby earn the grace of the Lord. 


Christmas Day Discourse to a large gathering of devotees from overseas countries in the 
Poornachandra Auditorium, on 25-12-1989. 


