1. Cultivate forgiveness and love 


Charity is the ornament for the hand, 

Truth is the adornment for the tongue, 

The scriptures are the ornaments for the ears, 
Of what avail are other ornaments? 


EMBODIMENTS of love! Brahman is full of love and, in fact, is the embodiment of love. Your 
love should merge with this love. It is the only one and there is no second. It is the non-dual 
state. The essential nature of love is sacrifice. Under any circumstance it does not give room for 
hatred. It is love that brings even a person far away closer and more intimate to you. It is love 
that drives away the feeling of separateness and promotes the feeling of oneness. Love also. 
raises a person from the animal to the human. Prema (Love) is the Praana (Life Force) of man 
red the Praana itself is Prema. One without love is like a lifeless corpse. Love is shown only to 
persons who are alive. No one will love a corpse. Love and life are therefore inter-related and 
intimately connected. 


Three angles of love constitute prapatthi 


In this worldly life love is manifesting in several forms such as the love between mother and son, 
husband and wife, and between relatives. This love based on physical relationships arises our of 
selfish motives and self-interest. But the love of the Divine is devoid of any trace of self-interest. 
It is love for the sake of love alone. This is called Bhakthi (devotion). One characteristic of this 
love is to give and not to receive. Secondly, love knows no fear. Thirdly, it is only for love's sake 
and not for selfish motive. All these three angles of love jointly cannot Prapatthi (Surrender). 
When one revels in this attitude of Prapatthi, one experiences the bliss of the Divine. For this, 
the prime requisite is Kshama (forgiveness). 


Only a person who has this attitude of Kshama can be considered to be endowed with sacred 
love. This cannot be learned from textbooks. Not can it be acquired from preceptors not from any 
one else. It is to be cultivated by oneself in rimes of difficulties, trials and tribulations that one is 
forced to meet. Only when we face problems and difficulties that cause grief and misery this 
quality of forbearance and forgiveness has the scope for taking root. When you are confronted 
with problems and difficulties you should not get upset, and become victims of depression which 
is a sign of weakness. In such a situation, you should bring tolerance and an attitude of 
forgiveness into play and should not get agitated giving rise to anger, hatred and revengeful 
attitude. You are embodiments of strength and not weakness. Therefore, in times of despair, you 
should be filled with the feeling of forbearance and be ready to forgive and forger. This quality 
of Kshama (forgiveness) is the greatest power for a human being. If one loses this quality, he 
becomes demonic. 


Kshama is Sathyam, Truth 
Kshama is Dharma, Virtue 
Kshama is Ahimsa, Non-Violence 
Kshama is Yajna, Sacrifice 


Kshama is Santhosha, Happiness 


Kshama is Dhaya, Compassion 
Kshama is everything in the world. 
Human beings should shine with human quality 


The moment one is giving up this great quality, the evil qualities of anger, hatred and jealousy 
creep in, making him lose his human nature itself, driving him to indulge in wicked deeds of 
demonic nature and even to descend to animal nature. Human beings should shine with human 
quality Today we find jealousy and hatred dancing like devils all over the world. People with 
jealousy and hatred are pursuing the wicked path and bringing ruin on themselves. The best 
example for this is the Kauravas in Mahaabhaararatha. The brothers Dhuryodhana and 
Dhusshaasana were the embodiments of the twin evils of hatred and jealousy. Krishna told 
Dharmaja, the eldest of the Paandavas, that the Kauravas who were surcharged with these evil 
qualities could never improve and imbibe human qualities. Karna who was embodiment of ego 
joined their company with Shakuni as the evil adviser adding fuel to the fire. Though 
Dhuryodhana and Dhusshaasana were born in a notable royal broils they discarded the human 
qualities due to jealousy and hatred and brought ruin to the family and the clan. Krishna added 
that jealousy is a dangerous canker that eats at the root of the tree of life, while hatred is pest that 
attacks the trunk of the tree. Thus the tree of life is completely destroyed by both these pests. The 
Kauravas were victims of these two pests and sought their own ruin. 


Without harmony in sense organs life will limp 


One may raise the question as to how to get over these dangerous pests of jealousy and hatred. 
This is possible when you make all the sense organs function in unison. If you look at the 
functions of the sense organs you may notice that even if one organ stops functioning in 
harmony; life will be limping. When mind conceives a thought, all the organs are co-ordinating 
to get the thought executed. If senses do not follow thoughts, life will become miserable. When 
there is forbearance, all organs co-ordinate harmoniously and work in unison. 


Once the organs of the body like eyes, ears, limbs became jealous of the tongue, saying that they 
make all efforts for securing food, but the tongue enjoys this. They struck work and never sent 
any food. Tongue is the one that tastes the food and passes only palatable items of food inside 
which is converted by the internal organs into energy giving blood. The tongue does not retain it. 
But for this vital part played by the tongue, the other organs would not be able to function at all. 
When the other organs became jealous of the tongue and stopped sending food with a view to 
harm it, they spelt their own ruin by such action, as they could not function when there was no 
food and consequently no supply of energy for these organs to function. Similarly jealousy on 
the part of a person ultimately results in his own ruin. 


Jealousy spells self-destruction 


Students must have studied the drama of Shakespeare in which a character was always filled 
with jealousy and finally met with his own end as his own jealousy made him very weak and 
forlorn. Bhasmaasura got a boon from Lord Shiva after doing severe penance that the person on 
whose head he keeps his hand will be reduced to ashes. Finally, he himself brought his end by 
keeping his hand on his own head. Buddha was once confronted by a woman who was full of 
jealousy against Buddha because of his great popularity When Buddha came towards her she 
expressed her wish to attack him with a knife and kill him, but Buddha smilingly told her "I love 
you too demoness." This surprised the demoness who thought nobody would love her and 


changed her heart instantly; she became a dove and surrendered at His Feet. Anger begets anger 
and jealousy begets jealousy. The only way to conquer this is the sense of unity and love. 


Happiness and sorrow have to be experienced in the worldly life as they are inevitable like the 
sunset and sunrise. You think new year will give better experiences. It is not correct. It is the 
mind that is responsible for pleasure and pain. If your mind is good you will find anything good. 
You are embodiments of the Divine which is nothing but bliss. While being so, is it not a folly 
on your part to say that you are suffering from pain and grieve over this? 


When Bhakthas pray to Bhagavaan sincerely making all their actions as offering to God, they 
will certainly receive appropriate grace from the Divine. There are nine types of devotion. 
Shravanam (listening to the glory of the Lord), Keerthanam (singing), Vishnusmaranam 
(remembering), Paadhasevanam (adoration), Vandhanam (saluting), Archanam (worshipping), 
Dhaasyam (obedient service), Sneham (friendship) and Aathmanivedhanam (Self-surrender). In 
whichever way you offer worship, God responds in the same way. Man conveniently forgets 
what he gets. Without God's Grace living itself will be impossible for mankind. Even the 
troubles you may experience are the gifts of the Divine. When you surrender all your actions, 
you will surely receive His Grace. This is the purport of the Geetha Shloka "Sarvadharmaan 
Parithyajva Mamekam Sharanam Vraja." 


Take whatever is given by God as good for you 


Some people want to have uninterrupted happiness. When you ear at 10 a.m. you do not go on 
caring every hour thereafter without break. You have to give a break for the food to be digested. 
So also when you experience pleasure it has to be digested before you meet with another bout of 
such experience, lust as you have to do some exercise for helping the food to digest, you have to 
go through the exercise of confrontation of pain after experiencing pleasure. Therefore, you must 
take whatever is given by God as good for you. 


The mother gets the pleasure of seeing her baby after going through severe pain. If you sit in an 
airconditioned room throughout the 24 hours of a day you cannot feel the pleasure of it. Only 
when you come in after being away in the hot sun, you will enjoy the coolness of the 
airconditioned room. After the Mahaabhaaratha war was over, Krishna asked Kunthi the mother 
of Paandavas what she wanted. She requested that she should be blessed with troubles always as 
only then she would be constantly remembering God as they did when they were in the forest for 
12 years. She said she was not thinking of God when she was enjoying the palace life as a queen 
earlier. 


Joy and sorrow go together 


You enjoy the sweetness of chanting the Lord's name only when you are in distress. The life is a 
mixture of sorrow and joy just as day and night. If there is night one cannot take the well 
deserved rest after the day's hard toil. There is sweet juice inside the orange fruit. But it is 
covered by the bitter outer rind. It is the bitter rind that protects the juice inside. So we should 
put up with the bitter difficulties in order to enjoy real pleasure. Man is embodiment of the 
quality of Kshama. There is nothing in this world that you cannot achieve with this quality. 


We are now bidding farewell to the year 1993 and welcoming /994. There is an intimate 
relationship between the two. We give send-off to one while we welcome the other one. In the 
same way we should bid farewell to bad qualities and welcome good divine qualities. You may 
offer all your bad qualities to God. Them is nothing wrong in this. It is only God who can take 


them and bestow His grace on you to foster good qualities. For example, suppose you have a 
soiled, torn and mutilated hundred rupee currency note, no one will accept it. But, if the number 
is intact, the Reserve Bank will accept it and give a good note of same value in return. Similarly 
God only will accept the bad qualities provided they are offered with sincere devotion and 
repentance and shower His Grace on you. 


Basing on this principle the worshippers chant the manthra "Papoham, Prapakarmaham 
Papaathmaaham" etc., surrendering the sins committed by one to the Lord and praying for His 
pardon and Grace. Even the Christians follow this principle of surrendering to God saying, "I 
confess my sin and pray for redemption." Thus people offer all the bad qualities to God and 
receive good from Him. 


True significance of Upavaasa and Upaasana 


We have Upavaasa (living in proximity) and Upaasana (sitting near God), in our customs. 
People generally believe that Upavaasa means only curtailing usual food and taking some tiffin 
like Chapaathi, Idlis etc. This is not correct. When you live near God, you will never feel hungry 
just as you get away from heat and enjoy the coolness when you sir near an airconditioner. When 
you sit near God, your bad qualities are kept off and good thoughts and divine qualities will 
come to you. This is the significance of Upaasana. People interpret it with distorted meanings. 


The year 1993 was really an eventful one with lot of dreadful happenings all over the world and 
naturally the people are afraid what would happen in 1994, and whether it would be a better year. 
It is not the particular year that is of consequence. Cultivate good thoughts, speak good words 
and do good deeds with the broad view that everyone in the world should be happy. Give up 
your evil thoughts, and evil qualities as they are the cause for all sufferings in the world. 


The new year has set in at the right moment, for today it is Savithi (fourth day of the lunar 
fortnight). It may cause people some suffering akin to the suffering of child under the step- 
mother. But in the wider perspective, moonshine is on the increase indicating the blossoming of 
the mind in a better way since moon is ruling the mind. Based on the thithi (auspicious day), we 
may expect this. year to be better than the past year. Them may be fire accidents in larger 
number, and certain conflicts may be there in the world. But we can hope that gradually human 
quality will be coming up and it will be a matter for delight, when there is transformation of 
mind to think that all are children of God. Such an attitude has to be developed to believe in the 
brotherhood of man and fatherhood of God. The bodies may be different but the soul is one. It 
cannot be fragmented. 


Keep God as your guide and saviour 


One moon is reflected in hundreds of thousands of pots. "Ekoham Bahusyaam" and "Ekam Eva 
adhvitheeyam" (There is only one Brahman which is reflected in the millions and billions of 
beings). There is no second. You place one before zero, the zero gets value. World is zero, Sun is 
Zero, Moon is Zero. Actually they are all round-shaped like zero only. All these get value 
because of the one God behind them. God is the only Hero and all else are Zeroes. 


Keeping God as your guide and saviour, whatever work you may do will yield sure success. God 
is your only true friend. All other friends may be with you as long as you have wealth, but the 
moment you lose everything, the friends will desert you. God is only friend who will be ever 
with you. He is always with you, in you and beside you. Therefore, the only way for prosperity is 
to develop friendship with the Lord. Being a human, you should make others happy. This is love. 


Your heart is full of love. You should share it with others. When you have some edible dish, you 
have to eat it and serve to others. Otherwise, it will get spoiled. You must share your love with at 
least five persons per day. You should practise, experience and share with others this Divine 
Love. 


On this New Year day, you should make resolve that you will start every day with love, spend 
the day with love, fill the day with love, and end the day with love. There should be no 
difference of caste, creed, colour, religion or nationality. Love knows no distinction of any kind. 
You must wish everyone to be happy. Fill the heart with love. The country will prosper and the 
world will prosper and everyone will be happy. 


Discourse in Puurnachandhra Auditorium on 1-1-94. 


All religions teach one basic discipline; the removal from the mind 
of the blemish of egoism, of running after little joys. Every religion 
teaches man to fill his being with the glory of God and evict the 
pettiness of conceit. 


BABA 


2. Spiritual significance of festivals 


Like the oil latent in the thil seed, 
Like ghee latent in milk, 

Like the fragrance latent in a flower, 
Like the juice latent in a fruit, 

Like the fire latent in a faggot, 


The Divine is immanent in every human being. 


Just as the power of sight is present in the eye, 
The power of hearing in the ear, 
The sense of taste in the tongue, 


Divinity is present in a subtle form as Chaithanya. 


Remaining invisible in the visible phenomenal world, 
The consciousness that shines in the cosmos 

Is the form of the Aathma which sustains everything, 
Like the thread in a garland of gems. 


EMBODIMENTS of Divine Love! Man engages himself in many exercises in his life. No single 
achievement satisfies man or society. Man constantly strives to accomplish more things. Today 
men seem to revel in dissatisfaction. 


Youth today do not appear to be seriously concerned about how to face a rapidly changing 
world. The preparedness to sacrifice everything for achieving a noble objective is hardly present 
among the young. 


Success in life consists in recognizing the truth of one's being. But youth today do not make any 
effort to find the Truth that is the Eternal Reality. They are prepared to go through any amount of 
trouble to acquire knowledge that is related to the physical and the transient. They do not make 
the slightest effort to comprehend the Divine that is all-pervading, that will confer enduring bliss 
and make one's life meaningful and worthwhile. 


Festivals in Bhaarath have been designed to promote awareness of this truth. Their inner 
significance as well as their scientific basis have to be understood. 


Four important transits of the Sun in a year 


Every month the Sun moves into a new house in the Zodiac This movement is called 
Sankramana. In a year the Sun transits twelve houses of the Zodiac. Of these movements four 
are important. Makara Sankramana is the first one. It relates to the entry of the Sun into Makara 
(Capricorn) from Dhanus (Sagittarius). The second one is Thula Sankramana the entry of the 
Sun into the zodiacal sign Thula (Libra). The third is Mesha Sankramana--moving into the sign 


Mesha (Aries). The fourth one is Shashi Sankramana--entry into the Moon sign (Cancer). Of the 
four, the most important and sacred is Makara Sankramana. This marks the apparent movement 
of the Sun from the south to the north. The northward movement of the Sun is considered highly 
significant, both spiritually and scientifically. It has immense spiritual meaning. 


The inner meaning of the Sun's northward journey has to be properly understood. The north is 
represented by Himaachala. Hima means snow. It is pure, untainted and extremely cool. All 
these endow it with the quality of Prashaanthi (perfect peace). Achala means that which is 
steady and unshakeable. Himaachala does not refer to the physical Himaalayan region. It 
represents that which is cool, peaceful and steady. From today the Sun is said to move towards 
such a state. The Sun symbolises the vision of man. The northward movement of the Sun is a call 
to human beings to turn their vision towards that which is cool, peaceful and unchanging. This 
means that men should direct their vision inwards. This is the lesson taught by the Sun. 


Uttharaayana is an occasion to develop inward vision 


Man's vision should not be confined solely to the external objects and worldly things which are 
transient and perishable. Man has been given this vision so that he may see the pure, sacred 
Divine consciousness abiding in his heart. The northward motion of the Sun--Uttharaayana--is 
the appropriate occasion for developing this inward vision. This is the royal road for the spiritual 
aspirant to realise the Supreme. 


It is not enough, therefore, merely to recognise the northward movement of the Sun in this 
period. Every effort should be made to direct the vision inwards towards the pure, sacred 
Indwelling Self. This is the period for cherishing sacred thoughts and performing holy deeds. 
The sages and seers of ancient times used to wait for the arrival of the Uttharaayana to embark 
on their sacred tasks. The great warrior, Bhishma, lay on a bed of arrows for 56 days on the 
battlefield, awaiting the arrival of Uttharaayana as the right time for giving up the ghost. The 
scriptures have declared that those who pass on during the Uttharaayana have no rebirth. This 
does not mean that one should hang himself in Uttharaayana in the hope of securing freedom 
from rebirth! The right way to give up one's life is to fill one's mind with holy thoughts and let 
the end come in the natural course. 


Sage Vaalmeeki wished to distribute the composition of hundred crore verses on the 
Raamaayana to the denizens of the three worlds in equal measure. After this was done, only two 
letters remained, which were offered to people in all the worlds for recitation. The two letters 
spell the names of Raama, Krishna, Hari, Eesha and Saayee. 


Man should abide by the laws of the Creator 


This illustrates how Bhaaratheeyas attempted to sanctify every holy festival by dedicating 
themselves to the chanting of God's name and to other spiritual activities. Youths today should 
realise that festivals in Bhaarath are not intended for feasting and pompous celebration but for 
concentration on devotional activities. 


For mankind, the Sun is the most important entity in creation. When the Sun himself is 
proceeding northwards, why should not humanity direct its vision Godward? Men today are a 
prey to many troubles because their vision is diverted towards ungodly objects. Man should 
abide by the laws of the Creator. Otherwise humanity is doomed. Religious festivals are 
observed all over the world for the purpose of raising humanity to a â€˜higher level of 
consciousness and conduct. 


Pushyamaasa brings with it a season of joy 


From this day, the Sun wears a peaceful and pleasing aspect. The nights get longer and the days 
become shorter. The day marks the beginning of the harvest season. As the crops are brought 
home, the granaries are full and joy reigns everywhere. A cool breeze blows all the time. 
Farmers sing with full-throated joy from their fields in the moonlight. The cold dew drops on the 
fields shine like garlands of gems. The chrysanthemums are in full bloom. 


This month, known as Pushyamaasa (according to the Hindhu almanac) is noted for the 
peacefulness, prosperity and joy which it brings with it. Hence it is regarded with special 
distinction. Unless men give up their bad thoughts and actions, the month, however great in 
itself, will be of no avail. The observance of Uttharaayana should be marked by spiritual 
transformation of the people and not by lavish feasting and revelry. 


In connection with Sankraanthi, many auspicious functions are arranged. Newly wedded 
bridegrooms are invited to the brides houses. Sacred bulls are taken from house to house by 
traditional performers who relate the Raamaayana story with the bulls playing their own role in 
it. In this way, with songs, plays and discourses, they celebrate the festival. The songs and plays 
had a sacred role in the celebrations. 


Unfortunately today music and sports have been commercialized. There is a price for every 
game, whether it is cricket or football or any other game. The sacred character of the games and 
dramas of the past has been tainted by the money nexus. 


It is clear that originally sports were promoted in the interests of health and strength. People took 
part in games for the improvement of their physique and to provide entertainment to the public. 
There was a time when a musician, if invited to sing songs at a wedding in his locality, would 
readily oblige. But today the musician will ask, "How much will you give me for my 
performance?" Singers have become sinners. Their music does not confer joy on the listeners 
because they sing, not out of the fullness of their heart, but for the sake of money and name. 


This was not the case in olden days. The performers with the sacred Gangi bulls used to gather in 
the centre of the village and provide entertainment as the members of one large family. Little 
children used to join in the fun, singing songs to gather all the children to watch the performance 
of the bulls. 


Sports should form an integral part of studies 


This month witnessed the annual sports meet of our students. I don't like to comment about 
students elsewhere, but I do wish to say something about the accomplishments of our students. 
Indeed, the students participated in the sports and games with great enthusiasm. Sports form an 
integral part of the scheme of studies in our institutions, along with various academic subjects 
like Physics and Chemistry. That being the case, why does not everyone take part in them? Not 
only should there be participation, but' there should also be an awareness of the philosophy and 
principles governing the sports and games. The aim in sports should not be victory by any 
means, fair or foul. Whoever may win, others should greet it with fraternal feelings. The rules of 
the game should be strictly observed. Prizes do not matter. What is important is the sense of self- 
satisfaction derived from playing the game well. 


Students enthusiasm in preparing for activities 


Looking forward to the sports meet, the students have been enthusiastically practising for nearly 
a month. In other universities, sports activities are supported by grants from the U.G.C. or other 
agencies. In the Sathya Sai Institute, no request is made to any outside agency for funds to pay 
the teachers salaries or to meet medical or other expenses. Education is provided free of fees, 
from kindergarten to Post-graduate studies. No fees are collected for sports, library, or other 
amenities. Not did the Central Trust or the College offer any funds for the sports programme. We 
do not desire to proclaim to the world the spirit of sacrifice and dedication of our students. We 
only express our own satisfaction with the performance of our students. 


In the preparations for the sports and cultural meet, all the expenses have been met by teachers 
and students out of their voluntary contributions. No one knows, not even the Registrar or the 
Vice-Chancellor, how this is done. It is rare to find students of such an exemplary nature, who 
cooperate with each other in a spirit of brotherhood. In all the three campuses--Brindhaavan, 
Ananthapur and Prashaanthi Nilayam--the dresses and other materials required for their 
programmes were got from their own resources. 


Kudos to primary school children 


Special mention should be made about what the Primary School did. If we make an earnest and 
truthful enquiry into what is happening all over the world, we will find that where women are in 
charge of schools, everything is done well. The children are well taught. The teachers 
concentrate on their duties, without diversions of any kind. Consequently, whatever they do is 
pleasing to the eyes, the ears and the heart. Look at the way the teachers look after little children 
in the primary school. You all know what trouble it is to look after a single child in the home. 
You can well imagine what an ordeal it is to look after eleven hundred young children. There are 
a large number of children between the ages of four and five. What discipline they displayed in 
their performances in sports! Their eating, dressing and other activities are regulated from a 
tender age. The world outside does not know what is being done here. Even many in Prashaanthi 
Nilayam do not know the facts. 


The teachers, the Warden and the Principal are engaged in teaching work all during the day They 
work all through the night, preparing the dresses for the sports events. All the dresses worn by 
the children were stitched at night by the teachers. My heart melts when I look at these teachers. 
Their eyes are swollen owing to sleepless work. When you see the children perform in their 
multicoloured dresses, the scene looks like a glorious garden blooming with flowers of all kinds. 
When the children come out in formation for their mass drill, you cannot see who is directing 
them. Every movement of theirs is regulated by themselves in perfect co-ordination and harmony 
Imagine what it costs to make these dresses. They are made from expensive material and each 
dress differs from another. All these are made by the teachers themselves. The children feel that 
Svaami has given them free education and they must show their gratitude to Svaami at least once 
a year by such activities, whatever sacrifice they may call for. 


Decline of discipline as students go to high schools 


This disciplined training which the children receive in the primary school sustains them rill they 
go to the Higher Secondary School. There, the temperature (the degree of enthusiasm among 
them) goes down a little. What is the reason? The encouragement and inspiration they receive get 
reduced. But, even in the Secondary School the teachers work day and night. Thereby, they 


maintain the standards built up in the primary school. But by the time the students reach the 
Institute (University) level, the "temperature falls below normal." The discipline deteriorates. 
The reason is the failure of the Institute authorities to take sustained interest in the students. The 
teachers are mainly concerned with carrying out their teaching duties; and are not concerned 
about the welfare of the students as a whole. They do not try to preserve what had been built up 
earlier. 


Nevertheless, most students who have come from the primary school adhere to the discipline 
they have learnt and by and large, continue to observe it. It is association with students who have 
come from outside which erodes their discipline and spoils them. 


It is the duty of every Institute teacher to see that the discipline inculcated in the primary school 
is maintained in the Institute. Look at the manner in which pay-scales are being laid down by the 
University Grants Commission and the manner in which dearness allowance is being fixed. This 
is contributing to the rise in prices. 


Employees in general should consider whether they are doing work commensurate with the 
emoluments they are receiving. There is more emphasis on rights than on responsibilities. If 
people in general discharge their duties properly, the country would make remarkable progress. 


Students devotion to Svaami 


From this new year people should develop a broad outlook and consider the interests of others as 
much as of their own. In our Institute the situation is very good. Our teachers and students 
mingle with each other in friendly spirit and the teachers coach the lagging students outside their 
class hours. Whether you believe it or not, there is no University in India which maintains such 
discipline and educational standards as our Institute. We do not publicize our performance. For 
instance, in the last All-India Xth standard examinations, our students got high ranks at the 
national level. 


The student who came first in the country received an award from the Centre. Svaami asked him 
to go to Delhi to receive the award from the President. But the boy said: "I did not study for 
getting the President's or the Prime Minister's award. I studied to earn the approbation of Svaami. 
Svaami's satisfaction is enough for me. That is the biggest award." Such is the high-minded 
attitude of our students. 


The children's hearts are pure, unsullied and sacred. If these qualities are praised, it is not for 
proclaiming them to the public, but to infuse enthusiasm in the students and encourage them to 
do better. Whcn some students came to Svaami and exclaimed: "I have secured 'O' grade," 
Svaami told them, "The 'O' grade has been given for your studies, not to you. It is only when you 
put into practice what you have studied that the 'O' grade or degree will belong to you." Many 
persons attach the degrees to their names. The degree will be really theirs, and not to the studies 
they made, when they act upto that knowledge represented by the degrees. One is a hero in 
learning and a zero in practice. What is required is the application of the knowledge acquired in 
daily life. Only then the degrees really become yours. 


Knowledge and service should go together 


What service are you able to render to the rural population by your knowledge? You are 
concerned more about your careers and the earnings which may be got from your degrees. This 
should not be the main concern of students to-day. You must consider how far your knowledge is 


of benefit to society. You must ensure the peace and security of society. That should be the 
principal aim of the students. 


Students! You have done well in your studies as well as in sports. What Svaami wants from you 
is that you should conduct yourselves when you go out into the outside world in the same spirit 
of discipline and devotion, which you display here. You must realise that it is only in our 
Institute that the students have the opportunity to have continuous contact with the Chancellor 
Himself from day to day. You must make good use of it and hold yourselves forth as models for 
the world. 


Spiritual practice is as important as education 


Students should realise that spiritual practice is as important as secular education. You should 
realise hew much you owe to God for all the benefits you enjoy in life which are really gifts from 
God, including the air you breathe and the water you drink. Should you not be grateful to God 
for all this? Without gratitude, life is meaningless. Be loving even towards those who hare you. 
Control your anger and other evil tendencies. I conclude My discourse with an advice to the 
Principals and Wardens of all the four campuses to co-ordinate their sports programmes in the 
coming years to avoid duplication of the same items. I call upon all teachers and the Vice- 
Chancellor and the Registrar to involve themselves in sports activities and encourage the 
students in every way. 


As regards the Sathya Sai Super-Speciality Hospital, there is no hospital like it anywhere in the 
world, giving totally free treatment. Not are there doctors rendering free and dedicated service as 
in our hospital. Svaami is spending crores on the hospital. The money is spent with scrupulous 
care. Not a naya paisa is wasted. Many devotees, seeing the good work that is being done, are 
sending voluntary donations according to their capacity All this money is being spent by the 
Sathya Sai Trust with unexcelled concern for economy and integrity. 


Unscrupulous and envious traducers are levelling charges of misuse of the funds by the Trust. 
This is a grievous sin. Svaami examines every bill, minutely before making payment. The 
doctors for their part are looking after the patients in a spirit of dedication and team work. This 
spirit of unity should prevail in all our Sai institutions and organizations. The character of their 
work reflects on Svaami's name. 


Discourse on 14-1-1994, in the Puurnachandhra Auditorium. 


The human body, so filled with skills, so capable of great 
adventures, is a gift from God to each of you, It has to be used as a 
raft on which you can cross this never calm sea of change that lies 
between birth and death, bondage and liberation. Pursue nobler 
ends; have grander ideals; sensory pleasures are_ trinkets, 
trivialities. 


BABA 


3. Food, the heart and the mind 


EMBODIMENTS of Divine Aathma! It is essential to observe the principle of moderation in food 
habits, work and sleep. The Buddha, preached the same principle of moderation to his disciples. 
"Be always moderate, never indulge in excess," proclaimed the Buddha. In fact, moderation is 
the royal road to happiness. 


The modern man, who flouts the principle of moderation in every aspect of life, endangers his 
health and well-being. The food consumed by man should be proper, pure and wholesome. But 
nowadays people eat whatever they get and wherever they get it, and thereby spoil their health. 
Food plays a major role in the preservation of health. Care should be taken to see that the food 
consumed does not have much fat content, for the fats consumed in large quantity are detrimental 
not only to one's physical health but also to one's mental health. Meat and alcoholic drinks take a 
heavy toll on man's health, causing many a disease in him. 


The efficacy of cardiac surgery 


This international symposium has for its theme "The Heart and its Ailments." Also on the agenda 
are discussion about the preventive aspects of diseases as well as the treatment and cure of heart 
diseases. Questions are raised about the efficacy of Cardiac Surgery and its related effects. 


The heart is a special organ in the human system. It is pulsating ceaselessly unlike the other 
organs. Heart surgery is a highly complex operation, as the surgery has to be performed without 
arresting the heartbeat. At the same rime the functioning of the lungs has also to be kept up. 


Medical men of genius invented the heart-lung machine in 1956 to carry on the activities of the 
heart as well as the lung during cardiac operations. The machine rakes upon itself the function of 
the heart and the lung ensuring purification of the blood and keeping up circulation of the blood. 
The derails of the functioning of this heart-lung machine are well known to the doctors. The tube 
which is fitted connecting the heart and the machine should be airtight and should be fixed with 
great care, for any lapse in the fitting of the tube may cause air bubbles which will endanger the 
patient's life. Unfailing power supply is most crucial for the success of the operation as any 
interruption in power supply will stall the operation. Therefore we have to depend on generators 
for ensuring uninterrupted power supply during the course of the operation. 


Prevention is better than cure 


Questions are posed whether heart surgery ensures a permanent cure. Cardiac surgery is helpful 
in so far as it enables the patient to carry on his daily activities and lead a normal life. But, it is 
wrong to conclude that surgery is the only way of curing heart diseases. Some of the diseases can 
be cured even by medicine. In my opinion, it is the primary responsibility of every individual to 
prevent becoming a victim of heart disease by regulating his food and other habits. Prevention is 
better than cure. There will be little room for cardiac ailments if one's food habits are properly 
controlled and regulated. 


Research has revealed that non-vegetarian and alcoholic addicts are more prone to heart ailments 
than vegetarians. If the vegetarian food that is consumed should be a balanced and wholesome, it 
should contain liberal doses of vitamin C and vitamin E, which are available in vegetables like 
carrots. The presence of these vitamins prevents heart ailments in a large measure. Every effort 
should be made to keep the human body healthy. Health is wealth. Wealth cannot be enjoyed by 


a person with poor health. Health is more important because it gives physical and mental strength 
to a person. 


Birds and beasts do not suffer from cardiac and digestive ailments to which man is prone. The 
cause can be traced to the natural food which the animals consume, unlike human beings who 
consume all sorts of fried and cooked items of food being slaves to the palate. Modern man 
consumes many artificial foodstuffs and a variety of alcoholic drinks, which are injurious to 
health. Birds and beasts lead natural lives, while the artificial life styles of man today takes a 
heavy toll of his health. When man observes moderation in diet he can be saved from most 
diseases. In the entire range of God's creation man alone is endowed with the faculty of 
discrimination. It is this faculty which sets him apart from animals. Man should exercise his 
discretion and discrimination in regard to food habits. 


How to bring about mental transformation? 


The progress of the universe is bound up with the progress of man. Any amount of development 
in the areas of scientific, economic and social spheres will not be of much use without mental 
transformation. How can we bring about this transformation? It is by restraining passions and 
emotions. Since mental tension is most detrimental to man's health, man should learn the art of 
controlling his passions and emotions, which cause stresses and strains. It is also essential to 
keep our mind serene and peaceful while eating food. We should not indulge in discussion of 
topics which will cause agitation and excitement and disturb our mental peace while we are 
taking food. Mental tension is responsible for ill health. We should also avoid viewing TV, 
video, etc., while eating food, as they may cause mental disturbances. 


Today there is pollution in everything such as the air we breathe, the water we drink, the sounds 
that are jarring to the cars and the food we consume. Because of this all round pollution, man's 
health is affected. Apart from this, man's mind is also polluted making him susceptible to 
diseases. Man should make an earnest endeavour to lead a serene and pure life. He should realise 
the truth that troubles and turmoils are temporary, like passing clouds. There is no scope for 
agitations to arise if one realises this truth. One who realises this truth will not allow his mind to 
be swayed by the passions of anger, cruelty, etc. Passions yield only temporary satisfaction, but 
cause serious emotional disturbances. Hence, it is imperative on the part of man not to yield to 
any unbecoming passions while taking food. The observance of the three P's, namely, purity, 
patience, and perseverance, vouchsafes permanent happiness and good health free from diseases. 


The three root causes of cardiac ailments 


It is not only unbridled passion which damages the health of man. Living on ill-gotten money 
also causes ill-health to some extent. Living on earnings got by unjust means causes many 
unknown diseases to take root in us. It is said; 


As is the food, so is the mind; 

As is the mind, so are the thoughts; 
As are the thoughts, so is the conduct; 
As 1s the conduct, so is the health. 


Man today is a victim of worry. What is the cause of this worry? Lack of contentment is the 
cause. The rich man is not contented is spire of the accumulation of wealth. Worry causes hurry 


and both together bring about ill-health. So, Worry, Hurry and Curry (fatty foods) are the root 
causes of cardiac ailments. 


The consumption of large quantities of fat is the cause of cardiovascular diseases. Doctors advise 
against the consumption of fatty food stuffs which cause increase in weight resulting in 
susceptibility to cardiac diseases The presence of toxins also inflicts equal damage. So one 
should eat in moderate quantity the right type of food and avoid intoxicating drinks to safeguard 
his health. The intake of food should be gradually reduced after crossing 50 years. 


Some people consume food indiscriminately unmindful of the caloric content of the food taken. 
For example, people eat pappads (thin circular flour preparations) fried in oil which have high 
calorie content. People also consume ghee which is also a high calorie food. A single pappad has 
100-150 calories of energy. A single spoon of ghee has 100 calories of energy. Even when the 
quantity of food intake is reduced, reductions in the calorie content is not ensured. 


There are some doctors who advise their patients against smoking and addiction to alcohol, but 
they themselves smoke and drink! This gap between precept and practice raises doubts in the 
minds of patients about the value of the medical advice given by them. Such doctors, who do not 
observe harmony in speech and practice, mislead the patients. 


Triple qualities that a doctor should reflect 


Embodiments of Love! You have high degrees such as MD, FRCS, MRCP, etc., as a result of 
your sincere striving. But it is a mistake to think that these degrees are yours. In fact these 
degrees have been conferred on you for your study, skill, memory power and knowledge. These 
degrees will truly belong to you on the day you apply this knowledge in practice. Unfortunately, 
in this modern age all activities and professions are tainted by a commercial outlook and greed 
for earning money Even the sacred profession of a doctor has degenerated into a business. A 
doctor should reflect the triple qualities of sacrifice, love and compassion in treating his patients. 
But some doctors do not have these virtues at all! They misuse their divine and sacred 
knowledge for the sake of money. Money is important, but we must exercise discretion in this 
regard. You can charge the correct fees from the wealthy, but be kind and considerate while 
dealing with the poor. Try to give free treatment to the poor. You should not treat a millionaire 
and a pauper alike! It is said, "Vaidhyo Naarayano Harihi" (The doctor is equal to God). As the 
Lord has love and compassion, doctors too should have these divine virtues of the Lord. A doctor 
devoid of these virtues is not a doctor at all! 


Doctors should win the hearts of the patients by talking to them with compassion and concern. 
Diseases are half cured when the doctors talk to the patients with love and consideration. The 
sick and the diseased respond favourably to your treatment once you start talking to them with 
love and with a smiling face. But, if you wear a grim expression, the patient loses heart. Doctors 
should administer the injection of courage and encouragement as calcium administered to the 
weak. It is essential that doctors should have the sterling virtues of love and compassion. 
Compassion is more important than money. 


Svaami's example to lead a healthy life 


How to lead a healthy life? Let Me tell you about My own health. Iam sixty eight years old, and 
believe it or not, My weight since my 14th year of age has been constant at 108 pounds only. It 
never went up to 109 pounds not came down to 107. You can lead a healthy life once you 
achieve this kind of balance and moderation. I never eat even a little bit excess. I observe the 


principle of moderation whether I am invited for food by a millionaire or a pauper. Even though I 
am sixty eight years, My body is in perfect trim! I do not suffer from aches and My heart is as 
sound as a rock. There is none who can work like Me and exert himself as much as I do! The 
secret of My sound health is My regulated food habits. 


This is how one has to achieve the unity and harmony of food, head and God. 
Spirit of sacrifice of some doctors 


The foremost quality of a doctor is the spirit of sacrifice. We have organized this Symposium to 
explore ways and means of rendering help to the sick and the diseased. We have in India some 
doctors who lead lives of sacrifice like Dr. Venugopal, Dr. Bhan and Dr. Sampath from the All 
India Institute of Medical Sciences. These doctors, who are committed to the cause of service, 
come to our hospital without even charging the travelling expenses. Their sacrifice contributes to 
the sanctity, of this Institute of Higher Medical Sciences. There is an atmosphere of infective joy 
and good cheer which pervades our hospital. Everybody is in smiles--the patients, their relatives 
the nurses, the doctors, everyone! They are all like flowers in full bloom. It is not the same with 
most other hospitals. 


The essential mark of a hospital is its cleanliness. Clean toilets are an index of the cleanliness of 
a hospital. Our hospital is as clean as a mirror, as it is kept always clean by the team of dedicated 
seva dhal volunteers who relentlessly work hard with a spirit of service and sacrifice. It is not the 
service of one, but the service of many which has contributed to the rapid development of our 
hospital! A single flower cannot make a garland. All the people--the patients, doctors, workers--- 
work in a spirit of harmony and unity. It is this sense of unity which contributes to purity and this 
purity of heart secures divinity. This hospital is a direct proof of the presence of purity, unity and 
divinity It is our fond. hope that such purity, unity and divinity should prevail in other hospitals 
as well! Unity is most essential in all fields of activity-moral, scientific and spiritual. Purity. 
vanishes in the absence of unity. Divinity will be absent when there is no purity and unity. 
Humanity will be healthier if doctors resolve to offer two days of free treatment every week. 


You can work wonders with purity of heart 


Some doctors wonder how we are able to give free treatment, free operations and free meals to 
our patients. To be frank, there should not be any room for wonder in tiffs regard. You can work 
wonders with purity of heart. Any work which is started with purity of heart is bound to succeed. 
Money flows if your work is suffused with love and sacrifice. People will provide munificent 
funds to support any noble endeavour. The land of Bhaarath has been a Punya Bhuumi (Land of 
sanctity), Thyaaga Bhuumi (Land of Sacrifice), Yoga Bhuumi (Land of spiritual austerities), and 
Karma Bhuumi (Land of righteous action). In fact, there is no dearth of money in India. 


Doctors should first and foremost have faith in spirituality. Faith in spirituality alone can bring 
about transformation of humanity. Spirituality is not the celebration of festivals, not even 
performance of rituals. True spirituality calls for earnest endeavour to eradicate all animal 
qualities. Today humanity has descended to such a degrading level that men see evil in good, 
without trying to see good in evil. 


Doctors who are eminent experts in their fields have come to participate in the symposium here. 
Sincere efforts should be made to put your great talents and skill to good use. The climes and 
countries from which you have come may be different. But all of you have one thing in common- 
noble feelings. These noble feelings are God's gift to man and come by Divine grace. 


Treat the patients as your own kith and kin. The help which you extend in good faith to your 
patients will be rewarded in course of time. It is My wish and blessing that you will have useful 
discussions and come out with ways and means of helping mankind to be free from heart 
ailments. 


Discourse at the inaugural session of the Second International Symposium on Cardio-vascular 
Diseases held in the Sathya Sai Institute Auditorium on 21-1-1994. 


Foster love, live in love, spread love--that is the spiritual exercise 
which will yield the maximum benefit. 


BABA 


4. Bhagavaan's valedictory address 


EMINENT DOCTORS! Though axed and maimed by man, trees selflessly serve him by 
providing him fruits and shade. Rivers carry water to quench man's thirst and to cleanse his 
body. The cow also selflessly serves man by providing milk. Man should in the first place realize 
the truth that he has been endowed with the human body not for seeking his selfish ends but for 
serving others. The wealth one possesses, the scientific skill one acquires, and the medical 
knowledge one obtains, are all secured from society. Since man has gained his wealth, 
knowledge and expertise from society, he has to discharge his debt to society by doing some 
good in return to it. 


The ideal of gratitude has been handed down the ages as a heritage in India. A man without this 
supreme virtue of gratitude is worse than a cruel animal. Having received his wealth, education 
and skills from society, if he does not serve the cause of society, his health, education and skills 
are a sheer waste. It is only by serving society that these acquire splendour and significance. 


The relationship that should exist between wealth and deeds can be likened to the relationship 
between rain water and the ocean. Water from the sea, vaporized by the sun, forms clouds in the 
sky which in turn come down as rain on earth. The rain water flows as streams which in due 
course form mighty rivers and merge in the ocean. Similarly, actions should spring up as clouds 
from the ocean of righteousness and confer the rain drops of love. The drops of love gather into 
rivers and merge in the ocean, which is the source. 


Inventions of new machines in the field of surgery 


Tremendous advances have been made in the field of medicine and surgery. The invention of the 
heart-lung machine marked a notable break-through in the field of surgery. The heart-lung 
machine is like a mother. It performs the functions of the heart and the lung without being aware 
of it. It does not know in the least that it is pumping, purifying and circulating blood. Like the 
mother, it is innocent and pure. The mother is unaware that she is sustaining the baby in her 
womb by nourishing it with substance from her own body. 


It is a wonder how the different organs of the body discharge their different functions. The heart 
performs its functions with utmost regularity and rhythm. It pumps the blood at the right time in 
the right direction. The lungs and digestive system in the body perform their functions perfectly. 
In this marvellous creation of God, the functioning of the body is the most wondrous. Doctors 
are aware of this wonderful mystery called the body. Endowed with this knowledge of the human 
system, doctors perform their services. They should have the awareness that the service which 
they render to others is nothing but service done unto themselves. 


Team-work of the organs in the body 


Doctors today have access to the latest techniques and most sophisticated instruments, unknown 
to their ancestors. At one time, by-pass surgery was breathtaking, but now it has become a 
familiar exercise. Doctors will come out with techniques far better than by-pass surgery in the 
years to come. The valves in the human heart perform most intricate and complex activities. All 
the organs in the body perform their functions with the finest coordination, displaying most 
astonishing unity, harmony and adjustment. 


The body and the mind work in perfect unison in the human system. Man should first understood 
the impact of the mind and the body on human life. The mind exercises supreme influence not 


only on the health of the body but on the universe too. Man is not merely a human being, he is 
the embodiment of Divinity. All acts of service done to others are to be treated as service 
rendered to God. 


Every physician should try to trace the cause of diseases. Doctors should make earnest efforts to 
educate the people in health and hygiene and impress on patients how food habits and lifestyles 
affect life and cause diseases. No treatment ensures permanent cure. All treatments enable people 
to prolong their lives. But realizing the impermanence of life, every person should strive to 
sanctify his life. All techniques like by-pass surgery are only artificial means of extending the 
life span of man. They bear testimony to the doctor's skills. It must be remembered that the heart 
is the creation of God while art is the creation of man. There is, however, close connection 
between God's creation and man's 


It is activity that confers authority 


It is the duty of the doctors to use their knowledge in the service of mankind. Take for example, 
Dr. Bhan. As he has been conducting operations sincerely in .our hospital, he has improved his 
surgical skill and has become a senior doctor. Acquisition of skill and perfection in one's work 
delights one's self. Education gains significance only when it is rested on the touch-stone of 
practice. 


One must continuously work. It is activity that confers authority. A doctor gains happiness in 
proportion to the work he puts in. The genuine doctor is one who delights in work. For example, 
Dr. Venugopal performs ten to twelve operations even without taking coffee. When I ask him to 
rake coffee or take rest he says, "No, Svaami. This work is a source of happiness to me." It is his 
dedication to work and continuous application which have made him a master of his job. It is the 
application of his knowledge that lends joy to him. 


Our hospital is an infant of two years. Within a short span of time it has become one of the best 
hospitals. It owes its magnificent success to the coordinated efforts of doctors, nurses, 
technicians and volunteers. The group from Hyderabad led by Dr. Somaraju also does 
tremendous work. The team from Delhi does invaluable work. Unity is strength. The doctors in 
our hospital perform their work with all love and sincerity. They work without any publicity. 


The other day Dr. Somaraju performed an intricate operation by making use of balloon 
technique. Our doctors are making an earnest effort to cure heart ailments without resorting to 
operation. One single flower cannot make a garland. Many flowers are needed to make a garland. 
It requires a thread also. All these doctors are like the fragrant flowers and Bhagavaan is the 
invisible thread which binds them together into a beautiful garland. Since all the doctors and staff 
work together, this hospital has earned great name and fame. The love of doctors and love of 
Svaami have contributed to its tremendous success. 


Faith in God is essential for all actions 


Without faith in God, we cannot perform any action. It is Divinity which pervades everywhere 
and works nonstop. All these doctors have been working as instruments. It is the infectious joy of 
doctors and patients which makes the hospital unique. Dr. Rajiv Mahajan, though not a doctor, 
exerts himself for the sake of the hospital. He comes three days in a month to check the 
requirements of the hospital. It is his love which prompts him to do all this for the hospital. 
Though we ourselves sometimes do not bother about the hospital, he himself comes and does the 
needful. 


This hospital owes its progress to the sacrifice and service of many But the most important of all 
is the will of God. Dr. Neelam Desai said, "The wings with you and the bodies with us." All 
these doctors work with the feeling that they are instruments in the hands of the Divine. 


Many of you, while glorifying this hospital say "Your Hospital." This hospital belongs to all of 
us. It is "Our Hospital!" You are always welcome to this Hospital! 


Discourse at the Valedictory function of the Second International Symposium on Cardio- 
vascular diseases on 23-1-1994 at the Institute Auditorium. 


What exactly is your duty? Let Me summarise it for you. First, tend 
your parents with love, reverence and gratitude. Second, speak the 
truth and act virtuously. Third, whenever you have a few moments 
to spare, repeat the Name of the Lord, with the Form in your mind. 
Fourth, never indulge in talking ill of others or try to discover 
faults in others. And, finally, do not cause pain to others, in any 


form. 
BABA 


5. Disease and Divinity 


You can reset a tree to make it grow straight, 
You can straighten even a granite stone. 

But you cannot easily set right 

The mind and rid of its vagaries. 


IT IS the mind that makes a man. The mind is a conglomeration of thoughts. Thoughts are 
reflected in actions. The consequences of actions are being experienced as pleasure and pain by 
man. Therefore, man should have noble thoughts, which will spur him to good and noble 
activity. 


Each one should enquire for whose sake he or she is living. When any one poses this question to 
oneself, the answer is: "I am living for myself and not for others." He justifies his answer by 
saying: "I am eating to appease my own hunger. I am taking medicine to cure my illness. It 
cannot be cured by anyone else taking the medicine." 


When two persons are sleeping in the same cot, they do not get the same dreams but have 
different dreams. Basing on these facts man feels that he is living for himself. Later on, when he 
grows up he seeks a job on the ground that he has a family to look after and support. The same 
person, who once said he was living for himself, later on pleads that he is living for his family. 
When invited by a friend to accompany him to Bangalore for an interesting sports event, he says 
that he has to attend his office and cannot rake leave and hence he is unable to accompany him. 
He thus cites his duty as a reason for his inability to enjoy the sports. But when his wife or child 
is sick and in a hospital he rakes leave even on loss of pay and goes to attend on them. The same 
person, when he is hungry and just sirs for taking his dinner, leaves the meal served on the table 
and rushes our when he hears that his son or daughter is involved in an accident. Even hunger is 
forgotten. The person, who was proclaiming that he was living for himself only, now starts 
caring for his wife and children. 


Man's own welfare is bound with that of society 


When the village is in the grip of an epidemic like cholera or plague, the same person comes 
forward to do his best to combat the spread of the disease, because this may affect his own 
family too as they are part and parcel of the village. Thus man is born in society and grows in 
society. It is the bounden duty of every one to feel that his own welfare is bound up with the 
welfare of all others in society. 


Today we are faced with the menace of fluorosis. If you enquire into this, we come to know that 
the problem of fluorests is not only prevalent in India but in many other countries of the world 
such as Indonesia, Germany, China, USA, Iran, Iraq, Turkey and Libya. Because of their 
affluence people in countries like U.S.A, are able to take steps to overcome the evil effects of 
this disease to a great extent. 


The ill-effects of polluted drinking water 


Many diseases are caused by drinking water that is polluted. If there is only one milligram of 
fluoride in a litre of water, it is safe. The presence of more than one mg in a litre may cause 
sickness. If there is 4 or 5 mg of fluoride in a litre, it affects the teeth and is positively injurious 
to health. In several States in India such as Himaachal Pradesh, Utthar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh 


and Raajasthan this disease is widely prevalent. In Aandhra Pradesh, it is rampant in 
Shrikaakulm, Guntur, Medhak, Nalgonda and Mahboobnagar districts. Recently it has been 
found to be prevalent in Kudapa, Kurnuul, Ananthapur and other places. It is found on 
investigation that the fluoride content in water varies from 15 mg to 10.5 mg in these areas. 


The fluoride that is contained in underground water sources varies from | mg to 300 mg per litre. 
In many areas they have established Aluminum factories. Fluoride is made use of to a large 
extent in these factories. This mixes with air and the polluted air affects the people. It enters the 
stronger portions of the body such as bones and teeth. A portion of this fluoride is excreted 
through urine. The ignorant are not aware of the serious damage caused by this fluoride to their 
health. Fluorosis causes pain in the joints and affects the bones at the back, etc. The affected 
persons stiffer from severe pain in joints. Some germs such as bacteria also enter the system and 
cause a lot of damage to the human body. Viruses also cause diseases. Polluted food also 
accounts for the spread of these disease carrying germs. Meat, fish, black and red salt, black 
coffee and tea also cause spread of fluorosis and aggravate it further. To the extent possible you 
should change your food habits. Chewing betel leaves also causes tooth decay Certain drugs sold 
in the market also aggravate this disease. 


Ways and means to combat fluorosis 


There are some types of antidotes that can be consumed with food to prevent fluorosis. You 
should take sour things like lime, orange and tamarind in greater quantity. You can also take 
more of tomatoes, potatoes and vegetables with Vitamin C. You should also take more of carrots 
to build the bones. Intake of such food items in a liberal measure will help to combat the 
incidence of fluorosis. Besides these, consuming of green leaves which contain a lot of calctum 
will also help in keeping off fluorosis. Food is the main factor in maintaining good health or 
causing diseases. 


In these days, though there is plenty of milk, curd and other dairy products available with the 
villagers in their houses, they are in the habit of selling these products and buying some useless 
and harmful things that affect their health adversely. Consuming of curd will help one to a great 
extent to combat the onset of this disease. Modern youth take black tea and coffee (without milk 
though milk is available) thereby inviting the disease. Some take black and brownish salt which 
contains more fluoride. They should avoid this and take only white purified salt. It is only by 
propagating such practical preventive steps that Government can play its role in checking the 
spread of this disease. 


Thought of Divine essential to combat disease 


Apart from the exercise of such care in the food consumed there should be also Dhaiva 
chinthana (contemplation of the Divine). Because people don't drink of God they are subjected 
to a lot of misery. Without divine thought, man is harbouring two bad qualities. One is he hides 
many defects and evil qualities within himself. The other is he magnifies even minor faults in 
others. Because of such evil qualities among human beings diseases are also on the increase. 
Only when human effort is there, with God's grace, good results will be attained. The Sanskrith 
saying declares "Dharmaartha Kaama Mokshaanaam Aarogyam Muulam Uthamam" (For the 
attainment of the four Purushaarthas, good health is essential). Even though one may have all 
the wealth in the world, if his health is impaired, he is miserable. Good health is the most 
important acquisition one should aspire for. Whether a villager or an urban dweller, good health 
is very essential for anyone leading a meaningful life. 


To enjoy good health, one should have water, food and air free from pollution. Now all these 
three are polluted. Apart from these, man's mind is also polluted. To purify the mind, one should 
nurture noble and sacred thoughts of service to others. One who does not hurt anybody and has 
feelings of love and compassion to fellow beings is the greatest of men. That is why sage Vyaasa 
gave the essence of the Eighteen Puraanas he composed in the aphorism; "Help ever, hurt 
never." 


You should make every effort to avoid harming others in any circumstance. You are only hurting 
yourself when you hurt others. You should not use harsh words. When you develop human 
values, you can be free from diseases and even enjoy good health with God's Grace. 


To enjoy good health you need control in living 


Once a poet gave the reason for the-lack of Dharma in this country in the form of a song. 
Because there are people who have bad thought, hear bad things through their ears, see bad 
things with their eyes, spread scandals through their tongue, there is no Dharma (righteousness) 
and no peace. Human beings are embodiments of Divinity. They should live up to their Divine 
nature and not descend to the level of animals. 


We should see that by our action no harm is caused to society. The incidence of fluorosis is a 
threat to public health and affects society in general. But, there are easy methods to combat this 
menace by taking preventive steps. In our Institute, Venkateshvara Rao has done detailed studies 
in this field and has found out methods of conducting numerous experiments to control this 
disease. This can be controlled to a great extent by using sour things such as tamarind, lime, 
oranges, etc., in larger quantifies in food. The villagers should consume lot of greens which 
contain a good amount of iron. 


The Government has embarked upon measures to control the spread of this disease. The people, 
for their part, should co-operate with the government. Then the results will be good. 


My opinion is that it is not good enough to provide for treatment for this disease. It is prevalent 
even in the affluent countries like U.S.A. With all their money power they are not able to 
eradicate the disease. So you should realise that God's grace is very essential. Along with 
medicine you need discipline and control in living. 


Pure engineers, officers, scientists have all gathered here. They must educate the people to avoid 
meat caring, which causes fluorosis. Water and other substances coming from underground have 
a lot of fluoride content. In some places there is as much as 8 to 10 mg of fluoride in one litre of 
water. 


Divine vibrations in Prashaanthi Nilayam 


Whether you believe it or not, in Prashaanthi Nilayam, which is situated in Ananthapur District, 
there is no trace of fluorosis. Here, there is a lot of Divine vibrations as all good and sacred 
things are being done. People of different religions and Nationalities are assembling here in 
thousands. But all are engaged in divine activities and constant remembrance of God. Here there 
is not more than | or 1.5 mg of fluoride in a litre of water. 


The Collector of Ananthapur district is making a lot of effort to combat this disease. It is 
necessary to combine divine activities along with the other steps to combat this disease. 


Discourse at the inauguration of the National Symposiumon methods to combat Fluorosis, held 
in the Sathya Sai Institute Auditorium on 29-1-1994. 


You love the God in all beings and the God in all beings responds 
with Love. 


BABA 


6. Start propagation in primary school 


Engaging oneself in arduous penance, 
Undertaking pilgrimages to sacred shrines, 
Dipping in holy waters, mastering the scriptures, 
Meditating on the Lord, and going in raptures, 
All these can seldom help a human 

To cross the ocean of life mundane. 

Service to mankind is the only course of action 
Which will help one to achieve liberation. 


EMBODIMENTS of Divine Aathma! It is the duty of Everyone born as a human being to engage 
himself in service to mankind, which is the only sure way to cross the ocean of worldly life and 
attain liberation from the cycle of birth and death. 


Be the master of your body and mind 


The human body is a prey to 386 types of diseases. These are caused by three main factors that 
are related to physical health. They are Vaatha (Wind), Piththa (Bile) and Sleshma (Phlegm). 
Wind is the cause of 80 diseases, while 84 diseases arise from bile disorders and 222 from 
phlegm. For the disease of fluorosis, which is the subject of this symposium, bile and phlegm are 
the causes. While there are curative medicines for several diseases, there are some diseases 
which are incurable. 


In this world, there are several types of people- those who are affluent, those who are virtuous, 
men of mighty strength and valour, persons of high literary attainments, eminent scientists. But 
persons engaging themselves in spiritual pursuits are very rare to come across. Such noble 
persons, who dwell in the realm of the spirit instead of the sphere of mundane affairs, will not be 
affected by any diseases of the body or the mind. They will be leading a noble and pure life. The 
body is a physical entity while the mind is subtle. There is another which is invisible and eludes 
the grasp of the ordinary individual. That is the Aathma. The attempt to comprehend the 
unknown and invisible Aathma is called Aathmaanveshana. When one makes efforts to realise 
the sweetness of the Aathma he is said to taste it--Aathmapreethi. When he experiences the bliss 
of the Aathma he is said to be an Aathma Jnaani (a Realised Soul). 


The body, the mind, the intellect and the senses are only your instruments. Then, the question 
arises, "Who are you?" The answer is: "You are the master who makes use of these instruments." 
When you refer to "My mind, my body, my senses," do you enquire "Who am I?" Though you 
may go on saying, "This is my body; my mind, etc.," which implies that you are different from 
these, yet you identify yourself with the body and become a slave of the senses instead of being 
their master. You are the Aathma, the Supreme Master. You have the potential to realise this 
through the discriminating power of the intellect. Once you recognise this truth, you will also 
understand human nature, which is a combination of values like Truth, Righteousness, Peace, 
Love and Non-violence and you will then rid your animal qualities. Then you will also realise 
the cause of diseases and the method of curing them. 


Aadhaaram and aahaaram are essential for life 


The disease of fluorosis is cause by contamination in food, air and water. Earth, fire and ether are 
the elements constituting the essential basis for human life. Water and air constitute the Praana 
Shakthi (Life-Force). While ether, earth and fire are the muula (basis), water and air are essential 
for Praana (life). Water and air provide the food for the sustenance of life. While the three 
elements earth, fire and ether form the Aadhaaram (support), the other two--water and air form 
the Aahaaram (food). You get water and air from the Bhuumi (earth). It is the nature of Brahman 
and is all powerful. The astronauts who travel in space-ships to explore space have to carry water 
and air with them from the earth for their survival. They have to take things from the earth while 
they travel to the moon to bring a few samples from the moon. Billions of dollars are spent on 
these exercises. 


What we should attempt really is to explore the means of cultivation of human values and 
realising the divinity within everyone. The sun shines with intense hear and wonderful 
effulgence. By the help of the sun's light, the moon shines. It cannot shine by itself, as it has no 
effulgence of its own. The relationship between the Buddhi (intellect) and the mind is also 
similar to this. The mind is made up of thoughts and fancies. It is dangerous to act as a slave of 
the mind. By following the mind, one becomes a Pashu (an animal). By following the Buddhi, 
one becomes a Pashupathi, the Lord of all living beings. 


Pay the greatest attention to the health of children 


You have discussed in great detail the incidence of fluorosis and the application of technology to 
combat this evil disease as a natural outcome of food and other habits. The main constituents of 
the body should be in proper balance. Any imbalance will affect the health and curtail the life 
span. The longevity of a person depends on regulation of food and other habits. 


Affluent and educated people are able to have recourse to advanced methods of treatment for 
curing diseases. What about the poor and illiterate villagers? They suffer a lot owing to fluorosis 
which affects the movement of the joints and weakens the bones. In some cases, hands and legs 
are bent out of shape and the victims can hardly do their daily work. 


A large percentage of people in Bhaarath are unable to work efficiently because of various 
physical disabilities. The greatest attention should be paid to the health of the young who have 
many years of life before them. 


We have to start investigation in the primary schools where children are susceptible to attacks by 
diseases such as fluorosis. You have to devise methods simple enough to be followed by them. 


One simple method is to mix lime and sand in water in a Proper proportion and stir it up slowly 
taking 15 minutes for the process. Allow it to settle down for 5 to 6 hours. You will see the sand 
deposit at the bottom. If this is done before bed-time, the water will be clear by the next morning. 
The water thus purified can be used with good effect. You can make use of alum also for this 
purpose. It is very difficult to get pure alum today. Everything is adulterated: milk, oil and other 
edible products. If you can teach the primary school children now about cultivation of honesty 
and good habits, the future of the country and the world will be better as these children are going 
to be the leaders, pleaders and teachers of the 


Regarding the treatment of fluorosis, you should think of long-term solution also along with 
temporary remedial measures. Yellow and black spots on the skins are signs of a person 
suffering from fluorosis. Doctors should concentrate on fluorosis-affected children as they may 
grow weak because of the disease. 


Ensure effective implementation of decisions taken 


This disease is prevalent in all countries, but in certain districts of some States of Bhaarath it is 
rampant. The decisions you have taken at this Conference should not be confined to the paper on 
which they are recorded. You should implement them and achieve results. What is needed is the 
will to work with a spirit of dedication in order to relieve the distress of the suffering masses. 


The participants who spoke earlier, expressed their gratitude for the hospitality and good food 
and comfortable accommodation provided for them here. We do have our share in looking after 
the welfare of society. We can be happy only when society is happy. You should go from village 
to village and rake concrete steps to eradicate this disease of fluorosis, offer simple methods of 
treatment to those already affected and teach the villagers the preventive precautionary measures 
like regulation of diet and drinking only boiled water etc. Our Prime Minister and the Chief 
Minister of A.P are extending enthusiastic support for this programme. You should also act with 
full initiative and interest so that you. can achieve the desired results. Having taken up a job you 
should not slacken your effort in completing it, facing any obstacles you may come across 
boldly. 


Work done for the welfare of the world is thapas (true penance), while work done for selfish 
purpose is thamas (useless). 


Bhaarath is a Punyabhuumi (sacred land). It is a Yogabhuumi (Land of sense control)and 
Karmabhuumi (Land of action). The present generation of people want to make it a 
Bhogabhuumi (Land of worldly pleasures). That is why people suffer from diseases. 


Secret of Svaami's youthful radiance 


Students here expressed their wonder as to how Svaami, though 68 years old, looks young and is 
energetic. Really the reason for this is the imbibing of the three P's by Me, namely, purity, 
patience, and perseverance. If you follow these three tenets you will not be afflicted by any 
disease. 


I am keeping Myself active day in and day out for the sake of the welfare of the world and no 
disease has affected this body at any time during the past 68 years. My teeth are quite healthy 
and strong even at this age. I can masticate anything. My eye sight is very sharp. People get short 
sight or long sight even at the age of forty and wear glasses. I take no medicine as no disease 
affects Me. Even while I take on the diseases of others. I pretend as though I take the pill offered 
by doctors to satisfy them. But actually I throw it away and sip only water. I ear the barest 
minimum to sustain the body. I take just one small oil-free dry chapaathi. I have never taken 
sweets even from my childhood. Doctors say you need vitamins and proteins for maintaining 
bodily health. I am always in Aanandha (bliss) and that is the vitamin and protein for Me. 
Happiness lies in union with God. When you think of God you are bound to be happy. 


Chant prayers even while taking medicine 


You must tell people to think of God and chant prayers even while they take' medicine for the 
disease. This must be taught mainly to school children so that they may grow up as good 
enlightened children. 


There was a professor in Kaashi who used to do prayer and worship at the altar in his house. An 
atheist friend of his who visited him remarked that he was wasting so much time in prayer. The 
professor replied that the prayer to God will never go waste. He added: "I waste only one hour 
per day, even if according to you God does not exist. But if God exists, you are wasting your 
whole life-time." 


You have to educate the children to consume lime and tamarind in larger measure, explaining the 
reason for this, in order to prevent the affliction by the disease of fluorosis. Teach them by songs 
in popular runes so that it will have an effective appeal. Even atheists who deny God will be 
moved by music as human beings. When you pray to God too, it is more effective if you express 
the prayer in musical runes as this will touch and move the heart. God loves music. He is termed 
as Gaanapriya and Gaanalola (one who loves music and revels in music). Inspire the children to 
sing Bhajans. They will attain happiness and satisfaction. 


Discourse at the valedictory function of the National Symposium on Fluorosis on 30-1-1994. 


Living becomes a glorious experience only when it is sweetened by 
Tolerance and Love. Willingness to compromise with others ways 
of living and cooperation in common tasks, make living happy and 
fruitful. Certain modes of behaviour have been laid down and 
proved beneficial by centuries of practice. These have to be 
observed with modifications to suit the conditions of today. 


BABA 


7. Imbibe Bhaarath's ideals 


Do not be conceited because of your studies, 
What is great about your learning? 

The hall-mark of education is humility, 
Realising that what is yet to be learnt is limitless. 
Shed your ignorance and pride, O witless one! 
Learn to be humble in pursuing knowledge. 


STUDENTS! TEACHERS! Today men have invented many types of machinery by their 
experiments and researches. Science has been pursued with relentless energy. But, being unable 
to experience peace or happiness, they have become strangers to both. Despite his acquiring the 
sacred human birth, man is immersed in the pursuit of transient worldly pleasures, forgetting his 
Divine destiny. Concentrating on scientific investigations, inventing all kinds of mechanical 
gadgets, man is content to lead a proud but purposeless life. 


To understand the basic purpose of life, you do not have the right type of education now. Mere 
worldly knowledge will not promote the cultivation of spiritual and moral values. This secular 
knowledge does not serve to reach you the secret of human life. If one wishes to bring down a 
tree he must attack the roots and not the branches. For man to attain his real destination and 
secure enduring peace and joy secular education is of no avail. 


Greatness of Bhaaratheeya culture 


Bhaaratheeyas in ancient times lived a life of morality and integrity and enjoyed peace and 
happiness. Students today, disregarding morality and their obligations to society, go astray and 
ruin their lives. Bhaaratheeyas have forgotten the essentials of their culture, based on morality 
and integrity. They cast away their great scriptural texts as trash. Western nations took these, 
learnt the profound truths contained in them and developed their technical and military skills and 
sought to give them back to Bhaaratheeyas. The weapons developed in Germany were based on 
the texts of the Atharvana Vedha. 


Bhaaratheeyas today are cultivating a passion for exotic things, ignoring what is good in their 
own heritage. Students should strive to understand what is great in their own Bhaaratheeya 
culture and heritage. Ignoring their own cultural greatness, Bhaaratheeyas are going abroad to 
earn money as an end in. itself. No doubt money is necessary, but, is it necessary to go abroad 
for this purpose? This cannot be the true aim of education. 


Students should recognise the truth of the saying, "The mother and the Motherland are greater 
than heaven itself." One who does not believe in this cannot be called a truly educated person. 
Making use of the education acquired by you, you should serve your country in such a way that 
it stands out as an example to the world. What perversity is it to neglect one's own house and try 
to beautify your neigbour's house? 


Students today are losing their love for the Motherland. The man who cannot proclaim that "This 
is my native land, this is my mother tongue," is a living corpse. He is no human being at all. 
People are giving up love for the Motherland and fostering greed for money. 


Selfless unity is the message of the Vedhas 


From ancient times, Bhaarath has held forth to the world great ideals. Spreading the message of 
spirituality to many countries, Bhaarath proclaimed the message-Lokaas samasthaas Sukhino 
Bhavanthu (May all people be happy). Bhaarath never permitted the concept of selfishness to 
prevail. Selfless unity was the message proclaimed in the Vedhas: "Let us live together; let us 
grow together. Let us share our knowledge with others, let us live in harmony and friendliness." 
Today in Bhaarath there is no spirit of harmony 


In ancient India, students, together with secular knowledge, sought spiritual knowledge, 
regardless of the sacrifices involved, and led purposeful lives. They conducted many 
investigations to comprehend the mysteries of creation and the secret of human existence. All 
experiments today are based on yanthras (mechanical devices). But in the olden days, they 
conducted the enquires with the help of manthras. The truths which they discovered, they 
proclaimed to the world in strident terms. 


"Less speech, more happiness" 


It is the duty of Bhaaratheeyas today to learn something about the great spiritual heritage of 
Bhaarath. The ancients practised economy in speech. Students today tend to be loquacious. 
Excessive speech harms the mind. "Less speech, more happiness." 


The ancients practised three kinds of silent penance to control speech. The first was Vaak- 
mounam (silence of the tongue, the second one was Mario-mounam (silence of the mind) and the 
third was Mahaa-mounam (Supreme Silence). 


Vaak mounam (Silence in speech) meant confining one's speech to the limit and the needs of the 
occasion. By this discipline, excessive talk was avoided. As a result, the power of their speech 
was conserved and enhanced. Discipline in speech also resulted in truthfulness. Truth speaking 
served to purify their thoughts. By this means they acquired Siddhi (Realisation of truth) and 
Jnaanasiddhi (acquisition of the highestâ€™ wisdom). Therefore purity in speech is vital. It has to be 
achieved by restraint in speech. 


Then, there is Mario mounam (Silence of the mind). The mind is a bundle of thoughts and 
fancies. These thoughts have to be reduced gradually. When thoughts are reduced, the mind 
naturally comes under control, like a clock that is unwound. When the activity of the mind is 
reduced, the power of the Aathma manifests itself. 


As a consequence Buddhi (intellect) becomes more active than the senses. When control of 
speech and control of the mind have been achieved, the state of Mahaa-mounam (Supreme 
Silence) is easily realised. Students should strive to reach the third stage by the disciplines of the 
first two stages. 


I have often told you, "Talk less and study more." What is meant by "study?" Study or education 
is the process of divinising one's Self. This calls for the cultivation of values in education. This 
"Education (is) for life." "Life (is) for love." "Love for man." "Man is for Service." "Service for 
Society." "Society for nation." "Nation for world." "World for peace." Education is for life and 
not merely for earning a living. This life is for love. Love is God. Live in love. This love should 
be for all mankind. Today this love is absent. What passes for love is something artificial. Love 
should emanate from the heart. 


Man exists for service 


What is the purpose of being a man? It is not for leading an animal existence. Man exists for 
service. Every man has to return to society by way of service what he has received from it. That 
service should be rendered selflessly in a spirit of sacrifice. Service is thereby converted to 
spirituality. 


Service is to society Society exists for the nation. The nation is a limb of the world. The world 
should strive for peace. That is the meaning of the benediction Om Shaanthi! Shaanthi! 
Shaanthi! Why is this Shaanthi (Peace) uttered only three times and not more times or less 
rimes? This refers to peace in three aspects. Aadhibhouthika (physical), Aadhyaathmika (mental) 
and Aadhidhaivika (spiritual). Peace relating to the body, the mind and the Self are invoked by 
this benediction. Such profound meanings are implicit in the pronouncements of Bhaarath's 
sages. 


All these are designed to remind us of God and make us seek God-realisation. People imagine 
that God is an entity far beyond human conception and grasp. That is not true. Divinity is nearer 
than anything else in the world. If you consider It remote, It will appear distant, but if you regard 
It as near It will be near. As long as man is conscious of the body, he cannot comprehend a 
formless Divinity. Hence, he must adore the Divine in human form. 


If, for instance, a buffalo or a fish thinks of God they can conceive of God only as a huge buffalo 
or a gigantic, fish. Man also conceives the form of God only in terms of his own human form and 
attributes. As long as man is attached to the body, he cannot realise God. Only when he sheds his 
attachment, can he experience the Divine. 


Man must worship God in human form 


As long as he thinks of his body and has human form, man cannot think of something which 
transcends form and body That is the reason why God incarnates in human form. To man He 
must appear as human. Only then relationships can be established between the Divine and human 
beings. If God comes in any other form, man cannot fix his thoughts on Him. Hence, you have to 
conceive of God in human form and worship Him. 


Shri Raama, who was the embodiment of Dharma, incarnated in human form. Because the 
Avathaars (Divine advents) come in human form, human beings could have intimate 
relationships with them and adore them. 


The Vedhas declared that the Vedhaaham etham Purusham Mahaantham Aadithyavarnam 
thamasah parasthaath (The Supreme Divine, with the effulgence of the sun, dwells beyond 
darkness). God is beyond Thamas (darkness). He is not outside. He is within you. You are He. 
While He is himself the Divine, man seeks the Divine in a forest or through meditation. What 
folly is this? The Vedhas deride man for failing to see God even while seeing Him. 
"Pashyannapi na pashyanthi muudho" (The fool fails to see even while he is seeing). When God 
comes in human form, moves freely amongst you, talks with you, jokes with you, eats with you 
and drinks with you, even then you fail to recognise God. You pursue your own types of 
devotion. This is not correct. You must worship the living Divinity, not the lifeless. Honour 
every human being who is in human form. See the Divine in every man. 


Develop control of senses first 


The cosmos is Vishnu svaruupam (a manifestation of the Divine). God is with you, in you, and 
around you. He is not elsewhere. Develop this firm conviction. It is a piece of self-deception to 
imagine that God is somewhere away from you. 


At the outset, you have to develop control of your senses. This control in the form of mounam 
(silence) influences your speech. Jayadheva went into rapture over the power of the tongue to 
chant sweetly the name of the Lord. Sweetness in speech makes all the differences between one 
man and another. The supreme greatness of the Lord's name has been commended in the present 
Age of Kali (Discord). It is an abuse of the tongue to make it recite anything other than God's 
name. 


Students should realise the supremacy of Aathma-Vidhya (the culture of the Self). It is the key to 
all knowledge. What is the use of all the secular knowledge which is concerned with acquiring a 
mess of potage? 


The great scientist, Einstein, regretted in his last years that his scientific findings had led to the 
production of the atom bomb. Sir Isaac Newton ended his life in a hospital with a mental 
affliction. True knowledge must secure mental peace and enduring joy For this contemplation of 
God is essential. 


Academic education has its uses. But it is not the summom-bonum of life. Adore the light of the 
Divine within you. Each student is like a petromax light. This light has to be kept burning by 
pumping kerosene from time to time. The soot has to be cleaned by a pin now and then. It needs 
kerosene. Only when all the three are present, the light will Butn brightly Your Shraddha 
(earnest devotion) is the kerosene. Your love is the pin. Your spirit of sacrifice is the pump. In 
addition, a wick is needed. That wick is the Lord's name. With the aid of the three accessories, 
when you chant the Lord's name, your devotion will shine effulgently This effulgence is the light 
of the Divine within you. You proceed from peacelessness to Paramjyothi (the light divine in the 
heart) through peace and an illumined mind. The heart of everyone is the scat of the Lord. 


In this way students should cultivate the discriminating faculty through education, cherish 
humility and foster faith in the Divine. This is the royal road to realisation of oneness with the 
Divine. 

Discourse at the Sai Institute Auditorium on 3-2-1994, after the distribution of prizes to winners 
in the sports and athletic events held for Secondary School students. 


8. Sathya and Dharma : bases of life 


Truth is God. 
Truth is the source of 
wealth and prosperity. 
It is, again, Truth that sustains 
virtue in the world. 


WHERE there is Truth, there dwells Lakshmi, the goddess of Prosperity. Truth is changeless and 
eternal. It is vital to man's life. If, in the midst of misery and suffering in the world, them is 
goodness, it is because of Truth. 


In ancient times, Kings ruled over their kingdom on the basis of Truth. They were ready to 
sacrifice everything, even their lives, for upholding Truth Harishchandhra stands as the supreme 
example. He sacrificed his wife, son and the entire kingdom for the sake of truth. He even 
offered to perform the low task of a caretaker in a crematorium. Because of lack of Truth, there 
is no peace and security in the world. Truth always protects a nation. 


Today we are not adhering to this Truth. Man is dallying with untruth forsaking the path of 
virtue. He is ruining his life immersed in falsehood and unrighteous actions. Man has lost respect 
for Truth today Love is a forgotten value. People deem righteousness as an irrelevance in the 
modern context. Everything that man does today, all his plans and projects are self-centered. 
Even spirituality is practised to gain social recognition, more ostentatious than genuine. All 
human activities are based on attachment and hatred. Selfishness and jealousy dominate the 
modern man. Human values have lost their hold and hence there is no peace and security. 


Truth is the foundation to build man's character 


There can be no peace when mankind forgets Aadhaara (the base) and concentrates on the 
aadheya (superstructure). Man is swayed by the delusion that life .is meant only to enjoy; eat, 
drink, and sleep. With this view, he acquires wealth and increases his possessions. He makes no 
attempt to understand the purpose for which he is born in this world. Though he attempts to 
pursue right action, he fails because of his greed, ambition, lust and other temptations. 


Truth is the foundation on which the character of man is built. When Truth is not respected, .the 
mansion of life collapses like a building that has a weak foundation. Man does not realise this 
and pursues a life of sensuous pleasures, ignoring Truth which is the Life Force that sustains his 
entire being. 


This is due to the delusion caused by Maaya. Maaya is a strange phenomenon that envelops man 
in spite of all his precautions. It is like a shadow that chases one wherever he may be. The 
shadow's size depends very much upon the direction of the light. When one moves towards the 
light and comes under it, the shadow disappears and there is no Maaya--only Truth remains. 


All worldly knowledge and physical prowess are of no avail if there is no spiritual strength. This 
is illustrated by the lives of Hiranyakashipu and Hiranyaaksha in the Bhaagavatham, of Karna 
and the Kauravas in the Mahaabhaaratha and of Raavana in the Raamaayana. 


It is doubtless essential to acquire skills of various kinds. But the purpose for which they are to 
be used should also be understood. They have to be used for the realisation of the four main 


goals of human life, described compendiously as the Purushaarthas. The four goals are: Dharma 
(righteousness), Artha (wealth), Kaama (desire) and Moksha (liberation). 


Understand the true meaning of Purusha 


First of all, the term Purusha has to be properly understood. In-common parlance, it is applied to 
a male person. But Purusha refers to the Jeeva, the Aathma, Praana and the Brahman. It is the 
Chaithanya (awareness or consciousness) in every being, as distinct from Prakrithi, which 
represents the body (and the phenomenal universe). Prakrithi represents the feminine principle, 
while consciousness represents the male aspect. Purusha, however, applies to both man and 
woman. Among the Purushaarthas, Dharma comes first. 


Dharma is commonly understood as referring to activities like going on pilgrimages, offering 
charity and performing good acts. But these activities serve only to provide mental satisfaction. 
They do not lead to the Divine. Dharma is the very embodiment of Divinity. All efforts to 
achieve oneness with the Divine can alone be termed Dharma. 


Artha is ordinarily understood as referring to wealth. But what is the wealth that one should 
really seek? It is the wealth of Jnaana, the wealth of Brahma Jnaana (Divine Wisdom). Pursuit 
of this knowledge is the real quest for wealth, not the pursuit of money and possessions. It is 
Jnaana Aishvarya that one must seek. Only that knowledge will lead man to the goal of human 
life. 


Kaama is not mere fulfillment of worldly desires, which are transient and momentary. The desire 
should be for Moksha, which means liberation from attachment to all worldly objects and 
cultivating attachment to the Divine. Attachment to the worldly objects is moha. The 
renunciation of these attachments, which is Kshaya, leads to Moha-Kshaya or Moksha. 


The speciality of Shivaraathri 


It is in order to rid oneself of evil tendencies that sacred days like Shivaraathri are observed. 
Nights follow days and days succeed nights. This is an everyday occurrence. What is the 
speciality of Shivaraathri? As the night precedes the New Moon day, it will be pitch dark 
everywhere outside, the heart will be filled with bright effulgence on this sacred night. Light 
represents mangalam (auspiciousness). That is why the day is observed as Shivaraathri. When 
Hanumaan set the entire city ablaze, 


the darkness of the night gave place to brilliant light. But at the same time the heart of Raavana 
was full of darkness. The significance of Shivaraathri is that though the entire world is dark 
outside, if one keeps his heart filled with divine thoughts, he will be filled with effulgence. Every 
year in the month of Maagha, the fourteenth day of the dark fortnight at midnight, when worldly 
objects concentrate on the Divine, they experience Divine feelings. This is associated with the 
Shivalingam that transforms the minds of the people. 


The proper way of observing Shivaraathri 


The significance or keeping awake on this night is that it should be spent in the awareness of the 
Divine. It is necessary to keep awake the whole night with the name of the Divine on one's 
tongue without stop. But people tend to give more importance to the aspect of merely keeping 
awake throughout the night in some form or another. They spend the night in witnessing cinema 
shows or indulging in other unholy activities such as playing cards. This is not the proper way of 
observing Shivaraathri. It is also customary to observe upavaasa (fasting) by giving up their 


usual food. The proper way to spend the night is by constant remembrance of Aathmathathva 
(the Inner-Self) by chanting the Lord's Name. 


To proceed on one's life's journey successfully is like driving a car safely. This requires right 
understanding of how to handle the switch, the steering wheel, the gears and the brakes. One 
should also follow the Vedhic Maxim; "Sathyam Vadha, Dharmam Chara." It is an injunction to 
man to speak the Truth and practise right conduct. This will help him to be true to his 
conscience. 


Those who practise Dharma and speak the Truth always in course of time become Divine. They 
merge in the Divine like the river merging with the ocean. Truth and Righteousness are at the 
root of human existence. No one should think it is difficult to adhere to truth. In fact it is easier to 
speak the truth while it needs a lot of cleverness to tell an untruth and sustain it. 


Dharma, Karma and Marma 


Dharma (Righteousness) is the root of human life. Its importance is not realised just as people 
looking at the fruit of a tree do not recognise the roots from which the tree and its fruits derive 
their sustenance. The tree has grown because of the water supplied at its root. People want to 
enjoy the fruits of life without watering the roots of Dharma which nourish the tree of life. The 
Bhagavath Geetha speaks about aathma-phala-thyaaga (renouncing the fruits of one's action). 
Karma is the tree and the fruit you see in the tree is the result of your karma. What is it based 
upon? That is the marma (the secret). It is the unseen Dharma that is the secret. It is the unseen 
root of the tree. The meaning of this marma is that we should follow Dharma which determines 
the nature of the fruit borne by the tree. 


To use another analogy, the mansion of life may be said to have four walls. These are dharma, 
karma, marma and janma (birth). Brahma is based on these four walls. 


The Brahmathathva (the Brahman principle) is within you. There is no need to search for it 
outside. All that is needed is to make an enquiry about the Self within. 


How the Divine works 


Take for instance, your body How many realise the miraculous working of innumerable organs 
within the body? Everyone must understand how organs like the heart function and see that no 
excessive strain is placed upon them. The heart and the lungs are discharging their functions 
ceaselessly and regularly with rhythmic precision. All the limbs are doing their functions in an 
orderly way; apparently up to the Geetha dictum â€œKarmanyeva adhikaarasthe" (You are entitled 
only to perform your duty). They are carrying out their respective duties without any concern for 
their rewards. This is, indeed, the lesson to be learnt from the ways of Nature. It has been well 
said- Nature is the best teacher. Look at the way the heart functions; the impure blood comes 
through one channel, it is purified and is pumped to all parts of the body through another 
channel. This is the process by which the body is kept hale and healthy. This is how the Divine 
works. Whatever doctors may say, the wonderful activities going on within the body ceaselessly 
and automatically are manifestations of the power of the Divine. 


Students today do not realise the inner meaning of some of the rituals practised by the ancients 
and preserved even today They have been prescribed for specific purposes and are full of 
meaning. They are intended to achieve physical, mental and spiritual purity. 


In this context I would like to relate an incident. The grandson of an old gentleman watched the 
latter sipping a few drops of water from the palm after uttering a manthra. The lad, who was 
dipping his pen from time to time in an ink bottle to do his homework, asked his grandfather why 
he was drinking the water in small droplets instead of drinking it all in one gulp. The grandfather 
asked him why he was dipping his pen into the ink bottle frequently instead of pouring the ink on 
the paper! Just as the pen has to be dipped for writing a few words at a time the water has to be 
taken with the words of the manthra each time. The lad learnt a good lesson from the example of 
his action. 


You must have full faith in God and should not let anyone disturb it. If an atheist asks you why 
you believe in God you should firmly tell him that it is none of his business to question the 
devotee's belief which is purely a personal matter between him and his God. No one has a right 
to question another man's belief. 


Have firm faith in God 


God's ways may not be easy to comprehend. But whatever God does is only out of His boundless 
love to help the devotees. Some do not understand this and attribute partiality to God. This is due 
to ignorance. True devotees should not give room for such doubts and undermine their faith in 
God. They should always try to strive to seek the One Divine in the many 


Scientists employ all kinds of yanthras (instruments) and declare that they have not found God 
anywhere. But the saints, seeing God with the inner vision, see Him everywhere. They use the 
power of manthra to see God; they see God through the lens of Love. 


When some people ask you, "Can you show God?" you should reply: â€œYou are God; that is why 
you are able to talk and act." There is nothing in the world other than God! To know divinity you 
should know the sacredness within you. Keeping salt in your mouth, you can't taste anything that 
is sweet. Only when you cast off the salt and wash your mouth can you experience the taste of 
the sweet. Worldly desires are like salt. Discard them. Then you can realise Divinity. You must 
shed the evil qualities of jealousy, hatred and anger and divest yourself of the ego. If you rectify 
your defects and cleanse your heart, you can realise Sathya and Dharma as the basis of your life. 
This is the Life Principle and with this you can lead a purposeful life. Making use of your 
intelligence as whip and the mind as the yoke, you can drive the chariot of life, with the senses as 
horses, to the right destination. 


Adhere to your Dharma 


You must understand your Dharma without which you cannot act in the right manner. You are 
the master with the intellect and mind as instruments. The mind is compared to the moon and the 
intellect to the sun. When the sky is clouded in the rainy season, the moon is hidden from our 
view by dark clouds. Similarly, our minds may be clouded by bad thoughts. But when the 
discriminating intellect represented by the sun comes into play, you have the effulgence that 
dispels the darkness. Man is unlike animals whose vertebral column is horizontal. Man can stand 
erect on his two legs. Animals have instincts but no mind or intellect. Man has the power to 
discriminate between good and bad. 


Embodiments of Love! Purify you minds. Shed jealousy and hatred. Chanting God's name will 
confer bliss on you. You are unable to understand the inner feelings of joy that the chanting of 
the Divine name will yield. You should identify yourself with the Divine vibrations which are 
like electric waves creating boundless energy. 


"Be human" 
The word "human" is full of significance: 
'H' stands for "high human values." 
'U' stands for "understanding of human sanctity." 
'M' stands for being "mindful of one's duty." 
'A' stands for "aanandham." 
'N' stands for the "name of God." 
So you should go on chanting the name of God repeatedly throughout this precious night. 


Discourse in the Puurnachandhra Auditorium on 10-3-1994. 


Try and prevent the five sins that the body commits: Killing, 
Adultery, Theft, Drinking intoxicants and the Eating of flesh. It is 
great help for the highest life, if these are kept, as far away as 
possible. 


BABA 


9. God realisation by sense-control 


EMBODIMENTS of love! Wherever the mind wanders, there the three worlds can be 
experienced. Where the mind is absent, there is total void. The Bhaaratheeya festivals have been 
designed to control the tendencies of the mind. 


It is easy to correct the mind. 

A tree can be made to grow straight, 
A stone can be shorn of its roughness, 
But can one straighten the mind? 


Everyone should understand the rationale of every sacred festival. Today is the holy day of 
Shivaraathri. Based on the science of numerology, every letter of the alphabet has a specific 
numerical value. "Si" bears the value 4. "Va" has the value of 5, "Ra", a value of 2. When the 
values of the three are combined, you have a total of 11. This eleven represents the eleven 
Rudhras (negative or destructive principles). 


Role of Rudhras in man's life 


What are the functions of these Rudhras? The Rudhras, in association with the Buddhi (the 
intellect), enter the. minds of people and cause them various types of difficulties and worries. Of 
these difficulties, three types are predominant in the world. They are Aadhibhouthika, 
Aadhyaathmika and Aadhidhaivika. 


Aadhibhouthika refers to difficulties caused by the five elements (ether, air, fire, water and earth) 
and the five sheaths (relating to food, life, mind, awareness and bliss). These sufferings are 
caused by human beings, animals, insects or other creatures. 


Aadhyaathmika refers to sufferings caused by Vaatha (wind), Pittha (bile), and Kapha (phlegm). 


Aadhidhaivika refers to the calamities caused to man by floods and drought, storms and 
earthquakes and similar natural disasters. 


Of all the sufferings endured by human beings, those coming under these three categories are 
most prominent. All other calamities are encompassed by these three. 


For all these sufferings the eleven Rudhras are the cause. The whole world is permeated by the 
Rudhras. Only Aadhidhaivika has an element of security. 


Whatever emanates from Rudhra is fraught with fear. The name itself testifies to the dangerous 
power implicit in it. Rudhram means that which induces fear. The eleven Rudhras are dreadful in 
form. These dreadful entities enter the minds of human beings and subject them to all kinds of 
afflictions. 


Rudhras and sense-control 


The Mahaashivaraathri festival has been designed to subdue these eleven Rudhras. This means 
that by the control of the senses the Rudhras can be controlled. Indhriya nigraha (control of the 
senses) is not that easy. Even if evil impulses coming from external sources are controlled, those 
arising from within cannot be easily controlled. 


But if, at least on one night out of 365 days in a year, the senses are brought under control, then 
peace may be experienced and the quest for liberation may be initiated. When the entire night is 
dedicated to the chanting of the Lord's name, one's mind, speech and senses all get centred on 
God. This is itself a form of sense control. At least on one day in a year all our thoughts and 
words should be centred on God. When this is done, people can realise the Supreme as described 
in the terms, Sathyam, Shivam, Sundharam. Socrates' disciple, Plato, used the terms, Truth, 
Goodness and Beauty to describe this state of Self-Realisation. In the experience of oneness with 
the Divine, there is Shaanthi (peace) Chith (Awareness) and Aanandha (Bliss). 


The Lord is experienced as Sath-Chith-Aanandha. What is Sath? Sath is Being, that which is 
eternally present. This means that even when an object is not there, its qualities are present. In 
Vedhaantik parlance, these qualities are described as Asthi, Bhaathi and Priyam (principles of 
Existence, Cognisability and Utility). Asthi means existence (the quality of permanence). This 
may be likened, say, to sugar. In whatever manner sugar may be used, by dissolving it in water 
or mixing it with flour, its quality of sweetness remains. It is Sath in the sense that it has the 
unchanging quality of sweetness. 


Chith is awareness (or consciousness). Chith is like water. When Sath (as sugar) is combined 
with Chith (as water) you have neither sugar not water, but syrup. The combination of Sath and 
Chith results in Aanandha (Bliss). When the unchanging, eternal Divinity unites with the 
changing and inert Prakrithi (Nature), you have Aanandha. The significance of 
Mahaashivaraathri is that it is an auspicious occasion when Sath-Chith-Aanandha can be 
experienced. 


While the Rudhras are inflicting sufferings on mankind in various ways, by the control of the 
senses, if humans turn their minds towards God and devote themselves to Godly pursuits, they 
will find their path to Moksha (liberation). Moksha means getting rid of Moha (the delusions 
relating to the physical). 


In this manner every one has to understand the true significance of sacred festivals like 
Shivaraathri. 


Importance of Shivaraathri 


Among these festival days, Mahaashivaraathri is of exceptional importance. Today God is in 
close proximity to man. At midnight (on Shivaraathri), Divine vibrations are close to every 
human heart. At such a time, when people are engaged in holy tasks, they get suffused with the 
Divine vibrations. 


People should realise that them is nothing closer to them than the Divine. Even one's mother may 
occasionally be remote from the child, but the Divine is never far from anyone at any time. This 
means that everyone is Divine. But each one must strive to recognise this indwelling Divinity 
that is the eternal Reality. Most people waste their lives in the observance of external rituals and 
forms of worship. Together with external observances, people should also try to achieve internal 
purity. How long should one waste his life in external forms? All knowledge and skills are of 
superficial value and effect no internal change. 


The seed and the fruit 


Embodiments of the Divine Aathma! Time is passing. You are forgetting your obligations. Your 
life has been given to you to fulfill your duties. Do your duty. For years you have been listening 
to Svaami's teachings. You are meeting many noble persons. You are performing various kinds 


of Saadhana (spiritual exercises). What is the bliss you have derived from all these? When you 
put this question, there is no answer. Are you going forward at least in any one aspect of 
spirituality? Are you able to concentrate your mind on a single sacred act? What is it you have 
accomplished? What are you seeking? What is the inner significance of the fruits you seek? 


There is no meaning in your quest. You seek the fruits of good actions, but you indulge in bad 
acts. If one seeks the fruits of good deeds, he must do good deeds. Bad actions can only yield bad 
results. There is a Sanskrith saying, "Man desires the fruits of meritorious deeds, but performs no 
meritorious acts. Man wants to avoid the fruits of sin, but indulges in sinful deeds." 


What kind of results can one have if from dawn to dusk he engages himself in untruthful, 
unrighteous and evil actions? To the extent possible, one should try to practise at least a few 
sacred teachings. Otherwise, one will be overtaken by death with the passing of time and the 
wastage of the body All your achievements amount to nothing. It is your primary duty to practise 
one or two of the sacred teachings. 


You have been in the Aashram for many years. You have listened to many discourses. But you 
have derived little benefit from all this. You must ponder over this seriously. Then only you will 
reap the benefit of participation in sacred festivals. 


Strive to eradicate the evil tendencies in you 


On this sacred occasion, you must strive to eradicate the evil tendencies in you. When your 
conscience tells you that something is wrong, you should refrain from doing it. You betray your 
true humanness when you fail to act upto the dictates of your conscience. 


When one's words are in accord with one's thoughts, they become truth. When the spoken word 
is translated into action, it becomes Dharma (right action). The basis for both Truth and Right 
Action is the Antharaathma (Conscience), the Indwelling Spirit. The thoughts that emanate from 
the Indwelling Spirit should find expression in speech. If the inner feelings are different from 
what is spoken, can the words be treated as truth or untruth? Clearly, it is untruth. When one's 
action is not in accordance with his words, it is Adharma (unrighteous action). Truth and 
Righteousness are expressions of the promptings from the depths of one's Conscience. Today 
people are prone to disregard the voice of conscience. 


I have had frequent occasions to refer to the lessons to be learnt from the great epics. In the 
Mahaabhaaratha, we have the heroic figure of Bheeshma. He was a great sage, a Jnaani (man of 
supreme wisdom) and a person of unshakable determination. He stood foremost in honouring his 
plighted word. Such a person knew quite well that what he was allowing the Kauravas to do was 
manifestly wrong. He knew that the Kauravas were indulging in evil deeds. He was aware that 
they were following unrighteous and untruthful ways. Nevertheless he was too weak to correct 
them or prevent them from pursuing their evil courses. Not was that all. He accepted the role of 
Commander-in-Chief of the Kaurava armies. This was a blemish in his character. He was unable 
to act upto the dictates of his Antharvaani (conscience). Therein lay his weakness. 


Compare Bheeshma's failure with the conduct of Vibheeshana. He was of demonic lineage and 
lived and moved among Raakshasas. He was aware that what his elder brother (Raavana) had 
done (by kidnapping Seetha) was wrong. Knowing this, he warned Raavana in various ways. He 
repeatedly told Raavana: "This is wrong. You should not do this. It is not good for you." 
Vibheeshana felt that it was his duty to warn Raavana (against his evil ways). Ultimately, failing 
to convince Raavana, he chose to give up his brother and seek asylum with Raama. 


A comparison of Bheeshma and Vibheeshana 


When we compare the attitudes of the two, we find that Vibheeshana is greater than Bheeshma. 
Despite his knowing the wicked ways of the Kauravas, Bheeshma was unable to intervene. 
Vibheeshana, on the contras, chided Raavana. He turned away from the wicked and found refuge 
in God. Thus, in the practice of sacred actions, Vibheeshana emerges as a greater figure than 
Bheeshma. This is the lesson taught by the epics. 


Are you giving any thought to such sacred lessons? You read books, but do not care to practise 
their teachings. You listen to discourses but do not live up to them. You have to put into practice 
the teachings which you learn. 


What, then, is the meaning of spirituality? It is not the reading of scriptures or the performance 
of rituals. It is to live up to truth one has learnt. Unfortunately today, because of the influence of 
Kali, this does not happen. 


Control of senses is a form of sacrifice 


At least on this auspicious day; people should concentrate their minds on God with purity and 
devotion. The control of the senses is itself a form of Thyaaga (sacrifice) which leads to 
Immortality. Sacrifice of wealth or possessions is no sacrifice at all. It is the sacrifice of the 
senses (the desires caused by them) which is the highest sacrifice. 


The Vedhas refer to the sacrifice of Thanu, Mana, Dhana. Thanu refers to the body. Mana refers 
to the mind. What is Dhana? It is the wealth of the senses with which man is endowed. It is the 
senses that have to be sacrificed, not the body, which is made up of the five elements and 
contains all kinds of refuse. It is the attachment to the body that has to be given up. The hold of 
the senses has to be reduced. What is the value of all the pleasures you profess to enjoy? If you 
cannot sacrifice these trivial and transient pleasures, how can you experience the Bliss of the 
Eternal? If people cannot give up petty addictions to coffee or betel leaves, how can they acquire 
control over the senses? This can be done only by spiritual Saadhana. 


In Svaami's view, giving up is easier than holding on to things. It is easier to give up a 
handkerchief than to hold it in the hand. Examine the sacrifices you are making in everyday life. 
You breathe in and breathe our. The exhalation is essential for purifying the lungs. Part of the 
food consumed is discharged, as excreta. Without this elimination, the stomach will be upset. 


These examples show that giving up is as necessary as acquisition. Our well-being is related to 
thyaaga (sacrifice). It should be recognized that festivals are intended to promote the spirit of 
sacrifice and not for indulgence in revelry, which leads to illness. Sacrifice promotes Toga 
(communion with God). God looks for your devotion and for your abilities. He looks into your 
Chittha (mind) rather than at your Vittha (wealth). He judges you by your virtues and not by your 
caste. He is concerned about what you think than about the religion you profess. He is intent on 
attracting your heart and not your wealth. But, today. people imagine that God can be propitiated 
by the offer of money. This is due to the devotee's ignorance. 


God cannot be secured by "force" 


However, money has a useful role to play in the service of worthy causes. God has no part to 
play in this. People try to influence the Divine by some kind of force. God cannot be secured by 
"force." He is amenable only to the "Inner source." 


Many good deeds are being done all over the world. People should participate in such good 
activities, render help to others and regard them as spiritual exercises. 


As I am always in a stare of bliss, I make no distinction between a happy and auspicious event 
and one that is unhappy or inauspicious. These distinctions are made by persons attached to the 
body-mind complex. 


A donation from New York 


Last night I received a communication from New York to the following effect: "The welfare 
activities carried on by Svaami, the service programmes launched by Svaami, the uniqueness of 
the Hospital established by Svaami, have been hailed by people all over. the world. 
Bhaaratheeyas have not fully appreciated their value. In appreciation of the unique services 
rendered by Svaami, without any kind of publicity or propaganda, we wish to make our humble 
contribution to this cause and our offering, as the first instalment, this token remittance." The 
donors, who wished to remain anonymous, have sent Rs. I00 crores. Out of this amount, Rs. 50 
crores are to be kept in fixed deposit, from the interest on which the recurring expenses of the 
Super-Speciality Hospital will be met. Rs. 25 crores are offered to the Institute of Higher 
Learning for the promotion of human values in education. The balance of Rs. 25 crores has been 
offered to the Sathya Sai Central Trust for whatever incidental expenses it may have to meet in 
carrying on its activities. 


This amount has been described as the first instalment. The donors have declared that they 
consider it as their good fortune to have been allowed to make this donation. This is true 
sacrifice. Many who make petty gifts advertise their donation in loud terms. The New York 
donors desired to remain anonymous. "Name is not important. Service alone matters. And even 
here, what Bhagavaan is doing is sacred service." This is their declaration. 


We do not ask for even a naya paisa from any one. What is the reason? You see here the 
response to our selfless service. Hence, engage yourselves in selfless service. The reward for it 
will come of its own accord. Do not have any doubts on this score. Whatever you undertake to 
do, do it with all your heart and to your full satisfaction. That satisfaction will give you all the 
reward and recompense. It will confer all strength. This is the quality you have to cultivate. 
Acquire this true wealth. Without goodness, all other riches are of no avail. 


Lead a life of firm, unwavering faith 


Embodiments of Love! Many sacred events like this are happening all over the world. The glory 
of Sathya Sai has spread to every part of the world. Unfortunately, Bhaaratheeyas alone appear 
to live under the shadow of a lamp, as it were. The entire world is enjoying the light going out 
from here. For this, the faith of the people outside is mainly responsible. Here, the faith comes 
and goes. Faith here swings like a pendulum. This is not good. You should have a steady mind. 
Every one should develop this kind of faith. Only when there is faith, love will sprout. 


Where there is confidence, there is love. 
Where there is love, there is peace. 
Where there is peace, there is truth. 
Where there is truth, there is bliss. 


Where there is bliss, there is God. 


Hence, if there is no confidence, how can there be love? When you see some miracle, devotion 
arises. But, the next moment, there is a change. This is not the right kind of faith. Faith should be 
unaffected by tips and downs. It should not be like passing clouds. Today many lack steadiness. 
People should have a rock-like faith that remains unshaken, whatever may happen. Take the 
example of Harishchandhra. His adherence to truth remained firm, despite all the troubles to 
which he was subjected, including the loss of his kingdom, his wife and son. He was reduced to 
the position of a watchman in a burning-ghat. But he remained steadfast. 


It is in this spirit that you should enter on any task. Harishchandhra did not worry about the 
sacrifices he had to make for the sake of truth. Accept whatever the Lord gives as a benediction. 
Esteem it as a gracious gift from God. Because of his firm faith, Harishchandhra ultimately got 
back his wife, son and kingdom. Therefore, you should h;ave a faith that is unwavering and 
unshakable. Lead a life of firm faith. 


The holy night of Mahaashivaraathri is intended to serve as a sacred occasion for turning the 
mind firmly towards God. You are surrounded by Rudhras and all your happiness and sorrow 
are earned by them. When you bring them under your control, your life becomes secure. You 
will be successful in every endeavour. 


Do your duty: realise God 


Men are wasting their precious lives in the pursuit of fleeting and petty pleasures. Make the best 
use of the opportunity you have now got. That is true devotion. You alone are responsible for 
your condition because of the way your mind works. Do your duty, recognise the truth ofâ€™ your 
being, and you will be able to experience your divinity. You have to purify your heart to 
experience the Divine. You may have desires, aspirations and yearning for happiness. But there 
is nothing equal to the bliss of experiencing the Divine and you will secure this bliss, wherever 
God may be. 


Life one long series of worries from birth to death. 
But all worries can be overcome by the love of God. 
Cultivate this love at least from now onwards. 


Turn your minds towards God. Limit your worldly desires. Why waste all your life in the endless 
pursuit of wealth? 


Svaami's Sankalpa 


The communication which I received yesterday made Me ask why so much money had been 
sent. Svaami decided that it should be spent on projects of permanent value. Svaami's will is 
adamantine. No one can alter it. Svaami's glory, fame and sacredness have not been achieved by 
publicity. They are the results of Svaami's actions. I have no concern with publicity. Action 
alone counts. What is achieved by publicity, will disappear through publicity. 


Sai will not be affected by propaganda. The world may be affected one way or the other by 
propaganda. Sai will not be affected at all. Conduct is most important. All Sai institutions must 
conduct themselves properly. Propaganda by practice is what matters. At least in future, set an 
example to others by your actions and give a lead to the people. This is what I desire, nothing 
else. 


The nation has to be improved. Render service to the country. Whatever you may do, consider it 
as service to Sai. Cultivate this spirit of sacrifice. When you are here, you display your spirit of 
sacrifice. But after you leave, you develop desires. This is not good. You must exemplify, the 
same spirit wherever you may be. Wherever you may go, you must have the spirit of service. 
You must redeem your life through selfless seva. 


True saadhana is to seek God within you 


Embodiments of the Divine Aathma! The whole of last night you were all immersed in the 
blissful vibrations in Prashaanthi Nilayam caused by the chanting of the Lord's name. You must 
see that the Nilayam in each of you is always filled with these divine vibrations. What is this 
Nilayam? It is your body, which enshrines the Aathma. There are the divine vibrations always in 
you. They constitute your Life-Force. The body is inert by itself. It is the divine vibrations that 
animate it. Both the body and the Vital Force derive their power from the energy radiating from 
the Aathma (the Indwelling Spirit). You are thus a composite of the body (material substance), 
the Life Force (vibrations) and the Aathma (Radiations). Seek God within you. This is true 
saadhana. 


You are indeed full of love. Why don't you share it with others? Love will grow the more it is 
shared. The heart is like a perennial spring. The more you draw from it, the more it will flow 
with love. 


Discourse in the Puurnachandhra Auditorium on the morning of 11-3-1994. 


10. Foster love: eschew hatred 


EMBODIMENTS of Divine Love! Though three ornaments of a permanent nature are available 
for man in the shape of charity for the hand, hearing God's glory for the ears and speaking the 
truth for the tongue, man is engaging himself in the pursuit of all transient and useless worldly 
things. He should strive to achieve that by getting which everything else is achieved. 


The first step is to understand the link that connects any two individuals. It is nothing but love. It 
is on the basis of love that the entire society is closely knit. What is a country? It is not the land 
but the society that makes a country or a nation. When the nation is prosperous and progresses 
with healthy growth, the needs of the individuals are also fulfilled. The individual is dependent 
on society . He is born, brought up and sustained by society. Therefore, it is the duty of every 
individual to render selfless service for promoting the common well are of society. 


All are the children of Mother Earth and should follow the selfless activity of the earth, which 
rotates on its own axis and goes round the sun at 66,000 miles per hour. By this constant morion 
we get day and night and variations in the seasons without which we cannot have food crops 
which sustain mankind. 


Character is more valuable than knowledge 


As children of the earth, people should learn the lesson of thyaaga (selfless activity) from 
Mother Earth. Without sacrifice it is difficult to sustain life itself. Some say knowledge is 
valuable. But, character is more valuable than knowledge. One may be a learned scholar, one 
may hold high positions of authority, one may be very wealthy or be an eminent scientist, but if 
one has no character all the other acquisitions are of no use at all. 


Sacrifice, love, compassion, and forbearance are the sterling human qualities that should be 
fostered, shedding jealousy, hatred, ego and anger, which are animal qualities. What is the use of 
being born as a man and leading a life of birds and beasts? 


Man should maintain equanimity in pleasure and pain, loss or gain. Without pain you cannot 
enjoy pleasure. Sorrow is verily the royal road to joy. Sufferings are the stepping stones that lead 
man towards virtuous conduct. One should neither be elated by pleasure not dejected by pain. 


You must understand the wonderful human life created by God. God created everything in the 
world and entrusted man with the responsibility to look after them. God allowed man to use 
things in the world as he wished, but on one condition. He has to suffer the consequences of his 
actions, good or bad. 


It is a folly to expect good results from bad deeds 


So, you have to do good deeds if you want to experience good results. Doing bad deeds man 
wants to enjoy good and beneficial results. It is a folly to expect good results from bad deeds. 
Nature is like a mirror, which reflects only the object before it. In every human being, good and 
bad are co-existing. One should strive only to do good deeds which alone will lead one to 
liberation or Moksha. Moksha is not an object that can be acquired from outside. It is a way of 
life itself. When you follow your inherent nature and cultivate good feelings you can attain 
liberation from worldly bondage. 


This year is called 'Bhava.' You should foster good Bhaava (attitudes and feelings) in this year. 
Your guna (character) depends on the food you consume. You should not be carried away by the 


vagaries of the mind. Such a great and powerful warrior as Arjuna told Krishna that the mind is 
wavering in nature and. difficult to control. "It can be controlled by practise and detachment," 
said Krishna. The leaves in a tree moves when the wind blows. lust as the wind causes the leaves 
to move, the company one keeps influences a man's mind. You should flee from evil company 
Though inherently the heart is good, by evil company it gets polluted with such bad qualities as 
anger, jealousy and hatred. You should use your body, mind and intellect for the benefit of 
society at large and not for selfish purposes. The mind is like a mad monkey, while the body is 
like a water bubble which may burst at any moment. Therefore, you must follow only the 
Conscience. You cannot realise your Divinity as long as your mind is filled with evil thoughts. 
Disregarding all bad qualities and bad thoughts, you should develop good thoughts based on 
unsullied love. Start the day with love, fill the day with love and end the day with love. This is 
the way to God. The primary requisite for cultivating love is to get rid of doubts and disbelief 
and develop confidence. 


Man has to go back to his source, that is God 


Where there is confidence there is love; where there is love, there is peace; where there is peace, 
there is bliss; where there is bliss, there is God. It is only because you are confident that she is 
your mother, you have her. If you doubt this, there is no scope for such love. Confidence is the 
basis for love and steadiness of mind. But, what we find everywhere today is mental restlessness. 
Most of you have come here from far off places, seeking mental peace. After coming here, you 
indulge in mixing with evil people, which makes you lose even the Ii.trio peace you had. You 
should question yourselves as to the purpose for which you have come here. 


If you want to lead a meaningful life, you must know wherefrom you have come and the 
destination or goal which you want to reach. Right from the time of birth you are asking the 
question, Koham (Who am I?). One's entire life is spent without getting an answer for this 
question. When you say "This is my mind, my body," you are different form your mind, body 
and senses. You are the master. The body, mind and senses are just instruments. The answer to 
the question Koham comes from within as you are breathing 21,600 times every day. As you 
inhale, you make the Sound So and when you exhale, you utter the sound Ham. Together, So- 
ham means, "He is me." This is the great truth proclaimed by the Vedhas: "Thath thvam asi" 
(You are that). 


You may study the process of water from the ocean going up as vapour through the sun's energy, 
forming clouds which come down as rain. The rain water is conveyed by rivers back to the ocean 
after undergoing several changes in the process. The intellect is the Sun. Truth is the cloud, drops 
of love are the rains. These flow in the river of Bliss which merges in the ocean of God. Just as 
water from the ocean comes back to the ocean after going through different stages of 
transformation, man has to go back to his source, that is God. 


The eternal truth proclaimed by Upanishaths 


If a piece of charcoal is kept apart from fire, it cannot burn. Both must be brought close together 
and you must use a fan to make the charcoal catch fire. Love is the fan which will make you 
glow with divine effulgence. This is the truth proclaimed by the Upanishaths, which say: "You 
are God." You think you are only the body: The body is inert without the soul which is the Life 
Force. 


You need not go anywhere searching for God. Divinity is within you. Just as there are many 
limbs in the body which are activated by one heart inside, the same God is the Life-force for all 
beings. The entire Universe is a reflection of the Supreme Being. Your Bhaava (attitude) is the 
cause of your suffering or happiness. With whatever feeling you see an object, the same is 
reflected back. Dhrishti (vision) determines your view of Shrishti (Creation). When you see the 
world through coloured glasses, you will see everything in the colour of the glasses you are 
wearing. Whatever happens, you should take it as a gift of God. Love is God. Live in Love. This 
is the proper way of worshipping God. All forms of worship and penance are only for control of 
mind. They will not give you the realisation of God. God is within you, around you, beside you. 
He is the only true friend. You develop friendship with worldly people, who may desert you 
when you are bereft of your wealth, power or status. God alone will be with you always. 


Desire is an unnecessary burden in life's journey 


As the Geetha declares, "Adhveshtaa Sarva bhuuthaanaam" (the devotee dear to the Lord is one 
who does not hate any being). You should not harbour hatred towards any one but keep away 
from bad company. You should not cultivate relationship with evil persons as this will spoil the. 
purity of your mind. The mind is the cause of bondage or liberation. You turn it toward God and 
cultivate detachment. If you turn towards the world you develop attachment. Desire is an 
unnecessary burden in your life's journey. You must reduce your desires to a minimum, as it may 
not be possible to give up desire totally. 


If you analyse the difference between God and man you will find that life plus desire is man and 
life minus desire is God. Confine your desires to primary necessities for sustaining life such as 
food, clothing and shelter. When you have excessive desire you become restless. Whatever the 
nature of your work, if you dedicate it as an offering to God, you will have no worry at all. This 
is real saadhana. 


Even when you are engaged in your daily chores, you can convert them into worship of God. 
While you are sweeping the floor, you can deem it as clearing your heart of all impurities. All 
work should be done with a pure heart filled with devotion, just as cooking must be done in a 
clean vessel. Whatever good you may do without a genuine feeling of love is of no use. It is love 
in a pure heart that transforms work into worship. 


Get rid of animal qualities of jealousy and hatred? 


I would advise all, and especially the overseas devotees who have come here from far off 
countries, to subject themselves to a process of self-enquiry. Is it right to call yourself a man? It 
is only a half-truth. You should be able to assert: "I am a man. I am not an animal." You will 
have to get rid of the animal qualities of ego, jealousy and hatred and develop human qualifies of 
love, truth, sacrifice and happiness. Consider pain and' pleasure as passing clouds. Happiness can 
be attained only by union with God. Worldly pleasure is transient. 


By nourishing good feelings in the heart you can transform yourself from bad to good. This is 
called Samskaara. It is akin to converting paddy into rice to make the grain fit for preparing 
food. 


There may be many paths for the same goal. You get confused because many preachers say 
many different things. You must choose one path, one road. God is one and he can be realised by 
love. Fill your hearts with love and distribute the love to others considering that all are sparks of 
the Divine. 


You must feel the Divine within you and develop divine qualities. Then only you can shine as a 
true human being. You should cultivate harmony in thought, word and deed which is the 
hallmark of a human being. Prema (Love) is the only weapon by which you can attain Godliness 
and make your life purposeful. God is like gold, the possession of which will enable you to make 
any jewel you want. Through unblemished love alone you can achieve the grace of God and 
enjoy blissful peace. 


Surrender to God who knows how to shape you 


People coming to Me frequently tell Me: "I want bliss," "I want peace," "I want liberation." 
When you want a jewel to be made out of the gold that you hand over to a goldsmith, he will 
have to melt it in a crucible, hammer it, cut it and weld the pieces to make the required ornament. 
By these processes only it can be made into a beautiful chain. Similarly, you must hand over 
your mind to God and allow God to do what is necessary. But, now-a-days, the devotees are 
laying down conditions to God while seeking His Grace! You must surrender to God and submit 
to His Will. God knows how to shape you. 


If you want to send a book by parcel, you have to pack k properly. In order to make use of the 
book you have to remove the packing. God has given you peace with a packing. When you 
remove the packing of 'I' and 'want', you get peace. You have to shed your ego and desire in 
order to enjoy peace which is inherent in you. When a sculptor wants to make a wooden statue of 
Krishna, he chisels the wood to get the shape of the statue. So also you have to shed your evil 
thoughts and feelings and surrender to God unconditionally without any reservation whatsoever. 


To overcome the bad influences of the thanu, mana and dhana (body, mind and wealth) the 
scriptures prescribe cultivation of sathsanga. What is sathsanga? It is generally believed that it 
refers to the company of good people. But this is not correct. Sath means Truth, which is Aathma 
or God. So sathsanga means the company of God and not of people. Divinity will manifest 
within you if you follow any one of the nine types of devotion. In a nutshell, the precepts to be 
followed are; See no evil: see only good. Hear no evil: hear only good. Speak no evil: speak only 
good. Think no evil: think only good. Do no evil: do only good. This is the way to God. 


Do not lend your ears to evil talk 


If any one starts talking ill of others, go away from that place without lending your cars to such 
evil talk. In the Raamaayana, Kaikeyi was influenced by the words of her servant Manthara who 
instigated her to stop the crowning of Raama and arrange for his banishment as she had some 
grouse against Raama. Because Kaikeyi lent her cars to the evil counsel of Manthara, she 
manoeuvred to send Raama to the forest. Thus both these women earned a bad name for 
themselves for all time. Among men, you have the example of Dhuryodhana in the 
Mahaabhaaratha who always bore ill-will towards the Paandavas and nourished always bad 
thoughts leading to evil designs. Similarly, Keechaka looked at Dhraupadhi with evil eyes and 
was killed by Bheema. Raavana did evil deeds. Manthara committed the sin of speaking ill of 
Raama, Kaikeyi lent her ears to evil talk, Keechaka committed the sin of casting evil looks on 
Dhraupadhi, Dhuryodhana nurtured bad feelings and Raavana indulged in bad deeds. These are 
examples to prove how the acts of speaking evil, listening to evil words, thinking evil and doing 
evil deeds cause one's downfall. Spiritual saadhana consists in speaking good, thinking good, 
seeing good, hearing good and doing good. 


Excessive talking must also be avoided as it is waste of energy. When one gets weak due to 
wastage of energy, he is prone to get angry and develop hatred. You must, therefore, use the 
God-given energy for good purposes. Energy is a divine gift. By curtailing unnecessary, talk and 
keeping silent, you can conserve energy. "Talk less and work more" is the golden role to be 
adopted. 


Keep close connection with God alone 


Many foreigners come here and involve themselves in unnecessary relationships with people. 
Some person says "I have come alone," when he first meets Me. After some time he brings a 
lady with him and says, "She is my wife." Why should you cultivate such attachments and 
relationships when you have come here for spiritual pursuits? All these relationships are 
temporal. You must cut off these connections and establish connection only with the permanent 
and eternal entity; the Supreme Lord. God is omnipresent. He was there before your birth and He 
will continue to be there after your death too. Therefore you should make efforts to keep close 
connection with God alone. Do your duty with a feeling of dedication, leaving the results in the 
hands of the Divine. Then you can always be happy. 


Your behaviour and character are very important and these should be reflected in your adherence 
to discipline and good manners. To-day, the nation is in turmoil due to lack of discipline. You 
should follow the maxim: "Help ever-Hurt never." People don't understand My ideal of 
perfection, which consists of purity, patience and perseverance. Patience means being in a state 
of Shaanthi (Peace). I am always happy and peaceful. Even when some people wish me "Happy 
birthday" I tell them that I am always happy and the wishes should be addressed to those who are 
not happy. Another feature of patience is not being elated by praise or depressed by calumny. I 
am not affected by pleasure or pain. It is the perfect state of Samaadhi (Sama + dhi), which 
means equanimity in pleasure and pain. 


Perseverance is most essential 


Perseverance is most essential for the accomplishment of objective. By perseverance Nara can 
become Naaraayana, that is man can become Divine. People lacking this quality cannot achieve 
anything. Their efforts are like trying to retain water in a pot with several holes. If you direct all 
your actions towards God, you will become one with God. This should be done on the basis of 
Prema (love). 


A man living without love is as good as dead. You are having love towards your father, mother, 
wife, children and others. There is nothing wrong in this. But you must see God in every one of 
them. This is the essence of the well-known prayer to God: 


Thvameva maathaacha Pithaa thvameva 
Thvameva bandhuscha Sakhaa thvameva 
Thvameva Vidhya dhravinam thvameva 
Thvameva Sarvam mama dheva dheva. 

This prayer addressed to the Supreme Being means- 


"You are the father, mother, friend, and relative. You are knowledge and wealth. You are 
everything. Oh my Lord!" 


We should see God in every being. The whole Universe is a manifestation 'of Brahman. As a 
human being, you have come from Naaraayana. You are divine but you are not realising it. 
When you do namaskaaram with folded hands in obeisance, it means that you are offering your 
five Karmendhriyas (organs of action) and five Jnaanendhriyas (organs or perception) to the 
Divine. 

Offering namaskaaram itself emphasises unity. If you have unity and purity, divinity will 
blossom there. But you have only enmity and community now. 


You have to practise speaking sweetly and softly and avoid unnecessary connections .and 
relationships with all and sundry. The easiest Saadhana is to reflect on God with love that is 
expanding and embracing one and all. It is the only way to realise the Divine. 


Discourse at Kodaikanal on 11-4-1994, Thelugu New Year's day. 


Whatever I do it is for you, not for Me. For what is it that can be 
called Mine? Only you. 


BABA 


11. Time is God : make best use of it 


EMBODIMENTS of Love! Nature is the best teacher for mankind to learn, the noble and sacred 
lesson of selfless sacrifice. Look at the trees which yield fruits for the enjoyment of others, 
without any trace of selfishness. The rivers flow for the benefit of others, providing water for 
quenching their thirst and helping them in many ways. Cows give delicious milk to the people 
without even a trace of selfishness. Similarly, a good person is one who strives ceaselessly to 
render help to his fellow beings. 


Ugaadhi or New Year day is a festival that teaches lessons in selfless service. It is not intended 
for feasting. It is sacred day when wholesome wisdom should dawn and enlightenment should 
blossom in the hearts of people. 


There are four yugas (aeons), namely, Kritha Yuga, Thretha. Yuga, Dhvaapara Yuga and Kali 
Yuga. The Kritha Yuga commenced in the month of Vaishakha. Thretha Yuga in the month of 
Karthika, Dhvaapara Yuga in the month of Maargashirsha and Kali Yuga in the month of 
Chaithra. As the present Kali age started in the month of Chaithra, the first day of the Chaithra 
month is called Yugaadhi. The aeons are only measurement of time. Time is God. God is called 
Kaala-svaruupa (the very embodiment of Time). Hence, we must respect Time and spend it in 
useful pursuits. Wasting of time is ungodly 


Every created thing is born of Time 


This world is termed as Jagam. Ja means taking janmam (birth) and gain stands for going. 
Jagam means that the world is a place where beings are born and die. In this changing world, 
God is the changeless entity. God is all-pervasive and can be experienced anywhere. He is 
worshipped as Kaala kaalaaya namah, Kaala svaruupaaya namah and so on. Without Time, 
there is no world. Without the world there is no creation, without creation there is nothing. Every 
created thing is born of Time. 


This New Year Day proclaims the truth that God is the Master of Time. Unfortunately, man fails 
to understand the power of God. He wastes three quarters of his time in unworthy earthly 
pursuits. Spiritual pursuit is the right way of making use of time. It calls for numbing good 
feelings and doing good deeds without selfish motive, extending love and compassion towards - 
all beings. This is real saadhana. Sa means Aathma and dhana means wealth. By utilising your 
time in spiritual pursuits, you can enjoy spiritual wealth. But, man wastes all his time in unholy 
thoughts and evil deeds without understanding the divinity within him. One should understand 
the value of time, each moment of which vanishes faster than lighting. If you want to sanctify 
your hard-earned human birth have to cultivate divine thoughts. 


Behave in a manner befitting your status 


This is the age of Kali, which is often described as Kalaha Yuga (the age of discord), in which 
there will be misunderstanding and quarrels between husband and wife, father and son, preceptor 
and disciple. Giving up the quarrelsome attitude, people must cultivate love and compassion and 
shine as embodiments of love which they really are. The heart is termed as Hridhaya, in which 
dhaya (compassion) 1s in-built. Only when one has dhaya towards others, can he be deemed fit to 
be called a human being. 


We find today people indulging in creel deeds, devoid of even a trace of compassion, and 
behaving worse than birds and beasts. Even trees and rivers help mankind selflessly. But humans 


are not behaving in a manner befitting their status as superior beings. They do not have the 
attitude of helping one another.' Trees are helpful even when they become dead and dry, serving 
as firewood. Trees are the best example of Thyaaga bhaava (the attitude of Sacrifice). They are 
the greatest teachers of the quality of sacrifice. But, human beings, who get all the benefit from 
trees, are not having the same spirit of sacrifice. They are attached to their bodies and spend their 
energy and time to provide comforts for the body How long will the body last? It is a bundle of 
diseases, a repository of filth and foul excreta. It cannot help one to cross the ocean of samsaara 
(worldly life). It is subject to changes such as childhood, adolescence, youth, adulthood, old age 
and finally death. One does not know when, where and how death will occur. M;m neglects 
svadharma (his rightful duty) and relies on this transient body, behaving like a beast. He does not 
make any effort to realise that in the changing body there is the changeless and eternal Aathma 
(Spirit). This Divinity is the same, in all beings and changeless through all the stages of life. 


Man is in quest of happiness that eludes him 


Everyone wants to achieve happiness and makes all sorts of efforts for this purpose without 
knowing where to find it. He thinks he can get happiness when he gets a job to earn his 
livelihood and pursues his studies only with this end in view. After he gets a job, he is still not 
happy. He wants to get married. He marries and sets up a family. Even then them is no 
happiness. He wants progeny. He gets a child. Still he is not happy. He wants promotion so that 
he can earn more to maintain his family: He gets it. Even then he is not happy. And he goes on 
like that in quest of happiness that eludes him. Happiness is not there in all these attainments or 
possessions. It is only in the heart within. He is himself the embodiment of happiness. Yet, 
without realising this, he goes on seeking happiness elsewhere. 


"Nithyaanandham paramasukhadham." Permanent bliss is only within and once you realise that 
you are the blissful Aathma and not the transient body, you will always be happy Some people 
raise the question, "Where is God?" God cannot be seen outside. You must direct your vision 
inside. Then you will realise that the entire world is a reflection of the Aathma within you. 


"Puurnamadhah Puurnamidham 
Puurnaath Puurnamudhachyathe 
Puurnasya Puurnamaadhaaya 
Puurnameva avashishyathe." 


'That' (Brahman) is Whole. 'This' (creation) is also Whole. From 'that' Whole 'this' Whole has 
emerged. Even though 'this' Whole has come out of 'that!' Whole, yet 'thatâ€™ Whole remains 
WHOLE only. 


What does this mean? From whatever source a thing is born, it retains the quality of the source in 
full. For example, this tumbler is made of silver. It retains the quality of silver fully. This mike 
set is made of stainless steel and it retains the quality of stainless steel in full. A pot is made of 
clay and it retains the quality of clay Similarly, man has come out of God and, therefore, he has 
the divine quality in him. God is Paripuurna Svaruupa (Total personality). You should engage 
yourself in wholesome divine pursuits and fulfill the purpose of this valuable human life. You 
should thus reflect your divinity in the human form. 


The lesson taught by Ugaadhi 


Ugaadhi teaches man the lesson that he should perfect himself as an embodiment of divinity. 
You should not waste time, because a moment gone, will not come back. You are only looking 
after the needs of the body; eager to make it last longer. But you forget that Time is God. There 
is nothing that can supercede this. So the Saadhana you should do is to utilise your time in doing 
good deeds for the benefit of the society at large and not to satisfy your self-interest. Don't waste 
your energy in unnecessary talk or gossip. God has endowed man with all the organs of 
perception and action, not for selfish activities, but to do godly deeds and help others. In the 
Purusha Shuktha it is declared that "Braahmanasya Mukhamaaseeth" (Brahmana came out of 
the face of Cosmic. Purusha). The reason for this is that all the organs of perception which help 
man to acquire knowledge, namely, ears, nose and tongue are in the face. Braahmana does not 
mean one that is born in the Braahmana community. It refers to one who has knowledge of 
Brahman-----"Brahmajnaani Braahmanah." 


True meaning of real saadhana 


Since the organs of perception are in the face, Braahmana is described as "The face of the 
Supreme Lord." Through these organs you can see, hear and speak. 


You must see no evil but see only good. 

You must hear no evil, but hear only good. 
You must speak no evil, but speak only good. 
You must do no evil, but do only good. 


This is real saadhana. You need not do japa, dhyaana and thapas. Your monkey mind wanders 
elsewhere when you sit in meditation. Then it becomes only a waste of precious time. Do your 
duty as dedication to the Divine. You can thereby transform work into worship. 


For saadhana, the nine-fold path of devotion has been prescribed for humanity: Shravanam 
(hearing God's glory), Keerthanam (singing His Glory), Vishnunaamasmaranam (remembering 
the Lord's name constantly), Paadhasevanam (serving the Lotus Feet of the Lord), Archanam 
(offering worship), Vandhanam (prostrating}, Dhaasyam (doing service as a servant to the Lord), 
Sneham (worshipping as a friend), Aathma-nivedhanam (total Self-surrender). You must listen to 
the glory of God being chanted, and do service to humanity, chanting His name and singing His 
glory. You should have the attitude that all are embodiments of God, that the whole Universe is a 
manifestation of God. In Vandhanam you should dedicate all the ten organs of perception and 
action as an offering to God. This is symbolised by bringing both your palms together and 
offering namaskaaram. All the ten fingers represent the ten IJndhriyas (sense organs). 
Namaskaaram also implies that "nothing is mine." The limbs are intended for service to others 
only. Dhaasyam means that you should render service to humanity considering the persons 
whom you serve as masters. 


Sneham means friendship. It is not the type of friendship that you generally cultivate by saying 
"hello." You must keep the heart hollow so that it will be filled only by Divine thoughts. All 
human relationships are based on the body, while the relationship with God is from heart to 
heart. It alone is permanent and unchanging. 


The entire creation came from the One 


Spirituality means seeking to realise the oneness of all beings. There is only One. All came out 
of this One only. The entire creation itself came from the One. This truth is proclaimed in all 
religions. For instance, the name of Yesu (Jesus) itself spells out this truth. Ye means one, su 
means good. There is only one good. In the term Allah, A stands for Aathma, la for layam. 
Invoking Allah signifies merging in the Aathma which is the One God. Names and forms are 
momentary and transient. Aathma (Divine Self) is permanent and changeless. In Vedhaantha it is 
called Sath-Chith-Aanandha. Sath is changeless while Chith is subject to change. 


To give an example, sugar is changeless and retains its sweetness in whichever way it may be 
used, while water is subject to change. If the two are Combined, you get syrup, which is 
comparable to Aanandha. Thus the combination of the changeless and changing entitles gives 
happiness or Aanandha. (Bhagavaan sang a Meera Bhajan and explained how Meera in this 
song, directs her mind towards Krishna and appeals to him to enter her heart and experience-her 
pure love). It is only by fostering love you can win the grace of God. The Prema Rasa (sweet 
juice of love) will be drained away if you have holes in your heart (spiritual heart) in the form of 
bad feelings and evil thoughts. If you plug these holes by curbing the evil qualities, the juice of 
love will be retained to some extent. 


Service to the Lord brings lasting happiness 


You should avoid following the body or the mind and follow only the Conscience. The purpose 
of life is to help others and not to indulge in sensuous pleasures. From dawn to dusk, you are 
engaged in acts for the sake of maintaining your bodily comforts. What have you achieved by 
this? Only mental unrest and physical weariness or illness. Your aim must be to achieve 
Divinity. Thyaagaraaja questions his own mind in a song whether wealth or service to the Lord 
will give suwkham (comfort) and comes to the conclusion that service to the Lord brings lasting 
happiness. Service involves thyaaga (sacrifice). You should sacrifice that which you consider 
very dear to you. Sacrifice brings about real communion with the Divine while carnal pleasure 
results only in disease. Control of the mind alone will lead to union with the Divine. 


This day is celebrated as Yugaadhi as Kali Yuga started on the first day of Chaithra. It represents 
both Sukham and Shubham (comfort and auspiciousness). Power or wealth cannot confer both. 
You must use the time well for the benefit of all. As you think, talk and act, so will be the results. 
Think of God and do good deeds by way of service to society, chanting the name of God. 


Embodiments of Love! Love is God. Start the day with love. Fill the day with love and end the 
day with love. Live in love. There is no need to fear. It is only a mental creation. Foster love. 
Then only Divinity can be realised. 


Discourse on Thamil New Year Day, 14-4-1994, at Kodaikanal. 


When the sun rises, all the buds of lotus in the lake will not open 
out in full bloom. Only those which are full grown can blossom; so 
the rest have to bide their time and grow. 


BABA 


12. Shri Raama : the ideal for humanity 


Sweeter than sugareane juice, 

Sweeter than honey, 

Sweeter than nectar itself is 
the name of Raama. 

As you chant the name you 
taste the nectarine 

Sweetness in abundance. 


EMBODIMENTS of the Divine Self! The sage Vaalmeeki, who was pure, holy and utterly 
selfless, wrote the Raamaayana in hundred crores of stanzas for the redemption of mankind. But 
the Dhevas and Rishis, realising the supreme greatness of the Raamaayana, sought from 
Vaalmeeki a share in his great work. 


Responding to their appeal, Vaalmeeki distributed the shlokas (verses) among the denizens of the 
three worlds. After the distribution of the slokas in equal shares among the three one shloka of 32 
syllables remained. After distributing in equal measure 30 of them, two syllables remained. 
These two syllables were the letters RAA-MA, which he gave to the dwellers of the three worlds. 
The same two syllables are found in the names of Krishna, Hari, Jesus, Allah and Saayee. Thus 
Vaalmeeki offered to the residents of all the three worlds the two-syllable name of the Lord 
equally. 


Raama, the supreme exemplar of many roles in life 


Raama is closest to mankind. Wherever they may be, to whatever land or clime they may belong, 
people everywhere have to undersold the Raama principle. Raama was an ideal son. Every 
family requires an ideal son. On' the eve of the coronation he chose to go to the forest as an exile 
in accordance with the command of his royal father. In carrying out the injunctions of the father, 
Raama stands out as the supreme exemplar. 


Raama, moreover, was an ideal brother. He exemplified harmony and love among brothers. He 
treated his brothers as his own life-breath and showered his love equally on all of them. Thus 
Raama is an example of fraternal love for every family. 


Raama was an ideal husband. Raama's adherence to the principle of monogamy has to be 
properly understood. Vaalmeeki understood it very well. One word, one arrow, one wife was the 
rule for Raama. What is the reason? In the body there are many organs. But all of them are 
animated, nourished and sustained by the heart alone. In the same manner the wife, for the 
husband is only one and the husband for the wife is only one. To demonstrate to the world this 
ideal of monogamy, Raama set the example. 


Raama was an ideal friend and ideal enemy 


Raama was an ideal friend. There cannot be a greater friend than Raama. There are in the world 
fair-weather friends who display their friendship when one is wealthy or wielding power. But if 
wealth and position are gone, not a single friend will show his face. Raama, however, was not 
such a friend. He was loving, considerate and affectionate equally in weal and woe, in times of 


joy or sorrow. Guha was an ordinary boatman. Raama hailed him as his fourth brother and 
showered his love on Guha. Raama treated in the same friendly spirit everyone who came to him 
for any help or to find an asylum. He thus stood out to the world as an ideal friend. 


Raama was not only an ideal friend; he was also an ideal enemy. In the world, it is common to 
see men resorting to all kinds of deceitful devices to foil their enemies. But Raama never 
stooped to such unworthy practices. Raama adhered to the noble heroic path even in dealing with 
his enemies. 


For example, when Raama was engaged in battle with Raavana, Raavana could not stand up to 
the arrows of Raama. All the weapons of Raavana were destroyed. Raama noticed that Raavana 
was tired and weaponless. In such a situation it was not proper to kill the enemy There is no 
heroism, in killing a weak or powerless man. The enemy should be destroyed when. he is strong 
and powerful. Recognizing the plight of Raavana, Raama laid down his arms and told Raavana, 
"O, Raavana! you are tired and without weapons. You are not in a fit condition to carry on the 
fight. Go home, take rest and return to battle tomorrow. We shall resume the fight tomorrow." 
By displaying this kind of magnanimity towards his enemy; Raama demonstrated that he was an 
ideal enemy. 


Raama was, first of all, an ideal son. In any country, anywhere in the world, every family needs 
an ideal son. Hence Raama's story does not have a message for the Bhaaratheeyas alone. It has a 
lesson for all countries and for all mankind. 


The significance of Raama's example of an ideal brother should be realised. Today brothers fight 
among themselves, go right upto the Supreme Court and even lose their lives in their bitter 
quarrels. Out of love for petty, money and possessions, today people are prepared to sacrifice all 
fraternal feelings. Raama's way was different. He regarded his brothers as part of his own being 
and would not cause the slightest pain to them. Thereby he took his brothers to the supreme state. 
Today brothers take their litigation to the Supreme Court! This is not right at all. 


Raama, the ideal husband 


Raama was an ideal husband. When Seetha was abducted, Raama felt the loss as if he had lost 
half his body. He looked upon his wife as ardhaangi, one half of himself. When Raama appeared 
grief-stricken over the absence of Seetha he wanted to merely show to the world what the loss of 
a wife means. He never thought of a second wife. Raama felt, "it is my duty to protect my wife." 
Every husband in the world should have a similar conviction. 


Today in the world, friends turn into enemies overnight. This is not right at all. Friendship should 
be enduring and last for all time. Normally it lasts as long as one has wealth and strength. But 
God's friendship is not like that. God is always with you, in you, behind you, around you. This is 
the kind of friendship that every man should experience. 


Let love rule the world 


Hanumaan was a servant. He exemplified the ideal of a servant. Raama embraced Hanumaan and 
said- "Dear friend, Hanumaan! You in your physical form belong to a different species. You are 
a monkey and I am a man. But the love principle is one and the same in both of us." Caste and 
creed may vary. But the love principle is one. In all beings, in all countries, in all individuals 
love animates every one. Today the reign of this love principle has to be established all over the 
world. God is the Indweller in the heart. The heart is full of love. That love must be shared with 


others. It is only when the love is shared that the old saying about equal-mindedness in joy and 
sorrow, in gain and loss, will be realised. 


Here is an illustration of this truth- Many people in Ayodhya knew that Raama was leaving for 
the forest. One aged and poor Brahmana exclaimed: "I hear Raama is going to the forest for 
fourteen years. I do not know whether I will live so long." Feeling thus, the old Brahmana, 
Thrijata by name, came all the way on foot to have a last glimpse of Raama. Eyes are given to 
man not to look at the world but to see God. Hence, the power of sight should be dedicated to 
God. With that aim, the old man, after enduring many hardships, came to Raama. What was 
Raama doing at that moment? The one who was to be crowned at one moment was getting ready 
to go on exile to the forest that very moment. Will any human being be able to bear such a 
reversal of fortune with equal-mindedness? Will he be able to look upon both in the same 
manner? Anyone other than Raama would be plunged in grief. But Raama (before leaving for the 
forest) was engaged in giving away to the poor all his jewels and possessions. What should have 
been a moment of distress was turned by Raama into an occasion for joy in distributing all to the 
people. Nothing is lasting in human life. No one can tell when life will come to an end, where, in 
what circumstances. Life may end in childhood, adolescence, middle age or old age. Death is 
certain. Hence man must learn to give up attachment to possessions. 


Raama and the old Brahmana 


Raama was giving away all his things. When the old Brahmana approached him, he was 
distributing his cows and furniture. When Thrijata saw this he exclaimed: "What an embodiment 
of sacrifice is the Lord! He is truly immortal, because of his acting up to the Vedhic dictum that 
immortality can be achieved only through sacrifice and not through good deeds, progeny or 
wealth. He is the embodiment of bliss. He is the very form of Dharma." Looking at Raama, he 
exclaimed- "Raama! You are :indeed the embodiment of Dharma!" 


Dharma (Righteousness) is the life-breath of everybody. For this Dharma, sacrifice is one 
element. For Dharma and Thyaaga (sacrifice), Prema (Love) is the basis. Hence Dharma, 
Thyaaga and Prema are essential for every human being. They are the three forces which 
activate the body, the mind and the Aathma (Divine Self). 


Seeing the aged Brahmana Raama beckoned to him to come near him. He asked him: "O noble 
Brahmana! What for have you come?" The old man replied- "Svaami! I am advanced in years. I 
learnt that you are going to the forest for fourteen years. I do not know whether I may live that 
long. I wish to gaze your splendrous face for once, experience your love for at least a brief 
moment, touch your sacred feet, and redeem my life." Raama asked him: "Have you no other 
desire?" "I do not have any other desire. I have difficulty in living. But I am reconciled to what I 
deserve according to my Karma. I am not concerned about it. I am only keen to have a vision of 
you, to speak to you and touch you." 


Three problems that haunt a man 


Then Raama asked him what the benefit was from these three. "Dharshanam paapa naashanam" 
(vision of the Lord destroys all sins). "Sparshanam karma vimochanam" (touching the feet of the 
Lord frees one from the bondage of Karma). "Sambhaashanam sankata naashanam" 
(conversing with the Lord dispels all distress). The old man said: "Svaami! Man is haunted by 
three problems - sin, consequences of his deeds and sorrow. To get rid of these things, I need a 
vision of you, contact with your feet and conversation with you." 


Raama was supremely pleased with the Brahmana's words. He drew him close to himself, 
embraced him and asked him: "Does this give you joy?" Shedding copious tears, the old man 
said- "I do not know what is heaven. I have no idea what is Kailaash or Vaikuntha. But in your 
embrace I have experienced all these. This is my heaven. Give me. some alms. I. shall return to. 
my place." Raama said- "Child! When you have offered me your love, I must offer my love to 
you in return. That is the way of love--give and take. As I have received your love, you must 
accept something from me". 


The old man carried a stick in his hand. Raama said "Child! Through my touch, you have 
received considerable strength. Your old age has disappeared. Cast your stick as far as your 
strength will permit. All the wealth and the cows in the area covered by your throw will be yours. 


Raama's touch had endowed the old Brahmana with immense strength. He felt that he should act 
upto Raama's command. "My life will be meaningless otherwise," he thought, "Although I have 
no desire, I shall obey Raama's command." With this feeling, he hurled the stick with all his 
might. Thanks to the power of Raama, the stick traversed the banks of the Sarayu and returned to 
where Raama stood. Several mansions, buildings and cattle were within the area which came to 
the Brahmana as Raama's gift. 


Raama's supreme quality is sacrifice 


The Brahmana said to Raama: "O Lord! When I came solely to have a vision of you, why are 
you Burdening me with so many possessions?" Raama replied, "O noble Brahmana! This is the 
fruit of your good deeds in your previous life, this is not the reward earned in the present life. 
Imagine how many came to see me from afar while I was preparing to leave for the forest? It is 
your wish which stirred my love. But for the laws relating to the governance of a kingdom, I 
would have given this entire kingdom to you. My love for you is my greatest gift." 


So saying, Raama gave the land to the Brahmana. Then the Brahmana said: "This is a supreme 
example to all the people. Even at the moment when He was leaving for the forest and the whole 
of Ayodhya was plunged in grief, Raama displayed His love by giving away all His. possessions. 
His supreme quality is sacrifice !" 


Raama's entire life was filled with ideals of every kind 


Thus, the Raama principle teaches us the supremacy of the qualities of charity and sacrifice. The 
Raama principle does not embody just one or two great qualities. Raama's entire life was filled 
with ideals of every kind. 


To convey the great lessons of Raama's life-story to mankind, the divine incarnates from time to 
time and from age to age. When does the Lord incarnate? The answer is given in the Geetha: "To 
protect the good, to punish the wicked and establish Dharma, the Lord incarnates from aeon to 
aeon." When the pure, the saintly, the Godly and the good are oppressed, the Lord incarnates to 
protect them and to punish the wicked. To relieve their suffering and to confer bliss on humanity, 
the Lord makes his descent on earth. When wickedness grows and the forces of evil rear their 
heads, the Lord comes down to put them down and establish righteousness among mankind. 


Today falsehood, injustice and wickedness are rampant in the world. Humanness has been 
reduced to dust. Behind the human form, there are no human qualifies. Human values have been 
given the go-by. Love does not prevail between man and man. If love is lost, what remains? 
Love is life. A man without love is a living corpse. 


Therefore cultivate love. Share it. Live in love. This is the need of the Kali age. There is another 
episode in the Raamaayana, which indicates what love the people of Ayodhya and Mithila bore 
to Raama and Seetha. The people of Ayodhya set our in their thousands to witness the wedding 
of Raama and Seetha in Mithila. The whole of Mithila was rejoicing over the auspicious 
occasion. Women were summoning all women and children to witness the sacred wedding. They 
were telling the other ladies: "Sisters! What a unique opportunity to witness the glorious 
wedding of Raama and Seetha!" 


Symbolic meaning of wedding of Raama and Seetha 


The wedding of Raama and Seetha is not a wedding of one young man and one young woman. 
This wedding is a union of Prakrithi (Cosmos) with the Purusha (Supreme Lord). An old lady 
sang a song calling upon all women to join the company of people going for the wedding. She 
described the decorations in Mithila, the divine beauty of Raama and Seetha, the splendid scene 
in the palace and depicted the memorable scenes they would witness at the wedding. (Svaami 
sang the song in his own mellifluous voice with such verve and charm that the entire wedding 
scene seemed to appear in all its splendour before the gathering). A similar appeal went forth 
from the men's side to all men, describing the wedding as an occasion that would eradicate all 
the beholders of their sins. "Come, all ye, for the glorious wedding of Kaushalya's son" was the 
refrain of the song. 


The whole world seemed to rejoice at the wedding of Kaama and Seetha, because it had its 
cosmic significance. It represented the union of Prakrithi (Seetha) with Purusha, the Super 
Absolute. Every being in the cosmos, whatever may be the gender, in external form, is 
essentially feminine. Prakrithi (Nature) is feminine. She represents one half of the Lord-- 
Ardhaangi. The Paramaathma (the Supreme Overself) is the Purusha (the Supreme Godhead). 
Together, Prakrithi and Purusha represent the concept of, Ardha naareeshvara--the Divine 
conceived as half-male and half female. This union of male and female is found in every human 
being. Every one should understand this aspect of the Raamaayana story. 


Raamaayana should not be considered as-a sacred epic for Bhaaratheeyas alone. The term Raama 
means "One who delights the heart" "Ramayathi ithi Raamah." Whomsoever you may worship it 
is the one Divine who delights the heart. There is only one God and one Goal. 


God is one 


When you consider mankind as one species, God is only one, by whatever name you may 
describe Him, as Allah, Jesus, Raama, Krishna or Buddha. The Bhaaratheeyas hold to the belief 
that God is one, though the wise may call him, by different names. All religious scriptures and 
godly men have in all ages worshipped God as one. Therefore, no one should have feelings of 
differences or even entertain ill-will towards others, Cultivate the feeling of fatherhood of God 
and brotherhood of Man. Bear no ill-will towards anyone. Help ever; hurt never. 


Raama showered his love on everyone. Love is the most important factor in life. Love is God. 
Live in love. 


Discourse on 20-4-1994 at Kodaikanal. 


13. Sacred role of mothers 


EMBODIMENTS of Divine Love! All that you see, hear, think and do are due to the power of 
Brahman (the Absolute). The feeling that you are the doer and the possessor is the source of all 
troubles. It is only when man realises that everything is permeated by the Divine that he will be 
able to experience the Divine bliss. The phenomenal world enables man to participate in 
mundane activities related to the physical, the social and the natural. But human life should not 
be confined to these alone. The sensory life is based on the inner life. Life and the world are like 
two sides. The world is external and life is internal. The phenomenal universe is based on the 
inner subtle entity. 


The phenomenal cosmos is a vast, boundless mansion. But every mansion has to stand on an 
appropriate foundation. Without a strong foundation, the mansion will collapse. For the vast 
physical, gross and mighty mansion of the world, the subtle, infinite and powerful mind is the 
foundation. Consequently, man can be powerful only to the extent his mind is powerful. Society 
benefits equally from the powers of man's mind. Not is that all. The entire human race benefits 
thereby. There is thus the interdependence of man, society and humanity for their security. 


Without the mind, one ceases to be a man 


When the mind is good, man can divinise himself. Only the one endowed with a mind can be 
called a man. Without the mind, one ceases to be a man. It is only when the subtle, invisible, 
inner base of the mind is in a proper condition that a being that has donned the human form can 
attain his true state. 


In the world to-day various changes are taking place. There is no shortage of wealth and 
property. Not is there any dearth of amenities for comfortable living. There is no lack of facilities 
for entertainment or recreation. Nevertheless, modern man is oppressed by frustration, 
depression and disappointment. What is the reason? It is the failure to use the divine power of the 
mind properly that accounts for the frustration and the lack of peace of man to-day. The 
differences between man and man are growing continuously. These differences lead to disastrous 
conflicts. 


Hence, the first requisite is to strive for the proper use of the powers of the mind. The mind of 
man today is that of an intoxicated person because his mind is giving free rein to the senses. 


The world today is filled with two kinds of intoxication. One is intoxication arising from wealth. 
The other is the intoxication of power. These two are not different from each other. They are like 
the two parts of a seed. Through wealth one secures positions of power and power is used to 
acquire wealth. Man's life today is based on these two- power and pelf. Man's conceit grows 
beyond bounds even when he has only one of these two. The stare of those who have both needs 
no description. Forgetting humanness, cherishing animal qualities, man develops a demonic 
nature. Man today makes no efforts to realise the greatness and power of the mind. Instead, he is 
submerged in worldly activities and wastes his life. 


Education should serve to refine man's nature 


Man's heart, which ought to be filled with compassion that is natural to it, is today full of cruelty 
and bitterness. Education, which should serve to refine man's nature and make him a hero, is 
failing in its purpose because in his conduct man is a zero. An education which does not develop 
humanness is an utter waste. The educational system should ensure that along with knowledge 


right conduct is also developed. Raavana and Dhuryodhana achieved unrivalled eminence in 
scholarship. But it was of no avail because of their polluted minds. They ceased to be human. 
True education should produce a blossoming of human qualities. It should not be merely for 
earning a living, but should result in a ripening of the heart, filling it with love. 


What happiness can one achieve 

if all his education makes him concerned 
Only about filling his stomach 

and makes him forget the Supreme Lord? 


The goal of human life should be, to strive for that which will give enduring happiness and not 
transient pleasures. The yearning for this sacred goal should be developed while one is still, 
young and has a pure, untainted, innocent mind. Of what use is all your book knowledge if you 
have not learnt to lift your hands in prayer to God? You salute persons of no account for selfish 
reasons. 


What is in a name given to the physical body? 


People should cultivate faith in the Divine. It is the duty of parents to imbue their children with 
faith in God from childhood. Here is a story to illustrate this need: 


Rithudhvaja and Madhaalasa were a pious couple with intense faith in God. Madhaalasa was a 
women of noble character. She excelled every one in virtue, wisdom and sacrifice. She was the 
embodiment of holiness. The couple had a son, to whom the father wanted to give a name that 
would be in accordance with his Kshatriya lineage. After considerable cogitation, he gave the 
boy the name Vikraanth. Madhaalasa burst into laughter when she heard the name. She was 
unhappy over the excessive interest taken by the king in naming the child. She felt that some 
name should be given for the physical body for worldly purposes. But to show excessive interest 
in it was meaningless. Later a second son was born, who was named Subaahu (which meant one 
with fine arms). Madhaalasa again laughed at the naming of the child. The king felt insulted by 
Madhaalasa's behaviour. Sometime later a third son was born. Rithudhvaja told Madhaalasa: 
"You don't like the names given by me for our sons. You better name the third son yourself." 


A name has to be given to anyone in the world as a mark of identity. In keeping with this need, 
Madhaalasa named the son, Alarka. The king was angry on hearing the name. He burst forth: "Is 
this the name that should be given to the scion of a royal family, a warrior's son and belonging to 
a line of courageous Kshatriyas? What a shame! I will not call him by this name." 


No names are given for the Aathma 


Alarka means a mad dog. The king asked: Is my son to be called a mad dog? Madhaalasa 
approached the king and said: "A person who does not know his real nature, who has no 
awareness of his divinity and who does not know his oneness with the Divine is worse than a 
mad dog. What value should be attached to the names of persons who have not recognised their 
true nature? What significance can names have for foolish persons who are not aware of the 
oneness of the universe and who do not contemplate on divinity? The body is human in form. 
But they are not mere men at all. They are the embodiments of the Aathma, the Formless and 
Attributeless Self. They are pure and unsullied. It is sheer ignorance to give names to the 


Aathma." In view of this belief, Madhaalasa started teaching her children from an early age their 
essential spiritual nature and their inherent divinity 


Today, the mothers are responsible for the good or bad behaviour of their children. It .is a matter 
for shame for any mother to say "My son will not heed my words." If the mother had brought up 
the son on right lines from the beginning, he would not behave like this. The snake-gourd has to 
be made to grow straight by tying a stone to it from its tender stage. Likewise, the stone of 
discipline and devotion should be attached to a boy from his infancy. Mothers experience the 
disobedience of their children because of their failure to inculcate discipline in the early years. 
Madhaalasa began teaching her sons from their childhood in this manner: "Child, you are not a 
son not am I a mother. Both of us are manifestations of Sath-Chith-Aanandha. We are like the 
waves on an ocean, not different from each other. All have arisen from the ocean of Sath-Chith- 
Aanandha. It is folly to think otherwise." 


Placing the children in the cradle of Omkaara on the cushion of Thathvam Asi, Madhaalasa 
named the child, Erotica (Awareness, Aathma, Prajna or Brahman) and called upon all the 
Dhevas to swing the cradle. 


To be a true human being respect your parents 


In this manner, the mothers of ancient times taught the truth about their divinity to the children 
and made them aware of their true nature. Thus the sacred stories of Bhaarath were taught to the 
children, who learnt to respect their parents and ciders. If one does not respect his parents and 
revere his preceptor, can he be termed a human being? To be a true human being one has to 
respect his parents and kith and kin in childhood, revere the teacher in boyhood, please elders in 
his manhood, and worship sages in old age. Ignoring these duties, youth today are running wild. 
They should realise the preciousness of human life as Thulasidhas described it. At the outset, 
mothers should teach the children the immense value of human life. Alas! They themselves do 
not know its value. How are they going to teach others? Hence, the parents themselves should 
learn the value of human life. They should have faith in the divinity of human life. 


Today, because fear of sin and love for God have become rare, morality in society is absent. 
Even when people seem to offer Namaskaar (salutation with folded hands), it does not stem from 
the heart and is only an artificial gesture. How long can such artificial expressions sustain a man? 
What is needed is a pure mind, filled with sublime thoughts. It should be selfless. When the mind 
is selfish, the man becomes selfish. A man with a polluted mind displays vicious looks. His 
speech and actions are impure. If the heart is pure, everything else will be pure. 


Aathma is like a flame in the body 


The Aathma is like a flame in the body. When it is covered by the ten senses, its light filters 
through holes, as it were. And when it is covered, in addition, with the blanket of Abhimaana 
(attachment to worldly objects), the effulgence of the Aathma (Divine Self) is not visible. When 
attachment is given up and the body consciousness goes, the Self is revealed in all its brightness. 


King Vikramaadithya once encountered a Brahmana who had been repeating manthras and 
performing vaagas for years to get a vision of God. Vikramaadithya prayed with all his heart for 
one brief moment and had the vision of God. The Lord told Vikramaadithya that God does not 
respond to mere mechanical repetition of manthras or performance of rituals. "I respond to the 
call of a sincere devotee even when he says Maadhava only once with a pure heart." 


The rituals done by people without feelings from the heart are dry and lifeless. They are like the 
mirage in a desert where you see water but it cannot quench your thirst. Even while singing 
Bhajans, you should utter the names from the depth of the heart, not concentrating on Raaga and 
Thaala (Tune and Beat). 


A young student, who had spoken earlier, referred to Shirdi Sai taking two rupees from devotees. 
The two rupees represented faith and devotion. When both join, it can grow into a big free and 
yield the fruit of Divine Grace. 


Today is observed as Children's Day all over the world. Parents should not hesitate to correct the 
children when they go wrong. Here is an episode from the Raamaayana which illustrates how a 
devotee who seeks nothing but the love of God is rewarded by the Lord in ample measure. 


How Raama rewarded His devotee 


Raama was giving away all his possessions before leaving for the forest. An aged Brahmana, 
who was staggering on his feet, came to Raama seeking His dharshan. When Raama asked him 
what he wanted, he replied that he didn't want anything and he came only to have a look at 
Raama as he was not sure he would live rill Raama returned from the forest after 14 years. 
Raama was so much moved by the pure heart of the Brahmana that he insisted that the old man 
should receive some gift from him. Submitting to Raama's will, the Brahmana agreed to receive 
the gift. Raama then asked the Brahmana to throw a stick as far as he could. All the land covered 
by the place where the stick landed would be his. The old Brahmana said: "Though I have no 
desire I have to obey the command of my king." He threw the stick chanting the name of Raama. 
It covered a large area, which Raama gifted to the Brahmana. The Brahmana, whose name was 
Thrijata, said: "Oh Raama, why should I have this land? My gathi (fate), sthithi (position), mathi 
(mind) and sampathi (wealth) are all yours only. That is why I came to see you." Raama said, 
"Such persons as you are the pride of our society." 


To-day, in the Kali Yuga, it is extremely rare to find such' persons. Selfishness and greed are 
rampant everywhere. Parents have a duty to shape their children as ideal sons of the nation. 
Students who have acquired proximity with Sai should develop more and more spiritual wisdom. 
Get rid of negative thoughts first. Then try to develop good thoughts. You are living in Svaami's 
Aashram. How far are you following the code of conduct relating to Aashram life? There is no 
use in keeping only the body in the Aashram, and letting the mind roam elsewhere. You should 
have only Dhaiva Chinthana (thoughts of God) in your heart. 


Discourse on Easwaramma Day, 6-5-1994, in Sai Ramesh Mandap at Brindhaavan. 


Service without idea of self is the very first step in the spiritual 
progress of man. 


BABA 


14. See the One in the many 


STUDENTS! You should know at the outset the aim and significance of education. Education is 
for elevation from the mundane level to the divine. 


Generally, you repeat the prayer: "Thvameva maathaacha pithaa thvameva_thvameva 
bandhuscha sakhaa thvameva." This prayer smacks of dualism. Why should you go on 
establishing such different relationships with God? The fight way is to say "I am you; You are 
me." This is true spiritually. That is why the Vedhas proclaim "Thath thvam Asi, Ayam Aathma 
Brahma, Aham Brahmaasmi." "1 am the Aathma and Brahman" is the essence of Vedhic 
teaching. This is the easiest path to realisation. 


You should consider the Divine as One only which is manifest in many forms. All the forms are 
creations of the mind. 


Arjuna asks Krishna in the Geetha- â€œChanchalam-hi-manah_ Krishna! Pramaadhi 
Balavadhrudahm Thasyaham Nigraham Manye Vaayoriva Sudhushkaram" (The mind verily is 
restless, oh Krishna! It is turbulent, strong and obstinate. I deem it as hard to control as the 
wind). If you go on cultivating relationships of various types, the mind is set wavering endlessly: 
To set it at rest will be extremely difficult. This is not the right type of devotion. 


Developing vision of unity is not difficult 


Narasimhan (in his speech earlier) said that it is difficult to comprehend the oneness in the many. 
In My (Svaami's) opinion, there is nothing easier than this. Japa, Puuja, Yajna and ritualistic 
worship are more difficult. You consider it hard to see unity in the diversity in the world because 
you do not have the proper vision. Supposing you want to pick up your kerchief, you can do so 
easily if you open your eyes and look for it. If you are blind, it will be difficult to pick it up. 
Similarly, a person in ignorance will be in frustration and confusion. The easiest path is to feel "T 
am you, You are I," so that there is no other object. 


You are the "Seen" Everything that you see is the seen. When the vision is concentrated on the 
Aathma within, both are one. When you get the feeling "I am you" there is no scope for any 
worry. This is the easiest royal path to comprehend the Reality. Without understanding this, 
people waste their lives in the process of meditation and other futile pursuits. 


You are going on adding to your objects of attachment from the moment you are born in the 
world. First, you have mother and father, then brothers, sisters, relatives and friends. After 
marriage, another set of relatives and friends are added through your spouse. Thus attachment 
goes on multiplying. 


On the other hand, if you go on detaching yourself from various relationships one after other, 
your attachments get reduced and you develop detachment or Vairaagya leading to liberation. 
Attachment and detachment relate to external objects. Divinity is in closest proximity to you, but 
it takes time to understand divinity. 


Three teachers in everyone's life 


There are three teachers for everyone. The first are the 'Parents.' They sacrifice their lives to give 
comfort to their children. Parents teach their children in a practical way by taking good care of 
them. The second teacher is the 'Preceptor' who guides the student in exercising his 
discrimination and taking the right path towards realising the divinity within him. The third 


teacher is your own 'Conscience.' This is divine and always helps one to take the correct 
decision. When anyone tries to commit a sinful act or speak an untruth, the Conscience revolts 
and warns him that he is not right. 


In the Raamaayana, we have the example of Raama who went to the forest in obedience to the 
command of his father. This caused sadness to the people of Ayodhya. Even great sages like 
Vashishttha were in grief. Raama was the embodiment of righteousness and the repository of all 
good qualities. Though he was still young, his administrative skill was unparalleled. Bharatha 
and Shathrughna, on arrival at Ayodhya, learnt about Raama's departure to the forest and felt so. 
shocked and grieved that they did not wish to stay even for a moment in Ayodhya and decided to 
go to the forest to request Raama to return to Ayodhya and take up the rulership of the kingdom 
as he alone was the right one to rule. All the people of Ayodhya followed them. Even 
Vashishttha accompanied them to reinforce their efforts to being Raama back to Ayodhya. All of 
them entreated Raama to return to Ayodhya and take over the reins of administration of the 
kingdom. 


Sage Jaabaali, who was a Jnaani, argued like an atheist. He said that one has several fathers and 
mothers during one's various births in previous lives and such relationships are only temporary 
like passing clouds. "In your case," the sage said, "your father is already dead and gone. There is 
no point in your adhering to the command of a person who is no more. By your not agreeing to 
rule the kingdom, you are causing a lot of distress to the people who may be led astray. You 
should not ignore the wishes of the living multitude in trying to honour the words of a dead 
person. So I entreat you to accede to the requests of the people and return to Ayodhya to rake 
over the reins of the ruler." 


Raama always honoured the plighted word 


Raama replied calmly; "Oh Sage! I thought you are a very learned savant and scholar well- 
versed in the scriptures. It is not becoming of you to argue in this manner. I consider it rather 
unbecoming on your part to ask me to ignore the command of my father because he has passed 
away I have promised to carry out his command. I have given my word and I am still alive. How 
can I go back on my word? It is better to give up the body than to go back on one's word. One 
should be ever grateful to one's parents, whether they are alive or dead. An ungrateful son should 
be considered blind and worthless. Many pray to the Sun as Himaghnaaya namah. When the sun 
rises, the snow melts away. (Hima means snow). He is also worshipped as Thamoghnaaya 
namhah, that is, one who is the destroyer of Thamas (darkness). Darkness cannot coexist with 
light. He is also called Krithaghnaghnaaya namah. He is the destroyer of a person who has no 
gratitude. It is the Sun that gives light to the eyes to see. The sun renders blind those who are 
ungrateful. I shall be the worst sinner. All people will follow me and become sinners. Do you 
want me to set such a bad example? It is ridiculous to think that I will go back on my word." 


On hearing these words of high wisdom uttered by Raama, Jaabaali prostrated before him and 
begged his pardon. He said, "Oh Raama! I am not against Truth! There is nothing that is not 
known to you. I had made use of this argument only to support the people of Ayodhya, who love 
you and want to return to Ayodhya to rifle over them." 


Raama explains to rishis the essence of Divinity 


Raama always set a fine example for the people to follow. He sent Seetha to the forest on hearing 
an ordinary citizen talking disparagingly about Seetha being taken back by Raama even after she 


had been in the custody of his enemy, Raavana, for some months. Raama did this out of respect 
for popular opinion. Raama has established such an ideal for society to follow at all times. That 
is why He is hailed as Purushotthama (the noblest of all Purushas). In justifying his action in 
following the command of his father he explained to the Rishis elaborately the essence of 
divinity. In the Geetha Krishna says: 


Kavim puraanam Anushaasithaaram 
Anotaneeyaan samanusmaredhyah 
Sarvasya dhaathaaram Achinthyaruupam 
Aadhithyavarnam Thamasah parasthaath. 


(The Being who is wise, ancient, the ruler, smaller than the smallest, the sustainer of all, 
inconceivable form, resplendent like the sun and beyond the darkness of ignorance). 


There is no Kavi (poet) other than the Lord. All that is in verse form is not poetry. "Thrikaala 
vaakyam kavi" (The Poet is one who has a vision of the past, the present and the future). Man 
knows only the past and the present. How can one know the future? How is the Divine Poet able 
to see the future too? Because God is Omniscient and beyond time and space. He is not affected 
by the passage of time. He is changeless and permanent. 


No one has the ability to punish the mind 


Puraana is ordinarily construed as meaning very old. But here it refers to the Consciousness 
which is pervading the whole body (city or pura of nine gates). It pervades everything. 
Anushaasithaaram (One who enforces the law). 


When a criminal is punished by a court after being found guilty, he is kept in prison. It is only 
the body that gets punished. But the real culprit is the mind. No one has got any right or ability to 
punish the mind which really causes the convict to commit the crime. The mind can travel 
anywhere even when a person is in prison. The Government or Police have no control over the 
mind. It is only the supreme power of the Divine that can have control over the mind. 


The effulgence of the Lord is equal to that of one crore of Suns. The Lord's face is beaming with 
the brilliance of the Sun. On being struck by the radiant effulgence in Raama's face, Shabari 
became ecstatic and described it as that of the blemishless full moon. The faces of present-day 
men look like a jungle with dense growth of beards and sideburns. Brilliance is absent. Raama's 
face was spotless because his heart was pure and was filled with feelings of sacrifice. He never 
did anything for himself. Whatever he did was only for Lokasamrakshana (the welfare of the 
world). Raamo Vigrahavaan Dharmah (Raama was the embodiment of Dharma). 


If one follows Dharma, he is protected by the same Dharana. Raama sacrificed all his comforts 
and enjoyments of royal life and endured the privations of forest life. Raama is to be taken as the 
ideal for the students. They should respect and obey their parents' words. The Guru, teacher, 
comes only after the parents. 


Total renunciation leads to Self-Realisation 


It is only when you reach the highest level of Sarvasangaparithyaagi (one who had renounced 
all worldly attachments) that one can attain Self-Realisation. Prahlaadha had realised 
Puurnathvam (complete identity with the Para Brahmam, Supreme Power). He was bereft of all 
earthly attachments. 


Saint Thyaagaraaja sang "Cheemalo Brahmalo" (the same Hari is in an ant and in Brahmam). 
When you acquire this Abhedha bhaavam (non-duality), you reach the highest stage. But when 
an ant crawls over your body,, you don't hesitate to kill the ant. You worship the figure of a 
snake in the belief that God is in it, but when a live snake comes before you, you hasten to kill it. 
This is indicative of the way of the world. 


As long as you are leading the ordinary householder's life, you have to practise morality, 
respecting parents, loving friends and serving society. 


Discourse to students in Thrayee Brindhaavan on 13-5-1994. 


Keep away from the ten-fold sins--the three physical, the four 
verbal and the three mental. Physical tendencies are: injury to life, 
adulterous desire and theft. The verbal sins are: false alarm, cruel 
speech, jealous talk and lies. The mental attitudes are: greed, envy 
and the denial of God. 


BABA 


15. The power of faith 


COMPLETE faith is most essential if you want to experience Divinity. There should not be even 
an iota of doubt. One living without faith in the Divine is like a lifeless corpse. I would relate a 
story to illustrate the power of faith. 


A young boy used to go from his village to school which was in a nearby town. He had to cross a 
forest en route to the town. Generally he used to return home well before sunset. 


One day; it so happened that he had to leave the school late in the evening and darkness set in. 
The boy was afraid to walk through the forest in darkness and told his mother that he was afraid 
to walk in the night without company. His mother said: "Why are you afraid? Whenever you are 
in need of company, shout aloud calling your brother. He will help you." 


The boy asked her: "Who is my brother?" The mother replied: "He is none other than Lord 
Krishna. God is mother, father, teacher, brother, relative, friend and all. Whenever you are in 
trouble don't hesitate to call on him for help." 


The boy had full faith in his mother's words. In these days, even if God himself tells, nobody 
believes. That is why Jesus declared: "If I were to be a child everyday for a while, with full faith 
in my mother, how happy I would be!" 


God is searching for a real devotee 


Another day the boy was returning home from school late at night in the darkness. He shouted: 
"Anna Krishna" (Brother Krishna). After a few moments Krishna appeared before the boy in the 
form of a lad and told him- "Why do you fear when I am here? I shall escort you home." He 
accompanied the boy to the village outskirts and disappeared. The boy told his mother how the 
brother helped him true to her words. The mother said: â€œHe helps not only you, but everyone 
who seeks his help." 


From that time onwards, the boy used to call the brother whenever he needed his help and 
Krishna never failed to respond. Gradually he picked up courage.. 


When you have full faith, God will surely help you and make you fearless. People who have 
faith in God will never be let down. But those who have no faith suffer. You need not search for 
God. It is God who is searching for a real devotee. 


The mind's speed is unparallelled. It is only became of lack of control of mind one gets into bad 
temper, which causes loss of discrimination and spells ultimate ruin. It is imperative that one 
should control the temper and avoid getting angry. 


One who yields to anger is bound to suffer 
Let me cite an incident from the life of Babu Raajendra Prasaad, the first President of India. 


Raajendra Prasaad had a very good servant by name Rathna who was exemptionally faithful and 
served him for a long rime to the satisfaction of his master. One day he was asked to clean his 
room. Raajendra Prasaad had kept a pen given to him by Mahaathma Gaandhi, in one of his 
books. When the servant was cleaning the table the book fell down and the nib broke. He became 
nervous but told his master the truth begging his pardon for his mistake. On hearing this, 
Raajendra Prasaad shouted at him in rage and asked him to get out and not to show his face again 
as the pen was a highly valuable gift from Mahaathma which he had broken. 


Then the servant pleaded that he could not survive without him and sought his forgiveness. But 
Raajendra Prasaad was in no mood to listen to him and went out bidding his servant to get out of 
his sight. 


During the night, Raajendra Prasaad could not sleep as the memory of his having driven away 
his servant was haunting him. When he got up next morning he missed his usual morning coffee 
which Rathna would usually serve him. He reflected over his behaviour and felt sorry for having 
sent out such a faithful servant for no big fault. He realised that it was his own mistake to have 
kept the pen carelessly in a book instead of keeping it in a safe place. He sent word to Rathna 
and took him back seeking his pardon saying: "Rathna you are a good boy. It was my mistake to 
have kept the pen in the book. So you must excuse me for my rash action." He asked him to 
continue to serve him till the end of his life. 


Anger comes from temper inside and one who yields to this bout of temper is bound to suffer. 
You should control anger and avoid talking or acting while in an angry mood. 


Another instance of how anger gets the better of even a very good person can be cited from the 
Mahaabhaaratha. 


Krishna seeks the help of sage Dhuurvaasa 


Ashvathaama prayed to Kaali to help him to keep his vow of killing the Paandavas before sunset 
next day and got a sword from her. Dhraupadhi heard about this and said- "The Paandavas are 
the five life-principles and I am the sixth. How can I live after they are gone?" So saying, she 
prayed to Krishna as He was always their saviour whenever they were in trouble. Krishna 
appeared before her and asked her why she had called Him. She explained how Ashvathaama 
had obtained a sword from Kaali with Her blessings for his killing the Paandavas before sunset 
next day Krishna said: "The word of Mother Goddess has to be fulfilled. At the same time the 
Paandavas have to be protected as they are my devotees. I shall have to devise a master plan." He 
summoned sage Dhuurvaasa. Though God can act on His own, sometimes He uses others as 
instrument. Dhuurvaasa was glad to have dharshan of Lord Krishna and asked Krishna as to why 
he was called. 


When Krishna said his help was needed, he remarked that everyone needed God's help and it was 
strange that God was seeking his help. Dhuurvaasa said: "Lord, I shall surely follow your 
command." 


Krishna disclosed His Master Plan. He asked Dhuurvaasa to prepare a pit large enough to hide 
the Paandavas therein. He said: "You should spread some branches of tree to cover the pit and sit 
on the top of the pit. Ashvathaama will come to you. You may tell the truth, but change only the 
tone." Ashvathaama came in the afternoon and prayed to Dhuurvaasa in all humility to disclose 
the whereabouts of the Paandavas, as he was a Thrikaalajnaani (one who knows the past, the 
present and the future). Dhuurvaasa said in an angry tone: "The Paandavas are under my feet." 
As everyone knew the effects of Dhuurvaasa's rage, Ashvathaama did not dare to proceed further 
and incur the sage's dreaded wrath. He slipped away from the place. By that time the sun had set 
and the Paandavas were saved. 


God's signs of pretending to get angry are only for the good of others and to protect humanity. 
God has to act in different ways in different situations. God has no anger in Himself. When He 
takes human form He has to act as a human. 


Some of the discourses in Thrayee Brindhaavan in May 1994, when Svaami narrated at length 
some Stories. 


16. Share your love 


EMBODIMENTS of the Divine Aathma! Human life is noble, sacred and precious. The way to 
realise this truth is to feel that you are a part of the Divine. Only human beings are endowed with 
the faculty to experience this truth. It is, therefore, the duty of every human being to strive for the 
realisation of this truth. 


The human body is constituted by the Pancha Bhuuthas (five elements), Pancha Koshas (five 
sheaths)--Annamaya (food), Praanamaya (Life-force), Manomaya (mental), Vijnaanamaya 
(intelligence) and Aanandhamaya (the sheath of Bliss). While other living beings have only the 
first three sheaths, the human species alone has all the five. Man is encompassed by attachment 
to worldly desires, which produce delusions of various kinds related to the three gunas (Sathva, 
Rajas and Thamas). To attain liberation man has to rid himself of these desires. The mind is the 
cause of both bondage and liberation. It is only by controlling the mind that man can achieve 
liberation. 


Everyone is proud about the body, the mind and the intellect, forgetting the indwelling Aathma, 
which is the basis for all of them. The Aathma has no birth or death. It is the root of a tree, which 
sustains the branches, the leaves, flowers and fruits. It is the basis on which the superstructure of 
life rests. 


The meaning of true renunciation 


The Vedhas have declared that man can attain immortality by thyaaga (renunciation) and not by 
any other means, actions, wealth or progeny. What is it that has to be renounced? One has to 
renounce one's bad qualities. Men today are only human in form, but are filled with beastly 
qualities. To manifest their inherent divine nature, men have to cultivate love of God and fear of 
sin and adhere to sanghaneethi (social morality). When people have fear of sin and love of God, 
they will not indulge in immoral acts. Thereby morality in society will be automatically ensured. 
It is meaningless to be born as a human being and lead an animal existence. 


God can be known only by experience and not by experiments. Saadhana is needed for this 
purpose. Men who are engaged in exploring space do not make the slightest effort to explore the 
Divine within them. Of what use are experiments aimed at exploring space, while there is no 
genuine cultivation of human qualities and the practice of such basic virtues as showing 
reverence for the mother, the father and the preceptor? Everyone should act upto the motto- 
"Help ever- hurt never." Every educated person should engage himself or herself in selfless 
service to society, with humility and a pure heart. 


All academic distinctions or even observance of spiritual practices are of little use if there is no 
love in the heart. The heart is called Hridhaya. It is made up of the two words, Hri and Dhaya 
(compassion). The Lord is described as Hridhayavaasi (the Indweller in the heart). Love and 
Compassion are inherent in every person. Each has to share his love with others. Failure to share 
one's love is gross ingratitude to society, to which one owes everything. One should give one's 
love freely to others and receive love in return. This is the deep significance of human life. 


Discourse in the Sai Ramesh mandap, Brindhaavan, on 5-6-1994. 


Man's life is meaningful only because he can use it to see God. The 
goal of life is the final merging in the sea, God. You should not fill 
life with the world; that will make it a vanity fair, an insanity fair. 


BABA 


17. Purity in thought leads to Divinity 


EMBODIMENTS of Divine Love! For the development human personality, the development of 
the mind and the refinement of the heart are essential. 


All actions of man originate in the mind. The mind functions through thoughts. Hence, thoughts 
are the root came of man's actions. Humanness is the outcome of thoughts. When the thoughts 
are pure, the mind is also pure. With a purified mind, man's conduct becomes pure. Thin, for the 
purity or impurity of one's actions, thoughts are primarily responsible. 


It is easy for man to stand but it is difficult for him to run. But, in the case of the mind, staying 
still is difficult, but running is easy. This is the difference between man and his mind. The mind 
runs about swiftly. This is based on the power of the thoughts. When a stone is cast in a well, a 
series of ripples start from the point where the stone fell. From there, the ripples go upto the edge 
of the well and cover the entire well. 


In the same manner, when the stone of thought is cast on the lake of the mind, the ripples started 
by it fill all the senses and limbs in the body. When the thought is a pure and sacred one, the 
ripples emanating in the mind fill all the senses and limbs in the body; from head to toe, with 
pure reactions. This pure thought, entering the eye, purifies the vision. The same thought 
entering the ear, makes it listen to sacred sounds. Entering the mouth, this pure thought brings 
about purity in speech. Permeating the hands, the sacred thought induces them to engage 
themselves in sacred acts. The sacred ripples from the mind entering the feet, induce them to go 
on pilgrimages. If the thoughts are impure, they travel in ripples to the senses and induce to 
indulge in unholy acts. 


Hence, the well-known saying "The mind is made up of thoughts and aberrations." It follows that 
people should not give room for bad thoughts, bad associations or bad relationships. 


Good company redeems one's entire life 


All that is good or bad in man is based upon his good or bad behaviour. This conduct is traced to 
the mind, which itself is dependent on thoughts. Therefore, to have good thoughts you must 
cultivate good company Good thoughts appear small in the beginning like one's shadow at noon. 
But as the day advances, the shadow lengthens. 


Likewise, the influence of the good thoughts also grows as time passes. In due course it acquires 
a magnificent form. It attains a highly sacred place. It confers divine bliss and redeems one's 
entire life. 


Thus, sathsanga (company of the good) is supremely important. Good company, by promoting 
good thoughts, leads to the highest achievements in life. Bad company, on the contrary, is like 
the shadow caused by the morning sun. At dawn, the shadow produced by the sun is long. As the 
morning progresses, the shadow gets shorter and shorter. Ultimately, it gets limited to one's feet. 
This is how the effects of bad company operate. At the beginning the gains seem to be large. But 
as time goes on, the gains vanish. Human values get destroyed. 


Why Sathsanga is important 


The power of thoughts is immense. Thoughts survive unchanged the death of a man. Therefore, 
everyone should foster noble thoughts. Bad thoughts should not be allowed to enter the mind. 
Bad company should be avoided as much as possible. The reason is: For Yogis meditation is 


important. For those who wish to sacrifice, wealth is important. For devotees, singing (poem) is 
important. For the sick, medicine is essential. 


The company of the sick will make you sick. The company of Yogis will make you a Yogi. 
Through yoga, you realise the Divine. Through yoga you control the mind. Hence, the 
importance of Sathsanga. 


What is Sath-sanga (the company of the good)? Does it refer to the company of persons 
performing bhajans or to a group of devotees? Or does it refer to association with persons 
engaged in social service activities? No. Sath refers to that which is everlasting. What is it that is 
permanent? It is Divinity. Sath-sangam means cultivating the company of the Divine. Where is 
the Divine? It is within each body. The body consists of Angas (limbs). These limbs are 
associated with Jangam (the Life-Force). The Life-Force exercises the power of discrimination 
to determine what is right and what is wrong. Today, this discriminating faculty is not used 
properly, with the result man becomes a victim of the evil forces of Sangam (lust, anger, greed, 
pride, etc). 


Sath-Sanga really means the company of Sath (good). In another sense, good company means 
the company of good thoughts, good feelings. So company does not refer to individuals. 


For friendship or enmity, one's thoughts are the root cause. Who is an enemy? Who is a friend? 
One's thoughts are one's friends or enemies. Hence it is said- "The mind is the cause of 
mankind's bondage or liberation." 


Samaadhi is a state of union with Sath 


What does Samaadhi mean? Is it a state of trance? No. Is it a state of emotional utterance? No. Is 
it absorption in one's self?. No. When people refer to a man in trance or in unconscious state as 
one experiencing Samaadhi, they are thoroughly mistaken. It may be a case of hysteria or of 
epilepsy. It may be the result of some strong emotion, or one caused by excitement. The true 
meaning of Samaadhi is: it is a state of union with Sath. Samaa (equal) + Dhi (mind), equal 
mindedness is Samaadhi. The proper term is Samadhi, not Samaadhi. To treat alike pleasure and 
pain, heat and cold, darkness and light is true Samaadhi. This is the quality of Sath. It has no 
pleasure or pain. It is all-pervading. (Bhagavaan recited a poem in which the Gopikas describe 
Krishna as the Unknowable Infinite Divine, who is inscrutable and whose ways are baffling). 


The question is often asked: "Where is God?" And the usual answer is that "He is in Vaikunttha 
or in Svarga (Heaven), or in Kailaasha." Not at all. The Lord has nothing to do in these places. 
The Lord is in Naraka (Hell). As the denizens of Hell are perpetually suffering and calling out to 
God, the Lord remains there. It is among those who seek peace that the Lord dwells. A hospital 
is needed to tend the sick. Where there is no ailment there is no need for a hospital. Likewise, the 
Divine doctor goes to those who are in pain and distress. "Vaidhyo Naaraayano Harih" 
(Naaraayana or Hari is the doctor). Therefore, where there is humanity there is the Divine. 


Descent of the Divine in human form 


The Divine descends to the earth in human form, declare the scriptures, to allay the sufferings of 
those who are sick of body or of mind. Man today seeks to have a vision of the supra-human 
transcendental Being. This is sheer folly, because as long as one has the feeling that he is a 
human being he can aspire to see God only in human form and is not entitled to see His 


transcendental form. When one transcends the sense of his humanness, he acquires the privilege 
to envision the Transcendental Divinity. 


That is the reason why Raama and Krishna came as Avatars in human form. To claim that when 
you close your eyes and meditate you see an effulgent light is only a delusion. Them are 
innumerable things that are not visible to your naked eyes and which are beyond your ken. How 
do you expect to see them or know them? You know only the human form. So, at the outset, try 
to understand humanness. You must understand the Life Principle that animates the human. 
From the Life-Principle you should seek to enquire into the nature of the Divine. 


Aathma is present in all 


Dheha + Aathma is Dhehaathma (body + Spirit). Jeeva + Aathma is Jeevaathma (Life + Spirit). 
Parama + Aathma is Paramaathma (the Supreme + Self). Although Dheha (the body), Jeeva 
(the individual) and Param (the Supreme) are different terms, Aathma (Spirit) is common and is 
equally present in all the three. The Aathma is all-pervading. That is termed Sath (Being). It may 
be likened to sugar which retains its sweetness in whatever way it may be used. Chith 
(Awareness) is subject to change and movement. Even if it is carried to a high level, it rends to 
come down. When you mix sugar in water, you have neither sugar not water, but only syrup. 
When Sath, which represents the Divine and Chith, which represents the Life Principle come 
together, you have Aanandha (Bliss). This is Sath-Chith-Aanandha, It is like an ocean in which a 
myriad creatures come into existence and disappear like waves. Their names and forms vary but 
essentially they are the same as the ocean. They are all living beings which have emerged from 
Sath-Chith-Aanandha. 


When I begin my discourse with the words Divyaathma svaruupulaara (Embodiments of Divine 
Aathma), 1 intend to convey that the same Divine Spirit is in every one of you. Just as the ocean, 
the wave and the foam contain the same water, the Spirit that is present in the body; in the 
individual being and in the Supreme is one and the same. To experience this spiritual oneness, 
your way of life should be holy. This can be accomplished only by entertaining sacred thoughts 
which lead to good conduct. 


Deem yourself as Divine 


The Divine can be experienced by human beings only as manifested in the human form. Raama 
and Krishna are worshipped in the forms painted by Ravi Varma. If the Kodhanda (Raama's 
bow) and the flute (in the hands of the Krishna figure) are taken away, only the simple human 
figures remain. The human being is referred to as Nara. Ra means that which is perishable. Na 
means Not. Nara refers therefore to that which is imperishable in man, the Aathma (Spirit), 
Naaraayana, a manifestation of the Divine Spirit. Consequently, sorrow should be alien to him. 
He should shed no fear. 


Deem yourself as Divine. Live with this firm conviction. The divinity in every being should be 
revered. You have to recognise unity in diversity. "Beings are many, but breath is one." This may 
be experienced by everyone in the process of inhaling and exhaling. (Svaami demonstrated how 
with every breath, everyone repeats the manthra, So-Ham---"He am I" or "I am God"). 


Do not give room to any bad thoughts. The body is a temple of the Divine and no evil thoughts 
should be allowed to enter it. Man should strive to reach the sublime, regardless of difficulties, 
and troubles. 


Embodiments of the Divine! Develop good thoughts and feelings of sacrifice. Cherish divine 
spiritual thoughts. Cultivate friendliness. To hail God as father and mother and not to have 
fraternal feelings towards one and all is treason to God. You should cultivate unity as the 
children of God and live in harmony in the company of the good and the godly. 


Share the nectar of love that is in you with one and all. Do not bear ill-will towards anyone. 
Speak sweetly to everyone. Chant the Lord's name which will help you to cross the ocean of 
mundane existence. 


Discourse in Sai Ramesh Hall on 26-6-1994. 


"My country is India. My religion is the religion of India. My 
ideals and traditions have been born in India." You must develop 
such thoughts in your mind. You must develop great respect and 
attachment to the culture that has flourished in this country from 
time immemorial. You will have to dedicate your life for the future 
of this country. 


BABA 


18. Cherish the sweetness of sacrifice 


The cosmos is governed by the Divine; 
The Divine is controlled by Truth; 
That Truth is subject to noble beings; 
The noble are Divinity itself 


EMBODIMENTS of Divine Love! The entire Cosmos, consisting of animate and inanimate 
objects, is dependent on God. The Divine is governed 'by Truth, That Truth is governed by 
Uthamaadheenam (noble beings). The noblest being is Divine. Every human being is inherently 
noble. It is this nobility that constitutes his divinity. The Divine manifests Himself in human 
form. There is no need to search for the Divine as a distinct entity somewhere else. Man must 
strive to realise the Divinity within him. 


From the earliest times, the sages looked upon human /ife as madhuram (sweet). This sweet life 
is associated with Maadhava, the Divine and not anything else. We must see that this Sweetness 
is properly cherished. Only when this sweetness is safeguarded will man be true to his human 
nature. Without this sweetness, man ceases to be human. 


To experience this sweetness the spirit of sacrifice is essential. This nectarine sweetness is the 
outcome of thyaaga (sacrifice). As the Vedhas declare: "Not by deeds, or progeny, or wealth is 
immortality gained. It is realised only through sacrifice." Whatever good deeds one may do, 
whatever wealth one may acquire, without sacrifice the Divine cannot be experienced. 


Bliss-filled sweetness pervades man from head to foot 


It is out of the feeling of sacrifice that the nectarine sweetness arises in man. That sweetness is 
Divinity itself. Krishna is extolled as "Madhuraadhipathe! madhuram! madhuram!" (Lord of 
Madhura, who is all sweetness). When the Lord is described as the "Master of Madhura," what 
is this sweetness? The heart is sweet, the feeling is sweetness. The love (one feels) is sweet. The 
action (of the devotee) is sweet. The aanandha (bliss) is sweet. The Aathma is sweet. This bliss- 
filled sweetness pervades man from head to foot. 


Unfortunately, man today makes no effort to recognise the sweetness that is in him. All his 
thoughts, feelings and desires are directed towards the external world. Not even a small fraction 
of it is turned towards the heart within. 


Bhaaratheeya culture contains illustrations of this sweetness. There is nothing in the world 
sweeter than the love of a mother for the child. For the well-being of the child the mother is 
ready to sacrifice her all, including her life. Such nectarine sweetness is manifest only in the 
mother who is the embodiment of the Divine. Hence, the Upanishathic injunction: "Maathru 
dhevo bhava!" (Esteem the mother as God). 


Likewise, the heart of the father who fosters the child, and develops his personality, is also 
sweet. The Upanishath, therefore, enjoins everyone to treat the father as God. Mother and father 
are equal to God. 


Therefore, at the outset, one has to honour one's parents. The mother is the visible manifestation 
of God. If ignoring the divinity of the mother, who is visible and adorable, one seeks to worship 
what is invisible, it must be regarded as a sign of ignorance. God is subtle form. He is invisible 


and is infinite and immeasurable. The mother is a visible and tangible proof of Divinity. When a 
child is born, the first person it beholds is the mother. The mother bears patiently many travails 
for the sake of the child. It is sweet to love such a mother. You may have love for God. But if 
you have no love for the mother who is physically present before you, how can you love the 
invisible Divine? 


One's foremost obligation is to revere one's parents 


People tend to worship stones, but do not revere living beings. Worship of inanimate idols has 
been in vogue from ancient times. But people are forgetting to revere their living parents. One's 
first and foremost obligation is to revere one's parents who are in flesh and blood, who are verily 
your life itself. 


In the Raamaayana, there is the following illustration-Before leaving for the forest, Shri Raama 
approached his father, Dhasharatha, and said: "I am not sorry I have to go to the forest. Not does 
it pain me that you have given this command to me. I am to uphold your plighted word. Of what 
use is a son who does not uphold the word of his father? I derive the greatest sweetness from 
carrying out my father's word of honour." 


It follows from this that children should respect and carry out the words of parents. That alone 
testifies to the true quality of a son. 


Life acquires sweetness when parents are revered 


Love is the primary source of sweetness for man. There is nothing greater in this world than 
love. Life acquires sweetness when one reveres one's father and mother. Here is another example 
from the Raamaayana. 


Immediately after Raama broke Shiva's bow, Emperor Janaka declared that he would offer 
Seetha in marriage to Raama. Janaka brought Seetha to the assembly hall. Raama, however, 
without any hesitation, but in sweet firm words, declared that he would not agree to the wedding 
without the approval of his parents. Raama said that he owed his body to his parents and that he 
would abide by their wishes. He declared that till his parents arrived (in Mithila) he would not 
even set his eyes on Seetha. "I will consent to the marriage only after their approval." In this 
manner, Raama rejoiced in setting an example to the world of ideal conduct for all to follow at 
all times. Sage Vishvaamithra also waited for the arrival of Raama's parents. 


In another episode in Raamaayana, sage Vashishttha accompanied Bharatha to meet Raama in 
the forest. Intervening in the argument between Bharatha and Raama (over the issue of Raama's 
return to Ayodhya to talc over the kingdom), Vashishttha said: "Jt is your right and duty to role 
over the kingdom. You are the eldest son of Dhasharatha. You are endowed with all the talents. 
You are well versed in the scriptures relating to Dharma (the code of Right Conduct). You have 
won the affections of the people. You are committed to the well-being of the people." 
Vashishttha appealed in this manner to Raama to assume the reins of rulership. 


Speaking sweetly, eschewing harshness of any kind, Raama replied; "Guruji! Without honouring 
the plighted word of the father, if I disobey the command of my deceased father, I will be 
rendering my life worthless. My primary duty is to carry our my father's injunctions. I may even 
transgress the command of the preceptor, but I will not go against the command of my father." 


Thus, carrying our the commands of his father, Raama spent fourteen years in exile and 
demonstrated to the world the joy and fulfilment to be derived from such an exemplary life. 


Qualities that constitute sweetness in man 


Human life should be sweetened by honouring one's pledged word. Sweetness in life consists in 
setting an example in righteous living to those around one. There is sweetness in doing a good 
turn to one who has done you a good turn. Gratitude is sweet. These qualities constitute the 
maadhuryam (sweetness) in man. 


You should be grateful all your life to one who has helped you. You are the big man that you are 
today because of all the love and care bestowed on you in your early years by your parents. 
Therefore, to experience the love of your parents you should show your gratitude to them. This is 
a debt you owe to them. 


Alas! in this Kali age children show no regard for the parents. This is the disastrous sign of 
modern rimes. In any circumstance you have to show respect and love your parents. You owe 
everything to them, from your flesh and blood, to the food you consume and the garments you 
wean. To remember with gratitude the parents who are no more is an act of sacrifice. 


It is a pity that people today are not aware of the supreme greatness of sacrifice. There is 
sacrifice in every aspect of life. The joy to be derived from sacrifice is incalculable. One has to 
learn the supreme value of sacrifice from one's own parents who sacrifice so much for the sake 
of their children. It is your duty to keep your parents happy as long as they live. 


The four types of human beings 


People today become scholars and acquire great wealth. But all that they achieve as a result is 
conceit--the arrogance of study and riches. People cherish the sweetness of wealth and not the 
sweetness of love. Love alone constitutes true wealth. There are no riches above love. Through 
love you must develop the spirit of sacrifice. Fill everyone of your actions with love. Human life 
should be filled with love and sweetness, which are shared with others. Otherwise, it ceases to be 
human. 


There are four types of human beings: the Divine in the human, the demonic human, the human 
man and the animal man. The four qualities of the divine, the demonic, the human and the animal 
are present in human beings in varying degrees. 


"Brahmaratho Dhaivah" (The man who is installed in human is divine). This implies that the 
man who is wedded to truth, who performs righteous actions, who renders help to others, who 
thinks about the well-being of others, who indulges in acts of charity and beneficence, is filled 
with Divine qualities. He is immersed in the knowledge of the Brahman. 


"Sathyadharmaparo marthyah" (He is a human being who adheres to Truth and Righteousness). 
A true human being should uphold truth and right conduct. If truth and righteousness are 
safeguarded, the nation will be safe and secure. It is not the army or bombs that will protect the 
nation. Only Truth and Righteousness will protect the nation. 


"Madhya paana ratho dushtah" (The demonic human being revels in intoxicating drinks). Eating 
meat and drinking liquor are demonic vices. Those indulging in drink lose all sense of propriety, 
have no compassion or love and become demons. 


A selfish man manifests his animal nature 


"JInaanena shuunyah pashubhis samaanah" (One who lacks wisdom is equal to an animal). 
Jnaana is the capacity to discriminate between right and wrong, the permanent and the transient. 


Animality in man is indicated by the absence of this jnaana. A real human being has to have this 
power of discrimination. He should know what to say, when and to whom, and he should know 
how to behave towards elders, towards friends and different kinds of people. A person who is 
ignorant in these matters is only an animal. Jnaana, in its deeper sense, means 


Aathma-Jnaana (knowledge of the Self). This is absent in modern man. One who is selfish and 
self-centred is manifesting his animal nature. Only when self-interest is coupled with concern for 
others can one be truly human. Without manners one cannot be a man. Without good behaviour 
one is not a boy. Without discipline one cannot be a devotee. 


A previous speaker had said that the hand-kerchief lent beauty to Bhagavaan Baba. This is 
absurd. The true nature of beauty was described by the poet Mallamma in Kannada. She said that 
to a pond the lotus lends beauty. The moon imparts beauty to the sky. For a devotee, the 
vibhuuthi on his forehead confers beauty. Without virtue, life ceases to be beautiful. Virtue 
implies conduct which evokes the approbation of others. It must be exemplary and confer delight 
on others. It should not cause harm to others or appear ludicrous. It should bring a good name. 


Let your speech be always sweet 


People should ponder over what is their aim in life, whither they are going and what they should 
achieve before embarking on any activity. In this context, the Raamaayana furnishes a lesson for 
all. Dhasharatha, without any concern for the future, granted two unconditional boons to Kaikeyi 
in return for the help which she rendered to him. Our of thoughtless love for her, he gave two 
boons saying that she could have what she wanted, whenever she might choose to ask. She chose 
the time and the boons she wanted. She asked for the exile of Raama and the crowning of 
Bharatha. The lesson to be learnt from this is that when you give your word, you must be aware 
of all its implications. Promises made thoughtlessly lead to grievous situations. One has to stand 
by one's word. 


Truth endows one's life with sweetness. Loving words sweeten life. Let your speech be always 
sweet, whatever be the circumstances. Just as sugarcane has to go through crushing and other 
processes before you can get candy from it, the body has to go through certain ordeals to 
manifest its sweet nature. These are termed: Samskaara---the good thoughts, good feelings and 
good actions which bring about refinement. Love is essential for their refinement. Hence, love is 
the means to realise the nectarine sweetness of life. 


Discourse in the Sai Ramesh Hall, Brindhaavan, on 3-7-1994. 


No one who has trodden spiritual path, and engaged himself in the 
spiritual process has escaped calumny and cruelty. Mohammed, 
who sought to establish the primary of the One Formless Absolute, 
had a large share of persecution, defamation, and privation; Jesus, 
who attempted to rebuild mankind on the basis of Love, was 
crucified by little men who feared that their tiny towers of hate and 
greed will be toppled by his teaching. Harishchandhra, who had 
resolved never to waver from Truth, was submitted to ordeal after 
ordeal each more terrifying than the previous one. 


BABA 


19. Role of teachers, parents and Governments 


EMBODIMENTS of Divine love! Teachers! Students! Educationists! Despite all the knowledge 
one may have acquired, if one has no concern for the welfare of the world, all that knowledge is 
worthless. Without good qualities, all knowledge is useless. 


Without refinement in daily actions, 
vast scholarship will not confer renown. 
Conformity to rules, without morality, 
will not enhance one's worth. 
Will anyone respect you in the world if you display 
the arrogance of power, overstepping the limits? 
Going astray from Dharma, 
if you preach Dharma to others, 
Will you be deemed human at all? 
If you have not cherished fear of sin 
and not entertained the 
Love of God in your thoughts, 
what have you achieved so far? 
Leading a truly human life, 
be human at least from now onwards. 


Embodiments of love! What we need today is not a new system of education. Not do we need a 
new social system. Such changes will not serve to solve the problems we face. We need today 
men and women who are pure in mind and heart. In a society lacking in purity of mind and 
integrity of character, noble-minded human beings will be few. Without spirituality there will be 
neither purity, not morality not integrity. Where there are no men and women of noble character, 
the state will not flourish. 


Bhaarath is like a multi-petalled rose 


No country in the world has so many races, creeds and languages as the sacred land of Bhaarath. 
Bhaarath shines forth as a multi-racial garden with its many races and creeds and languages and 
cultures. The different creeds and cultures are like so many flowers in a garden. The varied 
manners and cultures contribute to the many faceted brilliance of the nation. The magnificence 
of this diversity is beyond description. Bhaarath is like a multi-petalled lotus. 


Bhaarath is the home of people who cherished Love as the way of the Spirit and Truth as the 
breath of their life. Unfortunately, lost in the pursuit of worldly, physical and material objects, 
the people have forgotten their basic divinity as human beings. 


It is in this context that the educational system has to be examined. Teachers have to consider the 
fundamental features of this system. From early times, the ancient system of education 
developed a broad outlook and promoted virtues and morals which served to foster noble ideals 


in society. What are the changes we witness today in the educational set-up? Who is responsible 
in this sacred land of Bhaarath for moulding the young children of today into ideal citizens of 
tomorrow? It is only when this question is properly examined that we will find the right solution 
for our problems, Is the responsibility that of the parents? Or is it that of the teachers who enrich 
the intellects of the students? Or that of the national leaders who profess to strive for the progress 
of the nation? Or is it that of the administrators who are in charge of educational institutions? Or 
is it that of the writers who are producing the literature for the students and the public? The 
question may be asked whether all of them are discharging their respective duties properly Let 
them examine their hearts and furnish the answer. Only then we shall find the solutions to our 
educational problems. 


Who is responsible for the indiscipline? 


Among students discipline has almost totally declined. What is the means to restore this 
discipline on right lines? Is any one trying to find out the cause of indiscipline or the means to 
remedy the situation? Without seeking to find out who is responsible for this indiscipline, it is 
wrong to blame the students. They are not to blame. 


The truth is: The students are not being taught the greatness of the culture and ideals of Bhaarath 
through suitable books and writings. Are we teaching to our students the exemplary lives of 
those who struggled for freedom and gave even their lives for the sake of the country? Are we 
imparting to our students inspiration from the lives of great leaders like Baala Gangaadhara 
Thilak, Laala Lajpat Rai, Bipin Chandhra Pal and Nethaaji Subhaash Bose who asserted the 
nation's right to freedom? Are we teaching to out students the message of great men who 
proclaimed the supremacy of morality and character? 


Students should be taught to develop good qualities 


We do not impart to our students the lessons of our great epics like the Raamaayana and the 
Mahaabhaaratha. Are we teaching to our students the story of Shri Raama, who sacrificed his all 
to fulfill the promises of his father? Are they told about the sacrifice of Dharmaja who went into 
exile and lived on roots and leaves to uphold Dharma? Do they learn about the devotion of 
Shravanakumar, who did not spare himself in the service of his parents? Are the students taught 
anything about Ekalavya, who was prepared to offer anything desired by the preceptor as the 
debt he owed to him? Are we teaching our students the story of Prahlaadha, who rejoiced in 
chanting the Lord's name and demonstrated the infinite power of the Divine in coming to the 
rescue of the devotee? Are we imparting to them the great message of the Bhagavath Geetha, 
which is relevant not only to Bhaarath but to the entire world.? Are they receiving the message of 
the Buddha, who proclaimed the truth that there is no greater virtue than refraining from harming 
others? 


Are they taught the significance of the compassion of Jesus? Are they told about the message of 
Prophet Mohammed? Are they taught the hymns of Naanak which glorify the unity of all faiths? 
Do they learn about courage and sacrifices made by great heroines like Jhaansi Lakshmibai, 
Padhmini and others? 


It is because such examples of noble conducts are not being taught to our students that their 
sense of patriotism is on the wane. Love of the country is turning into indifference. We have to 
develop in the students deep love for the country. Students should be taught how to use in a 
worthy and ideal manner their talents and abilities. Students today, without developing good 


qualities, are wasting their lives by bad association and giving free rein to their energies. 
Character alone is enduring. Students are going astray because their virtues are not cultivated. 


All are to blame and not one single agency 


Who are responsible for this? In the home, the parents are responsible, in schools and colleges, 
the teachers, and outside, the Governments which have tiled to provide a proper system of 
education and the administrators who have not recognized their obligation to train young people 
on right lines. The responsibility thus rests on all of them and not on any one single agency. In 
the homes, the parents should teach the children to cultivate good qualities and noble ideals. 
Bookish knowledge alone is not enough. It is superficial and not practical. Students need also 
general knowledge and common sense. 


The teachers, for their part, should impart to the students knowledge and skills which will enable 
them to lead ideal lives. Students today are getting involved in all. kinds of petty agitational 
movements. Morality and discipline are not to be found. Educational institutions are growing in 
numbers but the quality of education is declining. The reason is that proper text-books are not 
made available to the children. 


Morality and character are confined to books. 
The hearts are filled with foul things. 
The hands are used for selfish purposes. 


This is the progress made in education today. 


One repays with harm the good done to him. 
One betrays the man that feeds him. 
Students mock at teachers. 

This is our progress. 


Students should cultivate human values. The teachings of great and noble souls should be taught 
to them. Education should not be to get degrees to earn a living, but should be a preparation for 
the good life. Education should be for elevation. Teachers should teach students discipline, 
observance of humility and respect, and instill in them the spirit of service to society and the 
sense of fellowship. 


There is only one religion, the religion of Love 


Differences of caste and creed should be eradicated from the minds of students. They should feel 
the sense of human unity, with faith in God. All religions teach essentially the same troths. 
Hence no religion should be despised. Because of the Government's policies, a wrong attitude 
has been developed towards religion. The concept of a Secular State is bandied about. 
Secularism really means that you should have equal respect for all religions and beliefs. No one 
can be asked to renounce his faith in the name of secularism. There is only one caste, the caste of 
Humanity. There is only one religion, the religion of Love. There is only one language, the 
language of the Heart. Imagine how our students would be able to serve the nation in the future if 
these basic truths were taught to them. Hence, at the outset, teachers should set the example. 
Parents should exemplify ideals. The Government should be exemplary in its actions. It is 


because teachers, parents and rulers have failed to set the right example that today our 
educational system is in shambles. 


Teachers should combine practice with precept, like the physical instructor who demonstrates the 
exercises the students should perform. In the hermitages of the ancient preceptors, this was how 
the Gurus taught their disciples. 


The six qualities that emanate from the mind 


The distinction between the body and the mind should be understood, in this context. The body 
can stand still easily; but cannot run so easily. In the case of the mind, to keep it still is difficult, 
but it can be always fleeting. From the body arise the six enemies of man: lust, anger, greed, 
delusion, pride and envy. Man today is a victim of these enemies. But from the mind, many good 
qualities can emanate. Good qualities, good feelings, adherence to truth, devotion, discipline and 
discharge of duty are the six qualities that emanate from the mind. These are the traits that 
uphold humanness. Man is called Manuja, the one who has come from Manu, the primal author 
of the Dharmashaasthra (the Code of Conduct for all mankind). These are the qualities that have 
to be cultivated and practised today. They are the property of man along with his mind. A good 
mind is a god-mind. The degeneration in education is indicated by the change in addressing a 
student as "good boy" in olden days, to "Bye-bye" at present. 


Teachers! Inspire your students by your example. Give no room for anger, jealousy or hatred 
within you: Teach the children the three P's: Purity, Patience, Perseverance. Armed with these 
three qualities, they can protect the nation better than any army or atom bombs. When Truth and 
Righteousness are protected, the nation will be secure. Truth is God. This is true for all countries, 
everywhere, without regard to nationality or creed. Both Truth and Righteousness transcend 
barriers of space and time. 


Students have | taught the path of spirituality. They have to acquire faith, which generates love. 
Self-confidence is the basis and Self-Realisation is the roof. That is the ultimate destiny of man-- 
the full realisation of his human potential by practising human values. 


Unity of head, food and God is vital for all 


When all concerned- from students to educational authorities--function in this spirit, they can 
achieve all that they want. Teachers should not be content with merely teaching the children. 
They should contact the parents and ascertain how the children are behaving at home. Most Bal 
Vikas Gurus are working in rural areas. It is not enough to relate stories and reach songs and 
bhajans to the students. They should tell them about health, and food. For instance, in areas 
where fluorosis is rampant, they should teach the children how to treat the contaminated water 
before drinking. The teachers should reach them how to purify their heads and food to realise 
God. The unity of head, food and God will make them ideal citizens of Bhaarath. Unity is vital 
for all, wherever they are and whatever their country, religion or sex. Love should be the 
unifying force. Utilise the three days of the Conference for exploring all problems relating to 
your work in small groups and come to practical decisions. 


Teachers! Promote the sense of human unity among all people, without regard to race, religion 
or caste. Make Bhaarath the leader of the nations. The entire existence of Bhaarath is based upon 
spirituality. If spirituality goes, Bhaarath will cease to exist. If Bhaarath goes, the whole world 
will go. Faith in God is the life-breath of Bhaarath. With this faith, Bhaarath can face any 


challenge, Imbibe the children with confidence and courage. Unify them through Love and Love 
alone. 


Discourse in the Sai Ramesh Hall, Brindhaavan, on 19-7-1994. 


Listen to all such things as will draw you towards the principle of 
Godhead; then, think it over in silence, make it over in silence, 
make it part of your consciousness. This process of Manana makes 
you a man, that is the test of man---Mananahood! 


BABA 


20. Spiritual orientation to education 


TEACHERS! Embodiments of Love! Educationists! students! You see light from a bulb. You 
enjoy the breeze from a fan. You experience the cool air from an air-conditioner and warmth 
from a heater. But what makes them all work is one and the same electric current. 


Likewise, what you hear, what you see and think all appear to be externally different sensory 
experiences, but it is the intellect that enables the impressions received through the senses to be 
experienced. 


Right education leads to refinement of conduct. With refinement of behaviour, one's life gets 
sublimated. Good intellect alone can lead to happiness which is the source of peace. Proper 
education brings about association with good people. The company of the good is peace itself. 
Good education redeems one's life and ensures liberation as a consequence. 


When one receives education that is 
based on truth and eternal values, 
He will be able to achieve liberation 
without having to go through 
the process of submergence in Samsaara. 
Therefore, come forward to get 
the benefit of such education. 
Humility is an attitude of mind free from egoism 


"Vidhyaa dhadhaathi Vinayam" (Education confers humility). Humility does not mean mere 
bending of the head. Only an attitude of mind free from egoism, ostentation and attachment can 
be called humility. Today neither teachers not parents are able to teach such humility to the 
children because they themselves have not cultivated that attitude. The water you can draw from 
a tap depends on the nature of the water in the tank. Today teachers and parents have not filled 
their minds with sacred divine feelings. How can they be expected to infuse the children with 
such feelings? 


Here is a piece of burning charcoal. If you take proper care of it, it will keep burning. But if you 
neglect it, it will soon get covered up with ashes. In the heart of every human being, there is 
Jnaana-Agni (fire of wisdom). That fire signifies a pure heart. Today we are not able to see that 
fire because the heart is enveloped by the ash of worldly desires. When the ash is blown away, 
the fire will be visible. Men tend to forget the noble and ideal sentiments in their hearts because 
they are covered by worldly material and sensual desires. 


Shri Krishna declared: "Adhyaathma-Vidhyaa Vidhyaanaam" (Among various kinds of 
knowledge, I am Knowledge of the Spirit). Bhaarath has given birth to countless noble souls who 
possessed such spiritual knowledge. People today have forgotten the message of such noble 
beings. Today, the noble, sublime and inspiring teachings of these high-souled sages should be 
imparted to our boys and girls. 


A sculptor converts a block of stone into a beautiful idol. Language expresses the feeling in 
appropriate speech. Character takes a man on the righteous path. It is the teacher who moulds the 
children into exemplary human beings. 


The real teacher teaches others how to live 


The ignorant and the blind declare that a man, who cannot earn a living otherwise, becomes a 
teacher. On the contrary, the teacher is really the one who teaches others how to live. 


Those good men and women who 
Teach children how to act righteously 
in the future ahead of them, 
And promote the spirit of 
equality and affection, 
Are alone real teachers. 


Today we treat teachers as mere employees and slight them. Teachers, in her, are the people who 
indicate the royal road for human life. Teachers illumine the nation by promoting great ideals. 
They are responsible for the blossoming of ideals in the young. They awaken in children the 
Prajna (integrated awareness) which is subtle and hard to recognise. They draw our the latent 
potentialities in the students. If they are encouraged to make the effort, students can accomplish 
anything. 


Teachers are beacon-lights in idealism. It is only when the light, of the teacher shines effulgently 
that the light among students can-shine. The light from a reacher can light several lamps. 


Recognise the importance of spiritual education 


Teachers! You have to strive ceaselessly to impart to your students your sacred thoughts, your 
exemplary conduct and your ideals. Teachers are like guide-posts. It is only when you play this 
role well that you will have done your duty by the boys and girls to divinise their lives. Although 
secular education may appear necessary for mundane existence, the importance of a spiritual 
basis for it should be recognised. However, the responsibility for imparting a spiritual orientation 
to education rests not only on teachers, but also on the parents as well as the authorities. 


In this context, students have to cultivate three qualities. â€œSarvaloka hithe rathah" (One must 
cherish the well-being of everyone in the world). "Sarva Jnaana rathah" (One must be interested 
in all knowledge). â€œSarva sadhguna rathah" (One must foster all good qualities). Without good 
qualities, without seeking the welfare of the country and without good thoughts centred on God, 
how can one be a true human being? 


It is only when the individual is good that society will progress. When the society improves the 
nation will progress. The welfare of the individual, society and the nation is based on the 
observance of human values. 


From ancient times the sacred land of Bhaarath has been standing forth as a leader among 
nations by its spiritual wealth, ensuring their peace and security. It proclaimed the great message: 
"Let all the people of all the worlds be happy." 


Students should be taught to use properly, all the talents and qualities given by God to them. 
Without-good qualities life is worthless. By their bad qualities students today misuse their 
knowledge. They should cultivate humility which can confer many benefits. 


They should learn the lessons which Nature provides by way of selfless service. Every element 
in nature--the earth, water, the sun--demonstrate the selfless service it is rendering to man. Man, 
who is a child of Nature, has become a stranger to compassion and other natural qualities. By 
filling a prey to all kinds of desires, man has strayed away from the right path. He has not only to 
acquire knowledge, but wisdom. He has to combine good qualities with good practices. Book 
knowledge has to be translated into good deeds. 


Demonstrate your unity and divinity 


Teachers! You have the responsibility for reshaping the future. There is a big difference between 
the conference you have held here and conferences elsewhere. At other conferences, the 
tendency is to regard them as occasions for picnics and sight-seeing. You, who have come here 
at great expense, from long distances, should demonstrate your unity and divinity Do not 
entertain any differences of race, religion and community. Foster the Caste of Humanity, the 
Religion of Love and the Language of the Heart. 


Teach your students that it is the same Aathma (Spirit) that dwells in all beings. You must 
emulate the example of the ancient rishis who were the preceptors in the Gurukulam. You must 
ensure by your conduct the esteem and respect of your students, who are highly intelligent. To 
mould the students into good citizens is a spiritual saadhana. A bad teacher will spoil the lives of 
many generations of students. 


Dedication shown by the Gurus 


In fact, our teachers are very good persons. They undergo considerable trouble in rendering 
service. Many ladies, who have to attend to their daily chores at home, are carrying on their 
educational work out of their devotion to Svaami. They are treating it as a spiritual exercise. No 
other institution in the world can claim to perform the kind of selfless and dedicated service 
which the members of our Samithis, our Seva Dhal and Baala Vikaas teachers are rendering. 
Whatever their difficulties, they are coming here at their own expense and bearing their food 
expenses. The Sathya Sai Trusts do not provide any funds, for them, nor do they seek any aid 
from the Trusts. 


Whatever trouble you may face, you must learn to feel happy in any circumstance. If you are 
string by a scorpion, you must console yourself that you were not bitten by a snake, and when 
you are bitten by a snake, you must console yourself that it has not proved fatal. Even if you are 
not able to own a vehicle, be happy that you have got your legs intact to enable you to walk. 
Even if you are not a millionaire, be happy that you have enough resources to feed yourself and 
your family. This is the way to experience joy even while in adverse circumstances. 
Ceiling on desires is a must for leading a peaceful and meaningful life. You must curb the desire 
to seek more and more wealth and turn your effort to realise the Reality within. In pursuing this 
effort, you must avoid waste of food, money, time, energy and knowledge as all these are Forms 
of God. Unnecessary talk should be avoided as this results in waste of energy and reduction of 
memory power. 


Teach children to talk softly and sweetly 


Besides observing the ceiling on desire, students should also practise the discipline of seeing no 
evil, hearing no evil, thinking no evil and doing no evil. Only when children are taught these 
good disciplines in the formative stage, they will grow as good persons. By leading a life without 
discipline, students will practically be like cars without brakes which will spell danger to the 
occupants. Sense-control is an essential requisite for students who are in the vulnerable stage of 
succumbing to the temptations of sensual pleasures. 


You must teach them how to talk softly and sweetly while adhering to truth. Some mothers 
complain that their children don't listen to their advice and retort- "Don't talk. I know." For this 
situation, the mothers alone are to be blamed because this is the result of their having allowed 
indulgence to their children in the earlier stages. From childhood, good things should be taught 
to them. When they send their wards to school, their responsibility does not cease. They should 
take cam to ensure that not only they study properly, but develop good behaviour, respect for 
parents and ciders, speaking the truth and avoiding unrighteous actions. 


Discourse to the Valedictory Session of the National Baal Vikaas Conference in Sai Ramesh Hall 
on 21-7-1994. 


21. Experience the fullness of love 


Does life consist in working for a living, eating and sleeping, 
wasting one's time in meaningless gossip? 
Was previous human birth given by God 
for this purpose? No. 
At least from now on lead a truly human life 
and achieve fulfilment. 
At the tip of the tongue dwells the Goddess of Prosperity. 
At the tip of the tongue remain friends and kinsfolk. 
Bondage resides at the tip of the tongue. 
Death lies in wait at the tip of the tongue. 


EMBODIMENTS of Divine Love! Through the power of Vaak (speech) one can acquire a 
kingdom or great wealth. Friends and relations can be got through speech. Through speech one 
gets bound and loses his freedom. Even death is brought about by speech. 


Speech is the life-force of human beings. Speech is the backbone of life. It is all powerful, 
Jayadheva addressed-his tongue as follows-"Oh tongue! You know all about the sweetness of 
speech! You enjoy truth and goodness; chant the sweet and sacred names of the Lord. Govindha! 
Daamodhara! Maadhava! Don't indulge in reviling any one. Speak, sweetly and softly." 


The reasons for declining discipline 


"Anudvegakaram Vaakyam Sathyam Prithihithamcha yath" (Let your speech be truthful, 
pleading and good and free from resentment) says Krishna in the Geetha. Unfortunately, because 
such sacred and sweet speech has become scarce, society is riddled with bitterness and discord. 
The permissiveness of a crazy civilization has destroyed discipline and morality and turned 
society into an inferno. Society today is divided in a myriad ways and. there is no peace. On 
account of differences of caste and creed, linguistic and parochial loyalties and desires of various 
kinds, violent conflicts have turned the social scene into a graveyard. 


Human life is vitiated by selfishness and the pursuit of ephemeral pleasures, forgetting what is 
eternal and true. Selfishness is rampant. Even affection for parents and children is tainted with 
selfishness. Man today has become a plaything in the hands of selfishness. 


On the one side, man has a achieved astonishing progress in science and technology, especially 
in the fields of electronics, synthetics, atomic power and exploration of space. On the other side 
we witness political and economic crises, caste and communal conflicts and students agitation. 


Today, moral values are steadily declining among men. In the moral, ethical and spiritual 
spheres, men's attitudes are deteriorating alarmingly. Even well-versed scholars and eminent 
public figures are caught up in the coil of bitter controversies because of narrow-minded 
thinking. Unity among the people is being shattered by the ideological and sectarian differences 
among persons who are well educated and intellectually eminent. Intellectuals who promote 


discord are on the increase, but there are few who promote unity in diversity. At the root of all 
these tendencies is the fact that mankind has still not got out of the animal stage. 


Men have to realise that essentially they are divine in origin. The individual selves have come 
from the ocean of Sath-Chith-Aanandha, like waves from the ocean. It is only when this truth is 
realised that men can experience true bliss. 


The need for men and women with sacred ideals 


To transform the world from its present state, there is no need. for a new social system or a new 
religion or creed. What is essential is a body of men and women with sacred ideals. When there 
are such godly souls the country will enjoy divine dispensation. But such godly persons can 
survive only in a society in which there is purity of mind and good character. For these two to 
blossom, the basis is morality. But morality cannot flourish without spirituality. Hence the 
mansion of the good society has to be built on the foundation of spirituality, with the pillars of 
purity and character, and with morality as the roof. 


The reputation and gloat of Bhaarath have been founded on spirituality from ancient dines. 
Bhaarath achieved this name and fame because of noble men, women of great virtue and 
exemplary children. Their ideals still shine today. Harishchandhra, Nala and others are still 
remembered for their adherence to truth. Heroic women like Saavithri, who by her devotion and 
determination brought back to life her dear husband from the hand of Death, and Seetha, who 
faced all ordeals in Lanka as a captive, ensured the welfare and prosperity of the country by their 
exemplary character. 


Today morality and character are at a discount. Money alone counts. But money and all that it 
can give will not confer peace. Peace can be got only when man manifests his inner divinity. The 
Divine is the Indweller in every being. Hence no one should have ill-will towards anybody 


Man, however is dominated today by selfishness. His thoughts, his looks, his words and actions 
are all tainted by selfishness. He is a slave of his senses. In short, humanness is in ruins. 


Manifest the compassion that resides in the heart 


The first requisite is sense-control. Man is today enveloped in evil qualities like jealousy and 
hatred. Man has to manifest compassion, which resides in the heart. 


Once Saint Thyaagaraaja, for a moment, developed doubts about Raama's prowess and later 
realised that Raama could not have commanded the allegiance and devotion of men like 
Lakshmana and Bhaarathha if he was not all-powerful. From this one episode, you have to 
understand that if Sai did not have unique power, would He be able to attract persons from 
America, England and other countries? If there is no power in Sai how do you imagine devotees 
from any countries to come to Him? Are they such innocents? Or are they witless persons? Not 
at all. They are all persons of great intelligence. Intelligence alone is not enough. They have to be 
filled with divine feelings. 


It should be realised that the divinity in human beings cannot be measured in terms of worldly 
goods. It has to be measured in terms of Love. Mankind has to understand this Love Principle. 


When there is Love, there will be no hatred. Without hatred, there will be no threat to peace in 
society. To ensure peace, society has to promote Love. This means that the mind has to be filled 
with loving thoughts. 


The significance of Gurupuurnima 


The moon is the presiding deity for the mind. Today, it is Puurnima (Full Moon day). What does 
Puurnima signify? It means the completion of the full circle by returning to the starting point. 
One half of the circle is represented by worldly life. It is like the letter "C". This is equated with 
science, which is incomplete knowledge. The full circle represented by the moon represents the 
state of the mind when it is filled with Love. 


Gurupuurnima is observed today. Guru means Big. Guru has also another meaning: Gu means 
darkness and Ru means dispelling. Guru metres one who dispels darkness (the preceptor who 
dispels the darkness of ignorance). Gurupuurnima is the day on which one celebrates the 
dispersal of the darkness of ignorance from the mind. 


Hence, people should fill their minds with the all-embracing Love Principle. To experience the 
fullness of Love, you have to fill your hearts completely with Love. That will be the result of 
total devotion. 


But today devotion is not total. The benefit also is partial. Part-time devotees cannot expect total 
reward. The Lord confers full grace on those whose hearts are totally filled with devotion. 
Spiritual aspirants may follow any one of the nine paths of devotion and realise the Divine. 
Among these, the attitude of friendship towards God is one to be cherished because God is the 
only true and enduring friend for everyone. 


The destiny of the world is based on Bhaarath 


In the process of achieving oneness with the Divine, the first stage is for everyone to consider 
himself as a messenger of God. Every Indian should propagate Baba's message of spirituality. 
All of you should take note of this supreme fact: If spirituality goes in Bhaarath, Bhaarath will be 
mined. When Bhaarath goes, the whole world will go. The destiny of the world is based on 
Bhaarath. 


It is because spirituality was being forgotten that Bhaarath became a prey to all kinds of ills. 
Love has virtually disappeared. Humanness has decayed. Humanness can exist only when the 
minds are holy. Man is called Manuja, which means one who is descended from Manu, who 
gave to mankind the Dharmashaasthra (the Code of Righteous conduct). The courts today do not 
follow the code of Manu. Justice has become a creature of time, circumstances and money. 
Dharma transcends the limitations of space, time and circumstances. Today we have forgotten 
Manu. 


We have also forgotten Kautilya. He was the author of Arthashaasthra (the laws of economics 
and statecraft). Our economy today is in utter disorder. Kautilya's teachings have to be relearnt. 


Failing to uphold the ideals of great men like Harishchandhra, who sacrificed everything for 
truth, the people today are becoming slaves of the senses. 


Children should be taught to respect all religions 


Teachers! Teach your young pupils the ideals of Bhaarath's great sages, heroes and heroines, 
who upheld the highest virtues and set an example to the world. They should be taught to behave 
as ideal sons like Shraavanakumar. One good son can redeem a whole family. Ekalavya 
exemplifies supreme devotion to the Guru. Prahlaadha should be held out as supreme example of 
total faith in God. Teachers should instill such devotion to God in the young. 


In the name of secularism, governments should not interfere with the practise of their respective 
religions by the citizens. No one should criticize the creed of others. The divinity that is adored 
by all religions is one and the same, though different names may be used. In the name of 
religion, violent conflicts are encouraged. Children should be taught to respect all religions. 


Teachers should also make the children realise the true purpose of education. Education should 
be a preparation for righteous living and not for earning money. Good qualities are more 
valuable than money. Sathyabhaama was made to realise that the name of the Lord and a thulasi 
leaf offered to Him were more valuable than all her jewels when weighed in the balance against 
Krishna. 


Teachers should practise the precepts which they teach to the children. If they teach the children 
not to quarrel or not to smoke, they should also refrain from such conduct. 


Teachers! You have put up with many inconveniences and difficulties during the past three days 
out of your devotion to Svaami. You regarded this as spiritual exercise. The body is intended to 
serve as an instrument for realising righteousness. There is no gain without pain. Sacrifice is the 
means for attaining immortality. Love and sacrifice are like two eyes for man. Whatever sacrifice 
you make, treat it as an offering to God. Then work will be transformed into worship. 


All that Svaami wants from you is only your Love. 
Discourse on 22-7-1994, in the Sai Ramesh Hall, Brindhaavan. 


The character of the children must be made strong and pure. Give 
them all the confidence and courage they need to become good, 
honest, and self-reliant children. It is not enough if they learn 
something by which they can make a living. The manner of living is 
more important than the standard of living. 


BABA 


22. Devotion is pure love for God 


What harm can Kali do to one 

Whose heart is compassionate, 

Whose speech is adorned by Truth, 

And whose limbs are used to serve others? 


EMBODIMENTS of love! Any human being who has compassion for others, who adheres to 
Truth and who dedicates his body to the good of others will experience no serious trouble. The 
primary reason is one's devotion to God. 


Bhakthi (Devotion) is not something which man can acquire by himself. It is indeed the inherent 
principle animating man. Devotion manifests itself as love. This love is the supreme treasure of 
man. It is this treasure which enables man to live in this world. But few persons recognise this 
truth. 


Time moves like a whirlwind. The allotted span of life for the body is melting away every 
moment like a block of ice. However, even before recognizing what is his duty, man departs 
from this world. What is the aim of human life? What is a man's duty? It is to discover this truth 
that God has endowed man with a body. â€œParopakaara artham idham shareeram" (This 
body is given for rendering help to others) 


We live in society, depending on it for our needs. But, forgetting what they owe to society, 
people lead selfish, self-centred lives. Service to society is the primary, Karma (duty). Concern 
for the welfare of all is Bhakthi (devotion). "Let all people be happy." Awareness of this feeling 
is Jnaana (true knowledge). 


Devotion is a fragment of the Divine 


Without recognizing the duty to serve society, without concern for the welfare of society, how 
can the all-encompassing desire for the happiness of all, which is devotion, arise in anyone? 
These three are intimately related like flower, render fruit and ripe fruit. The ripe fruit of 
devotion confers the wisdom which eliminates differences. Devotion is a fragment of the Divine. 
Without devotion, awareness of the Divine cannot be experienced. Equally, devotion without 
consciousness of the Divine can only breed Ahamkaara (egoism). 


Different people experience the bliss derived from devotion in different ways. One devotee 
begins with repeatedly reciting the word, Dhaasoham, dhaasoham (I am His servant), expresses 
his devotion as a servant of the lord. In course of time, by frequent repetition of this word and 
reminding himself of the Lord, he reaches the stage where the 'daa' drops away and only â€˜soham' 
remains. He begins to realise that he and the Lord are one. Starting as the servant of the Lord, he 
realises his identity with the Lord. 


Another devotee, starting with a consciousness of the material body, contemplating on the Self, 
merges in the higher Consciousness. How is he able to experience this subtle consciousness to 
the physical body? Without this earthly body, the Chinmaya (subtle Self) cannot be experienced. 


How did the transformation take place? How did the realisation come that the Divine and the 
individuals self are not different, but art inextricably linked to each other? This is because the 


Divine and the jeeva (the individual self) are united like substance and shadow. That is why 
Vedhaantha declares "Eeshvaras sarva bhuuthaanaam" (Lord dwells in all living beings). 


Krishna described Arjuna as friend and devotee 


Recognition of this truth is the essential mark of devotion. Bhakthi is derived from the 
combination of the verb "Bhaj" with the indeclinable "thi': Bhakthi means seva (service). It also 
means friendship coupled with fear. Without fear friendship cannot be firm. In the Geetha, 
Krishna refers to Arjuna as friend and kinsman. "Besides being a friend, you are also my 
servant," said. Krishna. Thereby, Krishna regarded Arjuna as a devotee. When one is a devotee 
he is reverential and submissive. If one is treated solely as a friend and not a devotee, he is likely 
to behave as he pleases. To maintain the balance between the two, Krishna described Arjuna as 
friend and devotee. 


In this relationship, there is equality and oneness. For this to be achieved, one has to get rid of 
Dhehabhraanthi (the identification with the body). The ancient sages observed rigorous 
penances to get rid of Dhehabhraanthi and in due course experienced Aathmabhraanthi (identity 
with the Self). 


Dheha-prema and dhaiva-prema 


In this context, the twofold nature of Prema (love) has to be understood. One is Dheha-Prema 
(love associated with the body). The other is Dhaiva-Prema (Divine love). Dheha-prema relates 
to experiences associated with the physical, the sensory and the natural. It is the identification 
with the body that accounts for all sufferings and miseries. It is portentous and produces 
inauspicious results. 


Divine love on the contrary, is sacred and leads to auspicious and enduring well-being. Grief and 
trouble are alien to divine love. Divine love sustains itself and is lasting. Bodily love depends on 
others and is evanescent. 


Every man should seek to acquire this divine love. The body, however, is an impediment in the 
way. The entire world is caught up in the vast net of Anuraaga (attachment). This attachment is 
an amazing Maaya (delusory) phenomenon. There is no connection between the body composed 
of the Panchabhuthas (five basic elements) and the transcendental Aathma (Self). But the 
delusory power of Maaya in the form of attachment brings about a link between the two. If this 
were not the case, what is the relationship between one person and another? Who is a wife and 
who is a husband? Who is a mother and who is a son? All these relationships have been brought 
about by Anuraaga (attachment born of desire) and not by love. There is no attachment between 
mother and son before the child is born. But after birth, Vaathsalyam (maternal affection) arises. 
This affection is based on bodily relationship and is by its nature temporary. 


Attachment to the body is a kind of disease 


Divine Love exists before birth, after birth and continues forever. No effort is made by men to 
understand this true and enduring love. Attachment to the body is a kind of disease which has to 
be treated by three kinds of remedies. One is observing dietary restrictions while taking the 
medicine. If diet regulations are not observed, the medicine alone will not cure the disease. Diet 
control without the medicine will be equally ineffective. Both diet control and medicine are 
equally necessary for curing the disease. With regard to the disease of attachment to the body, 
one has to abide by divine injunctions and practise love for the Divine to get rid of the ailment. 


Observing the Divine injunctions without love for God will not be efficacious. Equally, devotion 
without observance of the Lord's commands will be useless. Love is the medicine and God's 
injunctions are the diet restrictions. It is by the presence of both, that Divinity in man can be 
made to manifest itself. 


For all the troubles, chaos and discord present in the world today, the root cause is attachment to 
the body which breeds selfishness and self-centredness. Concern for the body is necessary upto a 
point. But excessive attachment to the demands of the body is harmful, because the body is 
essentially fragile and liable to break up any moment at any place. The body, of course, needs to 
be protected and allowed rest and recreation. But all these should be only for the purpose of 
enabling it to discharge one's duty. 


"Discharge of duty is Yoga,â€ says the Geetha. What is this duty? It is assumed that duty relates to 
one's professional or occupational responsibilities, as lawyer, doctor, etc. This is not duty at all 
because these actions are performed for selfish reasons, to earn money The Sanskrith word 
Karthavyam means that you are not free to act as you please and you have to respect the rights of 
others on the same basis as you expect others to respect your rights. The terms duty or right 
should not be misused. 


True devotion knows no differences 


Equally, in respect of the term Bhakthi, devotion is equated with performing puujas, observing 
rituals, going on pilgrimages, etc. But these are not the true insignia of devotion. The true mark 
of devotion is pure love of God. Without this pure love, bhajans, worship and the like are 
artificial exercises and are valueless. They may appear to be devotional acrs, but they do not 
contain the essential sweetness of devotion. They resemble plastic flowers and fruits. A life 
without love is like a barren wasteland. True devotion knows no differences. It sees unity in 
diversity. Today, devotion is marked by various differences. Though God is one, He is 
worshipped in many forms. Can this be called devotion? No. The one God is broken into 
fragments. On the other hand, man has to unite the fragments and see the One. The Upanishaths 
proclaimed the unity suffusing the multiplicity as the Aathmik Principle. 


Today you have a myriad individuals, but the Spirit that dwells in all of them is one and the 
same. 


"Ekovasee Sarvabhuutha antharaathma" (The Indwelling Spirit is one in all beings). God is one 
but is called by different names. It is our of self-interest that God is worshipped under different 
names and forms by different people. 


What has to be recognized today when people talk about devotion is the oneness of the Divine. 
The love of God should be developed. Love for all other worldly things is bound to change. Only 
love for the Divine can be unchanging. 


The Bhaagavatham proclaims the glory of Divine love. Bhaagavatham is described as a sacred 
book on Bhagavaan (Divine). Another interpretation is that the Bhaagavatham deals with the 
greatness of devotees of the Lord. Yet another explanation is that the Bhaagavatham describes 
the intimate relationship between God and devotees. 


It is this relationship that should be developed by all devotees. People feel distressed when some 
one among their kinsfolk is ill. If such is the affection they bear towards relations who are 


associated with them for brief periods, how much more love should one have towards the eternal 
Lord? 


Best way to serve God is to love all, serve all 


One should regard love for God as the greatest treasure one can have. When you love God, you 
will have love towards all because the Divine is in everyone. Therefore bear in mind: Love all; 
serve all. The best way to serve God is to love all and serve all. Your devotion will get diluted if 
you entertain differences between people. Devotion to Raama or Krishna becomes meaningless 
if you do not practise their teachings. The worship of the Lord should be accompanied by leading 
a Godly life. Only the bliss can be experienced. 


Today people carry on routine reading of scriptural texts like the Geetha or the Bible. This serves 
no purpose unless they lead pure and sacred lives. They should fill their hearts with love of God 
and share that love with others. There can be no greater demonic quality than hatred towards 
God. 


The Divine is both protector and destroyer. For Prahlaadha, who was a staunch devotee, the Lord 
was a protector. To Hiranyakashipu (Prahlaadha's father), who hated God, the Divine became the 
destroyer. 


God showers His grace according to one's deserts. He is the embodiment of Love. One's bad 
qualities prevent one from realising the grace of God. The fault lies with the individuals and not 
with God. 


Hrishikesha sevanam Bhakthiruchyathe (Service to the Lord is called devotion). If you fill your 
heart with love of God, you will secure all powers. Therefore, live in love. Redeem your lives 
through love. Let love become your life-breath and the sole goal of your life. 


Discourse in the Sai Ramesh Hall on 21-8-1994. 


Develop Prema (Love) towards the Lord, the Parama-Prema 
(Highest Love) of which He is the embodiment. Never give room 
for doubts and hesitations, for questions, to test the Lord's Prema. 


BABA 


23. The glory of Krishna Avathaar 


EMBODIMENTS of love! It was the middle of the Dhvaapara Yuga. Unable to bear the atrocities 
committed on good people by demonic rulers, the Goddess of Earth prayed to the Lord in many 
ways. Offering solace to the grief-stricken Goddess, the Lord said; "Dhevi! You may return to 
the earth. I shall do what needs to be done. You will be relieved of your Burden." Encouraging 
her in this way the Lord sent Mother Earth back to the world. 


Thereafter, the Lord summoned all the Dhevas (denizens of the celestial world) and directed 
them to take birth as Yaadhavas. The originator of the Yaadhava clan is Yayaathi. His eldest son 
was known as Yadhu. The descendants of Yadhu came to be known in course of time as 
Yaadhavas. Among the yaadhavas, there was a chief known as Aahuka, who was a righteous 
person, wedded to truth. The characters figuring in the Krishna legend belong to Aahuka's 
lineage. Aahuka had two sons Dhevaka and Ugrasena. Kamsa was the son of Ugrasena. Dhevaki 
was the daughter of Dhevaka. Kamsa had no sister of his own. He had great affection for his 
cousin Dhevaki, whom he treated as his own uterine sister. 


The warning to Kamsa from the ethereal voice 


In the Yaadhava clan, there was one Vasudheva, the son of Shura. Vasudheva was one of the 
satraps in the Yaadhava kingdom. He was known as one who stood by his plighted word. 
Ugrasena and Kamsa, after a great deal of search, picked upon Vasudheva as a suitable 
bridegroom for Dhevaki. Vasudheva already had a wife by the name Rohini. In those rimes, 
there were no restrictions regarding polygamy. Because he had no child through Rohini, 
Vasudheva agreed to marry Dhevaki. 


After the marriage, Kamsa got ready his chariot to take Vasudheva and Dhevaki to their home. 
Kamsa drove the chariot himself with a heavy heart, overwhelmed by the prospect of separation 
from his beloved cousin. Dhevaki was as dear to Kamsa as his life-breath. At the time of her 
leaving her paternal home, Dhevaki was presented with many precious gifts by Ugrasena, 
besides a retinue of elephants, horses and guardsmen. 


While the chariot was proceeding in a grand manner, all of a sudden a loud voice was heard from 
the sky: "You fool! You do not know what is in store for you. The one who will slay you for all 
your misdeeds will be born as the eighth child of your sister." After saying this, the ethereal spirit 
vanished. 


The moment Kamsa heard these words, he flew into a rage. He jumped down from the chariot, 
seized Dhevaki by the hair, unsheathed his sword to cut off her head. 


Vasudheva, who was the very embodiment of peace, truth and righteousness, held Kamsa's 
hands and asked him why he was worried so much over the prospect of death. "Death is 
inevitable, whether today or in time to come. Whatever you may do to protect yourself, death 
will come in its own time even if you hide yourself in a forest. All beings that are born are 
destined to die. Kamsa! The ethereal voice declared that death will come to you from the hands 
of the eighth child (of Dhevaki) and not immediately There are many years ahead before the 
eighth child. It is not proper that you should lose your temper. Release the girl whom you had 
loved as your sister. I shall hand over to you every child that is born to her." When Vasudheva 
gave his pledge, Kamsa realised the truth of his words and released Dhevaki from his hold. 
Kamsa returned to his palace without getting back into the chariot. 


Sage Naaradha's advice to Kamsa 


Vasudheva and Dhevaki reached their home with heavy hearts. As days passed by and Kamsa 
was immersed in worry about the prospect of death, Sage Naaradha came to him one day. After 
talking about world affairs in general, before leaving, Naaradha told Kamsa-"You are verily a 
fool. You are not aware of your real plight. The ethereal voice said that (Dhevaki's) eighth child 
will be your slayer. But you cannot know from which of her children death will come to you. 
You cannot rake a chance with any of them." 


From that moment Kamsa's distress and fear increased. He commanded Vasudheva to hand over 
to him every child. He killed six of the newborn children as they were handed over to him. 


When Dhevaki was enceinte for the seventh time, Sriman Naarayana made all arrangements to 
carry out His promise to Mother Earth. To promote the welfare of the world, to establish Dharma 
among mankind, to uphold truth and to instill devotion to God in humanity, the Divine process 
had to be set in motion. The Dhevas took birth as Yaadhavas. Vishnu summoned His all- 
pervading Yoga Shakthi (The Cosmic Energy), and said "Go forth immediately and enter the 
womb of Yasodha." Summoning Aadhisesha (the Divine Serpent) the Lord directed him to go to 
Gokulam and enter the womb of Rohini (Vasudheva's elder wife). "I shall be entering the womb 
of Dhevaki." 


Krishna's birth in prison 


In Dhevaki's seventh pregnancy, the Lord had the foetus transferred to Rohini's womb and 
Kamsa was informed that Dhevaki had an abortion. Krishna made His advent in her eighth 
pregnancy Apprehending danger from Kamsa, Vasudheva arranged to send Rohini to Nandha's 
home. Rohini was a sister of Yasodha. 


Expecting mortal danger to himself from the eighth child of Dhevaki, Kamsa kept Vasudheva 
and Dhevaki in a heavily guarded prison. He kept the key of the' prison lock with himself. 


Dhevaki gave birth to a son on an Ashtami (eighth day after the New Moon) in the asterism 
Rohini. The Child that was born was the Lord Himself with all His effulgence and all the 
insignia of Vishnu. On the child's chest was the Srivathsa mole. The Kausthubha ornament shone 
brilliantly. Dhevaki and Vasudheva folded their hands in adoration, blinded by the effulgence of 
the Divine Child. They felt that their lives had been redeemed by the birth of the Lord, whom 
they saw with their own eyes. Approaching the baby and caressing his palms and feet, they 
prayed to the Lord: "Thanks to our good fortune, you have taken birth as our son. But we are not 
in a position to protect you. You must use your divine potency to get away from this prison by 
any means. 


The ways of the Divine are marvellous and mysterious 


Vasudheva sat beside the child and started praying. Immediately a basket appeared before him. 
Placing the Divine child in the basket he looked at the prison door. He saw that it was open. The 
ways of the Divine are marvellous and mysterious, felt Vasudheva. He stepped out of the prison. 
He found all the guards sound asleep. As he came out, there was a heavy downpour. The 
Yamuna was in spate. He prayed to Naarayana to see that there was no impediment in the way of 
his mission to protect the Divine child. The Yamuna gave him passage. He reached Nandha's 
house. 


The same day Yasodha had given birth to a child. Yasodha was unconscious. The child was none 
other than Maayaadhevi. When she was born, both Nandha and Yasodha were in a state of 
trance. Leaving the infant Krishna by the side of Yasodha, Vasudheva returned to Mathura with 
the other child. When Vasudheva left Nandha's house, the child left beside Yasodha uttered a 
cry. Yasodha and Nandha did not know whether the newborn was a boy or girl. On hearing the 
child's cry, Yasodha looked at it and found that it was a boy. 


Vasudheva rook the female child back to his prison. There the child starred crying. On hearing 
the cry, all the guards woke up. They rotund the prison gates closed. They informed Kamsa 
about the birth of the child. Kamsa, who had been anxiously waiting for the news, rushed to the 
prison. Seizing the new-born child from Dhevaki's hands, he flung it up in the air to slay it with 
his sword. The child, Maayaadhevi, spoke from above, "You fool! The boy who is going to slay 
you is already born. He is growing up in a certain place. You cannot escape your destined end." 
Saying this, Maayaadhevi vanished. 


Kamsa's nightmare about his killer 


From that moment, Kamsa was engaged in finding out the whereabouts of the child that was to 
be his slayer. He released Vasudheva and Dhevaki from prison. 


Once, Vasudheva and Nandha, as satraps in Kamsa's kingdom, came to Mathura to pay their 
annual tribute to him. While they were returning, Vasudheva and Nandha were lamenting over 
their plight. Vasudheva observed that in Repalle (Nandha's place) some inauspicious events 
seemed to be impending. "In Gokulam also some untoward events are likely to happen. Nandha, 
do not stay in Mathura for long. Leave the place immediately:" 


On hearing this warning, Nandha immediately returned to Repalle. In Repalle, demoniac 
elements were all the time moving about actively. The first of them was Puuthana. She lost her 
life while giving suck to Krishna. This Puuthana in a previous life was Rathnaavali, the daughter 
of Emperor Bali. The Lord as Vaamana appeared as an extremely handsome young lad at the 
sacrifice being performed by Bali. Rathnaavali was charmed by the beauty of Vaamana and felt 
how much she would have enjoyed rearing him if he had been her son. As she was having these 
thoughts, she found that Vaamana had placed his foot on Bali's head (after he had measured two 
footsteps). 


Enraged at this sight, she was filled with desire to kill him. Because she desired at first to fondle 
Vaamana as a child and later to kill him, she was born as Puuthana and came to Krishna to feed 
him and kill him. In the end, she lost her life. The Lord has His own ways of fulfilling the desires 
of people. Hence, it is essential to have good thoughts and good desires. 


Child Krishna proves that He is Divine 


When Krishna was three years old he saw an old lady carrying a basket of fruits from the jungle. 
Krishna told her he would like to have some fruits. The old woman said he could get them only if 
he paid the price Krishna innocently asked the meaning of the word price. The woman said that 
something should be given in return for the fruit. Krishna went in and brought a palmful of rice. 
The woman placed the rice in her basket and gave Krishna some fruits. She was charmed by the 
beauty of the child. As she was returning to her cottage, she felt that the basket was getting 
heavier. When she placed it down in her hut, she was amazed to find that all the rice grains had 
turned into precious gems! She thought the child must be divine. Otherwise how could the rice 


turn into gems? Considering herself supremely lucky, she invited her neighbours to see the 
miracle. 


Krishna was pleading with Yasodha that he should be allowed to go to the forest with other 
cowherd boys. Thinking that if he was put to sleep he would forget his desire to go to the forest, 
Yasodha gave him milk. Krishna was no ordinary child. While drinking the milk, he pretended as 
if he was sleepy. He made a pretence of yawning to indicate his drowsiness. In that wide open 
mouth of Krishna, Yasodha saw all kinds of things---all the worlds in motion and many deities. 
She could not make out what it meant. "Is it a dream or Vishnu's Maaya (illustrious power)? Or 
is it some fantasy of mine? Or is it real? Am I Yasodha? Have I gone somewhere?" These 
thoughts racked her mind. "My son is an infant. How can all the worlds appear in his tiny 
mouth? It must be my imagination." Such doubts arise in the minds of those who are caught up 
in the delusions of the body complex. 


How child Krishna fought with the demons 


Yielding to his entreaties Yasodha allowed Krishna to go to the forest with the cowherd boys. 
Almost every day Krishna encountered some ogre or ogress and slayed them. His playmates used 
to describe to their elders these exploits of Krishna, how he fought with the demons and finished 
them off. 


Yasodha, however, used to say: "God is taking care of my child. Otherwise how could he 
overcome these encounters?" The cowherd boys observed: "When he himself is God, why does 
he need anybody's protection, oh mother!" Yasodha felt that the boys were naive in their 
judgment. "Will God come to one's rescue so easily? It is only because of my prayers, my child 
is protected." With this belief, Yasodha used to perform various rites, when. Krishna returned 
from the forest, to express her gratitude to Providence for saving him from the evil eye and other 
dangers. 


There was great rejoicing among the Dhevas (celestial beings) when they heard about the slaying 
of many demons on earth by Lord Naarayana in His incarnation as Krishna. On hearing these 
stories, Brahma wanted to verify the truth about Krishna's prowess red the miracles attributed to 
him. 


Brahma verifies Krishna's prowess 


That same night Krishna gave a directive to his mares. "Today do not rake the cows for grazing. 
Let us rake the calves. Come with the calves together with your respective musical instruments. 
We must spend the day with music." Most of them came with flutes on which they could play 
well, holding a stick in one hand and a flute in the other. Only two boys brought two mud-pots to 
be used as drums. Playing on the mud-pot is known today as Ghatavaadhyam. This art is as 
ancient as the Dhvaapara Yuga. 


The cowherd boys gathered on the bank of the Yamuna with calves. Some of them played on 
their flutes, some drummed their mud-pots while Krishna danced to the music. When Krishna 
stopped dancing, others started dancing. After sometime, Daama, one of the two intimate friends 
of Krishna (the other being Subaala), told Krishna that he was feeling hungry and would like to 
have some palm-fruits from palm trees a little far away. Balaraama, who was close by, said he 
would fetch the fruits. Balaraama went near the trees and shook them. All the fruits dropped 
brown. At the time of the naming ceremony of the child Balaraama, the sage Garga referred to 


the strength of the baby and said that the name Balaraama would be appropriate for him. At that 
time, a huge donkey appeared there. All were frightened. The donkey was getting bigger and 
bigger. Balaraama seized the donkey by the forelegs and dashed it to the ground. It died on the 
spot. The cowherd boys hailed Balaraama as a hero and danced in joy. 


Biding his time, Brahma created at that moment a huge cave. He took into the cave all the calves, 
while the cowherd boys were immersed in merriment. Missing the calves, the boys started 
searching for them, shouting "Krishna! Krishna!" Krishna knew what was â€˜afoot and directed his 
mates to search for the calves in the cave nearby They all went into the cave. Immediately the 
mouth of the cave closed in. The boys and the calves were caught inside. They were there for a 
whole year. 


Brahma realises the inscrutable ways of the Lord 


Krishna wanted to teach Brahma a lesson. He took the form of all the calves and all the Gopaalas 
imprisoned in the cave. In the evening Krishna and Balaraama took the calves and the boys back 
to their homes. This went on day after day for a whole year. The elders assumed that the calves 
and the boys were their own. Brahma wondered what was happening? Had Krishna managed to 
free the boys and the calves from the cave? When he went into the cave he found all of them 
inside. He was amazed to find that the same boys and calves were inside as well as outside. He 
then realised the inscrutable way of the Lord. "How can anyone know you, oh Krishna You are 
subtler than the atom and vaster than the vaste in creation. You dwell in all the myriad species in 
all the world, how can anyone know you?" He prayed to Krishna to forgive him and released the 
calves and the boys from the cave. 


This episode reveals that the Supreme Lord can assume countless forms. He can assume the form 
of the entire cosmos. That is why the Upanishath declared- "The entire cosmos is dwelt in by 
God." All are forms of the Divine. 


How is this possible? By the power of the Will of God. If a man, while asleep, experiences all 
kinds of things in the dream, including his own movements, while in fact he is motionless on his 
bed, what is it that is beyond the power of the Supreme Lord? Seeing the Divine in-human form 
people can have doubts whether the incarnation can have such miraculous powers when he has 
the same body as themselves. They do not perceive the oneness of the Aathma. It is difficult to 
recognise the Divine in the human form. 


Krishna's leelas were intended to reveal His Divinity 


Not recognizing His Divinity many people reviled Krishna calling him a philanderer and a thief. 
These accusations do not detract from His greatness. They are born of delusion. Men make the 
same mistake about themselves, forgetting their inherent divinity and identifying themselves 
with their bodies. Krishna appeared in human form to teach mankind to transcend their body 
consciousness. 


Krishna's /eelas (sportive miracles) were intended in one way or another to reveal His divinity. 
Once Balaraama teased Krishna by declaring: "You are not Yasodha's son. You may ask why I 
say so. This is because Nandha and Yasodha are of fair complexion and your are dark. You are 
not their child. You must have been born somewhere else." 


What Balaraama said was true and Krishna knew it. But assuming an air of innocence, Krishna 
went to Yasodha and complained "Mother! Balaraama is saying that I am not your son. Tell me 


the truth." Yasodha replied: "Krishna! What does Balaraama know? He is an innocent boy. You 
are very cute. You are highly intelligent. Don't pay any heed to his words. You are truly my son. 
The colour given by God is permanent. Colour as such is not important. Many people paint 
themselves in different ways to conceal their identity. All these are momentary. The colour 
given by God cannot be changed by anyone. God likes the dark complexion. You have got the 
colour of the Divine." 


Gopikas' spiritual love for Krishna 


The Gopikas used to describe Krishna in many ways. Their love for Krishna was entirely 
spiritual. Their feelings were absolutely pure. 


While Pareekshith was listening to Shuka's narration of Krishna's /eelas, many doubts occurred 
to him. Shuka resolved all the doubts. "Pareekshith! You are viewing things from a worldly point 
of view and missing the truth. No one can determine the form of the Divine. He can assume any 
form at any time. But, when he has to demonstrate the nature of Divinity to mankind, He has to 
come in human form. But man, because of his polluted mind is unable to recognise the Divine in 
human form." 


Even Yasodha, despite many occasions in which Krishna demonstrated His divinity, continued to 
regard him as a human child and frequently thanked the Lord for saving her child from many 
dangers. But Krishna tried to change her view by the words He used on different occasions. 


Once when Yasodha asked Krishna whether it was true, as alleged by Balaraama, that he was in 
the habit of eating mud, Krishna replied: "Mother, am I a child, or a naughty boy or madcap to 
ear mud? People are mad about me. I am here to cure the world of its madness." From these 
words Yasodha began to realise that Krishna was no ordinary Child but a manifestation of the 
Divine. 


The ways of the Avathaar 


There are many subtle truths relating to an incarnation which cannot be easily understood. 
Merely to describe the various sports and exploits of Krishna as a child is only a pastime. God's 
ways are infinite and inscrutable. No one can determine or dictate to God how He should act. He 
can transform anything in a moment. 


It must be clearly understood that Krishna was such a manifestation of the Divine. The name 
Krishna has to be properly understood. "Krish" + "Na" = Krishna. This means that He is one who 
cultivates (Krish) the heart. "Karsh" + "Na" is another derivation, which indicates that Krishna is 
one who attracts--Karshathi-ithi-Krishnah. Krishna attracts people not only by the matchless 
beauty of His form. He attracts people by his music, his dance, his sports and his words. Krishna, 
by His winsome ways, could turn the anger of the Gopis towards him because of his pranks, into 
an enjoyable joke. 


Not was that all. Krishna, in fulfilling the pledge He had given to Mother Earth, rid the world of 
many wicked rulers and sought to establish the reign of Righteousness for the protection of the 
good. 


The Divine incarnates from age to age for the purpose of protecting the virtuous, punishing the 
wicked and establishing Dharma. Krishna is said to have destroyed many wicked persons. But 
this is not quire correct. It is their own wickedness which destroyed these evil persons. 


Today if the Divine wants to punish the wicked and protect the righteous, there will not be even 
one wholly righteous person. All will qualify for punishment. It is .not a question of destroying 
the wicked. The task today is to transform Adharma (unrighteousness) into Dharma 
(righteousness). How is this to be done? Through love alone. 


Men's thoughts determine their destiny 


Krishna also changed the hearts of many people through love. It may be asked: "Js it not Krishna 
who killed Kamsa?" Not at all. This is the text-book version. In truth, it was Kamsa's own heated 
bhrama (delusion) which killed him. He was always haunted by the fear of Krishna. His death 
was a result and a reaction of that fear. 


Men's thoughts determine their destiny. Hence, men should cultivate good thoughts and eschew 
all bad feelings. 


God has no dislike for anyone. He envies no one. He has no ill-will towards anyone. Not does He 
have favourites. The grace one gets is the result of one's own feelings. "Bhaavaatheetham 
Thriguna rahitham" (The Divine is beyond feelings and attributes). He is "Ekam Sathyam 
Vimalam Achalam" (the One, Truth, Pure, Immovable). He is â€œSarvadhee Saakshibhuutham" 
(Eternal Witness in all minds). 


When devotees complain now-a-days why they are being punished by the Lord in various ways, 
they do not realise that it is not God who is punishing them. Their own fears and fancies are the 
cause of their troubles. He alone is a true devotee who recognises that his sufferings are the 
consequence of his own bad thoughts and actions. 


One such devotee was Kunthidhevi, sister of Vasudheva (and mother of the Paandavas). She was 
Krishna's maternal aunt. 


Kunthi's strange prayer to Krishna 


Krishna was leaving Hasthinaapura for Dhvaaraka. He was bidding farewell to all his kinsfolk 
and taking leave of Dharmaja and others. Everyone silently accepted his decision. The chariot 
was ready for Krishna's departure. But the Divine can change his mind at any moment. After 
raking leave of all others he went to Kunthi. Kunthi told him- "Krishna! All the troubles we 
experienced were due to our delusions. If Dharmaja had not been lured by the game of dice, 
would we have been subject to exile in the forest and all the troubles we went through? Hence 
my children were the root cause of all our troubles. You are always our protector. During all our 
troubles I always remembered you. In the world people remember God only in times of trouble 
and not when they are happy Therefore, Krishna, as long as I have a body, give me always 
difficulties. However, having had you with us all these years, we are deeply distressed to see you 
part from us. I have no power to change your mind. I only pray do not forget this aunt of yours." 


After that, Krishna went to Utthara (Abhimanyu's wife). Hearing that Krishna was leaving for 
Dhvaaraka, Utthara ran towards Krishna and fell at his feet. "Lord! Since Abhimanyu's death, I 
have been trying hard to bear the pain that is gnawing at my bosom. There is a fire burning in my 
womb. I cannot divine the reason. You should not leave at all for Dhvaaraka now. You must stay 
You have been the protector of my forebears for many generations. You were the saviour of the 
Paandavas. The child in my womb is the only hope of the Paandava clan. If anything untoward 
happens to that child, the Paandava dynasty will be extinguished. Therefore, you must not 
leave." So saying, Utthara firmly clung to Krishna's feet. 


Krishna was immediately moved by Utthara's deep devotion. The journey to Dhvaaraka was 
given up. Krishna made a promise to Utthara. "I will not leave for Dhvaaraka till your child is 
born," assured Krishna. At that moment, Dharmaja and his brothers, Dhraupadhi and Subhadhra 
praised Utthara's devotion to the Lord. Though young in years, Utthara was pre-eminent in her 
devotion. This was because when she was enceinte, Krishna entered her womb to protect the 
foetus from the Brahmaasthra (a terrible missile) of Ashvathaama. She had a vision in a dream of 
Krishna entering her womb. From that moment she was ceaselessly chanting the name of 
Krishna and seeing Krishna in every person and every object. 


Because of this, when the child was born, Krishna named him Pareekshith as he rested everyone 
till he recognized Krishna. 


Divine madness of Gopikas has a lesson for all 


It is clear that the /ee/as (miracles) of God are inexplicable and infinite. It is ludicrous to seek the 
whereabouts of the Divine, who is omnipresent. Utthara was one who recognised the 
omnipresence of God. Recognising her supreme devotion Krishna was prepared to change His 
plans. People should realise that God responds only to deep and genuine devotion. Verbal 
supplications will not suffice. The devotee must acquire the yearning that will melt the heart of 
God. Even butter which is so soft melts only when heat is applied. Likewise, the warmth of 
Bhakthi (love of the Lord) has to be applied to the butter of the human heart to make it melt. It 
was their intense devotion which made Krishna dwell in the hearts of Gopikas. They became 
God-intoxicate. Once when Krishna disappeared from their midst they started searching for him 
everywhere, among the trees and the bushes of Brindhaavan, oblivious to everything else. Their 
appeals to the creepers to tell them whether their Krishna was hiding amongst them night seem 
hysterical. But it would be a good thing if such hysterical love of God filled people's hearts 
today. The world will be a calmer and better place. 


Craze for God removes the craze for wealth 


Some people talk caustically to Sai devotees saying: "You have gone crazy over Sai Baba." This 
craziness is sublime madness. There are all kinds of lunatics in the mental hospital, many of 
whom pose difficult problems for the doctors. If some God-mad devotee sits in a corner chanting 
God's name, what a relief he would be to doctors! If you develop this kind of sublime madness, 
you will be supremely fortunate indeed! Everyone should be crazy about God. Only then they 
will get rid of the mad craving for wealth and the things of the world. The craze for money is the 
cause of all the ills in the world. With the result that the desire for God declines. 


Because of the craze for riches, all other evil qualities like pride, greed, envy and hatred have 
grown among mankind. Wealth is, indeed, needed, but it is the wealth of Divine Grace and the 
treasure of Divine Love. That alone is lasting. All other things are transient. 


Once Yasodha appealingly asked Krishna why he was going to the Gopika's houses to steal their 
butter when there was so much butter in their own house. The Child Krishna replied: "Mother, I 
am not stealing butter but the hearts of the Gopis." (Svaami sang a beautiful song relating to this 
episode). "Their hearts are pure and full of devotion," said Krishna. "Their butter is filled with 
the devotion with which they churn the buttermilk. Their bangles keep time as they sing 
Krishna's name while churning. The butter that is got contains the essence of the Vedhas." 
Krishna asked Yasodha whether this kind of churning was taking place in her house. 


Krishna Avathaar is hailed as Puurna Avathaar 


In this manner, every word of Krishna was replete with spiritual significance. The Krishna 
Avathaar is hailed as Puurna Avathaar, compared to all previous Avathaars. 


Vyaasa could obtain peace of mind only when, on the advice of Sage Naaradha, he began to 
write about the glorious incarnations of the Lord (described in the Bhagavatham). All his earlier 
writings, including the codification of the Vedhas and the writing of the puraanas, could not 
confer peace on him. 


Embodiments of Love! No amount of scholarship will give you peace, unless you are filled with 
the love of God. 


Discourse on Gokulashtami Day in Sai Ramesh Hall, Brindhaavan, on 28-8-1994. 


24. Let Truth prevail 


God creates the entire Universe from Truth. 
Finally everything merges in Truth. 

This pure and unsullied Truth 

Alone pervades everywhere. 


EMBODIMENTS of love! Without Truth, the world cannot exist. The entire world rests on Truth. 
Everyone has to seek this Truth. It is because man has forgotten this Truth that there is no peace 
and security in the world. 


Truth is the eternal witness and it cannot be hidden by any one not can it be altered. It is 
independent and cannot be affected by time and space. In ancient times, the people flourished as 
they followed truth unflinchingly. They were prepared to sacrifice everything for the sake of 
truth. Harishchandhra sacrificed everythingâ€”his kingdom and family too, to uphold Truth. He is 
still revered as Sathya Harishchandhra. 


God and Truth are not distinct. God is the very form of Truth. It is the duty of humans to keep 
Truth as the ideal and adhere to it at any cost. Truth is the abode of God. It is the basis of all 
knowledge and wisdom. 


The Vedhas are based on Thath. All real enjoyment of happiness, wealth and comforts is based 
on Truth. But, for the sake of transient worldly pleasures, sacred Divine Truth is forgotten. The 
ancients used to shun untruth as a poisonous snake. In the modern age, people are drawn to 
falsehood and not Truth. They make no effort to realise that they are themselves embodiments of 
Truth. 


Integral relationship between man and God 


Just as the eyes, ears and other limbs are parts of the body, every individual is a part of society. 
Society is a limb of humanity. Humanity is a a limb of Nature and Nature is a limb of God. Man 
has to realise the integral relationship between himself and God. 


Sin is not something outside man. Man's actions determine whether they are good or bad. They 
are based on thoughts arising in the mind. Through sublime thoughts one can reach the highest 
state of Saakshaathkaara (direct perception of God). For attaining this state of Realisation, one 
need not undertake penance in a forest. It has to be realised within oneself. The body, the mind 
and the intellect are only instruments. Man is their master. When the mind is infested with bad 
thoughts, one indulges in bad deeds. When one follows Truth, he can become Divine. One 
cannot visualize Truth or God until he achieves harmony in thought, word and deed. 


Goal of human life is progress from human to Divine 


Embodiments of the Divine Aathma! As long as you disregard truth, you cannot have even a trace 
of Bliss. Time is fleeting. You have to start enquiring into the purpose of this human life now 
itself. It is not for leading an animal existence. The goal of human life is progress from the 
human to the Divine. 


Today while Science is making rapid strides, morally man is going down. Selfishness and self- 
interest dominate everyone of man's activities. It is only by sacrifice that man can manifest his 
humanness and rise to divine heights. 


The unlimited proliferation of desires is the root cause of man's misery and ruination. If you 
follow two main principles, you can reach the goal of human life. "Sarva jeeva namaskaaram 
Keshavam Prathi gachathi." The reverence shown to all beings reaches God. "Sarva jeeva 
thiraskaaram Kesahvam Prathigachathi." Similarly, insult to any beings amounts to insult to 
God. If you hare anyone, it means you are hating God. You must understand the Omnipresence 
of the Lord. 


In the Bhagavath Geetha, Krishna declares that sacrificing the fruits of your actions is the best 
and easiest way of realising God. There is no Thyaaga (sacrifice) these days. People are 
interested only in Bhoga (worldly pleasure) which leads to Roga (disease). 


Sacrifice is the means of attaining liberation. You should, therefore, serve society, help the poor 
and needy in distress, and thus manifest the human quality of compassion. By doing seva to 
people, you are doing seva to God. Even Aadhi Shankara, who was supreme exponent of Jnaana 
Maarga (the path of spiritual wisdom), in his later days came to realise that the Bhakthi Maarga 
(path of devotion) is the best path for mankind to realise God. 


Seek to be good man and become a Godman 


Instead of talking about a hundred precepts, you should practise at least one of them. Persons 
who are drawing high salaries are agitating for more and more, but they should undertake some 
self-examination as to whether they are doing enough work to justify the salary they draw. You 
must understand that it is the people's money that you are enjoying. You should have your 
conscience as your witness and judge in deciding whether you are doing right or wrong. God is 
watching all your actions. You must do things to satisfy God from whom you have come and to 
whom you have to return. 


People tend to make even the worship of God as a business proposition now-a-days. Even 
spirituality is commercialized. Seek to be a good man. You can then become a Godman. Never 
become a bad man. This cam be achieved only by chanting the name of God constantly. 


Discourse in the Sai Ramesh Hall, Brindhaavan, on 4-9-1994. 


Love God, though tribulation may be your lot. Love Him, though 
you are refused and rebuked; for it is only in the crucible of travail 
that the metal is purified and cleared of dross. 


BABA 


25. Spiritual significance of Ganesha worship 


EMBODIMENTS of love! Charity is the ornament for hands. Truth is the ornament for speech. 
Hearing the scriptures is the ornament for cars. Where is the need for other ornaments? 


There is no greater experience than the feeling that one is Aathma-- Aham Ethath. " Aham ("I") is 
defined as Aathma, the Self. The word Ethath means all these. It covers all the objects in the 
Universe which are physical and subtle and also the Sun, Moon, stars and planers. It signifies 
that you are not the physical body You say body" which implies that you are not the body. What 
is this body constituted of? It is a combination of Pancha bhuuthas (five elements), Pancha 
Praanas (five vital airs), and the Pancha Koshas (five sheaths). The entire universe is the body 
of the Supreme Lord. It consists of all the moving and static things. In Vedhaantik parlance, it is 
deemed to be Jnaana (superior wisdom) when you say am not the body." 


One should be extremely fortunate to realise this. Whatever you see in the external world is 
Dhrishya (that which is seen). The Sun, Moon, stars, the five elements which are constituents of 
the universe are all Dhrishya. You are seeing your body too as you see other things. So the body 
is also Dhrishya, that which is seen by you. Who is then the sect? The seer is Dhrashta. The 
body is the object and you are the sect. Without a seer there is no question of anything being 
seen. Some people talk about Shuunya (emptiness or nothingness). Unless this has been seen, 
how can they talk about Shuunya? 


The great message of Ganapathi 


Knowledge of the seer and the seen is the great message of Ganapathi, whose advent we are 
celebrating today. "Ga" means Buddhi (intelligence). 'Va' means Vijnaana (wisdom). 'Pathi' 
means master. So, Ganapathi is the master of all knowledge, intelligence and wisdom. There is 
also another significant meaning for the word, that He is the Leader of all the Ganaas who are 
celestial. He is also called Vinaayaka, which term means that he is one who has no master above 
Him. He is the Supreme master. He is beyond the mindless stare. One who has stilled the mind 
cannot have any master. 


Without understanding this truth, we think of the physical form of Vinaayaka with the elephant 
head and human body. Whenever people want to commence any undertaking or start learning 
music or the fine arts or any branch of knowledge, they first offer worship to Vinaayaka. 


He is also called Lambodhara, which means Guardian of Wealth--Lakshmi Svaruupa. Here 
Lakshmi represents all wealth and prosperity and not only Dhanam (money) for which there is a 
separate deity called Dhanalakshmi, one of the eight Lakshmis. Here wealth means Sukha and 
Aanandha (pleasure and bliss). What is the use of having all other things when one has no 
pleasure or bliss? 


Ganapathi endows us with supreme intelligence 


Ganapathi is one who gives us spiritual potency and endows us with supreme intelligence. These 
two are termed as Siddhi and Buddhi respectively. Siddhi and Buddhi are described as his two 
consorts. As He is the Adhipathi (master) of Siddhi and Buddhi, he 1s regarded as their husband 
in mundane terms. Vinaayaka has no desire and hence there is no need for Him to have wife and 
children. He is worshipped by people in this country since very ancient times. There is historic 


evidence that the worship of Vinaayaka has been in vogue even in other countries such as 
Thailand, Japan, Germany and U.K. 


Adoration of Vinaayaka as Prathama Vandhana (First deity to be saluted) has been mentioned in 
the Vedhas. Ganapathi Thathva finds a place in the Vedhas and Upanishaths. Reference to Him 
is made in the Gaayathri also. He is one who instills purity in body, and fearlessness in the mind. 
It is said- "Thanno Dhanthih Prachodayaath," giving importance to his tusk. 


Some people, our of ignorance, comment upon the big animal form of this Primal Deity and 
question how one with such a huge form can ride on a small Muushika (mouse) which is 
depicted as His vehicle. Muushika is symbolic of the darkness of ignorance, while Ganesha 
signifies the effulgence of Wisdom that dispels the darkness of ignorance. 


Significance of steam-cooked offering 


Even the offering that is made to Ganesha has great significance because it is prepared with gram 
flour and jaggery or pepper and enclosed in an outer covering made form flour paste and then 
cooked in steam without using oil. This is supposed to be a healthy and delicious food item 
according to the Aayurvedhic system. Modern doctors also recognise the importance of such 
steam-cooked idlis (rice cakes) which they recommend as post-operative diet for patients as it is 
easily digestible, Jaggery too has the property of controlling gas formation and this food item 
gives relief from eye troubles and prevents gastric disorders. 


In the ancient traditional mode of observing these festivals, great emphasis was laid on good 
health as the pre-requisite for spiritual pursuits with a healthy mind. For achieving the four goals 
of human /ife---Dharma, Artha, Kaama and Moksha (Righteousness, Wealth, Desire and 
Liberation)-- one should have basically a healthy body. If you want to earn wealth by righteous 
means and cherish desires which lead to liberation, you should have sound health. 


Vinaayaka is also called Vighneshvara as He removes all obstacles coming in the way of 
devotees who pray to Him sincerely. He is worshipped by students with books so that all that is 
contained in the books may get into their heads. Now-a-days people are only after Dhanam 
(money). Whatever scholarship one may attain, whatever power and position one may enjoy, one 
cannot be happy without the peace of mind that is got by pure devotion. One may have immense 
physical strength, one may pursue the path of meditation and penance, one may acquire profound 
knowledge, but all these attainments will be of no avail unless one acquires knowledge of the 
eternal--Sathyam, Jnaanam, Anantham Brahma. 


Symbolic significance of elephant head 


The symbolic significance of Ganesha's elephant head has to be properly understood. The 
elephant has profound intelligence. For example, yesterday Sai Geetha, (Bhagavaan's elephant) 
came running when it heard the sound of Svaami's car approaching. Though many cars were 
following Svaami's car, Sai Geetha could unmistakably identify Svaami's car from an uncanny 
recognition of the sound of the car. That is why it is termed Gaja Thelivi (elephant intelligence). 
One having a sharp brain is described as having the intelligence of an elephant. It has Medha 
Shakthi. 


Moreover, the elephant has large cars and it can hear even minute sounds. Shravanam (hearing 
The glory of the Lord) is the first step in spiritual saadhana for which ears should be sharp. After 
hearing one has to ruminate over this and put it into practice which are termed as Shravana, 


Manana and Nidhidhyaasana. The elephant takes the Dhuushana and Bhuushana (praise and 
blame) equally. When it hears something bad, it moves its body this way and that way and 
shakes off the unwanted things while it retains goods things quietly. 


Only Vinaayaka reaches the lessons that are essential for mankind. You should not stop with 
installing the idol and doing puuja for a few days. You should make efforts to become a Naayaka 
or Master over yourself. You have the nine-fold path of devotion. Shravanam (hearing), 
Keerthanam (singing His glory), Vishnor naamasmarnam (thinking of and chanting the name), 
Paadha Sevanam (serving at His feet), Vandhanam (obeisance), archanam (worship), Dhaasyam 
(serving Him as a servant serves the Master), Saakhyam (befriending God), Aathma nivedhanam 
(surrendering body, mind and soul). The elephant signifies combining of the first and the last, 


that is Shravanam and Aathma nivedhanam, so that all the other paths in between are covered 
fully. 


When a man is born he does not have round his neck any necklace of pearls or gems or any 
possessions. But he is endowed by Brahma with the garland of the effects of his past actions, 
good or bad, which hangs invisibly around his neck. If you do good you will enjoy good results 
and if you are bad you will not escape suffering the consequences thereof. 


The lessons of sacrifice that Vinaayaka taught 


The teaching of Vinaayaka is one of sacrifice. You may not heed the contents of the Puraanas, 
but you should not miss the vital principles which they convey to mankind. 


When Vinaayaka was writing the Mahaabhaaratha to the dictation of Sage Vyaasa, the latter laid 
down the condition that Vinaayaka should go on writing non-stop whatever Vyaasa said. But 
Vinaayaka also stipulated a condition that Vyaasa should never stop his dictation but should go 
on without a break. While he was writing, Vinayaka's pen broke and he did not hesitate to break 
one of his tusks to use it as a pen. That is why he is called Ekadhantha or one with a single tusk. 
This is a shining example of the spirit of sacrifice that Vinaayaka exhibited for the welfare of 
humanity. That is why the Vedhas proclaim that it is only by sacrifice one can attain immortality 


Bhakthi is greater than Jnaana 


Prema and Thyaaga (Love and sacrifice) constitute Bhakthi (devotion to God). There is nothing 
superior to this. Aathma Jnaana (knowledge of the Self) is essential. This was the main teaching 
of Aadhi Shankara throughout his life, as he was preaching and following the Vedhic dictum- 
"Ekaathma Sarvabhutha-Antharathma"; "Ekam Sath Vipraah Bahudha Vadhanthi" (The one 
Aathma is present in all beings. The one Truth is described in many ways by the wise). He was 
also preaching that Jnaana was nothing but Adhvaitha Dharshana (vision of Non-duality). But, 
during his last days, Shankara realised that Bhakthi was greater than Jnaana. In his famous Bhaja 
Govindham, Aadhi Shankara emphasises that only the path of devotion will help you to get over 
the cycle of birth and death. 


There is no path superior to that of Bhakthi. Bhakthi does not mean doing puuja, bhajans, going 
on pilgrimage to holy shrines etc. Bhakthi means diverting the pure and unsullied mind towards 
God. People do not know the real meaning of Prema. The love you have for other beings is only 
temporal. God is the only one that is eternal. Love of God is Bhakthi. All other love may be 
termed as Anuraaga, which results in bondage, while love of God leads to liberation. 


One may raise a question whether it is possible for everyone to realise the goal through the love 
of God. One may not achieve this instantaneously, but can do so. progressing step by step. By 
Bhajans and other forms of worship one may advance towards the goal of final emancipation. 
There is no meaning in saying that one is searching for God. It is God who is searching for a true 
devotee. This is as true today as it was in the past. God is neglected by people when He is easily 
attained. What is easily obtained at home is not relished so much as what you get outside, though 
it is not wholesome. 


Significance of offering your hair to God 


In olden days, people going on pilgrimage to Thirupathi used to climb the hills step by step 
chanting the name Govindha, Govindha, as they climbed each step. Thus the pilgrimage was 
performed with sincere devotion and Naamasmarana. But, these days people go by buses and 
cars, gossiping all the while, and indulging in unholy pursuits. The tonsure ceremony in which 
one shaves his head completely and offers his hair to the Lord of Thirupathi signifies your giving 
up your Thamo Guna (ignorance and lethargy) which is symbolised by the hair on the head. The 
hair is black. Giving up the hair indicates giving up Thamo Guna. You have to assimilate Sathva 
Guna. 


All acts of worship have a spiritual significance. Now-a-days, people do not understand their 
inner significance, but give up not only their hair but also waste a lot of money and return home 
without being any the wiser for the trip. 


You may install idols and worship them. But do not forget the inner significance of all worship. 
All external activities are necessary only to help you to get into the spirit of non-duality and 
experience unity in diversity. Love and sacrifice are very important. Where there is pure, 
unsullied, selfless, sacred and sublime love there is no fear at all. Giving and not getting is the 
underlying principle of spiritual saadhana. Your heart is full of love, but you are using it only for 
selfish purposes instead of diverting it towards God. God is in the heart and not in the head. The 
heart is Prema mayam (full of love). On these festival days, you should remember that God is 
one, and all religions uphold the same principle of "One God, who is omnipresent." You should 
not have contempt .for any religion, as each is a pathway to God. Fostering love towards your 
fellow-beings, receive the noble love of the Divine. This is the goal of life. 


Discourse in the Puurnachandhra Auditorium on 9-9-1994, Ganesh Chathurthi Day. 


We are developing in each department of life, but it is a pity that 
we are not developing the unique qualities of human beings. 
Develop the Aathmik awareness, the consciousness of the Divine 
and the acquisition of Divine attributes. Expand love and 
understanding. 


BABA 


26. Onam: the message of sacrifice 


Trees yield fruits for the benefit of mankind 
without any selfish motive. 

Rivers carry water for helping others. 

Cows yield milk for the good of others 
without any trace of selfishness. 

The human body is given for the 
purpose of helping others. 


EMBODIMENTS of love! The entire cosmos is a stage for the play of the Divine. There should 
be no feeling of hatred among human beings because both in the individual and the society the 
Divine Consciousness is present. This Divine Consciousness which is termed as Chaithanya is 
not without purpose. The primary purpose of human birth is to manifest the Divinity within. 
When man is filled with ego, he indulges in wicked thoughts and actions, while he will do good 
deeds when he is conscious of the Divinity within. Human life is made up of virtue and vice, 
hatred and love. The root case for all troubles is Raaga and Dhvesha (attachment and hatred). 
This has plunged humanity in misery since time immemorial. 


Man should learn to balance his feelings 


Good and bad always: co-exist. Without pain one cannot have the enjoyment of pleasure. 
Without darkness one cannot feel the value of light. Man should learn to enjoy the dualities of 
good and bad, pain and pleasure, in moderation. Food consumed in excess causes indigestion. If 
it is inadequate it results in starvation. Man can even have ego in a limited measure. If he 
balances his feelings he can have peace and happiness. 


Kashyapa and his two wives, Dhithi and Adhithi, were the parents of Asuras (demons) and 
Dhevas (demigods). Indhra, the king of Dhevas went to war with the king of the Asuras, as it was 
common practice in those days for one king to invade, the kingdom of another to acquire 
additional territory. Mahaabali vanquished Indhra in the war and proceeded to annexe the 
territory of Indhra and occupied his capital Amaraavathi. Kashyapa had gone to the Himaalayas 
to do penance. Lamenting over the defeat of her son, Indhra, Adhithi was in great grief. When 
she was wailing, Kashyapa came to her. Instantly; he was able to recognise the cause of her grief 
by divine insight, which he had acquired as a result of his penance. He consoled his wife Adhithi 
saying that nothing happens in the world without God's will and people should go on doing their 
duties. He asked her to pray to Lord Naarayana and taught her a Vratha (ritual) to be followed 
strictly, known as Payovratha (milk ritual). It has to be observed from the twelfth day of the 
bright half of Kaartheeka (Shuklapaksha Dhvaadhasi). She observed the matha as pre-scribed. A 
devotee's sincere prayer will never go waste. Since she carded our the vratha with a pious heart, 
Naarayana appeared before her and informed her that He would Himself take birth in her womb 
and help Indhra. Adhithi was very happy and true to the word of the Lord, she gave birth to a son 
of uncommon effulgence on the twelfth day of the bright half of the month of Bhaadrapaadha. 
That child was Vaamana muurthi. Even as a child He demonstrated His Divine power by doing 
marvellous deeds. 


Vaamana approaches emperor Bali 


Mahaabali was performing an Ashvamedha Yajna (horse sacrifice). He had previously performed 
a hundred such yajnas. He declared that he would give anything that anyone sought from him 
during this yajna. Vaamana came to the Yaagashaala. As He was approaching them, the sages 
assembled there perceived the extraordinary effulgent form of the young lad. Mahaabali went 
forth to receive the Brahmana boy with all traditional honours and gave him and eminent seat 
befitting the status of a holy person. Bali told him: "Master, it is my good fortune that you have 
chosen to honour me with your presence. Whatever you desire, I am here ready to fulfill the 
same." Vaamana smiled and said: "You need not give me anything very great. It is enough if you 
give me that extent of land covered by three foot-steps of mine." 


On hearing him, Bali's preceptor, Shukraachaarya, who could have vision of the future, told Bali 
that the one who had come to seek a gift from Bali was not an ordinary Brahmana boy but Lord 
Naarayana Himself who had assumed this form. He advised Bali not to promise the lad anything. 
But Bali was a king who would never go back on his word and told his Guru that he would never 
break his promise. He was determined to give Vaamana whatever he wanted since breaking one's 
word was a sin and he had to keep his pledge. Shukraachaarya insisted that he should not fulfill 
the demand of Vaamana as He had come to deprive Bali of all his possessions. He said Vaamana 
was not really in need of anything as everything was in his hands. 


Bali, however, determined to honour the word given to Vaamana, begged pardon of his Guru for 
disregarding his advice. Earlier, while Bali was embarking on the war with Indhra, he had 
prostrated at the feet of his preceptor, Shukraachaarya, and on his advice he performed the 
Vishvajith Yajna from which he secured very powerful weapons. It was only because of 
Shukraachaarya's help that he was able to conquer Indhra. On this occasion, Bali was not 
prepared to heed the advice of the same preceptor. Shukraachaarya cursed Bali, saying: "As you 
have not heeded your Guru's words you will be reduced to ashes." Bali was firm and replied- "I 
am prepared to face any consequence, but will not go back on my word." 


So saying, he told Vaamana to measure the three feet of land as desired by him. All attempts of 
Shukraachaarya to dissuade Bali from offering the land desired by Vaamana proved futile. Bali 
told his Guru: "Praana (life) and Maana (honour) are the two eyes of a person. Even if life goes, 
honour should be protected. Granting that the person that has come now is the Lord Himself, I 
should be the most fortunate one as the Lord who gives everything to mankind, is seeking 
something from me." 


Bali was an example of supreme sacrifice. He sacrificed all his possessions and himself too to 
God. Bali said: "The hand of the Lord, which gives Abhaya (graceful benediction) to all has been 
stretched to take something from me. The Lord's hand is below while my hand is above. This 
must be the fruit of my penance in several births. I am prepared for anything." This was the spirit 
of Bali. Bali was also a very good ruler, who was much concerned about the welfare of his 
subjects. He was the son of Virochana and grandson of Prahlaadha. They were both devotees of 
Naarayana. Is there any one who has perished having believed in God? There might be people 
who have perished without belief in God. 


Only by sacrifice one can attain immortality 


Prahlaadha was happy and appreciated the good fortune of his grandson Bali when Naarayana 
himself sought a gift from him. He blessed Bali that he had kept up the noble tradition and name 
of the family. It is only by sacrifice that one can attain immortality and not by any other means. 


Shukraachaarya's anger was growing because of his selfish motive that he should continue to be 
the preceptor of the Asuras, He did not want Bali, to give the gift sought by Vaamana as he was 
sure that the last vestige of power of the Asuras would be destroyed by Vaamana. Earlier when a 
fierce battle was raging between Indhra and Bali, Indhra used his Vajrayudha (thunderbolt) 
against Bali. The latter hinted. Them was one Asura, Namuuchi by name. The Vajraayudha 
could not be effective against him. An ethereal voice said, "Namuuchi is very powerful. As he 
has Brahma's boon, nothing will affect him. Only a weapon that is neither wet not dry will be 
effective." Indhra looked at the ocean and recognized that the foam was neither wet not dry. He 
applied the foam to his weapon and attacked Namuuchi. Namuuchi fell down. 


Ekaagratha is mightier than any weapon 


Indhra is hailed as the chief of the gods. In the Purushasuktha, it is said that our of the face of the 
cosmic Purusha emerged Indhra. Indhra is one who is the Lord of the senses. In man, the mind is 
the master of the senses. No one can estimate the power of the mind. Brahmaasthra and 
Vajraayudha are not more powerful than Ekaagratha (concentration) which is mightier than any 
weapon. For this, sense control is essential. There is always a battle raging in the body between 
vice and virtue and only the one that has Ekaagratha can come our victorious. 


Bali is the symbol of Thyaaga (sacrifice). He controlled everything by his spirit of sacrifice. The 
Gaayathri manthra begins with the utterance: "Bhur-Bhuvas-Svaaha." These represent the three 
worlds which are in the body itself. Bhur represents Prakrithi (Earth), which is the physical 
body Mind is Bhuvarloka. Prajnaana (spiritual awareness) is Suvarloka. Body represents 
materialisation as it is made up of the five physical elements. The mind is Vibration and 
Prajnaaha is Radiation. If you enquire into their inner significance, all the three are in your body 
itself. The battle between Bali and Indhra represents the mind battling to control the senses. 
When the mind is controlled one attains Divinity. This is the spiritual stare. Bali performed many 
sacrifices to attain this stare. 


Bali means tax. You pay taxes to the Government for electricity, water, drainage, etc. What tax 
did Bali pay? He gave all his possessions, body, mind and soul, to the Lord. The Lord's first foot 
covered this world and the second foot covered the other world. How huge the Lord's feet would 
have been to cover the whole world? How can such a huge foot be kept on Bali's head for the 
third step of land? The inner significance of this action is that Lord entered Bali's body, mind and 
soul. Once the ego or body consciousness is surrendered, them is no bar to one's realisation. It is 
the body consciousness that stands in the way and makes you forget God. Vaamana opened 
Bali's eyes to help him realise Divine. The imprisoned man had to be freed. Bali offered his 
body, mind and soul, to the Lord. 


Bali performed supreme surrender to the Lord 


Kerala is a sacred land where Bali performed this action of supreme surrender to the Lord. He 
had good relationship with this people and they loved him in turn, and had faith in him. That is 
why Kerala is still fertile and prosperous. The lord goes about freely in this land. 


Bali sought a boon from the Lord that he should visit Kerala every year, on this day of Shravana 
asterism in the month of Shraavan. This day is celebrated as Onam by Keralites. They have been 
following this faithfully, since ancient times. This day is considered most important for the 
people of Kerala. They prepare many dishes and ear together on this holy day. 


We should appreciate the spirit of sacrifice of the devotees from Kerala who sacrifice the 
comforts of their homes and the company of their near and dear ones and make a pilgrimage to 
this place, to celebrate this festival in the immediate presence and company of Svaami. They do 
not mind the inconveniences and lack of comforts here. They reflect the spirit of sacrifice 
demonstrated by Mahaabali even to-day. It is My blessing that you should enjoy this and should 
never give up your love of God. God's love is permanent while all other love among human 
beings is only transient and temporary. 


Because this faith is imprinted strongly in the minds of Keralites you are making your trip to this 
place leaving your own native place with your unstinted devotion to Svaami. It is My wish that 
other Stares should emulate your example. People may brand Kerala as dominated by 
Communist doctrine but I am sure the people of Kerala are filled with pure devotion to God, 
whatever may be their political afflictions. 


I bless you all to cherish this pure love and devotion always. 


Discourse in the Puurnachandhra Auditorium on 16-9-1994, Onam Day. 


Adoration of God has to be through one name and one form, but, 
that should not limit your loyalty to that particular form only. 


BABA 


27. Divine potencies in man 


Oh man! if the Divine Lord is not visible to you, 
Just as the stars cannot be seen in daylight, 
Because you are blinded by ignorance, 

Do not deny His existence. 


EMBODIMENTS of Divine love! From the most ancient times, men have been engaged in the 
search for God. The questions, "Who is God?" and "What is the means to realise God?", are not 
of today. They have been there from the earliest times and have agitated mankind ceaselessly. 


A few yogis, who comprehended the nature of the Divine and who felt that the purpose of human 
existence is to seek the Divine, undertook various spiritual exercises to discover how to achieve 
this objective. The purpose of human life is to realise the Divine. It is, in this context, that human 
birth becomes the rarest among all living beings. The ancient sages, recognizing this truth, 
pursued different kinds of penances to experience the Divine. Some of them, feeling that the task 
was beyond their powers, gave up the quest in the middle. Some others, recognizing that this was 
the sole purpose of human life persevered in their efforts with determination. When man sets his 
heart upon achieving anything, there is nothing impossible for him. But, immersed in worldly 
pleasures, man becomes a prey to weakness and forgets his Divine nature. Few care to enquire 
into the real value of these mundane pleasures or their ephemeral nature. 


What is the difference between man and birds and beasts? Can eating, drinking, sleeping and 
ultimately dying, be the be-all and end-all of human life? All these are common to animals and 
human beings. What, then, is the difference? Although man is endowed with intelligence, 
discrimination and wisdom, without endeavouring to know the truth, man regards physical 
phenomena as the only reality, the Divine as remote from him, and forgets the main goal of life. 


Ancient sages experienced the effulgent Divine 


The ancient sages, however, regarded realisation of the Divine as their main goal and practised 
various austerities. There after, they went our into the world and proclaimed: â€œOh man! 
Vedhaaham etham Purusham mahaantham" (We have experienced the effulgent, all-pervading 
Supreme Divine). Where did they experience Him? They declared: â€œâ€œWe have found Him beyond 
the darkness, beyond the mind and the senses, in our hearts." 


Man is a combination of the body, the mind and the Aathma (Spirit). He is thus the embodiment 
of these three. But, forgetting the mind and the Aathma, when man identifies himself solely with 
the body, he reduces himself to an animal. When he forgets the Aathma and the body and 
identifies himself with the mind alone, he becomes a Dhaanava (demon). When one forgets the 
body and the mind and adheres only to the Aathma, he gets divinised. 


Bhakthi and Prema are synonymous 


The body is the instrument of action. The mind is the instrument of cognition. The Aathma is 
steady and unwavering. Corresponding to these three, are Karma, Upaasana and Bhakthi (action, 
ritual worship and devotion). What is the difference between Bhakthi and Upaasana? In both of 
them, Prema (love of God) is inherent. Bhakthi and Prema are synonymous. Contemplating on 
God, forgetting the world, living in a stare of Aanandha is Prapatthi (total surrender to God). 


Bhaaratheeyas have been celebrating the Navaraathri festival from ancient rimes as a mode of 
worship of Dhevi, the Divine, as Mother. They worship Dhurga, Lakshmi and Sarasvathi during 
these nine days. Who are these three? They are three forms which have fascinated man. Their 
esoteric significance is represented by three: sakthis (potencies). They are: Karma, Upaasana 
and Jnaana. These potencies have been given other names. 


The concept of Prapatthi (total surrender) is related to Self-Realisation (Oneness with the 
Divine). God, in fact, dwells in every human being as the Aathma. The body is the sacred abode 
of the Aathma. Hence the scriptures declare- "The body is the temple of God in which the 
individual Spirit dwells as the Ancient One." lust as the diamond is found in clay and not in a 
rock, the Spirit (as consciousness) resides in the earthly body. The body is of the earth, earthy. 
The Aathma is consciousness. Humanness is the coming together of the mundane and the 
spiritual consciousness. It is a combination of good and evil. It is a mixture of the transient and 
the eternal. 


Hence, for what is shubha or ashubha (auspicious or inauspicious), for Sathya or Asathya (truth 
or falsehood), for Kshaya and Akshaya (perishable or imperishable) the prefix "a" accounts for 
the difference. For instance, Asathya (untruth) is that which is not Sathya (true). Anithya 
(transient) is that which is not Nithya (permanent). By understanding these distinctions, men 
have sought to realise the Divine. 


Misuse of the body by man today 


The human body is precious. Man today is not realising what he owes to his body. The body that 
is composed of the five elements, which has been given to man to understand his true nature, to 
recognise the truth about his immortal Spirit, and to experience the eternal within him, is being 
used for the enjoyment of physical pleasures. The body surely has not been given for this 
purpose. The body is a Kshethra (shrine). The Indweller is the Kshethrajna (Knower). The 
relationship is that of shareera (body) and the shareeri (Indweller). Instead of recognizing this 
integral relationship, man is concerned with only the body and seeks to realise the Divine. How 
is this possible? The first requisite is for man to acquire the firm conviction that the Divine 
dwells in his heart. 


There is no need to search for the Divine elsewhere. There is no need to go to a forest and lead 
an austere life to experience the Divine Who is within each one. When man turns his vision 
inward he can experience eternal Bliss. The source of Bliss, the Spirit, is within himself. God is 
nearer to everyone than one's parents, spouse or children. Kith and kin are outside one, but God 
is within the body Forgetting the God who is nearest and closest to them, people are trying to 
seek for an invisible God elsewhere "Dhaivam maanusha ruupena" (God appears in human 
form). It is sheer human fancy to imagine that God is effulgent light or that he has four arms with 
conch and discus, and dwells in some remote place. A man who is attached to the body can never 
experience a formless, incorporeal God. Only when he gets rid of the body consciousness can he 
recognise the transcendental Divine. Hence, as long as one has attachment to the body, one must 
adore God in a physical form. 


God is the indwelling Spirit in all beings 


It is a waste of time to try to secure in one way or other a direct vision of God. God is 
manifesting Himself in the heart of everyone. "Ekaathma Sarvabhuutha-Antharaathma" (The 


One Supreme Spirit is the indwelling Spirit in all beings). The Sath (Absolute Reality) is One 
only, through the wise call it by many names. We have to endeavour to experience that Divine. 


The significance of Dhurga, Lakshmi and Sarasvathi has to be rightly understood. The three 
represent three kinds of potencies in man. Ichchaa Shakthi (Will power), Kriyaa Shakthi (the 
power of action), and Jnaana Shakthi (the power of discrimination). Sarasvathi is manifest in 
man as the power of Vaak (speech). Dhurga is present in the form of dynamism, the power of 
action. Lakshmi is manifest in the form of Will power. The body indicates Kriyaa Shakthi. The 
mind is the repository of Jchchaa Shakthi. The Aathma 1s Jnaana Shakthi. Kriyaa Shakthi comes 
from the body, which is material. The power that activates the body that is inert and makes it 
vibrant is Ichchaa Shakthi. The power that induces the vibrations of Ichchaa Shakthi is Jnaana 
Shakthi, which causes radiation (of energy). These three potencies are represented by the 
manthra: "Om Bhur-Bhuvas-Suvah." Bhur represents Bhuloka (the earth). Bhuvah represents the 
Life force--also means Conscience in man, Suvah represents the power of radiation. All the three 
are present in man. Thus, Dhurga, Lakshmi and Sarasvathi dwell in the human heart. 


Physical forms of subtle potencies within man 


Men are prone to exhibit raajasik qualities like anger and hatred. They are the menacing 
manifestations of Dhurga. The extolling of the Divine in song and poetry and the pleasing 
vibrations produced by them indicate the power of Sarasvathi. The pure qualities that arise in 
man such as compassion, love, forbearance and sympathy are derived from Lakshmi. 


When people worship Dhurga, Lakshmi and Sarasvathi externally in pictures or icons, they are 
giving physical forms to the subtle potencies that are within them. The unfortunate predicament 
of man today is that he is not recognizing the powers within him and developing respect for 
them. He goes after the external, attracted by the physical forms. The relationship between the 
material and the subtle has to be understood. 


The remedy for man's ills is contained within himself. But man seeks remedies from outside. 
Here is an illustration of what happens in the world. A hotel and a drug store are adjacent to each 
other. When a hotel server gets a headache, he goes to the neighbouring drug shop for a pill to 
cure his headache. When the drug storekeeper gets a headache, he goes to the hotel for a cup of 
coffee to cure him, instead of taking one of his own pills. 


Turn the vision inwards to experience the Divine 


Likewise, people today tend to ignore the divinity within them, but hanker after many external 
objects. There is no need to go in search of the Divine. Men must develop firm faith in the 
Divinity within them. All that is needed is to turn the vision inwards to experience the Divine 
within. 

Men engage themselves in many outward Saadhana (spiritual practices). These must be 
internalised. All scholarship is of no avail if there is no realisation in the heart. The scholar may 
expound the texts, but lacks the internal experience. One who has mastered the Vedhas may be 


able to explain the words, but cannot recognise the Vedha Purusha, the Supreme Person hailed 
by the Vedhas. 


When a person goes to a temple, he doses his eyes in front of the idol, because what he seeks is 
an internal vision of God and not a sight of the external form of the idol. God is Omnipresent as 
proclaimed in the Geetha. God is One, though names and forms may differ. 


All education today is related to the physical world. It will not serve to reveal the Divine. It was 
this which impelled Shankaraachaarya to teach a pandith who was learning by rote Paanini's 
Grammar that at the moment of death only the Lord's name (Govindha) will save him and not the 
rules of grammar. 


Though this teaching has been propagated for centuries, very few practise it. Many read the 
Raamaayana as a daily ritual. But how many carry out the commands of their fathers? How 
many practise the virtue of fraternal affection and love proclaimed in the Raamaayana? Is there 
anyone standing for the gospel of Dharma (Dray) as upheld by Shri Raama? Of what use is it 
endlessly to listen to discourses without putting anything into practice? The Geetha is being read 
and expounded all the time. Is a single precept from it being put into practice? Not at all. The 
Geetha shows the path to God realisation. But simply reciting the Geetha is valueless. Follow the 
Geetha and tread the path indicated by it. Only then you will reap the reward. 


Love is God. Get immersed in that Love 


What is meant by practice? Direct your sacred love rewards God. There is no need for any severe 
spiritual exercise. Love is God. Live in love. Get immersed in that Love. 


What should be pure love has been polluted today by all kinds of attachments. Pollution today is 
all pervading and has spread to the hearts of people. Purity has become scarce. Prema (Love of 
God) is all-powerful. Prahlaadha demonstrated this all conquering power of love for the Lord. He 
survived every kind of ordeal by his faith in Naarayana. 


Embodiments of love! Though people live in the phenomenal world and carry on their activities, 
they should perform all their actions as an offering to please the Lord. 


What is it you should do during these ten days of the Navaraathri festival? Convert your Jchchaa 
Shakthi (Will power) into a yearning for God. Convert Kriyaa Shakthi into a force for doing 
divine actions. Convert your Jnaana Shakthi into the Divine Itself. 


"Sathyam, Jnaanam, Anantham, Brahma" (The Divine is Truth, Wisdom and Infinite), proclaim 
the scriptures. These three are in man. You can experience the entire cosmos within your heart. 
The marvellous powers in man, the power of sight, etc. are all derived from God. 


Human birth has to be redcemed by contemplation of God. Man today is misusing his precious 
body. Instead of filling it with the nectar of love, he is filling it with worldly trash. Man should 
be the master of his senses, instead of being their slave. 


Discourse in the Sai Ramesh hall, Brindhaavan, on 9-10-1994. 


You must see, hear, study, observe, experience and reflect; only 
then can you understand Me. 


BABA 


28. Turn your vision towards the Divine 


Wherever the mind wanders 
There you see the three worlds; 
Where the mind is absent 
There is only a void. 


EMBODIMENTS of love! Wherever the mind moves, there the three worlds can be perceived as 
one. Wherever the mind is not present, there nothing seems to exist. From this, it is clear that the 
mind is at the root of all perception and is the cause as well as the witness of all that is perceived. 


The term Manishi (man) is derived from the word mind. All the three worlds are contained in 
man. In this vast cosmos, among innumerable living beings the human being studs foremost. 
Although it has been proclaimed that in all living beings the Divine exists as the Indwelling 
Spirit, not all living beings can recognise this truth. Only human being has the capacity to 
recognise it. This unique ability invests human birth with its rare quality, as proclaimed by the 
Vedhas. 


The difference between human and the animal 


Moreover, in every living being, there are five sheaths Annamaya (food), Praanamaya (vital), 
Manomaya (the mental), Vijnaanamaya (Awareness) and Aanandhamaya (Bliss). But while 
other creatures are not aware of the existence of the power to discriminate between the transient 
and the permanent, man alone can recognise the existence of this faculty. The second is Vijnaana 
(the ability to acquire the highest knowledge). This knowledge is not limited to the physical, but 
embraces also spiritual knowledge. This faculty is radiant in man, Now, to the third faculty: 
Every living being including man is born with Moha (attachment). But man alone has the 
capacity to realise that he can attain liberation by getting rid of this Moha. 


Thus there is a significant difference between human beings and all other living creatures. But 
the veil of Maaya (illusion) envelops man and makes him go astray. What is this Maaya? It is 
the combined expression of the three gunas--Sathva, Rajas and Thamas (the pure, the emotional 
and the lethargic). The Vedhas have declared that it is only when man overcomes the three gunas 
that he would be able to get rid of Maaya (the illusion which makes one see the unreal as real). 


What is Moha? There are three kinds of acquisitions wealth, wife and progeny--which serve to 
promote Moha (delusion). When attachment to these triple possessions is given up, Moha will go 
and Mukthi (liberation) will be easily secured. 


Man constantly strives in various ways to elevate his status and condition. As he succeeds in one 
effort, he seeks success in another, and so it goes on. But, what is the hall-mark of a true human 
being? Human life is bound up with gains and losses, ups and downs. Man has to face them. 
Incidentally he has to suffer blows of one sort or another. Only he is a true human being who 
overcomes these challenges with fortitude. 


There should be limits to every desire 


What is the reason for the vicissitudes in a man's life? The cause is to be found in man's desires. 
Doubtless, desires are inescapable. One man, for instance, seeks to achieve some ideals. Another 
may seek to do well in his studies and secure a good job. Yet another may desire to acquire a 


good name and bring up a good family. There is nothing wrong in such desires. But what we are 
witnessing in the Kali Age is the limitless growth of desires. As a consequences, man falls into 
bad ways. There should be limits to every desire. There should be a limit even to the pursuit of 
power and position. It has been well said: â€œNasshreyo niyamam vinaa" (there can be nothing 
great without restraints). Without such restraint man is bound to go astray: 


The Vedhas declare that wherever the mind wanders, there the three worlds will be perceived. 
What are these three worlds? All are familiar with the pronouncements in the Geetha and in the 
Gaayathri Manthra. The three worlds are: Bhur, Bhuvah, Suvah (the Bhuloka, Bhuvarloka and 
Svarga). These three are present in man: Aadhibhouthika, Aadhidhaivika and Aadhyaathmika. 
These were worshipped as three Goddesses--Dhurga, Lakshmi and Sarasvathi--by our ancients. 


Every form is that of Dhurga---the deity that is associated with Shakthi (Energy). There is 
infinite power within man, power that is beyond Comprehension and which is Divine. But he 
makes no effort to recognise it. If man did not have this power, how could he have gone to the 
moon? What is the power that makes the earth revolve round itself. It is not any machine or 
manthra. The power is within the earth itself. This energy, present in man and in other objects, 
has been characterised as Cosmic energy. What is this Cosmic power? The sun derives its energy 
and effulgence from this Cosmic source. It is the same Cosmic source that accounts for the 
power of the human mind and the marvellous power of the eye to see the most distant stars. 


Cosmic energy that is present in man 


With this power of sight, man is able to see the entire creation. There is no greater power than 
this. Thus, man is endowed with all powers. But this boundless power is being recognized and 
exercised by each one according to the level of his development. The same electrical energy is 
used for a variety of purposes for hearing, lighting, operating a fan, etc. Likewise, the divine 
Cosmic energy in human beings is used by different persons for varied purposes. This energy is 
latent in all beings. Because of his ability to manifest this divine, boundless Cosmic energy, man 
is described as a manifestation of the Vyakthi (Divine). Humanness consists in the manifestation 
of what is hidden and invisible in man. 


This energy in man is a Aadhi Shakthi (primordial power). It is termed Om. This power 
permeates the Prakrithi (physical world) of matter. This is known as Bhur. There is another 
power which animates this material substance. This is the power of vibration. It is termed 
Praana Shakthi (the Life Force). It is this Life Force which activates every part of the human 
body. This is termed Bhuvah. Lakshmi symbolises this power Lakshmi is the embodiment of that 
power which enables a human being to see, to hear and to do many things. Lakshmi represents 
the power to see what is good, to hear what is good, to speak sweet words, to entertain good 
thoughts and to do good deeds. The Lakshmi Principle accounts for all the good, happy, 
auspicious happenings in the world. 


The third form of energy is symbolized by Sarasvathi. She is regarded as the Vaak-dhevatha 
(Goddess of Speech). Lakshmi is Praana-svaruupini (the embodiment of the Life Force). Dhurga 
is Shakthi-svaruupini (the embodiment of physical energy). These three in their unified 
expression represent the Aathmik principle. 


Sankraanthi, Sihvaraathri, Navaraathri 


Today is an auspicious festival day for Bhaaratheeyas. There are three sacred festival nights for 
Bhaaratheeyas: Sankraanthi, Shivaratahri, and Navaraathri. Each of these has its special 


significance. Sankraanthi enables man to turn his vision towards the sublime. It is the day when 
the apparent Uttharaayan kaala (northward motion of the sun) begins. The day is considered 
auspicious for man to embark on his journey towards the goal of a purposeful, sacred and blissful 
life. The north is described as Himaachala. From ancient times, the Himaalayas were regarded as 
the abode of the Eeshvara (Divine). Himaachala symbolises a heart that is pure and cool as Hima 
(ice) and steady as a Achala (mountain). The message of Sankranthi is that people should direct 
their vision towards Himachal in this symbolic sense. It does not mean looking at the north with 
the physical eyes. It calls for enquiring into the truth of the Spirit with the Jnaana dhrishti 
(inward eye of wisdom). Sankraanthi signifies this internal vision. 


The next is Shivaraathri. Darkness prevails at night. But during Shivaraathri, the night is not dark 
but full of light. That light is experienced by contemplating on the glorious form of Shiva, 
meditating on the Divine, reminding oneself of unity with the Divine and attaining a stare of pure 
holiness. 


Then comes Navaraathri. This festival is intended to make man realise his true worth as the most 
precious object in creation. All things in the world derive their value from the labour and skill of 
man. 


Raaga and Dhvesha 


Navaraathri means nine nights. What does the nine signify? There are nine Grahas (planets) 
according to Astrology. The human body has nine openings. If a deep enquiry is made, it will be 
found that mankind is dependent on the grahas (planets). Although astrologers speak about nine 
planets, in reality there are only two planets that matter. They are Raaga (attachment) and 
Dhvesha (hatred). 


Today animals also sustain themselves on food. They eat as much as is required to appease their 
hunger. Man, however, does not act this way. He has limitless desires. He wishes to accumulate 
riches to last for generations so that he may live in comfort. In Bhaarath, there is no need for 
anyone to starve. There is enough for all. But some hoard food in excess. This mal-distribution 
accounts for food shortage. The accumulation by the few is responsible for scareity for the many. 
Hence, equitable sharing and distribution are essential. This must be brought about by social 
action inspired by a sense of justice. 


Students should get rid of the idea that education is for earning a living. They must realise that 
they owe a duty to their Motherland and the world. 


Students should realise that 

true education should inculcate 
In them the following qualities: 
Good thoughts, good speech, 

good actions, respect for truth, 
Discipline, devotion and 

dedication to duty. 


Students today are lacking in discipline. They must cleanse their minds of impure thoughts. They 
must pledge themselves to serve the nation. 


The vision and the world 


In the worship of the deities during Navaraathri every day one of them should be worshipped, 
not externally but with one's heart and soul. Bodily actions are ephemeral. The body derives its 
value from the spirit within. Hence it should be regarded as a sacred temple. 


Today, students develop many undesirable qualities like pride, envy and hatred even before they 
join college. With such polluted minds they view the world in dark colours. This may be 
illustrated by an episode from the Mahaabhaaratha. 


One day, Krishna summoned Dhuryodhana and Dharmaja and asked them to make a study of the 
people in the kingdom. He asked Dhuryodhana to find out how many good people existed in the 
country. He asked Dharmaja to find our how many bad people were there in the kingdom. 
Dhuryodhana went round and reported that he could find no good man anywhere. If them was 
any good man, that was himself, he said. Dharmaja reported to Krishna that he could find no bad 
man anywhere in their Dhaarmik (virtuous) kingdom. He could find some badness only in 
himself. 


The inner significance of this episode is that one sees only a reflection of one's self in the outer 
world. It is the vision that accounts for the difference, just as the colour of the glass one wears 
alters the colour of the world one sees through it. Change your outlook and the world will appear 
differently. Hence everyone should fill his mind with good thoughts. 


Meaning of offering Kumkuma to Goddesses 


During the Navaraathri festival, for the purpose of eradicating one's demonic tendencies, the 
deities were worshipped with Kumkuma (sacred red powder). The red powder is symbol of 
blood. The meaning of this worship is offering one's blood to the Lord and receiving in return the 
gift of peace from the Lord. 


There are four kinds of tendencies in man: the animal, the demonic, the human and the Divine. 
Of the three constituents of man--the body, the mind and the Aathma when man ignores the mind 
and the Aathma and identifies himself with the body, he manifests only his animal qualities. 
When the body and the Aathma are forgotten and only the mind alone is predominant, one 
becomes demonic. When the body and the mind are forgotten and one is immersed in the 
Aathmik consciousness, one becomes Divine. 


If, in this manner, one explores the potentialities in man, it will be found that they include 
everything. Man, therefore, has to know himself. There he will find everything. 


Arjuna saw the Cosmic Form of the Lord (as described in the Geetha). All the worlds were seen 
in that Cosmic form of Krishna. That Lord resides in every human being. He is nearer than one's 
closest kith and kin and is dearer than anyone else. He is the sole saviour and refuge of man. 


The means to progress spiritually 


Therefore, the Navaraathri festival is observed, by contemplating on God for ten days, cleansing 
one's self of all impurities, to experience the Divinity within. The penultimate day of the festival 
is dedicated to what is termed Aayudha Puuja (worship of weapons). The weapons to be 
worshipped are the divine powers in man. 


When the Divine is worshipped in this way, one is bound to progress spiritually. On the contrary, 
the usual practice now is to treat the Divine and the devotee as separate from each other. This is 


wrong. The Divine is omnipresent and is in everyone and in every object. This truth has to be 
realised from the message conveyed by the process of inhaling and exhaling that goes on in 
everyone 21,600 rimes in a day. Each act of respiration proclaims the message: So-Ham (I am 
He). With every breath, the message is proclaimed: "I am God." 


Realising this oneness, all actions should be done as an act of dedication to the Divine. What 
bliss can be experienced in such a state of mind! 


It is essential to celebrate festival in this sacred spirit. It is not enough to do this for only ten days 
during the Navaraathri festival. It should become the rule all through one's life, even as one 
draws one's life-breath till the end. 


Students today strive to achieve wealth, strength and friendship. But in addition to these three, 
they should also strive to develop divine qualities. Only then, they can lead ideal lives. 


Students! Embodiments of Love! Bhaarath has been from ancient, times teaching many esoteric 
truths to the world out of its abundant spiritual wealth. You must pray for the welfare of all the 
worlds and not only for your own personal good. I expect all of you to pray for the happiness of 
all, with your thoughts centred on God. 


Discourse on Vijayadhashami day, 14-10- 1994, in Sai Ramesh Hall, Brindhaavan. 


Youth is the stage in life when the slightest turn towards wrong 
will spell disaster. 


BABA 


29. Chant the Name : sing His glory 


When one gives up what has to be renounced, 

When one knows what needs to be known, 

When one reaches what should be one's goal, 

How can the Bliss that is got therefrom be described? 
What have to be given up are these worldly thoughts; 
What has to be known is the truth, about life; 

What has to be attained is the Brahmic Consciousness; 
What greater bliss can there be than this? 


EMBODIMENTS of love! Belittling human life as trivial and transient, people are forgetting the 
effulgent Divine that is eternal. Man is no ordinary being. The term Nara applied to man, means 
Aathma (the Spirit). Man is the embodiment of triple entities. He has one form in the waking 
state, another in the dream state and a third in the deep sleep state. Although the waking state is 
described in many ways, the presiding deity of this is called Vishva. Tiffs Vishva is made up of 
twenty-five constituents--the five basic elements, the five praanas (life-breaths), the five sense 
organs, the five Koshas (sheaths), the mind, the intellect, the Will and Ahamkaara (Ego) and the 
Jeevi (Indwelling Spirit). Together, these twenty-five represent the Lord of the waking state. 
This Vistula, making use of the sense organs in the waking stare, experiences the cosmos as 
pervaded by the Divine. 


Dream experiences are mental creations of dreamer 


In the dream state, the presiding deity is called Thaijasa based on Thejas. Thejas has only 17 
constituents. The five sense organs, the five life-breaths and the five sheaths and the mind and 
intellect. 


In the dream stare, the individual is creating his dream experiences, including joy and sorrow. 
The dream experiences are mental creations of the dreamer. In the deep sleep state, Prajna is the 
divine entity. In this state there is only one faculty present: the Prajnaa-shakthi (the power of 
Awareness). This awareness represents the Supreme Brahma Principle. The scriptures declare 
"Prajnaanam Brahma" (Awareness is the Supreme Absolute). In this state, the five elements, the 
five-breaths and the five sheaths are absent. With the mind and the intellect also absent, the 
individual is in a state of Supreme Bliss--Sath-Chith-Aanandha (Being-Awareness-Bliss). 


Man is thus not one entity but a threefold personality in the three states of consciousness. 
However, not recognizing the unifying factor, man revels in multiplicity, becomes a victim of his 
own self-deception through Maaya (delusion) and forgets his true nature. 


Man is described as Thungabhadhra, the river of Life 


It is because man becomes a slave of his senses that he descends to the animal level instead of 
rising to the state of the Divine Master, Pashupathi. Man is like a piece of sugarcane, which has 
many knots. These knots in man are the evil tendencies like lust, anger, greed, attachment, pride 
and envy. These tendencies assume various forms such as love of wealth, attachment to wife and 
children and the like. Because of these attachments, he forgets his true nature. The scriptures 


describe man as Thungabhadhra. This name is familiarly associated with that of a river. But, in 
reality Thungabhadhra is the River of Life. 'Bhadhra' means that which is auspicious. 'Thunga' 
means that which is immense and immeasurable. Thungabhadhra refers to the body which is 
capable of conferring limitless well-being on mankind. By misusing such a body man is ruining 
his life and destroying his true humanness. 


The body is intended for rendering help to others and not for self-enjoyment. Unfortunately 
because of the perversions of the mind, man loses himself in worldly pleasures. He is a slave to 
the vagaries of the mind and ignores the counsel of the Buddhi (intellect). 


Man should remember that the same Divine Prajna (Awareness) is present in all human beings. 
This truth is accepted by all faiths. It may be asked why God is not visible if He is all-pervading. 
The-answer is that though God is omnipresent, He can be experienced only by those who have a 
pure heart. Just as a cow's milk can be got only from the udder and not from any other part of the 
cow, God's image can be visualized only by those with a heart full of love and which is pure and 
free from selfishness. God cannot be perceived by those with impure minds and polluted hearts. 
The sun cannot be seen when he is covered by a cloud. But when the wind sweeps the cloud 
away, the effulgent sun becomes visible. Likewise man has to drive away the cloud of ignorance 
enveloping his mind by meditating on God. In this Kali Age there is no greater or easier means 
of realising God than chanting His name. 


Four ways of chanting the Lord's name 


There are four ways of chanting the Lord's name. One is through Keerthana (song). Then there is 
Sankeerthana (community singing). Another is Dhyaana (meditating on the Divine). The fourth 
is contemplation of the form of the Divine. In all these, meditating on the name is basic. 


By meditating on the Lord, Chaithanya and Meera experienced the ecstatic vision of the Lord 
within themselves. Both of them were immersed in the feeling of devotion to the Lord. 


Those who experienced the Lord by chanting the Divine name are Naaradha, Thukaaraam, 
Thulsidhas, Raamadhas and others. In reply to a question from Naaradha, Krishna declared that 
He is present wherever His devotees sing His glories. The singing must not be merely a musical 
exercise but express genuine devotion. 


Some devotees sing songs about the /ee/as (sportive miracles) of God. Jayadheva, for instance, 
sang only about the sports of Krishna and was oblivious of all other things. He totally identified 
himself with Krishna. 


Raadha represents Ruupa sankeerthana (singing the glory of the Lord's form) of Krishna. She 
saw Krishna in every object. The heart is moved only when the words of the poem or song are 
rendered melodiously. (Here Bhagavaan demonstrated how the manner of singing makes all the 
difference in the appeal of the song: "Raama Nannu Kaapaadu"--- O Raama, Save Me). 


By devotional singing one can get merged in the Divine. That is the reason why the Lord is 
described as Gaanalola or Gaanapriya (Lover of song or one who is charmed by music). It will 
be befitting if a devotee combines the reciting of the Lord's name with singing and praying for 
merger with the Divine. 


Now these three are considered as distinct from each other. This is not correct. 


God is one: names are many 


Devotees are inclined to worship the Lord under different names. They consider the names 
different from each other. They forget that they are all equally, embodiments of the Divine: Sath- 
Chith-Aanandha. (Being-Awareness-Bliss). There should be no feeling of high and low. Only 
the one who has the feeling of oneness can be called a renunciant. It is wrong to make a 
distinction between Raama and Shiva as some small-minded devotees do. Vaishnavaites and 
Shaivites who go to the Thirumala temple hail the Lord as Venkataramana or Venkateshvara 
respectively, as if the two names are different, though they represent the same deity. 
Thyaagaraaja pointed out that the word Raama is made up of the vital syllables "Raa" and "Ma" 
in the Naaraayana and Shiva manthras respectively. In this manner devotees should seek unity 
in apparent diversity rather than seek to divide what is one. 


The nature of the Divine can only be properly understood, by those who are filled with devotion. 
All should be filled with love. Love cannot flow from the manthras of those who are steeped in 
selfishness and self-pride. Love flows from those who are humble. It cannot arise in those who 
are conceited and pompous. The love of God can arise only from loving thoughts. There must be 
yearning for God, just as one has to experience hunger to think of food. There is hunger for God 
in every one, but the disease of self-pride prevents one from feeling that hunger. The denial of 
God is a kind of disease. The unbeliever is afflicted by a variety of diseases like pride, envy, 
anger and greed. 


One should be pure to be attracted by the Lord 


There are some who have one foot on faith and the other on disbelief. For sometime they live 
with devotion and then they get lost in worldly concerns. The result is they have the worst of 
both worlds. One should not attempt to ride two horses at the same time. Stick to one thing and 
pursue it with determination. There is no such perseverance today because men are attracted by 
various worldly pleasures. It is not good to be lured by such attractions. Man should be attracted 
only by the Divine. Krishna has been described as one who is alluring in every way--by his 
looks, words and action. One should be pure to be attracted by the Lord. A sensuous person is 
like a rusty piece of iron, which cannot be attracted by a magnet. 


In the world today man is caught between the forces of evil and the forces of good, similar to the 
war in the Mahaabhaaratha between the wicked Kauravas on the one side and the virtuous 
Paandavas on the other. Krishna was on the side of the Paandavas, though He did not take part in 
the fighting. God is always on the side of the good and the virtuous. 


"See good, be good, do good, that is the way to God." Make every effort to experience the 
Divine. 


Bhajans are supremely valuable 


People may say that when you go to Sai Baba, there is nothing but bhajan. Realise that there is 
nothing greater than bhajan. What bliss is there in bhajans! What a demonstration of oneness is 
it when a myriad throats join in uttering the name of God! The vibrations emanating from them 
make the heart vibrant. If you sing alone in your shrine, the vibrations return to you as reaction. 
But in community singing, what you have is not a reaction but a wave of vibrations. They enter 
into the atmosphere and purify the polluted air. The atmosphere today is polluted by bad 
thoughts and feelings. When you sing the glory of God, the bad germs in the air are destroyed 
and the air gets purified by a treatment with anti-biotics as it were. 


Bhajans are therefore supremely valuable. It has been said that in the Kali Age them is no greater 
spiritual practice than chanting the name of the Lord. Let one remember the name of Raama at 
the time of passing, whether he is a millionaire or a pauper, whether he is a scholar or an 
illiterate. Sing the name of the Lord and redeem your lives! 


Discourse in the Sai Ramesh Hall in Brindhaavan on 23-10-1994. 


30. Education and culture 


Wealth is worshipped as God, 

Selfishness has become the basis of life, 
Pomp and show have become the fashion of the day, 
Ego is ruling supreme in everyone, 
Ambition makes men ignore righteousness. 
There is no humility and no regard for truth, 
Education is sought for earning money, 
Hypocrisy has become the order of the day. 
How can the sons of Bhaarath Maathaaji 
Hope to progress in the right path? 
Spiritual education is the urgent need 

Of the hour to reform our children 

And turn them in the right direction. 


STUDENTS, teachers and educators! What do you mean by education? What type of education 
should you have? What kind of education will set an ideal? What is the outcome of education? 
One must enquire deeply, investigate and get the right answer to these questions. People feel that 
education helps in materialistic pursuits and rest content with this. This is a not a right attitude. 
Education should promote culture. It is not by education alone but by culture that one gets 
refined. 


Culture promotes refinement. It is termed as Samskaara which consists of Sadhguna (good 
character), Sadhaachaara (good practices) and Sadbhaavana (good feelings). For a person to be 
deemed educated, his behaviour should be good, his actions useful to society and his feelings 
should be compassionate and kind. "Sarvabhuutha Hithe Rathah" (One should have concern for 
the welfare of all beings). 


What is education without culture? 


It is not enough if a student is endowed with scientific and worldly knowledge. He should have 
essentially moral and spiritual knowledge also. 


The aim of education should be to bring about an all-round development of the personalities of 
the students. Education should make all virtues emerge and shine forth in students. Indian culture 
essentially aims at developing human beings with such a personality. 


What is education without culture? It is like a kite cut off from its main thread. It is not possible 
to predict where this kite would land--whether on thorny bushes or on dwelling places. It is 
difficult to predict how such education is going to affect and harm society. It may also be 
compared to a house without light; bats and poisonous reptiles enter into such houses. Education 
without culture makes man forget his true human nature and take to evil ways. Such education is 
like a counterfeit coin. Even beggars refuse to accept a counterfeit coin. Even parents would 


hesitate to love a son without culture. Refinement and culture are the very life-breath of human 
life. 


Knowledge with humility makes one blossom 


It would be wrong to call it education if it merely teaches the meanings of words. The basic aim 
of education is to make men of character and virtue. Many people think that knowledge is power. 
It is not so. In fact, character is power. Education should confer humility Education without 
humility, action without discrimination, scholarship without wisdom, words without truth, 
friendship without gratitude, music without melody, politics without morality and integrity can 
never shine in society. One's personality blossoms only when one has humility along with 
knowledge. 


Education should be useful to society. It should make citizens follow the path of morality and 
righteousness and make their lives happy. 


Human life is very sacred and valuable. Today people are not aware of the uniqueness of human 
life. They have forgotten human values. That is the reason why one comes across various 
agitations and strikes in society today What is the reason for the country getting poverty-stricken, 
for suffering from fear and anxiety, for not recognizing the sacredness of spirituality, for losing 
morality and integrity? The reason is that man is not living as a human amidst his fellow beings. 
He is living like an animal or like a demon. Today, the cloud of ego and pomp is covering the 
sun of Aathma and hiding its natural splendour. 


Selfishness is rampant. The true meaning of word Svaartha is that one has to know Sva 
(Aathma). Understanding the Sva (Aathma) is Svaartham (Sva+Artha). The syllable Sva in 
Svaartham does not refer to the body; but the soul. The Aathma (spirit) is pure, unselfish and ete- 
rnal. That was the reason why the ancient rishis described the Aathma in such glorious terms, but 
today man is misunderstanding the meaning of the word Sva, identifying it with the body instead 
of the soul. 


Man today is treating the body as the source of all happiness. Such happiness is not true and 
permanent; it is momentary. Educated persons are not striving to earn spiritual, permanent and 
real happiness. 


We need a fusion of knowledge and action 


We are acquiring knowledge, but do not put it to proper use. Knowledge without action is 
useless. Action without knowledge is foolishness. There is a divorce between knowledge and 
action today We need a fusion of knowledge and action. Students should cultivate patriotism and 
a spirit of service. It is conspicuously absent today. 


In India today there are 200 Universities and 9000 colleges. About a crore of students have been 
enrolled in these colleges. Universities are becoming factories which manufacture graduates. 
These students are let loose on the world after graduation. No one is bothered about the future of 
these graduates and how they will benefit the nation? 


What is the use of having education which does not benefit society? No one seems to bother to 
examine all these matters, whether Government, society, educational authorities, Vice- 
Chancellors or other administrators, etc. This is a sad state, which ails the system of education 
today. It is making man a slave of the senses. How can such people serve the society? Wherever 
you look at the students you find sacrifice conspicuous by its absence. 


Universities are busy developing different types of subjects to be taught, but are not aware of the 
Real Subject which they should reach. What is that subject which is the very basis of all other 
subjects? Aathma-Vidhya (Spiritual knowledge), is the basis of all education. It is like the ocean 
while all other types of education are like rivers which must merge in the ocean. Today, 
education without a spiritual base is causing harm. The essence of Spiritual Education is faith 
and dedication. They are like the two bunds of a river. Only when the river of life flows between 
these bunds would the river be safe. If there are no bunds, the waters would flow over villages 
and towns and cause vast destruction. It is the absence of spirituality which is responsible for all 
the problems, violence, agitation and strike. Education should foster the two bunds of dedication 
and faith in students. 


From self-reliance to self-realisation 


Education should inculcate in students the spirit of self-reliance and self-confidence. The first 
thing in life is self-reliance, second is self-confidence, third is self-sacrifice, fourth is self- 
realisation. With self-realisation life finds its final fulfilment. 


Sage Vaalmeeki has compared Raama and Raavana in his epic, the Raamaayana. Raama is 
described as a great Jnaani and Raavana as a fool. Raavana had mastered 64 types of worldly 
knowledge whereas Raama had mastered only 26. Why was such a highly educated person as 
Raavana called a fool by Vaalmeeki? It is because Raavana lacked three important qualities 
which Raama had. They are working for the welfare of entire humanity, possessing the supreme 
knowledge and having great virtues. Raavana was only a slave of the senses. 


Knowledge bereft of noble qualities and. virtues becomes only bookish knowledge which is of 
no use to society. What is it that made Raama God? It is imbibing of the six qualities, namely 
character, compassion, non-violence, control of the mind, control of the senses and fame. 
Students should imbibe these six qualities which make man God. Students should never indulge 
in violence. Hurting or harming any person essentially means hurting and harming oneself. It is 
in this context Vyaasa stated that the essence of the eighteen Puraanas is "Help ever, Hurt 
never." 


Spread Bhaaratheeya culture 


In today's system of education the teachers are not teaching this basic virtue. The Raamaayana, 
Bhaagavatha and Mahaabhaaratha are like three important life-breaths for Indian culture. Today's 
students do not know these three texts without which a person cannot be called Bhaaratheeya. 
Instead, students indulge in reading cheap novels, which contain bad ideas. 


Students going out from Sri Sathya Sai Institute of Higher Learning should take an oath that they 
would plunge into society and spread Bhaaratheeya culture from house to house to all people. 
Indian culture is the very backbone of our life. If you cannot spread this culture yore studies have 
no meaning. I desire only one thing from you. You should enjoy peace yourself and spread peace 
all around. That is the gratitude which you have to show to the Institution which has given you 
free education and which has showered so much of love on you. Strive to bring about unity; there 
is no greater strength than unity. 


Whatever you have learnt should be made relevant and useful to society. The gap between 
learning and practice should be bridged. Knowledge from books and laboratories should be made 
relevant and useful to society. Work for the honour and glory of the society and the nation. 


Carry on your secular life with spiritual outlook 


What are you planning to do after you obtain the Degree from the University? It is no use going 
in search of a job from office to office with your Degree certificate or registering your name in 
the employment exchange. If the Government starts colleges without being able to give jobs to 
the graduates, it leads to all sorts of problems arising out of unemployment. The colleges must be 
operated, keeping in view the demand for graduates. 


Our University spends Rs. 60,000 per head on Arts students, Rs. 90,000 per head on Science 
students, but we do not charge any fees. What benefit do we get out of this? The only benefit is 
to make your lives exemplary to the world at large. We want you to carry on your secular life 
with spiritual outlook and attitude. With the education obtained in the Institute, if you have 
determination, them is nothing which you cannot achieve. During your student days do not enter 
into politics. After completing your education, you may enter into politics and practise the values 
which you have learnt as a student and serve the society and the nation. 


We got Independence, but unfortunately after Independence unity is lost. Independence without 
unity does not benefit the nation. 


Today in the Convocation you have taken an oath administered by the Vice-Chancellor. Oath 
raking is like giving a promise. You must take the oath whole-heartedly It would be a great sin if 
you conduct yourselves in daily life contrary to the oath. 


Students! Whether you are aware of it or not, Mother Bhaarath is pining for you. You are not 
even recognizing the fact that you are born in the sacred land of Bhaarath. Mother Bhaarath has 
hidden an enormous treasure for you--the treasure of knowledge and spirituality. 


You may return to your places and conduct yourselves in keeping with human dignity and the 
type of training that you have obtained here. Do not get a bad name either for yourselves or for 
your parents. You should be free from ego, jealousy; arrogance and be full of humility, nobility 
and sacredness. Service to society and the nation must dominate your thought, word and action. 


Benedictory address to the Convocation of the Sri Sathya Sai Institute of Higher Learning on 22- 
11-1994. 


The children must have reverence towards their religion, their 
culture, their educational attainments and their country. They must 
learn well their mother-tongue, so that they can appreciate the 
great poetical works and epics written by the Seers of their land. 
This will give them valuable guidance in the stormy days ahead. 


BABA 


31. The Avathaar and the devotees 


More effulgent than the Sun, 

Purer and Whither than snow, 

Subtler than space, 

The Supreme Self pervades everything, 
From the minutest particle. 

Holding everything within Him, 
Illumining everything By His Consciousness. 
The Divine (Brahman) is in you 

And you are in the Brahman. 

There is no difference 

Between you and Brahman. 

What greater truth can I convey 

To all of you assembled here? 


EMBODIMENTS of the Divine Aathma, When the Lord (Naaraayana) incarnates in human form, 
He cannot avoid abiding by the regulations set by Him. You should not forget that even if the 
Lord is the Director of the" Cosmic drama, in His human form he is playing a specific role. If He 
does not act according to the role assumed by Him, either overdoes or underplays the role, 
departing from what is appropriate, He will be falling in His purpose. When the Divine assumes 
human form, He has to serve as an example by ideal actions. 


Hiranyaaksha and Hiranyakashipu, impelled by their hatred, embarked on many enquiries in 
search of Naaraayana. They felt after their prober that Naaraayana was not in any of the five 
elements. But the tide of time and circumstances led to situations in which they faced the Lord in 
His most dreadful forms and met with their end. 


When Krishna made His advent on earth, He also had to play His part according to His role. 
While Sishupala was railing at Krishna, He allowed him a long rope and destroyed him, when 
the appropriate time came. The Bhaagavatham relates the story of how Krishna retreated 
repeatedly in His encounters with Jaraasandha. How can the All-knowing, All-powerful, Omni- 
present Lord flee from anywhere? Where can He hide Himself? This is utterly fanciful. 


When one has faith in the ways of the Lord and abides by the will of the Lord, the Lord can be 
understood and experienced. 


For instance, there is the example of Dhraupadhi in the Mahaabhaaratha. In the court of 
Dhuryodhana, although she was humiliated and dishonoured by Dhuryodhana and 
Dhusshaasana, Krishna, in accordance with the role He had to play, did not intervene, as both of 
them were destined to meet with their death at the hands of Bheema. 


During Krishna's life-time, He was the target of attacks and accusations by many wicked 
persons. But the Divine has no likes or dislikes. The wicked persons suffer from the 
consequences of their own actions according to their deserts. 


What one gets in life is dependent partly on what he has earned by his actions. This is called 
Praarabdham (fate). This is by its nature temporary. What is got as the fruit of a past action will 
not last long. Forgetting this fact and forgetting also his Svabhaavam (true nature) man is carried 
away by the transient and acts according to his whims. 


When an actor in a play is assigned a certain role, he studies the entire play, but while acting his 
role, he has to play his part alone in each scene as required in the play and not all the roles that 
he knows. He has to suit his actions to the demands of his role in each scene in the play 
Likewise, the Lord, when He has assumed a role in the Cosmic play, has to act in each situation 
according to what is appropriate to it and according to the rules of the game. 


Mankind's fall from righteous conduct 


From ancient times, in accordance with the spirit of Bhaaratheeya Culture, Bhaaratheeyas have 
been according the Highest place to 7hyaaga (renunciation or sacrifice). They adored Dharma 
(Righteous Conduct). They were pledged to upholding justice. They adhered to Truth. People 
today have ignored these values of Bhaarath's ancient culture. They have fallen a prey to worldly 
and sensuous pleasures, believing that only earthly existence is real. 


People in the world today are taking to evil ways and cherishing evil thoughts the like of which 
have never before prevailed. Men are consumed by a limitless passion for wealth and power. No 
doubt money is necessary for meeting one's daily needs. But even here there should be a limit. 
The vast ocean, when it swells beyond its bounds, causes disaster. The food that is required for 
sustaining the body is conducive to health only when it is consumed within limits. Over-eating 
poisons the physical system. Food may give satisfaction or cause illness. By his food habits man 
is becoming a prey to disease. Food is essential, but it must be taken within limit for it to be 
wholesome. Likewise wealth is essential but within limits. When there is excessive wealth, many 
dangers ensue. With excessive wealth man turns arrogant and loses the sense of discrimination 
between right and wrong. He becomes a Dhuryodhana who exemplified greed rather than a 
Karna (who was noted for his generosity). 


Wealth and sacrifice should grow together 


Together with the growth of one's wealth, one's spirit of sacrifice should grow commensurately. 
Increase in wealth should bring about an increase in generosity. These days wealth increases but 
not magnanimity. 


Of what use is wealth if one cannot be happy? 
Even if a river is overflowing, 

A dog can only lap a little of it. 

For a greedy man, there is no contentment 
Even if he has large hoards. 


Today, when a man's riches increase, he becomes increasingly miserly. As a result, he forgets his 
true nature. 


When money earned by honest means does not always confer happiness, how can you get 
happiness through money earned by dishonest means? Hence, it should be realised that excessive 
wealth can never confer peace or happiness. When you have large wealth, offer it for good 
causes to help others. Thereby you will derive satisfaction. 


In the pursuit of power men sacrifice morality 


The second evil is the passion for power. From the villager to the topmost man in a city, 
everybody is after power. Power carries with it limits and obligations. There are five kinds of 
power--the power of knowledge, intellectual power, the power of fame, the power of character, 
and the power of sacrifice. Only the person who has all these five attributes should aspire for a 
position of authority. 


These days men conduct themselves in positions of power without any understanding of how to 
exercise authority. Every man aspires for positions of power from that of Panchaayath President 
to the head of the government of the country. In the pursuit of power, men are prepared to use 
any means, sacrificing morality and justice. All sorts of corrupt practices are being resorted to for 
securing power. Law and order are being undermined. 


In this manner, the true nature of man is being forgotten. This is a highly dangerous situation. 
Those who seek positions of authority should recognise their obligations. They should exercise 
power with due regard to the restraints to be observed. "Nasshreyo Nivamam Vinaa" (Nothing 
great can be achieved without restraint). Thus both wealth and power have to be used with 
restraint. But these restraints have been violated at present. 


Divine bides for proper time to play His full role 


All the troubles and disorders the country is experiencing today are due to these violations. Men 
are failing to recognise the nature of the Divine. Even though the Divine has come down as an 
actor on the world stage, He is biding for the proper time to play His full role. A fruit takes time 
to ripen. When the fruit is ripe it falls down of its own accord. Likewise when the time is ripe for 
one to reap the fruits of his actions, he must be ready to gather them according to the nature of 
the actions. It is one's own actions which lead to bad or good results. That is why the scriptures 
have declared that man's mind is the cause of his bondage or liberation. 


Hence, the mind has to be turned towards the sacred path. It should be concentrated on actions of 
service to others. It should be devoted to concern for the welfare of the world. Only then the 
purity of the mind expresses itself. 


For all the confusion and conflict prevailing in the world today, it is the feelings and thoughts of 
people that are responsible. To rake offence when some one criticizes you or to think of 
retaliation when one does some harm to you, is not the right way of reaching to them. Consider 
whatever good or bad that happens to you as the consequence of your own actions. Do not 
attribute them. to acts of the Divine. 


God is like a postman. The postman delivers one letter to one address and the people in the house 
rejoice over the good news contained in it. He delivers another letter at a second house and there 
is lamentation over the sad news contained in the letter. Is the postman responsible for the joy or 
the sadness of the recipients, of the letters? No. It is the content of the respective letters that is 
responsible. What you experience by way of joy or grief is a consequence of your own actions. 
God is only a witness. 


Earn God's grace by getting rid of ego 


In human society today, egoism is rampant. Ostentation is ubiquitous. Can peace and security be 
ensured in such a milieu? Can God's grace flow in such a state? No. Whatever one's scholarship 
or wealth, as long as there is Ahamkaara (egoism) God's grace will not flow. Grace, like water, 


flows from a higher to a lower level. God's grace will be showered on those who have humility 
and discipline. Humility is essential for securing God's grace. Revere elders. Be content with 
what you have. Develop goodwill towards 'all. Bear no 111 will towards anyone. When you desire 
that all should love you, you should equally love all. 


The history of Bhaarath bears testimony to the pacific attitude of Bhaaratheeyas. They defended 
themselves when the country was invaded by outsiders, but they never embarked on wars of 
conquest. The ancient Bhaaratheeyas never resorted to wrongful or unrightful policies. 
Adherence to peace and truth was natural to them. Unfortunately today; in the pursuit of power 
people are giving the go-by to morality and integrity. In western countries many leaders resorted 
to violence to capture power. In Bhaarath also, there have been many examples of Muslims who 
killed or imprisoned their own fathers or kinsmen to seize the reins of power. This greed for 
power converted men into demons. 


But look at what happened in the Raamaayana. To carry out the promises of his father, Raama 
renounced the kingdom and chose to live in exile for fourteen years in the forest. He did not 
aspire for power or position. He cherished Dharma (the code of right conduct). 


Raama's example for cherishing Dharma 


Shortly after their entry into the forest, one day, when Raama and Lakshmana were sitting under 
a tree, they heard the neigh of horses and cries of elephants. Raama asked Lakshmana to find out 
the masons for the unusual presence of horses in the forest. Lakshmana climbed to the top of a 
tree and surveyed the scene. He noticed the advancing of a huge army, but only the flag 
fluttering high over the haze could be seen clearly. Lakshmana concluded from the emblem on 
the flag that it was Bharatha who was coming with the army. 


Lakshmana got down and asked Raama to get ready with his bow and arrows. "What for?" asked 
Raama. Lakshmana said that at the instance of his mother, Bharatha was coming with his army to 
seize them. Amused at Lakshmana's naivety, Raama told him smilingly: "Bharatha is not such a 
person. He will do no such thing. He is coming to see us because he did not find us in Ayodhya 
when he came back to the city." Lakshmana retorted: "If he is coming to see us, why should he 
bring the army with him?" 


Raama said: "To allay the feelings of the people, Bharatha is coming with all the citizens. 
Lakshmana! You have failed to realise that no one born in the Ikshvaaku line will ever shed 
blood to ascend to the throne. Those who seize the throne by the sword cannot be righteous 
rulers. No such Kings will ever be born in the Ikshvaaku dynast. The rule of conduct for the 
Ikshvaaku Kings is to inherit the throne by righteous means and rule with the consent of the 
people. The spirit of service should inspire who seek positions of authority. Without knowing 
how to serve, one cannot become a true leaden" Raama allayed Lakshmana's apprehensions in 
this manner. 


Meanwhile, Bharatha came running towards Raama, crying "Oh Brother!" and fell at his feet. 
Watching this scene, Lakshmana regretted his misjudgment and sought Raama's forgiveness. 


Thus, from ancient times, the rulers in Bhaarath never resorted to violence or unrighteous means 
to ascend the throne. They were dedicated to the practice of Dharma. "Sathyam Vadhha: 
Dharmam Chara" (Speak the truth, follow Righteousness). These were the two basic tenets of 
the ancient Bhaaratheeyas. They esteemed them as their two eyes. Today the rule has been 
reversed---Sathyam Vadhha (Kill truth) Dharmam Chara (Imprison Righteousness). Today it is 


the reign of falsehood. Unrighteousness is the prevailing moral code. It is because of these 
tendencies. Bhaarath today is a prey to disorder. 


Every individual should try to practise and protect truth and righteousness. This is the bounden 
duty of every citizen of Bhaarath. This is the service they have to do to the nation. The nation 
will not be protected by an army or by the most modern weapons. If the people safeguard truth 
and righteousness, the latter will protect the nation and the world. 


Svaami's encounter with intellectuals 


Once, more than two decades ago, Sri K.M. Munshi convened a conference of intellectuals in 
Bombay to be addressed by Svaami. The so-called intellectuals today seldom have any 
intelligence. They are filled with conceit. The intellectuals in the gathering were proud and 
arrogant, gloating over their scholarship and book knowledge. 


Bhagavan was the Chief Guest at the meeting and Munshi was seated next to Svaami. Munshi 
requested Svaami to clarify the doubts of intellectuals regarding spirituality and right conduct. 
Many questions were put to Svaami and Svaami answered all of them clearly and convincingly. 


One member of the audience asked Svaami whether it was not necessary for India to equip itself 
with atom bombs in view of the fact that both affluent America and Communist Russia had huge 
piles of atom bombs. Svaami replied- "What folly is this! When there are millions in the country 
who lack food, clothing and shelter, the provision of these necessities is the most urgent task and 
not the manufacturing of atom bombs. Of what use are bombs when you cannot feed the people? 
Crores are being wasted on armaments. I cannot agree to such wastage." 


Then another member asked- "How are we to meet an attack from outside?" Svaami replied: 
â€œOur country's name is Bhaarath. For this country the Mahaabhaaratha is the authentic 
guidebook. The heroes in this epic are the five Paandava brothers. Among them, Arjuna and 
Bheema are incomparable warriors. Nevertheless, they submitted themselves to Dharmaja, the 
eldest of the brothers. If India upholds Dharma, America and Russia will have to respect 
Bhaarath. Confronted by Dharma, anyone however powerful, will be cut to size. Therefore, the 
most vital thing for Bhaarath is Dharma." 


When Svaami gave this reply, the entire gathering cheered Svaami for fifteen minutes. 
Thereafter Svaami told them. "It is not enough to clap your hands; open the taps of your minds. 
Take to the path of Dharma. There is no use merely applauding my words." 


There are many in the country who worship the Raamaayana as a sacred text. How many of them 
honour the words of the father? Of what use is it to recite the Raamaayana without following its 
precepts? You have discourses on the Geetha in every street. But is anyone acting up to even one 
of its reachings? If you go on learning for years, when are you going to start practising the 
lessons? The endless study of books is sheer folly; to put into practice a single word is better than 
such studies. Today Bhaarath is full of such foolish persons. 


Love is Sai's most potent weapon 


Many of you have been coming here for over twenty or thirty years. You have listened to 
Svaami's discourses many times. Svaami has been repeatedly declaring that immortality can be 
achieved only by sacrifice and not by deeds, wealth or progeny How many are making any 
sacrifice? How many are purring Svaami's teachings into practice? Why are you gathered here? 
It is all useless unless you practise at least one of the reachings. What is My directive? What is it 


that will please Me? What is it that I desire? Only one thing: Love, Love, Love. That is Sai's 
most potent weapon. Was any invitation sent to any of you to come here? So many of you have 
gathered here attracted solely by the power of Svaami's love. Them is nothing that cannot be 
achieved in the world through love. Some things may be achieved by other means, but through 
love even the Divine can be held in the palm of one's hand. 


Saavithri, Chandhramathi, Seetha and Dhamayanthi stood our as exemplars of Indian 
womanhood. People read books about them, but do not follow their example. The reason is that 
people are swayed by evil thoughts. These bad qualifies are due to bad habits relating to food and 
recreation. 


Eschew meat, liquor and smoking 


Today, let it be anyone, whether one deems himself a devotee or not, he should give up meat 
caring. Why? Meat eating promotes only animal qualities. It has been well said that the food one 
consumes determines one's thoughts. By caring the flesh of various animals, the qualities of 
these animals are imbibed. How sinful is it to feed on animals, which are sustained by the same 
five elements as human beings! This leads to demonic tendencies, besides committing the sin of 
inflicting cruelty on animals. Hence, those who genuinely seek to become devotees of God have 
to give up non-vegetarian food. Calling themselves Sai devotees or devotees of Raama and 
Krishna, they fatten on chicken. How can they be deemed Sai devotees? How can God accept 
such a person as a devotee? Therefore, whether they are devotees in India or outside, they should 
give up from this instant meat eating. 


Next, there is the question of drink. The water that one drinks is life-giving. It issues from the 
head of Shiva. It is sacred. Instead of such wholesome drink, it is wrong to drink intoxicants. It 
makes a man forget his true nature. Alcoholic drink is utterly obnoxious. It degrades the addict. 
It makes him forget God. The drink addict is not conscious of what he says or does. The very 
sight of such a person is revolting. The drink evil has ruined innumerable families. Alcoholics 
have caused misery to their wives and children by wasting all their money on liquor. Of what use 
to the world are such derelicts? 


In addition to liquor, many are addicted to smoking tobacco. Today cigarette smoking is the 
cause of many diseases like asthma, lung cancer, cosonaphilia and heart ailments. The evil 
effects of smoking can be easily demonstrated. If a whiff of cigarette smoke is blown at a 
handkerchief, the cloth turns red at the spot. If smoke can cause such damage to a piece of cloth, 
how much damage will it not do when it gets into the blood stream? It ruins one's health and 
shortens one's life-span. Therefore, those who aspire to become true devotees of God have to 
give up meat, liquor and smoking. 


Each one has to reform himself 


Drink addiction is the cause of many evils. But no Government can stop this. The change must 
rake place at the individual level. This can take place only through a mental transformation and 
not as a result of preaching by others. Each one has to recognise the truth and reform himself. 


Embodiments of Love! You are deeming this day as the sixty ninth birthday of Svaami. I have no 
desire to celebrate such birthdays. As I was coming I was greeted by many wishing Me "Happy 
Birthday" I am always happy Why should anyone wish "Happy Birthday" for Me? Be happy 
yourselves. Your happiness is My happiness. 


Today, as an offering to Svaami, give up meat eating, consuming liquor and smoking. By 
renouncing these three, you will benefit yourselves as well as society and the nation. Svaami's 
sole aim is to promote the welfare of the family, the society and the nation. If you wish to carry 
out Svaami's aim, renounce from this moment itself these three bad practices. Do not put if off to 
tomorrow. Take the resolve from this moment. Expecting that you will carry out Svaami's wish 
and thereby promote the well being of your family and the nation, I bless all of you. 


Discourse in the Puurnachandhra Auditorium on 23-11-1994, Bhagavaan's Birthday. 


32. The devotion that God loves 


Clay is one, but pots are multifarious; 

Gold is one, but jewels are varied; 

Milk is one, though cows are of many colours. 
The Supreme is One, but wears many vestures. 


EMBODIMENTS of Divine Love! Although clay is one, the products made out of it are varied in 
form and name. Gold is one, but many different ornaments are made out of it. Milk is same, 
though it may be derived from cows of different colours. Though the Divine is one, He manifests 
Himself in various forms with different names. 


From the fathomless ocean, countless waves arise. Though the waves appear as different from 
each other, the ocean is one. Likewise, though living beings appear in the Universe in a myriad 
forms, all of them are waves that have emerged from the ocean of Sath-Chith-Aanandha (Being- 
Awareness-Bliss ). 


The joys and sorrows man experiences in daily life, his attachments and aversions, his pursuit of 
sensory pleasures, are all due to the vagaries of the mind. As long as man is subject to the feeling 
of duality, he cannot be free from attachments and hatred. There can be no escape from dualism 
as long as man does not recognise his inherent divinity. 


Freedom from dualism 


There are today few who recognise unity in diversity, though there are any number of 
intellectuals who are engaged in promoting divisions and differences. The world today needs 
righteous men who will promote unity. 


The mind is the cause of differences and only by control of the mind can differences be 
eliminated. How can man discover his oneness with the Divine without seeking to know his true 
nature? Nine forms of devotion have been indicated for man to realise his divinity, starting with 
Shravanam (listening to the glories of God) and culminating in Aathma nivedhanam (total 
surrender to the Divine). 


Of these nine forms of devotion, the greatest is total surrender. But who is to surrender, what and 
to whom? When this question is pursued, man discovers that the entire tuff verse is made up of 
the Pancha bhuuthas (five basic elements), which are manifestations of God. Man is also a 
manifestation of God. God is not separate from man. But man is unable to recognise this because 
of his identifying himself with the body, which is only an instrument. When he gives up this 
feelings, he will experience the Self. 


Elevate every object to the level of the Divine 


Men are of three types. First, Bhakthi rasa-aathmakam (emotional type), The second, Kriya- 
aathmakam (active type). The third, the rational type. The emotional type of persons are engaged 
in activities like worship of idols, bhajans etc. They offer worship to an idol or picture in the 
faith that God in a certain form has shown to mankind the means to liberation. However, you 
may worship a picture as God, but not God as a picture. You may see God in a picture, but the 
picture is not God. No object exists with a form without the immanence of the Divine in it. 
Hence every object has to be elevated to the level of the Divine. Treat every object as a 


manifestation of the Divine. But do not reduce the Divine to the level of material objects. The 
process of devotion, beginning with adoration of physical objects, ultimately leads to the 
realisation of the Divine. Without this emotional yearning for God active pursuit of the Divine is 
not possible. 


When devotion develops, one resorts to the path of action. And then, one starts enquiring into 
what is transient and what is permanent, what is real and what is unreal. While this 
discriminating faculty is essential for the spiritual aspirant, it is being abused in the name of 
rationalism. The process of enquiring has assumed bizarre forms. Today many young persons are 
misled by so-called rationalism to deride spirituality. Few persons attempt to get at the correct 
meanings of things. By misinterpreting things and creating confusion, many are taking to wrong 
courses. 


Human life is precious, sublime and meaningful. But by involvement in purely worldly pursuits, 
the greatness of human birth is forgotten. Without values, life is meaningless. When there is 
purity in thought, word and deed, human values are practised. The unity of the three H's is 
essential--Heart, Head and Hand. But today this unity is absent among people, with the result 
that men are becoming inhuman. 


Man has to understand the inherent divinity 


Because man has not been able to shed the animal qualities inherited from his past, he does not 
behave like a true human being. Hence, man has to endeavour to understand his true nature, his 
immense potentialities and his divine qualities. 


He must realise that whatever he perceives is essentially Divine. All his actions should be 
dedicated to the Divine. Thereby work will be transformed into worship. In essence, there is no 
difference between work and worship. But, unfortunately; in these degenerate days even worship 
is turned into some form of undesirable activity. Today devotion is used for deriving sensory 
enjoyment. It is used more as a source of fleeting pleasure than a fountain of enduring bliss. God 
will not approve of such part-time devotion. The Divine is omnipresent and is watching everyone 
of your actions, wherever you may be. 'People in their ignorance imagine that God takes no 
notice of them. Divinity cannot be understood as long as this ignorance prevails. 


Many people imagine that they are caught up in the coils of Samsaara (worldly life) and are the 
victims of worldly existence. This is a ridiculous idea. It is not family life that binds you. It has 
no arms to clasp you. It is you who are endowed with hands, eyes and ears. It is you who are 
holding on to worldly life and suffering the consequences. This is the truth in the false and the 
unreality in the Real. This accounts for the fact that in the world today the false is deemed true 
and the truth is considered as untrue. 


All that exists in cosmos belongs to God 


How can man realise the Truth? Only when he experiences the Adhvaithabhaava (non-dualism). 
As long as he is steeped in dualism (that he and the Divine are different), he is bound to be 
racked by the opposites: joy and sorrow, the real and the unreal. 


All that exists in the cosmos belongs to God. But man imagines that he is the owner of various 
things and is a prisoner of the conception of "mine" and "thine." In reality all are only trustees of 
the property belonging to the Divine. This means that everyone has to consider himself as a 
trustee for the world's goods. A bank cashier handles an enormous amount of money. None of it 
belongs to him. He cannot use it for himself, but has to ensure its safety and right use. Likewise, 


all are trustees responsible for the proper use of the goods entrusted to them. No one can claim 
ownership. 


Hence one's life should reflect the unity of thought, speech and action. Devotion should also be 
the unified expression of love for God, action in the service of God and total surrender to the will 
of God. These are intertwined like the braid of a woman's tresses. Bhakthi (devotion), Upaasana 
(worship) and Jnaana (awareness of the Self) together demonstrate the oneness of the Divine. 


This truth is common to all religions like Christianity, Zorastrianism and other faiths. True 
spirituality emphasizes the truth that is common to all religions. One should not hate any religion 
or ridicule any form of worship. One must recognise the unifying truth in all religions. God is not 
separate from you. However, by regarding God as separate from him, man resorts to various 
kinds of worship. In the present day world this type of Karmopaasana (worship through action) 
is necessary. But one should not be engaged all his life in this form of worship. Gradually one 
should reach a higher level. Only then humanness gets divinised. 


Every human has latent tendencies of a sage 


What is important today is not what particular faith one professes, whether he is a Christian, a 
Buddhist, a Muslim or a Hindu. The real question is how far he is a true human, being. Develop 
therefore, your human qualities. What constitutes humanness? It is good conduct alone. The 
Indian epics hail man as Manuja. One who belongs to the lineage of the sage Manu. As such 
every human being has the latent tendencies of a sage. Unfortunately, instead of these traits, only 
vicious tendencies are to the fore. Man must recover his spiritual heritage. He must cultivate 
sublime and divine feelings. However, owing to misdirected education men are taking to evil 
ways. Compared to the behaviour of the educated urban population, there seems to be more 
goodness and virtue among unlettered hill tribes. Injustice and wickedness seem to flourish in the 
places where you have educational institutions and courts of law. 


Men should concentrate on their natural spiritual tendencies rather than succumbing to the 
allurements of worldly objects. For this purpose, association with good people is essential. 
Eschew totally the company of bad people. Good company does not mean participating in 
bhajans and religious gatherings. Sathsang truly means cultivating the company of one's Sath 
(conscience). It means being immersed in the contemplation of God. Carry on your daily, duties 
with your thoughts centred on God. Deem every action as an offering to God. That is the way to 
perfect one's human nature and sanctify one's life. 


Likhitha japam purifies the mind 


As this may not be an easy process, the method of Likhitha japam has been recommended for 
purifying one's mind. Likhitha japam is a form of spiritual exercise in which one is engaged in 
writing the name of the Lord). Likhitha japam should be performed in a spirit of devotion. A 
wealthy man, who had no peace of mind &spire his riches, went to a sage for advice. The sage 
suggested to him that as a way of reducing his insatiable desires, which were the cause of his 
worries, he should write the name of the Lord some crores of times. Unused to such an arduous 
exercise, the rich man found a shortcut to achieving what the sage had suggested, by resorting to 
mechanical devices for multiplying the number of times he wrote the name of the Lord. This is a 
total travesty of the spiritual exercise suggested by the sage. It is tantamount to cheating God. 
This sort of deception and hypocrisy is rampant today. It is not quantity that counts. Even the 
writing of a few names with sincere devotion is better than filling pages mechanically. 


In Thamil Naadu, numerous devotees have written with true. devotion the name of Sai Raam 
many crores of times, thinking of the name in their minds, spelling it by mouth and writing it by 
the hand. The unity of mind, speech and action has produced purity in thought, word and deed. 
Any spiritual exercise like Likhitha Japam should be done wholeheartedly. Only then it becomes 
sanctified and godly. All actions should be performed in this spirit of dedication and in 
accordance with the dictates of one's conscience. 


The name of the Lord is like a precious jewel which. must be considered valuable and cherished 
as a gem. Thulsidhas sang in praise of the Lord's name (Raama's name) as the most invaluable 
gift given to him' by his guru. The Lord's name should be recited with deep feeling so that it gets 
firmly entrenched in the heart. 


The example of Hanumaan 


Hanumaan is the supreme exemplar of true devotion. At the time of Raama's coronation in 
Ayodhya after his return from Lanka, Raama gave presents to all those who had helped him in 
the battle against Raavana. When it came to Hanumaan, Raama could not find anything that was 
worthy of the unparallelled devotion of Hanumaan. Praising Hanuman's unexcelled services, 
Raama said that the only fitting reward for such a devotee was to give himself to Hanumaan. He 
embraced Hanumaan most lovingly Seetha saw this and felt Hanumaan should not be left 
unrewarded for his great services. She took out from her neck the pearl necklace she had 
received from her father Janaka at the time of her wedding and gave it to Hanumaan. 
Immediately after receiving the necklace, Hanumaan removed one pearl after another from the 
necklace, crushed it between his teeth, placed it close to his car and then threw it away Surprised 
at his strange behaviour, Seetha asked him why he was treating the pearls in that manner. 
Hanumaan explained that he had no use for any object that did not chant Raama's name. Seetha 
asked him how he could expect to hear Raama's name from an inert object like a pearl. 
Hanumaan immediately pulled out a hair from his arm and kept it close to Seetha's ear. The hair 
was chanting Raama's name! 


True devotion means that even the blood stream should proclaim the Lord's name. Because 
Hanumaan was such a devotee he could be the foremost servant of Raama. He was totally free 
from egoism, pride and envy. In Lanka, he did not boast of his prowess, but was content to 
declare himself a humble servant of Raama. This humility is the true mark of a devotee. 


When a person is asked "Where do you live?" the correct answer is: "I am dwelling in the 
(Indwelling Spirit)." This is the truth to be learnt from all the scriptures and epics. Everyone 
should realise the oneness in spirit of all mankind, which is proclaimed equally by all religions. 


Sometime ago a devotional exercise called Likhitha japam (writing the names of the Lord as a 
form of worship) was started in Tamil Nadu. It was a collective (Samashti) exercise. Large 
numbers of devotees assembled at one place and wrote the name of the Lord as a (spiritual 
exercise). The joy to be derived from such a collective effort is indescribable. The community 
bhajan in which all join to sing in unison is an equally blissful experience. This community 
singing was started by Gum Naanak. During community singing divine vibrations emerge 
sanctifying the whole atmosphere. The same result cannot be expected when one sings alone. 
Community singing promotes unity which leads to purity and divinity. Today there is no unity, 
purity or divinity. What mankind needs today is unity based on the spiritual oneness of 
humanity. 


Worship of the Lord's feet 


Today we are celebrating the Paadhuka Festival (a festival for worshipping sandals blessed by 
the Lord). What is the significance of worshipping the Lord's feet? There is the devotee's 
yearning for touching the Lord. How is this to be done? The easiest way is to touch 


the feet of the Lord. A spiritual significance is attached to the touching of the Lord's feet which 
sanctify the earth by walking on it. Scientifically also them is meaning in Paadhasparsha 
(touching the feet). The blood circulates from the feet to the head. When one touches the toe of 
the Lord's Feet, he can experience a current present in the toe. That is a divine energy. 


From a mundane point of view the body appears as a physical form. But from the spiritual point 
of view, there is an aura around every body. It has Thejas (effulgence) from which arises Ojas 
(spiritual energy). This energy produces vibrations. That is why it is declared: "Dharshanam 
Paapa naashanam" (Sight of the Lord destroys all sins). "Sambhaashanam Sankata naashanam" 
(Dialogue with the Lord destroys all sorrows). "Sparshanam Karma vimochanam" (The touch of 
the Lord frees one from the consequences of one's actions). When the devotee touches the Lord, 
it is like the linking of the negative and positive wires, which generates divine energy. This 
connection should be from heart to heart. Only then the Divine energy will flow (from the Lord 
to the devotee). Then the Lord and the devotee become one. Because the spiritual significance of 
these practices is not properly understood people fall a prey to confusion. 


Men should go away from the worldly path 


Men should go away from the worldly path like the fish which swim against the current in a 
river. That is the way to realise the Divine. If you allow yourself to be carried away by the 
worldly current, you can only meet with a sad end. Whatever the world may think, keep your eye 
on the spiritual goal. When people ask for liberation, they should understand that liberation 
means oneness with the Divine. Become aware of your divinity. Then worldly thoughts will not 
enter your mind. To realise this oneness with God, one has to chant the Lord's name incessantly. 
You must pray for the vision of the Lord's feet in your heart. There should be no room for evil 
thoughts and feelings. 


Lakshmana's unalloyed devotion to Raama 


It was because of the unalloyed devotion of Lakshmana that Raama considered him greater the 
Seetha or anyone else. He declared: "It is impossible for me to find a brother like Lakshmana." 
This was a tribute to the way Lakshmana served Raama and Seetha for thirteen years in the 
forest. During all these years Lakshmana had never looked at the face of Seetha but revered her 
feet everyday. When the jewels dropped by Seetha were shown to Lakshmana he could identify 
only the anklets and not any of the other jewels worn by her. (Bhagavaan recited the shloka from 
the Raamaayana in which Lakshmana explained how he could only Seetha's anklets because he 
saw them every morning when he prostrated at her feet). Can such reverence be found among the 
youth today? One feels ashamed when one listens to their talk. Young people should follow the 
ideal exemplified by Lakshmana. 


Devotees should not feel satisfied with what they deem as their devotion. They should find out 
whether the Lord has appreciated their devotion. God should acknowledge your devotion. 
Krishna acknowledged Arjuna's devotion to Him only when the latter declared: "Karishye 
Vachanam Thava" (I shall abide by your words). If one does not pay heed to the Lord's words 


and does not act up to His injunctions, to claim that one is devotee is only a pompous boast. 
Activise your devotion. Let your actions be pure and sacred. 


Old devotee's example for dedicated service 


For one to come to this godly path, one has to contemplate on God incessantly. Today in Thamil 
Naadu the Likhitha japam movement and the worship of Paadhukas (sandals sanctified by the 
Divine Feet of Bhagavaan) have grown by leaps and bounds. An 85-year-old devotee is striving 
to achieve even greater progress in these movements. In devotion it is not age that counts. What 
matters is the determination and the dedication. At this age, he comes almost every week to 
Prashaanthi Nilayam without regard to the strain involved. His sole concern is service to 
Bhagavaan. All devotees should become exemplars like him, of dedicated service. When that 
happens the world will be an earthly paradise. 


This old devotee has been able to bring together large numbers of people to get involved in this 
form of collective worship by his example and enthusiasm. The saint Thyaagaraaja had great 
difficulty in chanting the name of Raama 96 crores of times. But in Thamil Naadu today the 
Lord's name has been written 108 crores of times (one crore is ten million). Countless devotees 
have been engaged in writing the name of the lord, without wasting their time in useless gossip 
or meaningless activities. What a sacred pre-occupation is this! Do not waste your time in useless 
pursuits. Instead devote all the time available to remembering and writing the Lord's name. 


Discourse in the Puurnachandhra Auditorium on 18-12-1994. 


33. Spread the message of Love 


The Cosmos is controlled by the Divine; 
The Divine is governed by Truth; 

Truth is governed by noble beings; 

The noble are the Divine Itself. 


EMBODIMENTS of Divine Love! The entire visible cosmos is under the control of the Divine. 
The Divine is governed by Truth. That Truth is subject to Utthamaa-dheenam (noble beings). A 
noble person is the embodiment of God. 


The human body, made up of the five basic elements and endowed with the five sense organs, is 
not different from the mind. The mind wears the body as a vesture. The mind, for its enjoyment, 
uses the body as an instrument. It is the cause of all experiences. A body without a mind is as 
illusory as a crop on a barren field. 


In ordinary life people regard the body as permanent and for the sake of its pleasures undertake 
all kinds of efforts. This is a sign of ignorance. A body without the mind is as useless as a school 
without a teacher and a temple without a deity. The body should be regarded as an instrument for 
right living. 


Men are developing their intellectual abilities but are using their intelligence for wrong purposes. 
Knowledge without right action is useless. Mere action without knowledge is foolishness. Hence 
it is necessary to combine knowledge with cultivation of character. 


The most important faculty in man is Prajna-Shakthi (the power of integrated Awareness). It is 
from Prajna-Shakthi that other powers like Ichcha-Shakthi (will power), Medha-Shakthi 
(intelligence), Vaak-Shakthi (the power of speech) and Vichaarana-Shakthi (the reasoning 
powers) are derived. This integrated Awareness is sustained by thoughts. 


Good company and good thoughts 


The most important requisite for man in the world is truth based on thought. True thoughts 
constitute the proper wealth for man. But, alas, modern man makes no efforts to cultivate good 
thoughts. The absence of good thoughts weakens the will power. With a weak will man cannot 
accomplish even simple things. To achieve anything worth while in life man has to strengthen 
his will power. 


It is well known that humanness thrives on good company and good thoughts. What good 
thoughts can achieve is illustrated by the life of a poor boy in Tamil Nadu, Muthuswamy Iyer. 
His father died at a very young age. The forlorn widow summoned the young man and told him 
that there were many poor people in the world who were suffering many hardships because they 
were not able to get justice. "Somehow you must pursue your studies so that you may one day 
provide help to these unfortunate people," she said. The mother's words strengthened the 
determination of the young lad. He pursued his studies diligently though he lacked many 
necessities. In the evenings he used to study under street lamps, as them was no light at home. 
He was solely inspired by his mother's good advice. As a result of this hard work, he graduated 
and secured a law degree. He dedicated himself to the service of the weak and helpless. His zeal 
and devotion resulted in due course in his becoming the first Indian Judge of the Madras High 


Court. Consider the lowliness of his birth and what eminence he achieved! It was entirely due to 
the noble thoughts he cherished and his strength of will. 


Noble thoughts strengthen will-power 


In many foreign countries, young men who started their lives as dish washers, or newspaper 
vendors or shoeshine boys, achieved eminence as writers by dint of hard work and noble 
aspirations. Their achievements are entirely due to their ennobling thoughts which strengthened 
their will-power and inspired in others confidence in their abilities. 


In Britain there was a poor youth named lames MacDonald who used to help school children by 
writing the addresses on letters for them. As he wrote each address he used to tell the boy; "God 
bless you." He also used to tell them, off and on, "God is great." Often he had to go without food, 
but his heart was filled with noble feelings. Such a lad one day became the Prime Minister of 
Britain. Only his noble thoughts could have raised him from his poor state to the office of the 
Prime Minister: 


Good fortunes grow according to good thoughts 


Man's bad or good fortune is related to his thoughts. Sowing the seed of thoughts man maps the 
fruit known as Karma (deeds). Sowing the seed of karma, man maps the fruit called Abhyaasa 
(practice). From Abhyaasa, man reaps the fruit of Seela (character). From Seela one reaps the 
fruit of Adhrishtam (good fortune). Thus fortune is based on character, which is based on good 
practices arising out of good deeds based on good thoughts. Thus according to the development 
of good thoughts, one's good fortune will also grow. 


Unfortunately; men today are deluded by bad thoughts and are engaged in evil deeds. They enjoy 
bad company and as a result come to a bad end. Everyone of you can experiment in a small way 
with the gradual elimination of bad thoughts. You will discover for yourself how your will- 
power grows with the diminution of bad thoughts. Man has forgotten that the spiritual path alone 
will rescue him from the grip of insatiable desires, endless worries and numerous troubles. He is 
indulging in various malpractices. 


As desires multiply; the will-power weakens and vice versa. You can find out for yourselves how 
when addiction to coffee, tea and smoking is reduced, the willpower gets stronger. The results 
can be verified with just one week of practice. By addiction to various deleterious practices, 
man's will-power and other faculties decline in strength. The will-power should be strengthened 
by giving up bad habits and it should be directed towards social service. 


Jesus and social service 


Jesus exemplified the spirit of social service. The inspiration for this came from his mother 
Mary. From his childhood Mary taught him such good qualities as truth, kindness, compassion 
and justice. In his twelfth year, Jesus and his parents went to Jerusalem for a festival. In the 
crowds the parents lost trace of Jesus and searched for him everywhere. Not finding him 
anywhere, Mary sat under a tree and prayed to God to come to her help. At that moment, a 
thought flashed in her mind that Jesus was perhaps in a nearby temple. And Jesus was there 
sitting in a comer of the temple and listening to the words of the priest. Mary affectionately 
rushed towards him and embraced him. "Child, what agony I went through on your account," she 
said. Jesus told her: "Mother! Why should you have any fear? Those who believe in the world 
will have fears. But why should anyone believing in God fear at all? I am in the company of my 


Father. Why do you fear? You taught me that God is everything for us. How, then, can you 
worry like this?" 


Jesus had learnt his lessons from his mother and developed his spiritual faith. 


After they returned from Jerusalem, Jesus felt that service to his parents was his foremost duty, 
because he owed everything to them. In this spirit, he used to assist his father in his carpentry 
work. Joseph passed away when Jesus was thirty. He sought his mother's permission to devote 
himself to the service of the needy and the forlorn. 


After leaving home, Jesus had himself baptized by John. Then for forty days Jesus observed 
severe austerities without food and drink. At first he considered himself as Messenger of God. 
After the penance he realised he was the Son of God. He began his ministry with a group of 
fishermen as his first disciples. He taught them that they should first seek the Kingdom of 
Heaven. To enter that Kingdom they had to cultivate loving hearts. Then, their hearts would 
become the Kingdom of Heaven. Jesus further declared to them: "I and my Father are one." 


Foster love in your hearts and redeem your lives 


What is it that men should acquire today? It is the broadening of the heart so that it may be filled 
with all-embracing love. Only then the sense of spiritual oneness of all mankind can be 
experienced. Out of that sense of unity will be born the love of God. This love will generate pure 
bliss in the heart that is boundless, indescribable and everlasting. For all forms of bliss, love is 
the source. A heart without love is like a barren land. 


Foster love in your hearts and redeem your lives. Whatever your scholarship or wealth, they are 
valueless without love. Without devotion all other accomplishments are of no avail for realising 
God. Men aspire for liberation. True liberation means freedom from desires. Today men cannot 
go to forests for penance or engage themselves in meditation and other spiritual exercises. The 
easiest spiritual path for all people is to dedicate all their actions to God. 


Today we celebrate the birthday of Christ. It is said that when Jesus was born in a manger, three 
kings were led by a star to Jesus's place of birth. In fact, they were not kings but three shepherds. 
One of them, seeing the infant Jesus observed: "This child will be a lover of God." A second one 
said: "No, God will love him." The third one said: "Verily he is God Himself." 


Oneness with God 


The true significance of these three statements is-"To love God is to be His Messenger." To be 
loved by God is to be a son of God. The final state is to be one with God. As Jesus said: "I and 
my Father are one." Thus all persons are messengers of God. This means that they should 
divinise themselves. When can men call themselves "Sons of God?" Recognise what pure actions 
are done by God, selflessly for the sake of all. There is no trace of self-interest in Him. 
Everything He does, says or thinks is for the good of others. On the other side, everything men 
do, speak or think is born out of selfishness. Men have become puppets in the hands of 
selfishness. Men can describe themselves as "Sons of God" only when they are completely free 
from selfishness and become Godly. To call yourself the "Son of God," you have to manifest the 
qualities of the Father. 


In the Prahlaadha story, consider the emergence of the Lord from a pillar. The significance of the 
destruction of the pillar is a prelude to the manifestation of the Lord. The illusion relating to the 
body has to be destroyed for the Divine to manifest Himself. 


The body is no doubt essential upto a point. It has been given for the performance of right 
actions and to discover the secret underlying action. Kaaya (body), Karma (action), Marina 
(mystery) and Dharma (righteousness) together signify the purpose of Janma (human birth). 
Today men are not aware of righteousness or the role of Karma. Of what use is human 
existence? 


Do not give room for the waywardness of the mind. Purify the mind and direct it towards the 
righteous path. It is a straight and narrow path. In the spiritual field there is no royal highway. 
The path is narrow because the goal is infinitely precious. Crowds swarm a fish market but only 
a few go to a diamonds shop. The road to God is for the few who are genuine saadhaks (spiritual 
aspirants). 


The birthdays of saints and prophets are being celebrated these days with feats and festivals. This 
is not the way to celebrate them. The followers should live upto the teachings of the great 
Masters. 


Uniqueness of Christmas in Prashaanthi Nilayam 


Christmas is celebrated today in many countries. In every country small groups of people go to 
their respective churches, listen to the sermon and return to their homes. In some places people 
eat, drink, and make themselves merry. 


But nowhere in the world can you find Christmas being celebrated with the solemnity and 
holiness obtaining in Prashaanthi Nilayam. Here are gathered men and women from all 
countries. There are many denominations among Christians and the members thereof celebrate 
Christmas in their separate ways. Only in Prashaanthi Nilayam do Christians of all 
denominations and men and women of other faiths join to celebrate Christmas. Here are devotees 
from Germany, Russia, Argentina, America and many other countries. They speak different 
languages. Prashaanthi Nilayam has become a mini-world. All of them work in unison. You 
witnessed last night the beautiful play by children from so many countries. They conveyed the 
Divine Message so effectively. Here is a concrete manifestation of the Brotherhood of Man and 
the Fatherhood of God. 


People talk about brotherhood, but there is often no fraternal feelings among brothers even in one 
family. That is not the case here. Here you see brotherhood in action, from heart to heart and 
love to love. 


Holy festivals are conducted in such an ideal manner only in Prashaanthi Nilayam. Devotees 
should set an example of ideal living to the whole world. 


Messengers of Sathya Sai 


Today; the former girl students of Sathya Sai College at Ananthapur, who have formed as 
association called Messengers of Sathya Sai, are observing their annual day They are doing good 
service. They carry out the commands of Svaami in the spirit and the letter. They are spread all 
over the world---Switzerland, Australia, Canada, Germany; Japan and other countries. They 
come to Prashaanthi Nilayam from these far off places out of their devotion to Sai. They are 
bringing their husbands and children also out of their deep love for Svaami. They go our to 
villages and do various kinds of service there. They serve the blind and deaf and dumb children 
and make them self-reliant and useful citizens. They are carrying on their work wholeheartedly. 


For the expenses of their travel from far off countries they save money from their domestic 
budgets. This is a sign of their dedication to God's work. 


In this manner the old students of the Ananthapur College are leading exemplary lives wherever 
they are. In addition to all their multifarious household duties, they carry on their social service 
activities. 

In this cosmic university all are students. Hence everyone should render social service to the 


extent of one's capacity and spread Svaami's ideals among all. There is nothing selfish in 
Svaami's message. Hence anyone can spread it selflessly. 


Carry the message of unity to every home 


Sow the seed of love in your hearts and it will grow in due course into a big tree. God is one. Do 
not entertain any differences of creed or caste. Carry the message of unity to every home. 


Embodiments of love! Regard Love as your life-breath and as the sole purpose of your existence. 


Discourse in the Puurnachandhra Auditorium on 25-12-1994, Christmas Day. 


You tell Me that you have read the Bhaagavatha Vaahini and all 
the other Vaahinis that I have written for you. Good! But let Me. 
ask you, have you put even a single direction given in them into 
daily practice? Question yourself calmly and decide to benefit by 
practising the process mentioned in them. 


BABA 


