1. Purity--the path to Divinity 


The Lord of the Universe permeates the entire Cosmos 
Remaining invisible in the visible Universe, 

The Cosmos Consciousness illumines everything 

Like the thread that runs through a necklace of gems. 


THE phenomenal world that is perceived by us is called Vishvam (the cosmos). This Cosmos is 
Kaaryam (action or effect). Every action is preceded by a cause. This cause is God. Hence, God 
and the Cosmos are related as Cause and Effect. The relationship is interdependent and 
inseparable. 


Vishvam means that which has emerged from the Divine with many limbs. Vish + Vam means 
that which is pervaded exceptionally. Another meaning for Vishvam is Vaayu (air). Air is all- 
pervading. "Vishnuh Vishvasvaruupah" (The Cosmos is the embodiment of Vishnu). Vishnu also 
means all-pervasive. 


There is no specific proof for the Divine. Hence, He is called Aprameya (Immeasurable). For 
such an Infinite being Time is the proof and Time is the basis. God is adored as 
"Samvathsaraaya Namah." "Samvathsara" means Daivasvaruupam (the form of the Divine). 
The mere passage of 365 days does not amount to Samvathsara. Samvathsara refers to one who 
is the Kaalaathmah (Time-Spirit). Spirit means Brahman (the Supreme Absolute). The Brahman 
Principle refers to the Chaithanyam (consciousness), that is omnipresent. Brahman has no 
specific form. It is present in all human beings as Consciousness. 


God is the Consumer of Time itself 


For man to recognise the Brahman, he has to comprehend the nature of that which transcends 
Time. Time is consuming the body. God is the Consumer of Time itself. Hence, the Vedhas have 
declared that “Kaala-Kaalaprapannaanaam, Kaalah kim karishyathi" (Time is powerless against 
those who have taken refuge in the Over-Lord of Time). 


Man's joys and sorrows, happiness or misery are not dependent on Time. They are based on 
man's actions. Time has no relations or friends. Time is not subordinate to anyone. All are 
subject to Time. Hence, if one has to realise the Divine, who is the Lord of Time, one has to 
carry out His injunctions. God looks with love only at such a person. 


In this context, the Geetha has described the traits of the devotee who is dear to the Lord: 
Anapekshah shuchir-Dakshah 
Udhaaseeno Gathyavyathah 
Sarvaarambha parithyaagee 
Yo madbhaktah sa me priyah 


(That devotee is dear to me who is free from desire, who is pure in body and mind, who is 
resolute, unconcerned, free from sorrow and has renounced all sense of doership). 


True meaning of "desireless" actions 


Anapekshah: In this world, man, with his body, senses and mind cannot be free from desires. But 
how is he to become Anapeksha (free from expectation)? When he performs actions, regarding 
himself, as the doer, the actions become fetters that bind him. All action which are performed 
with the feeling that they are intended as offerings to please the Divine, do not lead to bondage. 
They become Anapeksha (desireless actions). One has to recognise that it is the Divine principle 
in all beings which is getting all actions done through human beings as instruments. As long as 
man regards himself as karthruthva (the doer) and bhokthruthva (enjoyer) he cannot escape from 
the consequences of his actions. 


When a man regards a certain piece of land as his, the crops grown on it will belong to him. The 
Geetha teaches that when actions are done as offerings to God, they become "desireless" actions. 
Man has taken birth to perform his duties and not to enjoy power or assert his rights. When one's 
duty is performed, the right comes of its own accord. Men today fight for their "rights" and 
forget their duties. Hence discharge of duty comes first. It is through duty that man realises God. 


Inner purity is vital for all aspirants 


Shuchih: This refers to purity. It is not enough if the body is clean. Inner purity is essential. The 
latter, in fact, is more essential than the former. For the proper enjoyment of all things, purity of 
mind is essential. Whatever sacred acts you may do in the external world, if you have no purity 
of mind and heart, all of them are valueless. The food cooked in an untinned vessel will be spoilt 
even if all the ingredients are good. Likewise, in the vessel of the heart, the inside must be 
purified by Prema (love). Then, all that one consumes will be wholesome. Hence, purity is vital 
for all aspirants; without it, all man's actions get tainted. Actions done with an impure heart can 
only produce undesirable results. 


Whatever good results you want to secure in the external world, inner purity is the basis. 


Dakshah: This refers to the determination that is needed to accomplish anything. One must have 
the fortitude and resoluteness to achieve one's purpose, whatever might be the obstacles in the 
way. To accomplish any sacred task one has to possess this determination. Daksha signifies this 
quality of unwavering determination in the devotee. 


Udhaaseenah: One who is unaffected by whatever happens. This means that one should be 
totally free from selfishness. He must consider the performance of his duties as the sole purpose 
of his existence. The human body is the result of past actions. Man is bound to the world by his 
actions. The body is the primary requisite for the performance of Dharma (right action). 
Indifferent to fame or blame, not seeking power or position, one should perform one's duties 
selflessly. Do not be swayed by any consideration other than your duty. Whether it be in a 
political organisation or in regard to a personal matter, or in relation to national issues, you 
should act according to the dictates of your conscience, without any other concern. One can 
become a courageous leader only if he performs his duties in this spirit. All actions must be done 
in a spirit of service. Only one who serves is fit to become a leader. The man who seeks a 
position, can he be pure-hearted? No. Forgetting power and position, concentrating only on one's 
duties, men should engage themselves in action. This is the true import of Udhaaseenah. 


Act in the present to get rid of mental anguish 


Gathavyathah: Vyathah refers to anguish in the mind. Falling a prey to mental anguish, man is 
totally confused. Man has a tendency to brood over the past. Of what use it is to worry about 


what has happened? Nor should one worry about the future which is unknown and uncertain. 
Bear in mind only the present. This is the way to get rid of mental anguish -- Gathavyathah. The 
present is the product of the past and the parent of the future. When you act properly in the 
present, the future will take care of itself. Do what is appropriate for the present moment. If there 
are no expectations, there will be no disappointments. 


Sarvaarambha-parithyaagee: This means do not give room for ostentation in any of your 
undertakings. The world today is immersed in ostentation and egoism. What does it matter 
whether the world praises you or decries you? For instance, why should a devotee show off his 
devotion to earn the approbation of others? His devotion must be for pleasing the Lord and not 
for earning the approval of the world. In the spiritual path, what matters is the inner joy you 
experience. That is the key to self-satisfaction. Sarvaarambha parithyaagee means one who is 
prepared to relinquish all his possessions and acquisitions including wealth, knowledge and 
strength. 


Thus, it is only the devotee who has these six qualities that is dear to the lord. It is such a devotee 
whom the Lord loves. 


Man is ruined by six enemies lust, anger, delusion, greed, pride and envy. Equally man is 
redeemed by the six qualities mentioned in the above mentioned Geetha shloka. 


Without cultivating these qualities, without cherishing such pure feelings, what is the use of 
immersing one's self in so-called devotion? It is only a hallucination, which cannot lead man to 
the experience of the Divine. 


True devotee is one who practises what he has learnt 


If you are true devotees, examine for yourselves how long you have been listening to Svaami's 
discourses? Years have gone by. To what extent have you gone spiritually? How far have you 
put into practice Svaami's teachings? What is the use of merely listening? Is it not all a waste? 
You are listening, but not putting the teachings into practice. Hunger can be appeased only when 
the cooked food is eaten. Only the devotee who practises what he has learnt is a true devotee. 


Your practices are different from precepts. You are leading selfish and self-centred lives. Such a 
life is led by birds and beasts. Even these exhibit selflessness often. Man alone leads a totally 
selfish existence. It is a shame to call such persons as devotees. One must strive at least to 
practise one or two of the teachings. This calls for Thrikarana shuddhi-- purity in thought, word 
and deed. Without such triple purity, man ceases to be human. 


Today, human values have given place to demonic tendencies. Animality has become dominant. 
The Divine has been forgotten. Consequently, all spiritual exercises are filled with ostentation. 


What is needed is sincerity. One should not do anything for the sake of earning other's 
approbation. If one acts with sincerity, he will be duly respected. But if one merely preaches and 
does not practise, he will be ignored. How can such a person expect to win the grace of the Lord? 


Self-interest cannot be totally given up, but there should be a limit to it. Everything in the world, 
including the body, organs like the eyes and other things are governed by strict adherence to 
limits. When the limits are exceeded disease sets in and the consequences may be serious. 


The mortal man and the Immortal Divine 


Among youth today, there is no regard for the limits to be observed in any sphere. Whether it be 
eating or sleeping or wandering about, they indulge in excesses in the name of freedom. What is 
real freedom? It is Aathma Jnaana (knowledge of the Spirit), Aathma Nigraham (self-control) 
and Aatmaanandam (Bliss of the Spirit)which constitute real freedom. Man is mortal and the 
Divine is immortal. In the mortal human being, there is the immortal Divine-Spirit. In the field of 
the heart, there is a Kalpatharu (wish-fulfilling tree). The tree is surrounded by bushes and 
briars. When these are removed, the tree will be visible. This wish-fulfilling tree is within each 
person, but it is encompassed by the bad qualities in man. When these qualities are eliminated, 
the celestial tree will be recognised. This is the saadhana that each one has to perform. This is 
not the quest for something new. It is to experience what is yours. The entire cosmos is within 
you. The Universe is permeated by Brahman. One should be lucky to get this experience. 


How to experience the Aathma? 


How is the Aathma experienced? It is the consciousness that is experienced in the interval 
between one sankalpa (thought) and another. 


This may be illustrated by an example. Once, a man holding a time-piece in his hand and 
listening to the endless tick-tick of the second-hand, asked the time-piece whether it has any rest 
at all. The timepiece announced: “You simpleton! I have all the rest I need. It is the interval 
between one tick and another!" The "rest" is' given by the "Rest watch." "Watch" means "look 
out." Seeing the watch, you have to look at the "rest" indicated by it. This is the way lessons are 
learnt in their spiritual journey. 


When you want to swim across a river, you push the water ahead of you, behind you so that you 
may move forward. Today, people do not make this effort. They remain stagnant, going through 
the same experiences all the time. With the result, that they do not comprehend higher ideas. 


For instance, there is the example of the ocean. All kinds of rivers flow into the ocean. It absorbs 
all the waters, but its level hardly rises and all the water that comes in becomes saltish. What 
happens to the water that rises from the sea as vapour and cloud? It is pure and sweet. The 
clouds, when they produce thunder, proudly declare that by going up from the sea, they have 
achieved eminence as well as purity. Moreover, the clouds come down as rain and nourish the 
crops on earth. Can all the waters of the ocean nourish a farm? No. Only the transformation of 
the sea-water into vapour and clouds can serve this purpose. 


If one wishes to go up spiritually, one has to get away from the low level. Only then, will it be 
possible for a person to engage himself in service to others. 


Unity is supremely important 


It is not time that is responsible for all the chaos and violence in the nation and for all the 
difficulties experienced by the people. Men's thoughts are responsible for all these. These 
thoughts are filled with selfishness. It is because of these selfish and self-centred people that the 
nation is suffering from so many troubles. 


As long as self-interest prevails there can be no unity. Without unity you cannot experience 
happiness. Therefore, unity is all important. With the strength derived from unity, you can 
accomplish anything. The Weakness of the nation is due to growing discord between man and 
man. Unity is supremely important. This calls for the shedding of selfishness to some extent. 


The years are passing endlessly. It is now 1992 years since the birth of Christ. After nearly 2000 
years what is it the people have learnt? What ideals are they upholding? People are celebrating 
the advent of the New year, but what are they doing to improve their conduct? This is what 
matters. Without it the celebrations are meaningless. 


Act according to your conscience 


Jesus taught many good lessons. Allah gave many high teachings. Raama and Krishna taught 
many good lessons. What have people gained from all this? How far have they tried to put this 
into practice? There are numerous persons who read the Bhagavath Geetha everyday. There are 
persons propagating the Geetha in every street. Preachers have multiplied but the number of 
those practising the precepts is dwindling. 


People talk about what Svaami has been saying. How many are practising what Svaami says 
even to the slightest extent? No. What, then, is the use of all this? Whether it is Svaami's 
teachings or the instructions given by elders, whatever is good you should put into practice. You 
must act according to whatever your conscience tells is good. This is the way to honour the great 
ones. Not to practise their teaching is to disrespect them. 


Joy is not derived from the mere advent of a New Year. All people want to know whether the 
New Year will bring better progress and improvement in the general condition. Having regard to 
time, place and circumstances, some good and bad things may occur. If, however, people desire 
an improvement in the state of affairs they have to change their attitude. It will be helpful if the 
time factor is favourable for change. This month, January, is not quite promising. January Ist 
starts on Ashtami, the eighth day after the New Moon. The end of the month January 31th will 
also be an Ashtami. All kinds of difficulties are likely during the month. 


The New Year appears to have started on an Ashtami, which is considered inauspicious but this 
should not cause any apprehension among the people. With purity of heart, anything can be 
accomplished. Even the course of destiny can be changed by human will power. 


Only the Divine has a free Will 


Some students today talk about free Will. Only the Divine has free Will. Man is endowed with a 
Will but not a free Will. When the Divine free Will moves, the human Will also operates. There 
are a myriad leaves in a tree but not a leaf will move in the absence of wind. The leaves have no 
free Will but they have a Will which can be swayed when a breeze blows. In the tree of life 
human beings are like leaves. When the Divine Will blows the human Will begins to move. 


Thus, there is need for the coming together of Divine Will and the human Will. Then, there will 
be a blossoming of human nature. Man can never achieve anything by his own efforts. There is 
something which a man accomplishes without much effort on his part. There are other things 
which he is unable to accomplish even with his best efforts. What is the reason? It is on account 
of the play of the Divine Will. 


How the Divine operates may be known from two examples from every one's experience. The 
heart beats and the lungs breathe without any conscious human effort. These are the results of the 
operation of laws of nature according to the Divine Will. There is Nature on one side and human 
effort on the other. The two should function in unison. When there is such unity you have purity. 
That purity leads to divinity. These are not three different things but three stages in the process of 
a tender fruit achieving ripeness. 


Bhaarath's foremost need today is unity. When the nation is in peril all parties should come 
together. There is no room here for ideological or partisan interests. All should regard themselves 
as the children of Bhaarath. All should have the nation's interest in their forefront. When this 
view prevails the nation's welfare is assured. 


Help ever, Hurt never 


Students! Regard every second as a new year and act on that basis. You need not wait for the 
passing of twelve months to embark on any enterprise. Transform yourselves every moment. Get 
rid of the bad old ideas; that will herald the birth of the new year. Take part in service activities 
to sanctify your lives. Adhere to righteous conduct. Live upto the motto. Help ever, Hurt never. 
This is the essence of the message of Vyaasa's eighteen puranas. 


In rendering service you must have total dedication. For instance when you have to attend on a 
patient you should not leave the patient for the sake of having Svaami's dharshan. Your first duty 
is to look after the patient. Your devotion will be mere show if you leave the patient in the lurch 
and go for Svaami's dharshan. Duty is God. Work is Worship. Some nurses are behaving in this 
manner. They imagine that they are filled with devotion but this is not devotion. This is hurt, not 
help, This is not proper. God will not be pleased with this kind of "devotion." You must be by 
the side of the patient when he is in pain. This is real service to Svaami. But this does not 
happen. When delivery cases have to be attended to, instead of looking after them, people come 
to Svaami. This is not right at all. 


In our old hospital some nurses used to behave in this manner. They are not good devotees at all. 
They are merely putting on the cloak of devotion. Duty comes first. Divine grace will come 
according to your desserts. Devotion may be there, but duty should be the first concern. 


This applies to students also. They have to attend to their duties first. If duties are neglected, any 
pretence of devotion is merely a show. It is even a form of deception. 


See the Divine in every patient 


A patient should be regarded as Naaraayana Himself. You may come to Svaami in your free 
time. I have been saying these things for many years. But how many are acting up to them? Very 
few. In this manner, they are not only neglecting their duties but also acting against the directive 
of Svaami. 


Hence, you should see the Divine in every patient and render service in the feeling that God is 
the Indweller in all beings. This will promote your spiritual progress. When you regard 
yourselves as devotees of Svaami, you have to bring glory to Svaami's name. If you behave in a 
wrong way, you are betraying Svaami. 


God alone is the Master and so follow Him 


All the world's problems today are due to selfishness. Individuals are concerned about the 
welfare of themselves and their families and do not care what happens to the rest of the world. It 
should be realised that the welfare of the individual is related to the welfare of society, the nation 
and the world. Students must develop a broad outlook. Selfishness and narrowness of outlook are 
more prevalent among the educated than among the villagers and tribal folk. The evil practices 
prevailing in big cities are not to be found even in jungles. Yudhishthira learnt that the educated 
man who had bad qualities was truly blind. Educated persons should develop discrimination, 


humility and a right sense of values. Students should try to enquire into the cause of the world's 
problems, seek remedies for them and live in unity. 


If you carry out the injunctions of the Divine, all will be well with you. Every one is selfish in 
this world. God alone is selfless. He alone has the authority to confer joy even on selfish persons. 
He alone is the Master. Follow the Master. 


Discourse on 1.1.1993 at Prashaanthi Nilayam. 


2. Sanctify sports and games 


The advent of the Sankraanthi festival is greeted by farmers who have brought home their 
harvest, singing with joy. 


THIS sacred and auspicious Makara Sankraanthi is a divine occasion for people to transform 
their lives so that they may experience the divinity, the grandeur and greatness of human birth. 


Whatever possessions and luxuries one may have, 
They will not confer peace of mind. 

Only when Godly feelings are developed, 

Man will realise peace and bliss. 


In this mundane world, what people regard ordinarily as jnaana (knowledge) is not proper 
jnaana at all. Aathmajnaana (knowledge of the Self) alone, is true knowledge. Aathma and 
Jnaana are synonymous. Jnaana is fundamental. It cannot be got through thought or sense 
perceptions. All that is acquired as knowledge about the things of the world is not jnaana. 
Jnaana is that which remains after the mind is stilled. 


Students! Remember that wealth lost can be regained, health lost can be recovered, but time lost 
is lost forever. Hence, do not waste time. Time is God. Sanctify the time given to you by worthy 
deeds, experience bliss and share it with others. 


Commercialisation of sport has lowered its value 


Sports and Arts are intended to give pleasure. But the commercialisation of sports and music has 
lowered their value, together with the decline in human values. There should be no room for 
hatred or jealousy in games and sports. Our Institute students should engage themselves in sports 
for health and enjoyment. The participation of students coming from different regions and 
different backgrounds in games should be conducive to the promotion of unity. Even games 
should be regarded as sacred. Thereby, the participants become holy. 


Students! Uphold your human status by developing firm faith in the Divine. Men act on faith in a 
hundred trivial things in daily life but why don't they have firm faith in the Vedhic dictum that 
they are one with the Divine--Tath Thvam Asi (Thou art That)? Because immersed in sensual 
pleasures, they are oblivious to their real potency and state. 


In worldly matters, every action has a subject, object and predicate, as in the statement: “Raama 
killed a dog." But this rule does not apply to the actions of the Divine. He is the doer, He is the 
deed and He is the object of action (Kartha, Karma and Kaarana). No one is competent to 
enquire into the actions of the Divine. One cannot know how the Divine is directing his actions 
in relation to his past. Each one should carry out his self-examination himself. Students should 
continue spiritual exercises together with academic studies. 


Regard yourselves as instruments of the Divine 


Men should realise that they are entitled only to carry out their duties without concern for the 
fruits thereof. Duties come first. The results will come in due course. Men should realise how so 
many vital things are happening without any conscious efforts on their part. Their breathing, the 
functioning of their hearts and digestive organs are taking place naturally without any effort on 
their part. Even the time and manner of one's death are dependent on the Will of the Divine. 


However, man should regard himself as an instrument of the Divine. This was the advice 
Krishna gave to Arjuna. After Arjuna has exhausted all his questions to Krishna and got the 
answers from Krishna, his final decision was: "Karishye vachanam thava" (I shall abide by what 


you say). 


Priding himself on his talents and powers, man ruins himself. He does not realise that all his 
powers come form God. But it is in his power to ruin himself by the misuse of his talents. 


No one can know the origin of anything. For example, there is a green gram seed. Who can trace 
its genealogy? But one can recognise its future. The moment it is placed in the mouth and 
munched, that will be its end. Its origin is not known, but its end is in our hands. This is the 
reason why man is enjoined to concern himself about his end. Do not worry about rebirth 
because that is not in your power. Strive only to ensure that your end is pure and sacred. That 
calls for saadhana (spiritual practice). Many imagine that the quest for God is saadhana. There 
is no need to search for God. When the God is all-pervading, inside and outside, where is the 
need to search for Him? The only saadhana one has to practise is to get rid of the Anaathma 
bhaava (identification of the self with the body). Anaathma is that which is impermanent. When 
you give up the impermanent, you realise what is permanent and eternal. 


Man today foolishly seeks to enjoy all things indiscriminately. This is wrong. One must enjoy 
what is good and wholesome and eschew what is bad and unwholesome. In spiritual, terms, this 
means that one should give up the impermanent physical objects and realise the Aathma that is 
permanent. This alone is true saadhana---not various forms of worship and meditation, which 
are not genuinely concentrated on God. 


Combine studies with elevating actions 


All acts should be performed in spirit of dedication, realizing that God is omnipresent. Then bliss 
will be experienced. 


Students should combine normal studies with the refinement of their way of living through 
Samskaaras (elevating actions). This refinement cannot be got from teachers or books, but only 
by one's daily conduct. 


Some students refrain from taking part in sports and games on the pretext that they are not 
interested in winning prizes. This is not genuine detachment, but only a form of laziness. 
Participation in sports and games is necessary for your health and recreation. 


Our Institute students are doubtless filled with devotion and faith. But together with these, they 
should cultivate humility and discipline. Their behaviour should be exemplary. When Svaami's 
car is going, students run beside it faster than the car. This is a bad example to others. During 
bhajan sessions students are eager to sit as near as Svaami as possible. But in their eagerness 
they rush forward and fall upon each other in a manner which may cause serious collisions. Is 
this a good example for others? No. Students should set a good example even in small matters 
like these. 


Students have abundant love for Svaami but this is exhibited in unseemly ways. There should be 
restraint in doing anything. 


Life is a game! Play it! 


Students think that sports events are confined to a few days in January. On the contrary, they 
should regard life itself as one continuous game. Life is a game! Play it! Treat the play as an 
ideal. Thereby you will be adhering to your ideals wherever you go. 


Understand the true meaning of discipline. It is not something that should be observed only when 
you are in the hostel. Discipline must accompany you like your shadow. After leaving College, 
when you get employed, then also you should observe discipline. Discipline is the life-breath of 
man. It is like the spine for the human body. 


Moreover, students should take care to avoid undue risk in their physical feats. You may desire 
to please Svaami to the maximum extent. But if you sustain injuries, will it give joy to Svaami? 
Your safety is important. All the spectators should feel happy. Your displays should be attractive 
without being unduly hazardous. You may perform thrilling feats. But do not give room for 
anxiety to others. Svaami is concerned about your welfare. Whatever you do, it should be 
pleasing and enjoyable. Where there is devotion and earnestness, nothing serious may happen, 
thanks to the grace of Bhagavaan. 


Devotion earns the grace of God 


One student fell from a height with the head downwards. Doctors felt that it was a serious case 
and that the boy should be sent to Hyderabad. But I declared that it was nothing serious and that 
all would be well with him. The boy is full of devotion for Svaami. Without any bandage or 
treatment, he was all-right. (Svaami summoned the student to come on stage. The entire audience 
cheered as the student came walking to Svaami). Look at this boy. The doctors said that his 
entire leg has sustained a fracture. How did he come here after the severe fall? His devotion and 
faith helped him to overcome the effects of the fall. 


Hence, if devotion and earnestness are present, even great dangers can be averted. Dangers may 
come from any cause. But even mountains of danger can be removed by the grace of God. But 
that does not mean you may take any risk. You should be cautious. Moreover, when some 
hazardous exercises are performed, there should be safety measures to meet any untoward 
contingencies. Soft mattresses should be kept on the ground. Such precautions should be taken 
by the organisers of the sports events. 


Cars for hostels presented by Svaami 


The students from the Brindhaavan Campus put up a good show. They spent money from their 
own pockets to go to several places and arrange for attractive programmes. They suffered form 
lack of adequate facilities. Our Prashaanthi Nilayam students, despite the nearness of the old 
hospital, have oftentimes need to go to the speciality hospital by taxi or auto-rickshaw. 


You have witnessed the superb performance of the Primary School children. Not even the 
grown-ups reached the level of their excellence. All their programmes were designed by 
themselves without any outside help. This is an amazing achievement. Their displays were done 
with ease and were thoroughly enjoyable. Likewise, the performance of the girl students from 
Ananthapur was splendid. Even they desired to perform some hazardous feats. They showed 
great presence of mind in their exercises. No accidents occurred. Their only concern was to 
please Svaami and win His approbation. 


All the students from all the three campuses are full of devotion to Svaami. To meet the needs of 
the four Institutions in regard to transport facilities during emergencies. I am presenting cars to 
each of the three Institute campuses--Brindhaavan, Prashaanthi Nilayam and Ananthapur--and 
one for the Primary School. In view of the high cost of petrol, they are being given diesel-driven 
cars. Students, however, should use the vehicles carefully. The Wardens and principals must 
see to this. 


The cars should not be entrusted to juveniles. I am handing over the keys of the cars to the 
Wardens of the Brindhaavan Campus, the Prashaanthi Nilayam Campus and the Primary School. 
The key of the car for the Ananthapur hostel has already been given. 


I bless you all that you should continue to give joy to your parents and others by your perfor- 
mances in the future and acquit yourselves well in every way. 


Discourse in the Puurnachandhra Auditorium on 14-1-1993. 


Hate breeds fear; hate is the seedbed of anxiety, scandal and 
falsehood. It drains your mind of peace. You may have light 
without oil, fire without smoke, breeze without a bearer fanning 
you, a chillness in the air of your room in the sizzling heat of 
summer but, unless you are at peace with yourselves and with 
those around you, your pulse will be quick and your blood will be 
racing in rage and rancour. Love alone can alleviate anxiety and 
allay fear. 


BABA 


3. The predicament of man today 


The influence of the Western style of life 
and the alien language has eroded 
The glorious culture and righteous conduct 
of the people of Bhaarath. 
It is high time Bhaaratheeyas woke up 
and made efforts to restore the 
Wisdom and Culture of their motherland 
to its ancient glory. 


THE primary requisites for ensuring the safety, security and peace of this great country are 
tolerance, understanding and unity amongst its people. The feeling that the same Divine Aathma 
is residing in all beings should be cultivated so that wisdom, social justice and real sense of 
freedom can prevail. The entire humanity should be considered as one brotherhood on the basis 
of Universal Love. Then only the objective of human birth can be fulfilled. The feeling of 
oneness is essential for enjoying bliss based on realisation of divinity in everyone. 


In ancient times, the Rishis enjoyed fullness of human life. They experienced this bliss of 
Universal Love within them and conveyed it to all mankind. They propounded the Premathathva 
(doctrine of Love) which is the means to know one's Inner Reality. 


Today, there is no security or safety for the people in the country and there is disorder all over 
the world. Hatred and anger are rampant among the people. Under these circumstances, the only 
path they have to follow is the Path of Love. 


Man has become a slave to selfishness 


With the rapid growth of industrial development in the West, humanness has deteriorated. 
Because of this, man has moved away from his true inner self. Though man has advanced 
considerably in the field of Science and Technology and has reached higher levels in the 
development of secular and physical knowledge, he has strayed far away from spiritual and 
moral goals. Everyone is indulging in selfish pursuits only. In fact, man has become a slave to 
selfishness. 


Because of the scientific and technological advancement man is attaching importance to the 
physical body, taking it to be the real self, and spends, his time in catering to the needs and 
comforts of the body. He is using the body as a toy and plays with it in a mechanical way. The 
body is functioning through the power of Prajna Shakthi (Integral Awareness) which is directing 
the functions through the Spandana Shakthi or Praana Shakthi (Pulsatory life force). 


The triple forces through which man functions 


Man is functioning by the combination of three forces: Radiation, Vibration and Materiality. The 
body is just matter only. It is called Prakrithi. Praana Shakthi makes it vibrant. This vibration is 
directed by the Prajna Shakthi which is consciousness (awareness). Thus man's life is a 
combination of consciousness, vital force and matter. Without realising this fact, man is always 
keen on looking after the body alone, with the wrong conception that the body is all powerful. 


All of you know that America (U.S.A) is considered to be a land of plenty where there is no 
dearth of food. So the people eat well and enjoy material pleasures. They consume excessive 
‘food and lead a life of luxury. But we find that there are more deaths owing to heart diseases in 
that country, than in other countries. 


Sweden is very affluent country in Europe and the government is also providing all possible 
comforts and looks after the people well. In spite of such prosperity, there are more suicide cases 
in this country than anywhere else and the number of divorce cases are plenty. What is the cause 
for this?’ It is not lack of any physical or material facilities but lack of spiritual outlook that is 
responsible for such a situation. It is because they identify themselves with the body, which is 
perishable and impermanent, and are ignorant about their Real Inner Self which is the permanent 
and eternal entity. They lead an artificial life. 


The power of Gaayathri manthra 


In Bhaarath, from ancient times, through the sacred Gaayathri manthra, spiritual awareness has 
been developed. The manthra "Om Bhur Bhuvas Suvah" represents the three basic principles of 
the godliness in every one. Bhu means matter. Bhuvah is the Praana Shakthi (the vibrant 
principle). Suvah is the Prajna Shakthi (awareness). These three constituent forces--radiation, 
vibration and material energy--activate the human being. But man is not able to realise this fact. 


In the mythology of Bhaarath, Naaradha is a sage well known as Thriloka Sanchaari (to 
constantly travel in the three worlds). Naaradha represents the life principle. The three worlds are 
Bhur, Bhuvas, Suvah meaning material energy, life force and latent Aathma Shakthi (spiritual 


energy). 


Man is not making efforts to understand the relationship between Prakrithi (phenomenal world) 
and Jeevathma (man) and Paramaathma (Supreme Spirit). These are very intimately inter- 
related to one another. They are not disparate. The relationship between Paramaathma and 
Prakrithi--God and Nature--is the same as that between mother and child. The relationship 
between man and society is the same as that between the honey-bee and the flower. Just as the 
child is fed by mother's milk, as the honey-bee is fed by the honey in a flower, man must enjoy 
the gifts of Nature. From time immemorial man has been plagued by negative ideas. There is a 
legendary tale in which one greedy man killed the goose that laid, golden eggs thinking that he 
can extract all the eggs from it in one lump. Such acts of folly are committed freely by scientists 
today by exploiting Nature's gifts beyond all limits, creating disastrous imbalance resulting in 
natural calamities such as earthquakes, spelling danger to humanity. We cannot blame science 
for this. Those who apply the scientific discoveries without discrimination are to be blamed for 
this. They fail. to consider with deep deliberation the effects of excessive depletion of the natural 
resources. 


Do not trigger the negative aspect of Nature 


Man has to consider himself as a limb of the society and help in the welfare of society, just as the 
organs of one's body are used for one's well-being. Again society is a limb of Prakrithi (Nature) 
and Prakrithi is a limb of Paramaathma (Supreme Lord). Thus there is close relationship 
between man and God. Nature is more progressive than man, and to protect Nature, man has to 
exploit it within limits. When man tampers.with Nature recklessly, it reacts adversely and trouble 
arises. In order to protect Nature,, man has to practise ceiling on desires. He should not trigger 
the negative aspect of Nature. 


In this respect, scientists have no concern for the harmful effects that may accrue to society by 
their inventions. They don't care for the welfare of the mankind and go on making use of 
intelligence to produce their weapons of destruction. 


Care should be exercised in providing comforts as excessive comforts may spoil man's mind and 
cause misery instead of happiness. "Na Shreyo Niyamam Vinaa" (Nothing good can be achieved 
without certain restraints). Because of the advancement of technology and provision of excessive 
comforts, life has become mechanical and spirituality has declined. Science fragments 
everything to pieces while spirituality builds up unity in diversity. Today man is not making 
efforts to cultivate the feeling of oneness among humanity. 


Intimate relationship of man, God and Nature 


To quote an example you have the ozone layer in the atmosphere which protects the people on 
earth from the evil effects of solar radiation. Because of the advance of technology, several 
factories have sprung up causing emission of harmful gases in the atmosphere as a result of 
which the ozone layer has become thinner and if this goes on unchecked it may have disatrous 
consequences. The scientists are trying to stop the break up of the ozone layer but they are 
unable to find a remedy. 


The actual cause for this situation is that more carbon-dioxide is let into the atmosphere, which 
normally is absorbed by the plants and trees which can assimilate the gas and supply oxygen by 
the natural process of photosynthesis. But, because there is de-forestation to an alarming extent, 
the extent of carbon-dioxide in the atmosphere has considerably increased. Therefore, the 
remedy for this situation is intensive afforestation, growing more tress everywhere and 
protecting’ the existing trees without destroying them for other purposes. Thus the relationship of 
man, Nature and God is very intimate which scientists may not be able to realise. 


You have to enquire into everything thoroughly. Dharma is a word that has originated in 
Bhaarath and is misinterpreted often. The attitudes of the Westerners and our countrymen differ 
widely. In the 


West, they are more keen on the rights of the individual. Immediately on birth, the child acquires 
aright. Father, mother, society and government each has a right. The worker has a right, the ruler 
has a right. While in the West, they were more concerned about rights the people of Bhaarath 
had been laying stress on Dharma or the duty of everyone. 


The concept of Dharma is peculiar to Bhaarath 


The word Dharma is peculiar to Bhaarath and no language other than Sanskrith has it in its 
vocabulary, nor any country for that matter. It is interpreted by some as 'Righteousness' and by 
yet others as 'reason', etc Dharma is Dharma only. No other word can give the same meaning. 
"Dharmo Rakshathi Rakshithaha" (Dharana protects those who protect it). That which controls 
and encompasses everything is Dharma. There is a lot of difference between Dharma and 
religion. Dharma is like an ocean. Religion is just like a small lake. 


Religion is related to the individual while Culture is "fundamental order." They use the terms 
"Mohammedan culture,’ 'Hindu culture,’ 'Christian culture’ and fight against one another. In 
reality, there is no difference between one Religion and another. There is no difference between 
man and man as God is in the form of love in everyone. So it is not correct to fight on the basis 


of religious differences. All belong to the human race. When one understands this truth one can 
comprehend Dharma. 


"Karmanyeva Adhikaarasthe Maa Paleshu" says the Geetha. You have the right to perform your 
duty only. You have no right to demand the fruits of your action. No one has got any right other 
than doing his duty. He has the responsibility to discharge his duty. But, today people are 
clamouring for rights and don't want to discharge duties. The result will always be there whether 
you ask for it or not. Right and Responsibility are like two wings of a bird which make it fly or 
like the two wheels of a vehicle which facilitate a person to ride on it. How long can you drive 
with a single wheel? How can a bird fly high with one wing? 


If you discharge your duty with responsibility result will take care of itself. This is what 
everyone should clearly understand today. If everyone does his duty well there will be no trouble 
in the world. It is because people claim rights without doing their duty there is chaos and 
confusion. Man is immersed in self-conflict because he is keen on exercising his right without 
discharging his responsibility. 


The body is given to man for helping others 


Man should realise his reality. The body is given to him for performing his duty. What kind of 
duty? "Paropakaaraartham Idam Shareeram" (This body is given for helping others). So your 
duty is to help others. But people don't cherish this broad outlook. 


Today there is terrible conflict and misery and disorder in the country because such a broad 
outlook is not there and people are narrow minded. They should discard this narrow selfish 
feelings and practise expansion of love. You should cultivate the feeling that all human beings 
belong to one family. The divinity in all beings is one. 


Constant Integrated Awareness 
Bulbs are many but current is one, 
Jewels are many but Gold is one, 
Beings are many but Breath is one, 
Nations are many but Earth is one. 


People should develop broad feelings on the above lines. Then only humanity will prosper. There 
is divinity in every one which one should sincerely try to realise. It is not enough only to 
propagate the theory. There are a large number of people who propagate and preach but those 
who practise are rare. Many speak one thing and act differently. There should be harmony in 
thought, word and deed. This is the unity of head, heart and hand. But, now-a-days people think 
in one way, speak in another and do yet another thing. This is why the Prajna Shakthi (power of 
conscience), Praana Shakthi (life force) and material force are diverted in different directions. 
Matter, life force and conscience should be unified. 


One should be careful about conscience which will always spell the truth.-It will never lead you 
on the wrong path. Vedhas call this "Prajnaanam Brahma." It is present equally in body, mind, 
intellect and Inner Instruments. This is Constant Integrated Awareness. No one is making efforts 
to realise the latent Divine Power in him. In the world today, people care only for material 
things. Selfishness is on the increase. 'Right'’ is born out of selfishness and ends in conflict. 
Dharma is born from Prema (love) and merges in Aathma (spirituality). Therefore one should 


discard 'rights' and take up 'responsibility' born out of love. Such an individual only will lead a 
true life. 


Divinity within is responsible for the functioning of all organs of the body. That divinity is the 
Prajna Shakthi, the life force and also the Chaithanya (Awareness). This awareness is in 
everyone. It is Brahman. "The One is in all beings." This is a sutra (aphorism). Sutra means also 
a thread. When you make a garland of flowers, the thread keeping them in position is only one 
though flowers are many. They may be in different stages of bloom and change every day, but 
the thread is the same today and tomorrow. Similarly the Chaithanya (consciousness) is the same 
while one is a child or boy, or adult or in old age. Though the description of the person changes 
as boy, man, grand father etc., the Chaithanya inside is changeless. There is no distinction of 
woman or man too. Changes are in the body and not in Aathma which is changeless. It exists in 
all brilliance at all times. There is beauty in it. We should understand the principle of beauty. 


Service to humanity is beauty 


For the hand, charity lends beauty.-For speech, it is truth that lends beauty. For ears, wisdom 
lends beauty. What more beauty do you need than these? For life, service to humanity is beauty. 
In Kannada there is a wise saying that houses make a village beautiful, flowers make the branch 
of the tree beautiful, moon beautifies the sky, waves beautify the Ocean and character makes a 
person beautiful. 


Every man has intelligence. When you put it to skillful use it is serving well. But actually man is 
misusing knowledge. This is termed as technology which is in fact 'Trick'nology. Because of this 
man is not having peace. An individual utters falsehood to please another person. He may think 
that he is deceiving the other. But he is deceiving himself. One should not act against the dictates 
of his conscience. Conscience is Chith, awareness is Sath. Both combine and give Aanandha. 
They are like syrup got by mixing sugar and water (Sath + Chith). The syrup is Aanandha. I and 
you should combine to say 'we'. Many don't understand this properly and say "I and you are 
one." This is not correct. "I and you are We" is the correct statement. "We and We are One." I 
am in you and you are in me and so we are one. This is a combination of Aathma and Aathma 
and not matter to matter. The bond between matter and matter is the life force. Life is sustained 
by the infinite force of Prajna Shakthi. Prajna is the source and Praana is propelled by this. 
Even if there is life unless the Prajna Shakthi is there this can't work. Human life is therefore, the 
combination of three: Prajna, Praana and Matter. Man is ignorant of this truth and concerns 
himself only with the body which is matter only. 


Unity leads to purity and divinity 


Ancient Rishis called these three as Bhurh, Bhuvah and Suvah. When you realise this unity in 
everyone child, boy or old people--how can you hate any body? When one develops this 
principle of unity there will be peace. The 'divide and rule' policy is driving the society to 
destruction in the political field. In the spiritual field unity must be the basis. It leads to purity 
and. divinity. 


Embodiments of Divine Love! Spirituality is not mere worship, japa or dhyaana. These may be 
good activities but they don't constitute spirituality. The driving away of animal qualities and 
proceeding from the human to the divine is real spirituality. There are human, divine and animal 
traits in every one. You should get rid of the animal nature and develop divine quality. 


What is Saadhana? It is doing good deeds with this body. These good works are God's work too. 
The essence of the eighteen Puraanas of Vyaasa is condensed by him as "Help ever; Hurt 
never." This is true devotion. While doing worship and meditation on one side if you hurt others 
can it be real saadhana? 


God is love; love is God 


One may get angry. He should not plunge into action immediately. If he does so his hasty action 
will be fraught with undesirable consequences. "Haste makes waste; waste makes worry." He 
should think whether it is right or wrong before plunging into action to hurt the other man 
towards whom he is angry. Slowly as his temper comes down he will change his mind and desist 
from hasty action. This is the practical way of controlling oneself in daily life. This is the way of 
life which is called culture. You should engage in such thoughtful action as will serve the cause 
of society and foster goodwill and unity. You should foster good thoughts. This is real 
Saadhana. 


God is Love; Love is God (Bhagavaan sang the song Prem Eeshvar Hai; Eeshvar Prem Hai). 
Love is one. It is not good to cause hurt to others. The world is a globe. You know that the 
balance has to be maintained to keep it stable. We utilise the natural resources without any limit 
and create imbalance. 


I have been visiting Madras for the past 45 years. Now I see that there is traffic even at 2.00 a.m. 
as it used to be in Bombay. There is more carbon dioxide smoke released. There are factories and 
industries everywhere. So there is more pollution of the air and diseases are on the increase. All 
these are dangerous offshoots of technological progress. 


Love all and Serve all 


One can serve God only through Shrama and Prema, (effort with love). The best way to serve 
God is to Love all and serve all. 


There was an old lady in Mathura. She used to take blankets in the darkest hour of the night and 
distribute them to poor people who were shivering in cold. One day she was bending her head 
and serving the poor. A few youths gathered there and asked her "Oh! Lady! while you are doing 
such selfless work why are you bending your head and walking?" She replied: “God has given so 
much of wealth to the people with so many hands. But I am able to serve the people only with 
my two hands. Is it not a thing about which I should feel ashamed?" 


We are not prepared to share with others and are only ready to receive whatever we can get. This 
is one way traffic. "There is no chance of immortality without doing sacrifice" say the Vedhas. 
You should sacrifice and share what you have with others. Then only you may have peace. You 
should make others happy. You must do the Saadhana of Sacrifice. You should provide help to 
other devotees. Charity is the beauty for hands and not decoration with bangles. 


The Mind is like a key to the lock of the heart. If you turn it towards God you get liberation; if 
you turn it towards the world you get into bondage. You should develop the feeling "Lokaas 
Samasthaas Sukhino Bhavanthu." You should aspire for world unity. Out of unity you get purity 
and from purity comes divinity. Now there is only community and enmity, which has to be 
eliminated. 


Prema is the binding factor to unite all humanity together. Therefore, cultivate Prema or 
Universal Love. 


Discourse in the Kaamaraj Memorial hall, Madras, on 21-1-1993. 


The Mahaabhaaratha and Raamaayana which are the most 
precious jewels of India are like vast oceans. If we look at these 
oceans one side, we will have only a limited view but if we climb 
up a hill and have a look at them, we get a fuller view and a better 
understanding of them. What we have to do is to delve into them 
and try to explore and understand the treasures contained in these 
big oceans. 


BABA 


4. Integral approach to human ailments 


One whose heart is filled with compassion, 
Whose words spell truth, 

And who works for the welfare of others 
Will never suffer from difficulties 

Or diseases even in the Kali age. 


"IN THIS wide world, everyone aspires for long life, prosperity and health. A healthy body is 
essential if one has to achieve the four goals of human life, namely, Dharma (righteousness), 
Artha (wealth), Kaama (desire) and Moksha (liberation). Science and technology have made 
great strides in contributing to the progress of human society. But man has deteriorated morally 
and spiritually. 


Among the four Vedhas, the Atharvana Vedha is the one that has given the science relating to 
longevity, known as Ayurvedha. Ayurvedha transcends time and space and is valid for all places, 
at all times. It relates to the spirit, mind and the body and has an integrated approach. The 
Allopathic system came much later. It is based on an objective, external approach while 
Ayurvedha is subjective. Both have to be coordinated for better results. Since Ayurvedha is 
subjective it is more efficacious than the Allopathic system. There is a superior artistic sense in 
Ayurvedha. 


Doctors have to realise the distinction between subjective and objective approaches. The latter 
has an external outlook while the former has an inner view. The object is a reflection of the 
subject. Without realising this relationship between Ayurvedha and Allopathy, doctors are 
wasting their time in arguments. 


Basic difference between Ayurvedha and Allopathy 


Ayurvedha affirms that purity of mind is more essential for one's health while Allopathic doctors 
do not consider the mind as so important. They give importance to the eradication of disease- 
causing germs and consider this as the only means to cure diseases. This does not take into 
account the role of the mind and the Spirit in the eradication of disease. Allopathy is based on 
external knowledge and experimentation, while Ayurvedha is based on inner knowledge and 
experience. There is gulf of difference between experiment and experience. Because of the 
difference between the subjective and objective approaches, in course of time, Allopathy resorted 
to the use of antibiotics to deal with various diseases. The antibiotics act powerfully and yield 
quick results in curing a disease. But, in the process of curing a disease they give rise to adverse 
side-effects. 


The role of the mind in causing sickness 


Allopathic doctors experiment only with matter. They do not take the inner consciousness (Self) 
into account. In spite of the prodigious technological developments in the world, man is not able 
to enjoy peace. Peace cannot be achieved by knowledge of the physical. Peace should come from 
inner feeling or the Spirit within. It is only when the body, the mind and the Spirit are in 
harmony that peace will prevail. Medical science should recognise the role of the mind in 
causing sickness. Good health confers mental peace. Mental worry impairs physical health. 


Ayurvedha, therefore, lays emphasis on mental peace and aims at the elimination of the root 
cause of disease. 


There are three basic factors which are responsible for health or disease in the human body 
according to Ayurvedha. They are vaatha (vital air), piththa (bile) and shleshma (phlegm). 
Vaatha accounts for 36 diseases, piththa accounts for 98 and shleshma for 96 diseases. These 
three factors are essential for the human body but they should be in proper balance without 
exceeding their respective limits. When they are in balance, there will be no disease. Moderation 
is the golden rule for good health. 


For the treatment of disease arising out of vaatha, piththa and shleshma, gingely oil, ghee and 
honey respectively are prescribed as remedies. These should be taken in moderation. The body is 
a gift of God and cannot be made by doctors. The human heart beats 1,03,000 times a day. The 
blood circulation in the body is computed to cover 1,68,000 miles per day. Man breathes 21,600 
times and consumes 438 cubic feet of air every day. These are based on Divine Will and are 
regarded as a Law of Nature. 


God is the preceptor of Prakrithi (Nature). The body is unclean in many ways and is subject to 
various diseases. But in such an inherently unattractive abode dwells the most valuable divinity. 
Man should always act in harmony with Nature, which is reflection of Divinity. 


Heart troubles are caused by hurry, worry and curry 


What is the cause of heart ailments? Many doctors say that they are due to smoking, 
consumption of fatty foods, overeating and other habits. The relationship between food and 
habits should be properly understood. We should see that proper balance is maintained between 
the physical body and inner feelings (Spirit). Modern man is continuously in a hurry. Hurry 
causes worry which affects the physical health. The main cause of heart troubles may be said to 
be hurry, worry and curry. Curry means fatty foods. Many doctors have made investigations in 
this field but the results have not been made known widely. Heart diseases are found to be more 
rampant among non-vegetarians while vegetarians are not prone to heart ailments to the same 
extent. This is because of higher percentage of fats in non-vegetarian food which increases the 
cholesterol in the blood. Worry causes high blood pressure and hurry causes diabetes. Both of- 
them are like twins, one acting on the heart inside and the other externally on the blood. 


Every one should know how to control these causes. Some people do not do any physical 
exercises and lead a sedentary life. My advice to office-goers and students is that it is good for 
them to commute by cycle at least 5 or 6 kilometers a day. This cycling exercise is very useful 
not only for maintaining health but' also for reducing the expenditure incurred on automobiles. 
Another advantage is the avoidance of accidents. Moreover, it serves to reduce atmospheric 
pollution caused by the release of harmful fumes from automobiles. The carbon-dioxide smoke 
form motor vehicles and factories is already polluting the air in cities and is affecting the ozone 
layer above the earth. 


Purifying the environment is the primary task 


The primary task’ is to purify .the environment which is affected by pollution of air, water and 
food. All the five elements are affected by pollution. People should, therefore, try to reduce the 
use of automobiles and control the emission of harmful industrial effluents. 


In the ancient times, sages and scientists commended the Ayurvedhic system of treatment as it 
was considered a natural system for curing disease. Trees play a vital role in helping mankind to 
receive oxygen from the atmosphere while they absorb the carbon dioxide’ exhaled by human 
beings. Hence, the ancients favoured the growing of trees to control atmospheric pollution. But 
nowadays trees are cut down indiscriminately and pollution is on the increase. The relationship 
between man and trees is indicated by the term "Vanaspathi" (herbs) employed in Ayurvedha. 


Man is leading an artificial life today. One should understand that he is not merely the body but a 
combination of body, mind and Spirit. In the Gaayathri mantra, "Om Bhur Bhuvas Suvah" is the 
first line. In this Bhu refers to matter, that is the body, Bhuvah refers to the Praana Shakthi (Life 
Principle) which animates the body, and Suvah refers to Prajna Shakthi (Awareness or 
Conscience) which acts through radiation. Hence man is made up of Prajna (awareness), Praana 
(the vital force) and the body (the material substance). The doctors should not consider only the 
body (matter), but should take into consideration the Praana (Life Force) and Prajna Shakthi 
(Integrated Awareness). Prajna Shakthi is the radiation energy that promotes wisdom. Vibration 
is the expression of the Praana (Vital Force). In every action, there is a vibration which is in 
between the consciousness and the physical body. We should see that the mind is not influenced 
by any external 'force' but by the internal 'source,' which is Prajna or integrated awareness. 


Doctors' duty to ensure healthy life for all 


Esteemed Doctors! You must strive to ensure long and healthy life for the people. In my view a 
godly life is more important than mere longevity. What is the use of a selfish person leading a 
long life without rendering service to society? Only those who serve the society and the nation,, 
should have a long life. The essence of the 'Eighteen Puraanas of Vyaasa was given by him in 
the motto' Help ever, hurt never. 


It is true that doctors generally work with devotion and dedication. It will be better if they 
develop more devotion towards God instead of being concerned with earning money. Obviously 
money is needed to carry on worldly life but there should be a limit to the acquisition of money. 
The use of money should be properly regulated. When one does not observe restraint in daily 
life, he is a prey to disease. The body is governed by limits and controls. The temperature should 
be 98.4°F neither more nor less, the blood pressure should be 80-120. Any increase or decrease 
spells illness. Doctors should not compete with one another in earning huge sums and acquiring 
more and more possessions. They should render free service to the needy and the poor. The spirit 
of sacrifice is the hallmark of true education. Money earned should be usefully spent in a spirit of 
sacrifice. 


Health and human values 


There should be a harmonious blend of religion, philosophy and art for man to live healthily in 
the world. In this context religion means the religion of love. This is the only religion in the 
world. There is only one caste, the caste of humanity. One should cultivate human values for 
healthy living. This calls for harmony in thought, word and deed. When you cultivate this 
harmony you will be free from desires and fears. As selfishness is rampant in the field of medical 
science and other branches of sciences, the world is rocked by many hazards and calamities. 


Doctors should educate laymen about the various reasons for heart ailments. Whenever people 
think of heart disease, the prospect of an operation looms large before them as a bugbear. As far 
as possible you should avoid surgery and try to cure the patients by drugs. Doctors should treat 


operation as a last resort. As the word operation creates fear in all types of people, whether rich 
or poor, high or low, you should help them to develop self-confidence and remove the cause of 
fear. 


What the Super-Speciality hospital signifies 


Divine members of the medical fraternity! It is not my intention to extol the excellence of our 
Hospital here. I wish to highlight the fact that the people in these areas used to be mortally afraid 
of heart disease because there was no facility for high-grade medical or surgical treatment and 
they had to take the patients to far off places entailing enormous expense. But, from 22nd 
November 1991, when the Super-Speciality Hospital started functioning, even kids entered the 
hospital smilingly without any sense of fear. Their courage and faith ensure successful treatment. 
This is the only hospital where you can see patients, doctors, nurses, technicians and paramedical 
staff with smiling faces. Even the relatives accompanying the patients are all smiles. Wherever 
you move in the hospital, you can see smiling and cheerful workers doing their duty with 
devotion and dedication. 


How has this happiness come to the people who go to the hospital for treatment of dreaded 
diseases? Happiness arises out of union with God. Because there is lack of faith in God 
elsewhere, there is grief. But in our hospital there is full faith in Divinity. Most people who have 
all physical comforts do not have inner peace. We get peace only from within us. If one acts in 
consonance with one's conscience one gets peace. A spirit of sacrifice is essential for securing 
peace. 


This hospital is not Svaami's. It belongs to all of you. This hospital was established with the 
noble aim of serving suffering humanity. Besides excellent equipment of the highest quality, we 
have here the most modern facilities for medical and surgical treatment and, above all, a team of 
dedicated doctors and other staff who render selfless service with a smile. The construction of 
the hospital was completed in an incredibly short period of five months. The construction of a 
hospital of this magnitude might have taken even ten years if the Government had taken up the 
work. When I announced on 23rd November 1990, that this hospital will function from 22nd 
November 1991, many eyebrows were raised, doubting the possibility of the date being kept up. 
But it became an accomplished fact as willed by Svaami. 


Devotion and selfless service of doctors 


Dr. Venugopal came from Delhi to conduct the operations on 22nd November, 1991. Ever since 
he took up the work; it has been a saga of success. It has not been mentioned in the public before 
that he is a doctor in government service working in the All India Institute of Medical Sciences. 
He used to start from Delhi on a Saturday; arrive here and perform operations on Sunday and 
return to Delhi for work on Monday. He has not taken any remuneration for his work and has 
defrayed even the travelling expense himself. I am mentioning these facts only to highlight his 
devotion and sense of selfless service. His entire team is of the same type. They are very happy 
to have the .opportunity to serve here. Their purity of heart and selfless service, have helped the 
hospital to achieve such splendid results. 


Most of the nurses and technicians are our college students. They were sent to Delhi for technical 
training in the operation of highly sophisticated equipment. They have often been working 
smilingly from 6 a.m. to 12 midnight. They serve here only out of devotion to Svaami and not 
for money. 


To cite an example of the spirit of dedication of the staff, yesterday while Svaami was returning 
from the hospital, nurses who had done hard and strenuous work for more than three days were 
found walking on the road and on enquiry it was learnt that their bus broke down and they 
decided to trek the long distance back to the Mandhir on foot. Svaami asked them to wait there 
and arranged for a relief bus to pick them up. The relationship between Svaami and. devotees is 
heart to heart based on love. 


A word of advice to the doctors 


Not a single paise is collected from patients for anything, right from diagnostic tests to surgery 
and after-care. Even nutritious food is supplied free to the patents. In the beginning, the innocent 
and simple village folk did not know how to use the hospital beds. Some of them slept under the 
cot saying in utter simplicity that they were not worthy enough to sleep on such expensive beds. 
Patients do not show any sign of worry in this hospital. 


I wish to give a word of advice to the doctors. While you are examining the patients you should 
have smiling faces and talk to the patients sweetly. If you check the pulse with a grim face the 
patients may collapse fearing that there is something radically wrong. Some patients even dread 
the very sight of a doctor when he approaches to examine. This is not good. Doctors should 
infuse courage in the patents and speak soothingly radiating compassion and love. The kind 
approach of the doctor will have greater healing effect on the patients than the medicine itself. 
Doctors must instill courage in the patients. Svaami wants more hospitals to render free treat- 
ment to the poor. Doctors should cooperate and work with unity. 


Aim at a disease-free human society 


It is only by sense control and steadfastness that one can lead a happy and healthy life. Along 
with control of the mind, one should control the temper and avoid tension. Prevention of disease 
should be the goal. We should aim at a human society free from diseases. It will be a happy day 
when a hospital gets no patients at all. 


All of you have assembled here to discuss and exchange your knowledge and experience in the 
field of medical science, particularly relating to treatment of cardiac and cardio-vascular cases. I 
wish you should discuss freely and find solution to problems and render service to the people. 


Discourse to an international gathering of Cardiac specialists present at a symposium held in 
the Auditorium of the Shri Sathya Sai Institute of Higher Learning, Prashaanthi Nilayam, on 6-2- 
1993. 


5. Doctors, patients and society 


Charity is the ornament for the hand. 

Truth is the adornment for the tongue. 

The scriptures are the ornaments for the ears. 
Of what avail are other ornaments? 


EMBODIMENTS of the Divine Practioners of Modern Medicine! It is dhaanam (charity) that 
lends adornment to the hand. Only Truth lends beauty to speech. The scriptures serve to adorn 
the ears. Man needs no more beautiful ornaments than these. The glory of Divinity consists in 
sanctifying human existence by these ornaments. 


The human body is a thing of marvellous beauty. Men cannot easily comprehend the secret of 
God's creation. No one can explain how the eyes have acquired the power of seeing this 
phenomenal world. 


The beauty of all the organs in the human body is a secret of creation. Doctors try to find out 
how each sense organ and how each limb functions. No one tries to find out why they are 
functioning in this manner. This secret can be grasped only through the Aathmik or Divine 
Principle. 


Human life is based on six constituents in the Panchabhuuthas (five basic elements) and the 
Aathma. To recognise this fact, three paths have to be pursued. One is to recognise within one's 
self the presence of Nature and the Divine. A second path is to recognise in God the cosmic 
creation and one's self. The third path is to see in Nature the presence of God and one's self. It is 
only when knowledge is acquired by these three paths that Aathma Jnaana (Knowledge of the 
Self) arises. This three-fold path is termed Prajna (Integrated Awareness). Every man should try 
to understand this three-fold path. This can be done at all times in all places. It has universal 
application. It has permanent validity everywhere. But, man gets involved in what is 
impermanent and ever-changing. 


Treat the patient; not the disease 


There are in the world today highly intelligent and experienced doctors of great renown. They 
are, however, concerned only with the cure of diseases and not the redemption of the patient. It is 
more important to cure the mental condition of the patient than to relieve his physical illness. 
Doctors treat the disease and not the patient. 


During the past two days, the doctors have been discussing how to cure diseases. They have 
presented statistics as to the number of cases handled, the number of cures effected and the 
incidence of mortality. The doctors have had some doubts about how all diseases are cured in our 
Sathya Sai Hospital. How does this happen? There is a good answer for this doubt. In regard to 
any action, if it is done with a pure heart and good intentions, it is bound to be successful. Man 
today regards self-interest as a way of life. This has become the philosophy of the modern world. 
But, we should consider thyaaga (sacrifice) alone as the true philosophy for the world. When 
you approach the patient in a spirit of sacrifice, the patient's feelings get purified. 


Vibrations of light around the body 


Our body is surrounded by Divine vibrations. If you look at the thumb, there are vibrations of 
light around it. Few attempt to recognise this phenomenon. The body is surrounded by vibrations 
of light. When these vibrations of light from one person meet another's, several good things 
happen. 


There are two important organs for man. One is the heart and the other is the hand. The head is 
preoccupied with enquiring into mundane phenomena. It is concerned with the external. Its focus 
is on objects outside. The heart looks at what is within. The concern with the external has been 
termed Pravritthi Maarga (the path of externals)... All man's actions today, including the 
knowledge he acquires and the wealth he gets, are all related to the Pravritthi Maarga. The six 
vices of Kaama (lust), Krodha (anger), Moha (infatuation), Lobha (greed), Madha (pride) and 
Maathsarya (jealousy) are related to the Pravritthi Maarga. These undergo constant changes. 
Because the body is associated with these qualities, it is also subject to change. 


But the heart remains unchanging. It is associated with the Nivritthi Maarga (the Inward path). 
What are the qualities associated with the heart? Truth, compassion, love, forbearance, sympathy 
and sacrifice: These human qualities emanate from the heart. So, in human life, the head and the 
heart play crucial roles. These two are kept in balance by the hand. Thus, the heart, the head and 
the hand are the three H's which are important in studying the human predicament. 


Close nexus between the mind and praana 


What are the causes of diseases of the heart? All diseases are a reflection of Pravritthi, the 
disposition of the mind: Hence, in worldly matters, man should follow the right path. In this 
context, two elements among the five basic elements are important. "Bhikshaannam 
Dheharakshaartham, Vasthram Seetha nivaraaranam" (Food is essential for protecting the body; 
raiment is necessary for protection against cold). Associated with food is water. These two 
occupy pride of place in human life. 


Life is the subtle form of the water consumed by man. The mind is the subtle form of the food 
taken by man. Hence a close nexus should' be established between the mind and Praana (life 
force). As is the food, so is the head. Man's thoughts, desires and aspirations are related to the 
kind of food he consumes. For instance, you may discern from practical experience how food 
affects the mind. The cyclic process which starts with the formation of clouds and ends in the 
harvest of grain, determines the kind of food one can have. 


Heat (or fire) is the basis of this process. This fire is present within man as Jatharaagni, the 
digestive fire, which accounts for the conversion of the food consumed by man into various 
forms of energy. This fire has to be in proper balance. When the balance is upset, you have 
illness. The state of man's body depends on the maintenance of this balance. Man's entire life 
depends on preserving this balance. When is the balance upset? When there is no mental 
steadiness. Men today develop all kinds of intellectual abilities, but they have not learnt how to 
keep the mind steady. When serenity of mind is achieved, there will be no disease. IIness will 
not approach you at all. 


Importance of food in maintaining health 


There should be some regulations with regard to food. Many doctors emphasize the value of 
proteins and recommend meat, eggs, etc. But proteins got in this form serve only to build the 


body, but do considerable harm to the mind. Doctors are primarily concerned with the gross 
physical body. They pay little attention to the subtle form of the mental makeup. Most of the 
diseases that are prevalent in the world today are related to the mind. Mental illness seem to 
outnumber physical ailments. The Vedhaantha has declared that the mind is the cause of man's 
bondage or liberation. This means that the mind has to be used properly and turned godwards. 
Equally the mind is responsible for health or sickness. 


In this context, food is all important. Proteins are present in milk, curds and vegetables as much 
as in meat. If in the matter of diet, the doctors give the right prescription, diseases can be averted. 


Prevention is better than cure 


In my view, instead of treating people after the onset of illness, it is better to ensure that they do 
not fall ill at all. Both doctors and the authorities should educate enceinte women about pre-natal 
care of children in the womb. It is distressing to find that new-born babes suffer from congenital 
heart diseases. Dr. Iyer showed the picture of a smiling child that had grown up after a heart 
operation shortly after birth. While one rejoices at such a sight, it is frightening to think of the 
operation that had to be done on a ten day old infant. In the case of congenital heart diseases, 
neither the parents nor the child can be happy. Nor can society be happy with such a situation. 
Something must be done to prevent heart troubles developing during pregnancy. There are 
medicines for preventing congenital heart ailments. For instance, if the mother is given various 
vitamins, the child's heart can be strengthened. The mother should be taught all about pre-natal 
care and given the necessary medicines. Pregnant women should be periodically checked in the 
hospital. It is better to take all preventive measures before the birth of a child than to carry the 
burden of bringing up a weak and crippled child all his life. 


Doctors alone cannot impart this message to all women. They can only advise those who come to 
them. But doctors can bring home to the authorities their responsibility in the area of preventive 
measures. What is the use of spending crores on curative measures without promoting health? It 
is a waste of money. There are many hazards in the use of antibiotics in the treatment of certain 
diseases like tuberculosis and the use of pesticides in agriculture. 


Doctors should be grateful to the society 


Doctors should realise what they owe to society, which has preserved and imparted to them their 
knowledge of the medical sciences. Medical knowledge has been enriched by the contributions 
of dedicated investigators over centuries. Doctors should be grateful to society for all the 
knowledge and skills they have acquired from the dedicated labours of others. They should 
realize their deep indebtedness to society for all they have received from it. Only then, they will 
use their knowledge and skills in the right way. 


People today think in terms of only their personal interests. They should develop a social 
consciousness, realising what all they! owe to society. Men today have become so utterly selfish 
that they behave in inhuman ways. They do not make proper use of their talents and resources in 
the service of their fellowmen. 


Doctors are embodiments of the Divine. As such, it is their duty to see that people do not shed 
tears of grief. They may doubt how far this is possible. Do as much as lies within your power. 
What happens thereafter need not bother you. Treat Duty as God and Work as Worship. If you 
carry on your work in this spirit, the world will be a happier place for all. 


I have to give a word of advice to the doctors present here. There is a tendency to specialize in 
the treatment of heart diseases which has gone to absurd lengths. I would advise the doctors to 
treat the heart as a whole and not fragment every part of it for specialised treatment. 
Specialisation has grown to alarming proportions in the world today. Doctors should be 
"generalists," who know how to treat different ailments of a patient. 


The heart teaches an important lesson to man. It appears to beat tirelessly without stopping. But, 
in fact, it is able to rest in brief intervals between one beat and another. The heart teaches you 
how to take rest even while at work. I often tell the students that "change of work is rest." This 
is-the way the heart functions when it pumps the blood from one chamber to the other. 


Lessons from the human cell 


Few can realise the limitless potentialities of each cell in the human body. It is one of the great 
secrets of creation. The cells teach man the lesson of thyaaga (sacrifice). For the progress of 
human life, sacrifice is essential. The scripture, declares that immortality can be attained only 
through sacrifice. Immortality means the removal of immorality. The various' cells in the body 
account for the performance of various functions by the senses and other limbs of the body. The 
power of the cells comes from the Divine. No one can explain it. Modern scientists term it as a 
"law of Nature." But wherefrom has this "law" emerged? There should be some one who lays 
down the law? For every product, like this silver tumbler, there is a maker. Silver is God's 
creation. The tumbler has been made by a goldsmith. It has not come as a ready-made tumbler. 
You have on the earth water and clay. They are God's creation. By mixing them both, the potter 
makes pots out of them. The creator for the pot is the potter. God is the Creator for the five 
elements--space, air, fire, water and earth. No one else can create these elements. But man makes 
use of these natural elements for making objects for his enjoyment. One man produces an 
aeroplane for flying. Another makes a parachute for safety if something happens to the plane. 
Scientists should be concerned with producing things that ensure safety. 


How the Divine works 


In this connection, I should like to tell you something whether you believe it or not. I do not have 
any worry. When I embarked on the construction of such a big hospital (the Super Speciality 
Hospital), Joga Rao used to say: "We are drawing up such gigantic plans. We don't have enough 
money. How are we going to construct this hospital?" He was highly apprehensive. I told him: 
"What we are undertaking is good work for the welfare of others. There is no selfishness in Me. 
We are doing everything for the well-being of the world. Do not give room for these depressing 
thoughts. It is bound to come up. Have this confidence." 


When does such confidence arise? When you know you are engaged in a good cause. There is a 
difference between an optimist and a pessimist when they view a glass half-full of water. The 
optimist is glad that the tumbler is half-full, while the pessimist is sorry that the tumbler is half- 
empty. You should not give way to pessimism. You must feel content with whatever you have. 
With contentment, anything can be achieved. 


Medical education should lay stress on quality 


The plight of doctors (in India) deserves sympathy. Many of them have to spend large sums to 
get seats in medical colleges and to complete their education. The doctor is worried how to 
recover the money that has been spent on his education. Something must be done to solve this 
problem. For instance, no one should be admitted in a medical college merely because he is able 


to pay a large capitation fee (of lakhs). Only those who have the talents and aptitude for medical 
studies should be admitted. Such students will immensely benefit from medical education and 
will be of use to society. Today you must have either plenty of money or influential backing to 
get into a medical college. Students who get admitted this way take even twelve years to 
complete the five year medical course. Of what use are such men? The stress should be on 
quality and not quantity in the sphere of medical studies. 


In earlier years, medical students used to work hard spending even 18 hours a day. Without such 
hard work, no one would get his degree. Alas! today things are otherwise. Students pass without 
much study. Such ill-educated doctors are a calamity to the nation. Not all doctors are of this 
kind. There are quite a few competent doctors. 


It is the duty of the medical profession to rectify this situation. They should contact the 
authorities to bring about reforms. Only then will the nation progress. 


We do not need many hospitals. Patients can be treated easily. In my view, there is no need for 
you to worry about money and resources. Treat your patients with love, Duty is God. This love 
should be mutual give and take. You may charge fees for your services, but do it with love. This 
is the right course for you. When you render service in this spirit, you will be successful in all 
cases. When you treat the patient with love, you will win the patient's love. Hence, your motto 
should be: "Start the day with love, fill the. day with love and end the day with love." This is the 
way to God. 


Our American doctor, who addressed the valedictory session, said that doctors should speak 
sweetly to patients. Whatever you do should be filled with love. A patient feels reassured when 
he sees the smiling face of a doctor. 


Tribute to participants of Medical Conference 


Embodiments of Divine Love! You have come from long distances, undergoing many strains. 
Conferences and symposia of all kinds are held all over the world all the time. But none of the 
decisions arrived at these gathering are implemented. Our Symposium is different. You have all 
come in a spirit of dedication. The decisions taken here should be implemented. You came here 
to learn from others as well as to share your experiences with others. You should return all the 
better for your visit. You should feel encouraged by your experiences here. Elated by this 
experience, you should be able to achieve many things. Return to your countries with joy in your 
hearts. You have had edifying experiences. It is fortunate that highly experienced doctors have 
been able to participate in this Symposium. They have also visited our Hospital and given many 
useful suggestions for enlarging its usefulness in the years ahead. We shall try to give effect to 
these suggestions. We are making plans for developing the Urology and Neurology wings. 
Please convey your experience and suggestions from time to time and encourage our doctors to 
do better. We wish that you should also make occasional visits to our Institute and Hospital. You 
are always welcome. Do not have any hesitation. This is your Hospital! Not mine. You are my 
property. Do not wait for invitations from here. There can be no objection to your coming to 
your own home. 


Highly experienced professional men have come here. No conference could have taken place in 
such a peaceful atmosphere as here with such pure hearted participants. In most conferences 
there are heated debates. Here everything was peaceful and calm. It was a sacred exercise. As Dr. 
Somaraju said, we have here a temple, where proper prayers should be offered. What should be 


this prayer? It is' All patients should get well. "Lokaas samasthaas Sukhino Bhavanthu!" (Let all 
people be happy). 


I conclude my discourse with the benediction that in the years to come all people should lead 
healthy and ideal lives. 


Address to the Valedictory session of the Cardiac Speciality Symposium on 7-2-1993. 


6. Secure God's grace by Shraddha and Vishvaasa 


Why does sun rise and set in the sky regularly every day? 


Why do the stars that shine so peacefully in the sky at night hide themselves during the 
day? 


Why does the wind that blows tirelessly protect living beings? 
Why do the murmuring brooks flow ceaselessly? 


Why are there among the myriad human beings In the world differences of race, religion, 
caste and wealth? 


Who is the Lord of all this? 
Who is their Controller? 


Come forward, all ye, to learn to carry out His commands! 


Isaanah sarva vidhyaanaam 
Iswaras- sarvabhoothaanaam 
Brahmaadhipathih Sadaa Shivoham. 


THE entire creation is the cosmic dance of the Lord. It is a marvellous and incomparable dance. 
It is an enchanting scene to behold. 


In this world, birth and death, happiness and sorrow follow each other in ceaseless succession. 
However, Sumathi, an exemplar of chastity, could stay the sun from rising to prevent the death 
of her husband. In order to restore her husband to life, Saavithri confronted successfully the lord 
of Death. Such extraordinary power is given only to human beings. 


Dharma and adharma are prevalent in creation 


In this creation, both Dharma (Righteousness) and Adharma (unrighteousness) are prevalent. At 
one time righteousness is predominant. At another time unrighteousness reigns. Only a man 
filled with devotion can attain the triune embodiment of the Divine-----Sathyam, Shivam, 
Sundaram (Truth, Auspiciousness and Beauty). 


When confronted with his final destiny man becomes a prey to many fears and doubts. The 
moment Kamsa heard that the child that would be born to his cousin Devaki would prove his 
slayer, he wanted immediately to kill her. Vasudeva saved his wife's life by promising to hand 
over to Kamsa every child born to Devaki. To kill or to save a life, the power vests in man alone. 


Every human being is a fragment of the Divine. Only when a man discharges his duties will his 
life find fulfilment. Duty is man's primary obligation. If a man is endowed with wealth and 
possessions, he has a duty to enjoy them. But to covet or seize other people's wealth is a crime. 
Wealth is not confined to money or gold or other possessions. All the knowledge and skills 
acquired by a person also constitute his wealth. Even health is wealth. The power to think is also 
wealth. Physical strength and mental abilities are also wealth. The time at one's command is also 
his wealth. 


Hence, it is man's primary duty to utilise his time and every other form of wealth in the right 
manner. Unfortunately, today man wastes the time, wealth and talents of others. This is 
Adharma--opposed to righteousness. 


Dharma implies right use of one's time 


Oftentimes, I advise the students not to indulge in excessive talking for the reason that it is a 
gross abuse of the time available to them. Moreover, by excessive talk with another person, he is 
robbing the latter of his time. This is also wrong. 


Dharma implies the right use of one's time and resource. Adharma is the abuse of one's time and 
wealth and depriving others of their wealth. 


Every person has a mind of his own in which thoughts arise based on his Ichcha-Shakthi (will 
power). One person favours adoration of Raama. Another prefers Shiva. A third one enjoys 
worshipping Krishna. A fourth is inspired by contemplation of Jesus. Another is musing over the 
thought of Allah. All these are based on individual preferences. 


But, in the minds of all persons, in whatever country or region, whatever form one wishes to 
adore, whatever deity one wants to worship, whatever name one likes to chant, two things are 
essential. Vishvaasam (faith) and Shraddha (earnestness). Without earnestness, even the most 
trivial act cannot be performed well. Without Shraddha nothing can be accomplished. 


"Shraddhaavaan labhaathe Jnaanam," says the Geetha. Only the earnest seeker can acquire 
knowledge of the Divine. However intelligent one may be, without earnestness he will achieve 
nothing. A man with earnestness can convert a small burning cinder into a huge bonfire. 


Shraddha and Vishvaasa represent Shakthi and Shiva 


Shraddha (earnestness) is the means to the realisation of the Divine. What does Shraddha 
signify? It signifies Dhaiva-Shakthi (Divine power). Shraddha is called Bhavaani. It refers to a 
goddess, to Shakthi (Divine energy) or Prakrithi (Nature). 


Next comes Vishvaasam (faith). What is faith? It symbolises Eeshvarathvam (the Divine 
Principle). Through Shraddha (earnestness) Ichcha shakthi, Kriyaa-shakthi and Jnaana-shakthi 
(will power, the power of action, and - the power of wisdom) are manifested. The essence of 
these three potencies is Eeshvarathva (Divinity). They constitute the power of Vishvaasam 
(faith). 


Thus, Shraddha and Vishvaasam represent Paarvathi and Parameshvara. Humanness represents 
the combination of Shakthi (or Nature) and Shiva. These two are not disparate. Just as fire and 
the power to burn go together, these two go together. Sugar and sweetness are similarly 
interrelated. There is no sugar without sweetness. Where there is sweetness there is sugar. 
Likewise Shraddha and Vishvaasam are symbiotically related to each other. Hence these should 
be regarded as present in man in the form of Shiva and Shakthi. 


The whole of Prakrithi (nature)is Ardhnaari-svaruupam (the feminine half of the Divine couple). 
Any man who has no Shraddha and Vishvaasa is verily a corpse. 


Although both Shraddha (as God,) and Vishvaasa (as Nature) are present in man, by ignoring 
God (lacking earnestness) man wastes his life. Earnestness and faith together constitute 
spirituality. Without these, all spiritual exercises have no value. 


Dedicate all actions to God 


How is man to realise the presence of Shiva and Shakthi in Him? It is by doing all actions as a 
dedication to the Divine. “Mathkarmakrith, Math-paramah, Madh-bhakthah," declares the 
Geetha (Whatever actions you do, dedicate them to me. Consider me as your Supreme Lord. Be 
devoted to Me). This is the message of the Lord in the Geetha. This is the right way to worship 
the Saakaara (attributeful Lord). This kind of worship promotes devotion. 


Only a land that is properly ploughed, weeded, manured and sown with good seeds will yield a 
rich harvest. Likewise, after the field of the heart has been cleared of the weeds of bad thoughts 
and qualities, fertilised by good feelings and virtues, and the pure seed of Prema (Love) is sown, 
the sacred crop of Jnaana (wisdom) can be enjoyed. 


Based on this, two paths have been laid down in the spiritual field: Vidhvamsaka and Vidhaayaka 
(the destructive and the constructive paths). Vidhvamsaka path refers to the clearing of a field of 
bushes, thorns and the like before it is got ready for cultivation. Vidhaayaka path refers to the 
planting of good seeds in the form of good qualities which will yield a harvest of joy. Hence 
everyone's heart has to be filled in the right way by Shraddha and Vishvaasa. 


It is not enough for a devotee to claim that he loves the Lord. He must find out whether the Lord 
loves him. You must see whether God showers His grace on you. Only then, your devotion 
becomes meaningful. 


In all his actions, man should not be concerned only with self-interest. He must find out whether 
his actions are approved by his conscience. Just as the Divine is always blissful, the devotee 
should be a Santhushtah (ever-blissful). But in the present times, men have no contentment or 
sense of joy. They are racked by doubts and apprehensions. How can such persons ever 
experience divine bliss? It has been said that one who is vacillating is merely a living creature, 
but one who is firm and unwavering is divine. 


Treat God as a friend 


God has the appellation Suhrith (a good hearted friend). In every human relationship, there is an 
element of selfishness in the display of affection. God alone showers His love with no trace of 
selfishness. Man fails to understand this sacred, Divine Love principle. I would like to illustrate 
what it means to have God as friend from the example of the Pandavas whom Krishna was all in 
all. When Arjuna returned to Hasthinaapura from Dhvaaraka after the passing of Krishna, he 
could not bear to answer his mother Kunthi's question as to what had happened to Krishna. With 
tears in his eyes, he said. that Krishna, who had been their charioteer, their councellor, their 
preceptor, friend, lord and everything else, had left the world. There can be no greater thing than 
to have God as one's Suhrith (friend). 


Our aim should be to dwell in the Lord 


Another appellation of God is Nivaasah (the Supreme Abode). Our aim should be to dwell in the 
Lord. This cosmos is the abode of the Lord. We are living in this cosmos. We are not separate 
from it. But the sacred feeling that we are living in the abode of the Lord should be cherishable 
by everyone. Such sacred feelings do not arise in man because of the barriers created by raaga, 
bhaya and dhvesha (attachment, fear and hatred). Attachment is the feeling that one develops 
when he considers that something other than himself can give him. satisfaction and joy. This 
sense of separateness should go. The consciousness that the same constituents are present in one 


and all should be realised. Then, there will be no room for differentiation and alienation. The 
sense of oneness will be experienced. 


Where there is attachment, there is dhvesha (hatred), which is a reflection of raaga. Fear is born 
out of attachment--the fear of losing what one has. Attachment and fear breed hatred. These three 
lead man to stray from his adherence to Shraddha and Vishvaasa. Hence, these three have to. be 
brought under control. 


To realise the 'Divinity within man, everyone' has to turn his vision inward. All that is perceived 
in the external world is subject to changes. Man cannot derive happiness from an unchanging 
world. He desires change. But the change He should seek is a divine change, not changes in the 
mundane world. he should seek to know the truth about himself. Ignorant about his true self, man 
today is harried by fears. As long as the fear remains, God will elude him. He has to develop 
faith in the Divinity (Shiva) within him, to get rid of this fear and acquire the Brahmabalam 
(strength of the Divine). 


Difference between raathri and Shivaraathri 


Every night is marked by darkness. But tonight it is Shivaraathri. What is the difference between 
raathri (night) and Shivaraathri? For the man who has recognised his divinity, every night is 
Shivaraathri. For the man immersed in worldly concerns, all nights are the same. That night is 
marked by darkness. This night is marked by light. Spirituality is the lighthouse that spreads light 
for the man who is full of despair, immersed in insatiable desires. The name of God is the 
lighthouse. By chanting the name, the bearer of the name can be realised. 


Man has to proceed from the body to the Divine. Man is a limb of society. Society is a limb of 
Nature. Nature is a limb of God. The Aathma is present in everyone. It knows no territorial 
barriers. It is omnipresent. To recognize the omnipresence of the Divine is the purpose of 
observing Shivaraathri. This purpose is not served by fasting and keeping awake all the night. 
These are mere auxiliaries to what is considered the ultimate goal. But God-realisation should 
not be put off to some distant future. It has to be taken up here and now. That is the purpose of 
Shivaraathri. 


Concentrate Mind on God 


But today, people have forgotten their Divine destiny and are wasting their lives in worldly 
pursuits. They have no faith in their future. Where there is no faith, there is no Shiva. They lack 
the power of Shraddha (earnestness). So Paarvathi is also not there. Man's pathetic condition 
today is he has denied himself the grace of both Paarvathi and Shiva. He can obtain it only by 
cultivating human values. He has to acquire the Jnaana (spiritual wisdom) that comes from 
Shraddha (spiritual earnestness). The true values for man are Ichcha-shakthi, Kriya-shakthi, and 
Jnaana-shakthi. These represent the triple aspects of the Divine: Sathyam, Shivam, Sundaram 
(Truth, Auspiciousness and Beauty). These are the eternal verities. Though endowed with these 
divine powers, man goes after petty trinkets. When the Divine is ready to confer liberation, why 
get involved in the bonds of worldly life? 


Man should seek God alone. Once God's grace is secured, all else will be got with ease. For this 
purpose, man has to get rid of attachment, fear and hatred. He must perform all actions as an 
offering to God, who is omnipresent. 


The vigil and fasting observed on Shivaraathri night have become farcical. True vigil and fasting 
consist in concentrating all one's thoughts on God during the whole night. God's grace is a direct 
sequel to one's actions. Each one has to examine for himself in what spirit he is performing his 
worship. The Divine can be realised only through Shraddha and Vishvaasa. The Divine is within 
everyone. Once man recognises this fact, he will give no room for bad qualities. 


Embodiments of Divine Love! Dedicate yourselves to the performance of your duties. Do not 
waste your time or that of others in idle talk. Starting. with the duties of the individual, man 
should aim at achieving-oneness with the Divine as the ultimate goal. Shivaraathri is an 
auspicious occasion for concentrating the mind on God. Devote at least this one night entirely to 
the contemplation of God, to the exclusion of all other thoughts and worries. 


Discourse in the Puurnachandhra Auditorium on 19-2-1993, Shivaraathri Day. 


Iam showing you by My example how you must fill every moment 
with useful beneficial activity. You talk among yourselves, "O, 
Swami is having his rest hour; Swami is sleeping. "But I have 
never craved for a minute's rest or sleep or relief. Shall I tell you 
at what time I feel restful, relieved, content? When I know that you 
are all earning supreme bliss through detachment and spiritual 
discipline, not until then. 


BABA 


7. Serve the Divine: chant the Name 


What can Kali or the forces of evil do 

To one whose heart is filled with compassion, 

Who wears the jewel of truthful speech, 

Whose limbs are devoted to the well-being of others? 


IF MAN is to be free from the sway of evil forces, The has to achieve the triple purity of thought, 
word and deed. It is only when the heart, the tongue and the body are pure that man can fully 
comprehend Para thathva (Supreme Principle.) 


This world that is inhabited by man is called Prapancha. Pra implies that which is shining or 
blooming. It is a prefix. It is only when this Pra is prefixed to every sense organ that Prapancha 
(the world) emerges. 


Prapancha and Paramaathma 


There are the five basic elements (space, air, fire, water and earth), the five sense organs (relating 
to hearing, touch, sight, taste and smell), the five sheaths (Annamaya, Praanamaya, Manomaya, 
Vijnaanamaya and Aanandhamaya), and the five life-breaths (Praana, Apaana, Vyaana, Udaana 
and Samaana). When the prefix Pra is added to each of these Pancha (five) categories, the 
Prapancha emerges. This means that the world is made up of the five elements, the five senses, 
the five sheaths and the five vital airs. Consequently, wherever you turn, you see in the world 
differences: differences among material objects, a variety among individuals, differences in 
experiences, etc. Wherever such differences exist, there are bound to be likes and dislikes, Raaga 
and dhvesha (attachments and aversions). If man has to transcend these differences, he has to 
recognise the all-pervading Divine principle. Only then both attachment and hatred can be totally 
eliminated. 


The five elements are manifestations of the Paramaathma (Over-self). So are the five sheaths 
and the five vital airs. Hence, man cannot exist without these manifestations. That is why the 
scriptures declared: "His feet and hands are everywhere; His head, face, eyes and ears are 
everywhere." The omnipresence of the Divine can be experienced in the Cosmos. 


When a man embarks on some undertaking, he imagines that no one is observing him. But no 
man can do anything unseen or unnoticed by God. Is it possible to. deceive the Divine whose 
face and eyes are every where? "Sarvam Aavrithya thishthathi" (Encompassing everything, He 
remains). The Divine shines in every object. It is a mark of supreme ignorance to imagine that 
you can conceal anything from God. Nor is that all. God is described, as "Acharam Charameva 
Cha" (He is non-moving and moving). That is, though appearing to be moving, He remains 
unmoving. God has no hands, but He can grasp anything. He has no feet but He can move 
everywhere. He has no eyes, but can see everything. This is the significance of the statement 
"Acharam Charameva Cha." 


Here is an example. Man in the dream states feels that he is moving about. In the dream he 
wanders over all places. He experiences many actions done by the body. But despite the 
movements and activities in the dream, his body is still and motionless on the bed on which he is 
sleeping. The same body is moving about in the dream. The Divine is in that body. Equally the 


Divine is in the body that is motionless. Thus, He is both the unmoving and the moving. It is not 
easy to recognise this subtle Jnaana (spiritual wisdom). 


Perception of One without a second is Jnaana 


What does Jnaana mean? Jna means to know. Na refers to that which cannot be known. Jnaana 
therefore refers to that which cannot be easily comprehended. "Advaitha Dharshanam 
Jnaanam," declares the scripture. Jnaana (Super-knowledge) is the perception of the One 
without a second. Only the One exists. There is no second. In such a situation, there is nothing to 
be known. There is no knowledge, knowing or knower (in that state). In comprehending the One, 
the nature of the many has to be properly understood. Every man has to recognise the Divinity 
that is present in all human beings. 


God is one. That One is the Indweller in all beings. Did the Divine fragment Himself in a myriad 
ways? The answer is: without fragmenting Himself, the Divine is present in all beings. In his 
ignorance, man notices only the manifoldness around him. 


This may be illustrated this way. The sun's image can be seen in an ocean, a river, a lake, a pond 
or a well. Everywhere the sun appears to be shining. Are there so many different suns? No. The 
objects reflecting the image of the sun are varied and different from one another. Likewise, 
names and forms say be different, but in all beings, the same God, without being divided, shines 
as the Indweller. Thus, although bodies may appear with different names and forms, the Divine 
in them is one. 


Develop love, nearness and obedience to the Divine 


To recognise this. omnipresent Divine, man has to get rid of Raaga, Bhaya, and Dhvesha 
(attachment, fear and hatred). These three are worldly ‘qualities. But, merely by shedding these 
qualities, man cannot have God-realisation or comprehend the Divine.principle. This table before 
me has no qualities. Can it comprehend the Divine? The mere absence of bad qualities is not 
enough. There must be love. You must develop love towards God. But love alone will not serve 
to make one comprehend the Aathmik principle. One must move towards the Divine. But, here 
again, nearness to God is not enough. You have to carry out the injunctions of the Divine. It is 
only when love, nearness and obedience to the Divine commands are present that one can realise 
the Aathmik principle. Recognition of the Divinity inherent in the human state calls for spiritual 
saadhanas (disciplines) of various kinds. 


Today man is enveloped in a certain disease. It is Ashaanthi (peacelessness). For curing any 
disease, there are normally three methods. One is to take the prescribed medicine. After taking 
the medicine, the prescribed diet regimen has to be followed. Taking the medicine without 
observing the diet regulations will not help to cure the disease. Adhering to the prescribed diet, 
without taking the medicine, will also not serve the purpose. Both medicines and diet control are 
essential to ensure a cure. 


If the disease of peacelessness afflicting man is to be cured, he has to take the medicine of love 
and adhere to the diet of following the injunctions of the Divine. Only then will the mental unrest 


go. 


Three different types of argument 


It is true that many have love for God. But they do not live up to the dictates of the Divine. 
Those who follow the Divine injunctions in a formal manner, do not act with love for God. It is 
only when there is a union of love and obedience that man can recover peace of mind. 


In this context, a Vedhic aphorism declares: "Vaadhah pravadhathaam" (Let the argument be 
expounded). There are three different ways of carrying on a Vaada (argument). Without 
attachment or hatred, with the desire to understand the Aathmik principle, with a sincere -heart, 
engaging oneself in a spirit of enquiry, is termed a discussion, Vaadhah (purposeful argument). 
This means that one conducts the debate with a heartfelt yearning to know the truth, with a pure 
mind filled with noble thoughts. 


Without such an attitude, if one is keen only to assert his own opinions and defeat the others in 
the argument by any means, condemning the beliefs of others and defending one's own views in 
an egoistic spirit---this type of argumentation is termed Jalpa (wrangling). 


The third type of argumentation is condemning everything and indulging in such condemnation 
habitually, without any regard for one's own defects, finding faults in others perpetually, 
magnifying those faults and broadcasting them. Such an attitude is termed Vithandavaadha 
(perverse argumentation). 


Of these three types, unfortunately these days we notice only the third type of perverse logic 
prevalent. Vaadha and Jalpa are not very much in evidence. One pretends to be all-knowing in 
any argument. Such people enter into an argument only for furthering their selfish. ends. These 
persons can never realise the Aathmik principle even after any number of lives. 


Strive to understand the inherent Divinity' 


The first requisite is the urge to comprehend the Aathmik principle. Only when this arises in man 
will his humanness become worth while. In spite of human birth and the inherent Divinity in 
them, men are failing to recognise their Divine nature. Man is learning all about other things, but 
is making no effort to understand himself. 


What is the real meaning of Jnaana? It is to know the truth about one's self by a process of 
refinement. What is spirituality? What is the refining of one's nature? It is discovering one's true 
self. 


One is searching for something in a room. He sees everything in the room except himself. 
Likewise in this vast room of the cosmos, man is searching for everything and perceives all 
things. But he does not know himself and has no perception of what he is. He cries out: "Where 
is God? Where is God?" This query is like that of a man who asks others where he is. "Where am 
I? Who am I?" What is the meaning in putting such questions to others? He knows where he is. 
How can others tell him where he is? 


"As is your feeling, so is the outcome" 


Likewise, it is sheer ignorance to search for God. There is no need to search for God. He is 
everywhere, all-pervading, inside and outside. You have to know the Divine which is here, there 
and everywhere. The Bhaagavatha says: "Dhuuraath dhuure anthike cha" (He is farther than the 
farthest and close by as well). There is none who is nearer to us than He. But there is also none 
who is farther from us than He. What is the reason for this nearness or remoteness? One's 


feelings alone are the primary reason. If you feel He is near, He is near; if you feel He is distant. 
He is remote. It is on account of this that the scriptures declare: "As is your feeling, so is the 
outcome." 


God has been given three names: Om Thath Sath. Man has a fascination for names. When the 
name of his native place or his own name is mentioned, he feels happy. But with regard to the 
Divine, the name is not important. If the inner significance of all the different names of the 
Divine is understood, it will be found that they mean one thing alone. Om is Parabrahma (the 
Supreme Absolute). Tath is 'That.' Sath is the Real. "Om Thath Sath" means "The Supreme 
Absolute is that Reality." By describing Om as Pranava, made up of the three letters A, U, M 
and elaborately commenting in this manner, the pedantic expositors confuse the aspirants. By 
such expositions, devotion is weakened. Each one expounds these statements in his own way. 
When the question is asked whether these exponents practise any of the teaching they preach, the 
answer is in the negative. When such is the case, how can spirituality grow? 


Hence, practice is more essential than preaching. When you practise the teachings, others will 
follow your example. When you preach to a lakh of people what you don't practise yourself, all 
of them lose their faith in the teachings and are indifferent to them. 


Three stages to attain the Divine 


Moreover, the Aathmik bliss to be derived from practising spiritual truth cannot be derived by 
any other means. No preceptor's teaching will be of any use. Nor will the reading of scriptures be 
of any avail. The gain from study or listening is precious little. It is only when you practise what 
you have seen and heard that you can experience Aathmik bliss. In the Geetha, Krishna declares. 
"Inaathum, Dhrashtum, Praveshtum" (the three stages of knowing, seeing and experiencing in 
Self-Realisation). You have heard about something: that is Jnaathum. You wish to see what you 
have heard about: that is Dhrashtum. And then you wish to have the experience of what you 
have seen: that is Praveshtum. Only when these three take place can the human being attain the 
Divine. At present, you are merely studying the scriptures or listening to the expositions of 
scholars. You must embark on an undertaking to ascertain whether what you have heard can be 
found and put into practice. You have to begin the quest. But where is the quest to be made? Not 
outside you. Everything is within you. All that is outside is a reflection of the Inner Being. 


Experience of the sages in realising the Divine 


In ancient times, the great sages performed rigorous penances to experience the Divine. Some of 
them gave up the attempt after a time, considering the Divine as unattainable. Some others 
persisted in their attempts with the determination to achieve the goal. Thereby they realised the 
Divine. What did they proclaim to the world after their Realisation? "Vedhaaham etham 
Purusham Mahaantham Aadithyavarnam Thamasah d" (We were able to see the Lord, the 
Effulgent One, bright as the Sun). Where did they see God? "Thamasah parasthaath" (Beyond 
the Thamo-guna), came the answer. 


Today man is enveloped in a thick cloud of Thamoguna. The effulgent Lord can be seen beyond 
the Thamoguna (the quality which is the cause of all man's ignorance and wrong doings). This 
Thamo-guna, which holds every man in its grip, should be got rid of. For this purpose, men 
should perform good deeds and render service. 


In the Raamaayana, during an encounter between Hanumaan and Vibheeshana, Raavana's 
youngest brother, in Lanka, Vibheeshana asked Hanumaan why he (Vibheeshana) had not 
secured a vision of Raama in spite of his chanting Raama's name. Hanumaan replied that mere 
chanting of Raama's name was not enough. Vibheeshana had failed to engage himself in any act 
of service to Raama. He had done nothing to render help to Seetha, who was held captive in 
Lanka by Raavana. 


It is not enough to recite the Lord's name. One has to render service to the Lord. Only then, there 
is a unification of the Name and the Form and the Divine is experienced. 


People are chanting the name of the Lord today. They are dwelling in the aashram. Why have 
they come here? To secure Bhagavaan's grace and experience Aathmaanandham (spiritual bliss). 
Those who have come may be reciting the name of the Lord. But are you engaging yourselves in 
any of the Lord's work? What part are you playing in Svaami's work? Without participating in 
Divine service, your stay here for any number of years will be as futile as the presence of a frog 
on a lotus. While bees coming from long distances taste the nectarine sweetness of the honey in 
the lotus, the frog derives no benefit from its nearness to the lotus. This truth is not recognised by 
devotees. 


Duty of the aashramites 


Hence, it is not enough to come to the aashram. You have to take part in the aashram activities. 
You must render service according to your capacity. You are not asked to do more than that. 
Svaami does not ask for your services. He is saying all this for your own sake. 


Hence, from today everyone staying in the aashram, whoever he may be, should render service 
according to one's capacity. There is no use merely in consuming food and taking one's seat in 
the Mandhir Verandah or the Dharshan (audience) line. Everyone must render service to the 
limit of one's ability. Those who cannot render such service should quit the Mandhir. Why have 
you come here? What are you doing? Consult your conscience for the answers. You have come 
from far away places, giving up all things. But despite this renunciation, what are you doing? 
You are wasting your time. This is a grievous mistake. Time is a manifestation of God. Time is 
consuming man. God is the consumer of Time itself. Therefore, you should strive to earn the 
grace of God. If you waste time, you will forfeit God's grace. 


Embark on active work 


Many persons are wasting their time in this manner. Whatever you tell them, they say: "Sai 
Raam! Sai Raam!" Even a tape-recorder can repeat this. What is the use of uttering the name? 
Embark on active work. Even for eating a masala dosa, you have to engage your hands and 
mouth in action. Likewise, you have to use your hands for service. Chant the name with your 
tongue. And experience bliss in your heart. Only when all these three are done will you qualify 
for God's grace. 


Therefore, everyone who had joined the aashram should take part in service activities according 
to one's capacity. Some are doing-this. There is one devotee who is 86 years old. He is engaged 
in some work or other right upto 10 p.m. in the night. For doing work earnestly, is age a bar? He 
has difficulty in climbing stairs or coming down. But he carries on his work by using a vehicle. 
There is another devotee who is also an aged person. According to his strength, he renders 


service in the Canteen by serving water. There is a third devotee. His energies have declined. 
Despite this, he is carrying on the editorial duties assigned to him. 


Do service according to your capacity 


Therefore, each one may do what lies within his power. But there are quite a few younger 
people. who don't do any work. They take food several times. They sit in the verandah and do 
nothing. There is no room for such persons in the verandah. You have to work. Those who do 
not work, should leave. This is the import of the Geetha declaration: "Karmanyeva 
Adhikaarasthe maa phaleshu kadaachana" (You are entitled only to do your duty, not to the 
fruits thereof). Practise. and propagate this Karma Maarga (the Path of Action). 


When one is told to take up some work, he says: "I won't be able to do this." Now, what is it such 
a person can do? He must at least say what it is that he can do. He is not being asked to build 
walls or dig wells. No one is asked to do such arduous work in the aashram. All tasks are easy 
ones. We want persons who will take up such work. It is not for the development of the aashram. 
It is for fulfilment of your life. The work can always be got done by wage earners without your 
service. But if you do that work, get involved in Karma Yoga, aim at Dharma Yoga and merge in 
Brahma Yoga (union with the Divine), you will have Self-Realisation. This. is the teaching of 
Svaami. 


Grief follows happiness like a shadow 


Dear devotees! All actions should be done with a view to achieving Thrikarana shuddhi (purity 
in thought, word and deed). Everything is in the heart of man. Divinity is installed in the heart. A 
foolish person is carried away by the wealth and pomp of the outside world. The conceit that 
accompanies the fascination for these possessions is not recognised. Grief follows happiness like 
a shadow. Under the shadow of Adhikaara (Authority) flourishes the demon of Ahamkara 
(egotism). Do not be carried away by the lure of power. Self-conceit, which comes in its wake, 
will overwhelm you. Beware of its presence. Only then you will be well. Do not gloat over 
wealth and possessions. There is an ogress that will submerge them. That is dhurabhimaanam 
(self-conceit). You must take note of such dangers. 


When there is a lightning, you see a sudden burst of effulgence. This is followed in the next 
moment by intense darkness. Darkness lurks all the time behind light. Hence, man is advised to 
treat pleasure and pain, profit and loss, victory and defeat with an equal eye. There is nothing in 
the world without these opposites. This is termed Dhvaitha (duality). Darkness and light, heat 
and cold, good and bad, sin and merit, truth and falsehood--these pairs are always there. Man has 
two eyes, two ears, and two nostrils in one nose. 


Thus the world presents a picture of dualism. And because of this, we have the phenomenon of 
constant" change in the Jagath (world). Jagath means that which "comes and goes" (Ja + gath). 
Nothing is permanent. There is only one thing that is unchanging and eternal and that is Divinity. 
To experience that Divinity man must first of all get rid of his bad qualities. He must suppress 
his ego and render service to the Divine along with chanting the Lord's name. That is the way to 
redeem one's human life. Moreover, both the chanting of God's name and rendering of service 
should be done with a love-filled heart. 


Discourse in the Puurnachandhra Auditorium on 20-2-1993. 


I am ever engaged in some activity or other for your benefit. 
Things I could get done, I do not entrust to others; I do them 
Myself, so that they may learn self-reliance and get experience 
thereby. I have always your progress, your comfort, your 
happiness in mind. You can note it in the slightest act of Mine. I do 


all work pertaining to Me. I open all letters addressed to Me and 
they are legion. 


BABA 


8. New horizons for the Sai Institute 


STUDENTS! Do not be proud that you have acquired scholastic knowledge. The true form of 
knowledge is humility. Eschewing pride and self-conceit, pursue the right goal. 


Students today are acquiring considerable scientific knowledge. It serves only to promote 
civilised living in the phenomenal world. But what the students need today is the refinement of 
the heart. This is possible only through an internal process. Students who have imbibed modern 
culture should not only develop their intellects, but should also develop a broad outlook. 


The students today have a two-fold duty: One is to face the challenges of modern civilization, the 
other is to protect and preserve the ancient spiritual and cultural heritage of the country. Students 
should shine as ideal citizens of the nation. 


A complete education is that which makes a man compassionate. Besides giving appropriate 
exercises to the body, students should strive to cultivate the heart and keep it pure. 


Two kinds of learning in educational system 


There are two kinds of learning in the educational system today. One relates to information about 
various subjects. The other relates to the rectification of the individual's life. The first relates to 
the physical. The second relates to the spiritual. The former is concerned with earning a living. 
The latter is concerned with the basic goal of life. 


In the first type of education, you have opportunities to investigate various matters, and arrive at 
scientific truths. For instance, you find out that water is composed of two parts of hydrogen and 
one part of oxygen. You thereby know the composition of water. This enhances .your scientific 
knowledge. But what is relevant from the social and spiritual point of view is how to ensure fair 
distribution of water among all people. 


A national system of education calls for the cultivation of humility, devotion and obedience. 
When students go through such a national system, they will not only manifest the inherent 
divinity in them, but also develop discipline. If education consisted only of scientific knowledge, 
the world will be a hopeless place. Scientific knowledge alone does not constitute the content of 
education. Character is knowledge. Character is power. Character is life itself. Character is the 
hallmark of true education. 


Unfortunately, the student today fills his head with a lot of information, but his personality is 
impaired in the process. Filling his mind with physical facts and absorbed in physical 
investigations, he undermines his basic humanness. 


Aim at cultivation of good qualities 


Selflessness, humility, unostentatiousness are qualities that underlie the human personality. 
Along with academic excellence, a student should aim at the cultivation of good qualities. 
Education enables you to score marks, but you also need elevation of your personality. Qualities 
contribute to elevation. Education and elevation combine to develop the human personality. 


Unfortunately, people today are only concerned about academic education and ignore the 
cultivation of good qualities. Today the progress of scientific and technological education has 
virtually destroyed the sacredness of the human personality. Even the great war leader and Prime 
Minister of Britain, Winston Churchill, once declared: "Man has conquered everything, but has 


not conquered himself." Prahlaadha reproved his father, Hiranyakashipu, by telling him that 
though he had conquered the three worlds, he had not learnt to conquer his senses. 


Without being able to control the senses, what is the use of learning every kind of knowledge? 
All knowledge is useless, if one has not acquired Self-knowledge. Such a person may be 
regarded as intellectually clever, but cannot be called intelligent. The first step, therefore, is to 
know one's Self. Spirituality is the means to acquire knowledge of yourself. Hence, as much 
importance should be assigned to the promotion of good qualities in the educational process as is 
given to academic studies. 


During the past two centuries, many marvellous and even dangerous achievements have resulted 
from the pursuit of science. Exploiting the resources of the earth, they are boasting about their 
accomplishments. They have produced atomic bombs which can cause terrible destruction. Is it a 
sign of wisdom to boast one's capacity to destroy the world? This is a demonic power The 
Western nations are now worried about the consequences of their dreadful discoveries. 


Vijnaana should be combined with Prajnaana 


It is essential that the development of science should be accompanied by a corresponding 
development-of the power of Viveka (discrimination). Vijnaana (Science) is doubtless, 
necessary. But it should be combined with Prajnaana (divine wisdom). Prajna is the essential 
principle in man. This 'Integrated Awareness! in Vedhaanthik parlance, Prajnaanam has been 
equated with Brahman (the Supreme Absolute). 


When science is combined with Prajna, discrimination follows as a corollary. By forgetting 
Prajna and pursuing Vijnana (science), man is making a mockery of his existence. It is not 
enough to make a mere man out of a person through education. Education should aim at making 
him a "full man". 


It is well known that the Indian economy is passing through a critical phase. But this is not so 
grievous a problem as the decline in morality and character. If this moral decline is not reversed, 
education will be utterly ruined. Students therefore must endeavour to promote morality and 
ethics. Without these, the entire nation will be ruined. 


Four-fold formula for developing human qualities 


Earning of money should not be the primary aim of students. Education should be for developing 
human qualities, not for securing jobs. There are four requisites for promoting this attitude to 
education and life. They are: "Thyaja dhurjana samsargam" (Give up all association with the 
evil-minded), "Bhaja Saadhu samaagamam" (Pray for the company of the good), "Kuru punyam 
Ahoraathram" (Engage yourself in meritorious deeds day and night) and "Smara_nithya- 
anithyathaam" (Remember what is permanent and what is transient). 


You should run away from bad company. A bad company can spoil even a good man. A 
renunciant may be turned into a covetous man. This is the effect of bad company. The ancient 
sages considered association with the evil-minded as companionship with a poisonous snake. It 
was to escape from the danger of such association that they resorted to the solitude of forests. A 
snake may bite a person once in a way but a bad man infects others with poison all the time. A 
bad man is one who is filled with bad thoughts, speaks bad words and does bad deeds. 


The Mahaabhaaratha offers four examples of. bad men called Dhushta Chathushtayam. The first 
one is Shakuni (Dhuryodhana's maternal uncle). Shakuni was all the time filled with 


Dhuraalochana (bad thoughts). He is a total stranger to good ideas. He was always plotting 
something bad for someone or other. 


Dhuryodhana was having Shakuni as his adviser Dhuryodhana was engaged in Dhuscharya (bad 
deeds). They were comrades in evil. 


Then came Dhusshaasana (brother of Dhuryodhana). In association with Shakuni and 
Dhuryodhana, Dhusshaasana became notorious for his Dhushpravarthana (bad behaviour). 
When these three evil-minded men came together, "even stars, started " falling during daytime," 
as the saying goes. The whole cosmos rebels against such evil-minded men. 


Karna, out of a false sense of Dhurabhimaanam (bad attachment), joined this trio. Gratitude is 
doubtless a good quality. But because Dhuryodhana came to his rescue on a critical occasion, 
Karna developed a wrongful attachment to Dhuryodhana. Karna was a good-natured person. He 
was noble-minded. But because he was associated with evil-minded men he also became a bad 
person. Despite his valour, physical prowess and intellectual abilities, Karna met with disaster., 
because he had made himself remote from God. What was the defect in Karna? 
Dhurabhimaanam (misguided attachment). 


Four kinds of evil persons 


Evil thoughts, evil deeds, evil conduct-and attachment to the evil-minded---these are Dhushta 
Chathushtayam (the four evil persons). Hence, students should, at the outset, give up the 
company of bad persons. Once you have achieved maturity in moral stature, you can associate 
with anyone. At this stage, when your hearts are tender and your minds are not developed, you 
should not move freely with all and sundry. When you are spiritually immature, you should not 
associate with one and all equally. 


These four rules should be the guiding-posts in your life. If you adhere to these four rules, you 
will be able to acquire all knowledge, by the grace of the Divine. This is illustrated by the story 
of Padhmapaadha, who acquired spiritual knowledge from Aadhi Shankara purely by his devoted 
service to the preceptor, without any attention to scriptural studies. Service to the preceptor was 
the Punyakarma (meritorious deed) which he performed all the time. This sanctified his life. 
While bringing the clothes of his guru from the other bank of the Ganga, the river was in spate 
and rose to the level of his neck. He prayed to Lord Shankara to enable him to serve his 
preceptor He could reach the other bank by walking over lotus shaped slabs which appeared on 
the swollen river. He got the name Padhmapaadha and received all spiritual knowledge from 
Aadhi Shankara by sheer grace. 


Service to Guru sanctifies one's life 


Let me relate the story of Ashvathaama, who secured the Chuudaamani (diadem) by the grace of 
his preceptor for his devoted service to the guru. The Chuudaamani which Ashvathaama wore 
on his head, saved him from being beheaded by Arjuna, who had taken a vow to cut off 
Ashvathaama's head for his crime of slaughtering the Upa-paandavas (infant children of the 
Paandava brothers). Though Arjuna was keen on carrying out his vow and took Ashvathaama 
before Dhraupadhi, she, out of the largeness of her heart and from the inspiration of Krishna, 
found a formula to punish Ashvathaama without cutting off his head. 


She said that if a Brahmana was kept captive in a house and sent out as free man, it was 
equivalent to beheading him. She also told Arjuna that it was not Dharma to kill a Brahmana 
who carried on his head the precious jewel given to him by his guru. 


Students have to bear in mind these four principles: (1) Give up association with the evil-minded. 
(2) Welcome the company of the good. (3) Do meritorious acts ceaselessly. (4) Remember 
always what is transient and what is eternal. 


You must remind yourselves that you are human beings and not animals. You must give no room 
to bad thoughts. Develop the inner vision to realise the Divine within you. This is the 
significance of devotees closing their eyes when they are in the inner sanctum of a temple. They 
pray to the Divine to open their inner vision. 


The unique Chancellor and Vice-chancellor 


In today's programme, we regard two items as important: one, a send-off and the other, a 
welcome. That is not so. Both are welcome. There is no such thing as a "send-off" with Sai. 
Svaami will not stand in the way of those who wish to leave. But I will not ask anyone to go. 


However, during the past two years, Prof. Sampath moved among the staff and the students as 
among the members of the family. The teachers, the students and others lived as members of the 
same family. In other educational institutions, the Vice-Chancellor puts in his appearance once a 
year Chancellors are hardly to be seen at all. But in our Institute, even more than the Vice- 
Chancellor, the Chancellor is ever present. 


The most amazing fact is that the Chancellor spends all twenty four hours with the students. How 
should they answer their examination papers? How should they face their examinations? 
Speaking to the students even about these simple matters, Svaami gives them joy. In the same 
manner, the Vice-Chancellor also, from the morning prayer, till late in the evening, discusses 
their problems with the students. Prof. Sampath is a devotee. He did not come here seeking an 
office. To lead a sacred life in close proximity to Svaami was the sole desire of the couple Mr. 
and Mrs. Sampath. Coming here, he carried on his duties, to the limit of his capacity, without any 
deficiencies on his part. This is his home, not mine. So everyone carried on his respective duties. 
It is not merely to praise him that I say all this. He performed his duties well. That is enough. 


Need for research in harnessing solar energy 


Do not consider that from this day he is relinquishing his post. Spending the rest of his life with 
Svaami, giving to the students the benefit of all his knowledge, he should contribute to the 
growth of our Institute in a unique way. He has specialized in electronics. In addition, he is 
interested in the harnessing of solar energy. Bhaaratheeyas revere the sun. The sun is an 
immense ball of hydrogen and helium. There is immense scope for harnessing a small fraction of 
the energy coming to the earth from the sun. My desire is that "Our Sampath" should remain here 
and make use of his knowledge to utilise solar power. The sun is the embodiment of effulgence. 
Wherefrom does this light come? How does it come? No scientist has yet found how this light 
reaches us. It comes from a Divine power. The Divine is fully effulgent. He has the splendour of 
a billion suns. Today you are not able to make use of the energy from a single sun. How can you 
measure the power of One who has the splendour, of a billion suns? The solar system is like a 
candle to the effulgence of the Divine. 


For harnessing the solar energy, with the realisation of its divine source, special efforts should be 
made in our Institute to develop research in electronics and solar energy. I desire that Prof. 
Sampath should ascertain what arrangement should be made for this purpose and carry on his 
work here in the years ahead. 


Raamaayana should be enacted in the Sai Institute 


The new Vice-Chancellor, Dr. Hanumanthappa, has been a devotee of Svaami for the past 25 
years. When the Sai College was started in Brindhaavan, he used to come all the way from the 
city and hold classes in Commerce for our students. Nor is that all. He has been closely 
associated with our educational institutions from their inception. At that time our college in 
Brindhaavan was affiliated to the Bangalore University. From those days he has been rendering 
service in various ways. He is an ardent devotee. Both the outgoing and the incoming Vice- 
Chancellors should work in perfect harmony, make our Institute an ideal institution and do 
pioneering work in new fields for the progress of our students. They should be like Raama and 
Lakshmana. Our Institute should be like Seetha. When you have these three, Raama, Lakshmana 
and Seetha, our students will develop like Bharatha and Shatrughna. The Raamaayana should be 
reenacted this form and presented to the world. 


What is the inner significance of the Raamaayana? "Sathvam Vadha: Dharmam Chara" (Speak 
the Truth and follow Righteousness). Today, these two have to be upheld. Without these two, life 
is worthless. 


Prof. Sampath honoured 


Prof. Sampath could have continued for some more time. But official regulations have prescribed 
an age-limit, which has to be complied with. Therefore, he had to retire. But this is only in 
conformity with external regulations. He will not depart from Svaami's heart. For the signal 
service rendered by him during the past two years, he has to be appropriately honoured. We are 
binding him closer to ourselves. The bonds we are placing on him are that he should impart all 
the knowledge he has acquired to our students and offer to the nation the new discoveries by our 
institutions in Prashaanthi Nilayam. 


I, therefore, fasten two gold Kadiyams (bangles) on the wrists of Prof. Sampath. Sampath! we 
are going to bind both your hands. Hence, you will be a bondman, engaging yourself to the full 
measure of your capacity in Svaami's work, and rejoicing in the service you render 


Discourse at a special function, unique of its kind, got up by Bhagavaan Baba, Chancellor of 
Shri Sathya Sai Institute of Higher Learning, on 4-3-1993, in the Institute Auditorium, to honour 
the retiring Vice-Chancellor, Prof: Sampath, and to welcome the new Vice-Chancellor, Dr. K. 
Hanumanthappa. 


9. Chaithanya and the 'Outcast' 


ONCE, a mendicant with tattered clothes, unkempt hair and dirty body, came and stood at the 
threshold of Chaithanya's room and was meditating with closed eyes. On seeing him Chaithanya 
came out and asked him, "Who are you? You can come inside." On hearing these soft and sweet 
words, the mendicant opened his eyes and replied in all humility, "Svaami, I don't deserve to step 
into your room. I am a despicable person belonging to the caste of Chandalas (Untouchables). I 
am unfit to defile your sacred residence." Full of smiles, Chaithanya went closer to him and said 
endearingly: "My son, never say that you are mean, despicable or unworthy. Who is mean and 
who is sacred on this earth? All are sacred because the same God shines in every one's heart. So, 
please come inside without any hesitation." 


Power of the Lord's name erases all fears 


When the mendicant was still hesitating to go inside, Chaithanya questioned him about the 
purpose of his visit. The visitor replied, "Svaami, I am repeatedly, chanting God's name but I feel 
it lacks chaithanya (spiritual power) just as a person in a state of coma has mere life without any 
consciousness. I seem to be mechanically chanting the Lord's name without experiencing the 
power of the Divine. I have come to you with the hope that if you initiate me in one of the Lord's 
names, it will be charged with spiritual potency and I will be benefitted by chanting such a 
name." 


Chaithanya replied, "All the names of God are full of chaithanya (divine power). God's name is 
omnipotent and self-effulgent. Hence it is not proper for you to underrate the efficacy of any of 
the Lord's names. However, for your satisfaction, I will give you Manthropadesha (initiation into 
the sacred formula) as desired by you. Please step into the room." The visitor responded by 
slowly entering the room, full of humility, hesitation, nervousness and fear, and sat in one comer. 
of the room. Noticing his plight, Chaithanya gently told him, "My son, why are you so full of 
fear? Freedom and fearlessness are the birth-right of every man. Freedom being your real nature, 
why do you give room for fear? You must recognise that the Aathmik power is behind all 
thoughts, and give up fear." 


Saying this, Chaithanya came closer and closer to the mendicant. Seeing this, the mendicant 
cried out apprehensively: "Svaami, please don't touch me. If you touch me, both of us will be 
guilty of breach of the traditional norms of our society. I say so particularly because it is winter 
now, and if you touch me, you will have to take a cold water bath again and that will tell upon 
your health. I have accepted you as my Guru (preceptor) and since, according to the scriptures, 
the Guru is verily God, I shall be sinning against God by hurting you in any way. I have come to 
obey your commands and receive help from you, but not to hurt you in the process. Because of 
my sins in my past life, Iam now born as an untouchable. I don't want to add to my load of sins 
by allowing you to touch me now’. 


There is no caste for any of the five elements 


On hearing this, Chaithanya remonstrated- "What a simpleton you are. You are only betraying 
your ignorance by observing untouchability, ignoring the divinity inherent in every being. God 
has no distinctions of caste and creed. There is no caste for any of the five elements, namely, 
earth, water, fire, air and sky, all of which have emanated from God. Irrespective of the castes, 
and creeds professed by men, all are equally sharing the bounties of Nature offered by the five 


elements. Therefore, there is no need to observe such differences of caste and creed. Come closer 
to me." 


However, the mendicant could not shed his fear, because he had been nurturing this fear from his 
childhood. This shows that feelings such as fear, love, hatred etc., become ingrained in a person 
if he nurtures them for a long time from an early age in his life. Chaithanya told the mendicant, 
"God never endows man with fear. It is one's own weakness that fosters fear, because of some 
short-comings in one's self. 'One who has not committed any wrong or evil act will have no fear 
and hence will not need any protection or security. Fearlessness is the hall-mark of divinity. 
One can become fearless through thyaaga (renunciation or sacrifice). For example, if you have 
some valuables with you, there is room for fear. But if you give up those valuables, you will be 
free from fear wherever you may be, even in a jungle infested with robbers. My dear child, 
realise that your very nature is absolute fearlessness in all circumstances. Remain true to your 
nature." 


Lord's name sanctifies and transforms 


Saying this, Chaithanya hugged the mendicant. But the latter began shaking with mixed feelings 
of bliss and fear, bliss because of the embrace of such a holy saint like Chaithanya, and fear 
because of the misapprehension that Chaithanya would be polluted by physical contact with him. 
He cried out, "O Svaami, let not my sins pollute you." Laughing at this statement, Chaithanya 
told him assuringly: "O innocent one, you and I have now become one. We are no longer 
separate." So saying, Chaithanya hugged him in a warm embrace and whispered the Lord's name 
into his ear. The name went straight into the old man's heart, and so transformed him that he 
exclaimed in ecstasy, "Svaami there is no one as lucky as myself. I have now become sanctified, 
sacred and pure. I have got rid of my wrong notion that I am only the body made up of the five 
elements and have realised my true nature, because of your grace and the grace of the Lord's 
name which you gave me. 


One's life becomes sanctified by treasuring the Lord's name in one's heart with a feeling of 
intense love. In the absence of such love, all so-called spiritual practices will prove futile. 
Various spiritual disciplines are necessary only for the purification of the heart. Once the heart 
becomes pure, there is no further need for study of the scriptures or spiritual practices. 
Explaining thus, Chaithanya exhorted his new disciple to give up fear henceforth. From then 
onwards, the mendicant became known as Haridhasa. 


The moral of this story is that we should give up all differences based on one's birth and position 
in life and chant or sing the Lord's names with intense love and devotion. First, the Name should 
melt the devotee's heart; then only it can melt God's heart and draw His Grace upon the devotee. 
God does not care for how long and in what ways you have practised Saadhana (spiritual 
discipline). What He wants is sincere, wholehearted and intense love for Him. 


Discourse on 16-3-1993,' when Bhagavaan chose for His theme a significant episode from the 
life of Chaithanya Mahaaprabhu to underline the truth that the Godly man should rise above 
differences of caste and creed. 


Love is the vital force. Love is the governing principle. It is only 
when the precious diamond of love is shining in one's heart that 
sacred and divine thoughts about God will arise in the mind. 


BABA 


10. The life of Samartha Raamadhas 


IN a place called Baadar in the Aurangabad district of Mahaaraashtra, a son was born to a couple 
highly devoted to God. He was named Naaraayana. He grew up as a naughty boy, neglecting his 
studies and quarrelling with other children. At the age of eight years, he lost his father. His 
mother Ramaa Dhevi, found it difficult to control her mischievous and delinquent son. Her 
relatives and neighbours advised her to get him married so that he might realise his 
responsibilities and change for the better. 


Although the boy was only 13 years old and too young for marriage, his mother yielded to the 
persuasions of others and arranged for his marriage. At the time of the wedding, a screen of thick 
cloth was held in-between the bride and bridegroom, according to the prevailing custom, and the 
purohiths (priests) removed the curtain to hand over the Mangala Suuthram (the sacred thread of 
wedlock) to the bridegroom for him to tie it round the bride's neck. Lo and behold! The 
bridegroom had disappeared behind the curtain, without anybody's notice. A thorough search 
was made to trace him out, but in vain. So, the marriage could not be performed. 


Hanumaan's blessings showered on Raamadhas 


The boy Naaraayana, who had escaped from the marriage, hall, ultimately reached a place called 
Nasik near the source of the sacred river Godhaavari. He stayed there for sometime and then 
moved to a nearby mountain called 'Chithrakoota' which is considered holy, because Lord 
Raama lived there for nearly 12 years. There he selected an exquisitely beautiful spot by name 
Panchavati. The boy was enraptured by the grandeur of the scenery of the place, and its sanctity, 
associated with the stay of Lord Raama there during his exile, sent thrills of ecstasy in 
Naaraayana. He was always immersed in the contemplation of Lord Raama. 


What was the cause for the naughty boy turning into a pious young man? Apart from the fact that 
his latent good Samskaaras (accumulated tendencies) were aroused by the sudden shock of the 
‘prospect of being saddled with the heavy responsibilities of married life, the boy, during his 
journey to Nasik, entered a famous Hanumaan temple enroute, and wholeheartedly prayed to the 
Deity to bless him with all the noble qualities for which Hanumaan was renowned. And he had 
an indication of his prayer being answered by way of gentle movement of the idol transmitting 
spiritual vibrations in the direction of the boy. 


After 12 years of intense penance at Panchavati, Naaraayana gained the three-fold realisation of 
Lord Raama, as did Hanumaan, namely, when he had body consciousness, he was the servant 
and Raama the Master, when he was conscious of his being a Jeeva (individual soul) he was a 
part of Raama (Visishtaadhvaitha) and when he was aware of his being the Aathma he and 
Raama were one (Adhvaitha or non-dualism). 


Raamadhas enters the arena of social service 


After this realisation, he returned to Nasik from Panchavati. While there, he came to know that 
the country was in the grip of a severe famine. Then he began to reflect that to spend his time 
thinking of only his own liberation, when all his countrymen were suffering due to famine, 
amounted to extreme selfishness. So, he coined the slogan, "Dhil me Raam, Haath me Kaam" 
(Raama in the heart, and work in the hand), and entered the arena of social service with all his 
energy and zeal, giving to himself and his band of dedicated workers mottoes such as: "Maanava 
seva (service to man) is Maadhava seva (service to God)" and "Graama seva (service to the 


villages) is Raama seva (service to Raama)." He filled the tank of his heart with the holy water of 
Raama naam (Raama's name) which flowed through the top of his hands to quench the thirst of 
the multitudes of his countrymen. 


Proceeding thus from village to village, doing social work, coupled with chanting of Raama 
naam, Naaraayana finally reached Raameshvaram at the southern tip of the Indian peninsula. 
From there he went to the pilgrim centres of Thirupathi (where he had the darshan of Lord 
Venkateshvara) and Hampi (where he worshipped Lord Viruupaaksha). Ultimately he returned to 
Nasik. On the way to Nasik, he saw Saint Thukaaraam, who was singing the glories of Raama so 
melodiously that a large number of people including Shivaaji, the ruler of Maharashtra, were 
attracted to him. As Shivaaji listened to Thukaaraam, and told him about his decision to give up 
his kingdom and to devote himself fully and whole-heartedly to the pursuit of the spiritual path, 
Thukaaraam admonished Shivaaji for his narrow-minded view of spirituality and exhorted him to 
consider duty as God and work as worship. Thereupon Shivaaji prayed to Thukaaraam to give. 
him initiation. Thukaaraam declined saying, "Raamadhas is your Guru, not I, so you have to 
receive initiation only from him." Rather disappointed, Shivaaji returned to his capital. 


Shivaaji's offer to Raamadhas 


When Shivaaji came to know that Naaraayana alias Raamadhas was in Nasik, he sent his 
Ministers and other high dignitaries to invite Raamadhas to the royal court with a band of music 
and other traditional honours befitting a highly distinguished personage. When Raamadhas 
arrived, the king received him with due honours and reverence, arranged for his stay in the 
palace itself, and after washing his feet, he sprinkled the holy washings on his own head and 
submitted to him in all humility: “O revered Master! From this moment this kingdom belongs to 
you; and I too, am yours. 


Thereupon Raamadhas replied, "My son, I am an ascetic who has renounced everything. I have 
neither the right nor the desire for your limited kingdom. God's kingdom is unlimited. The goal 
of my life is to help every one to reach that unlimited kingdom of God. So I don't want this 
kingdom of yours. I am now coronating you as the ruler of this kingdom which you have offered 
to me. From now onwards, you will be king with a difference. You should consider that the 
kingdom really belongs to God and that you are only "His instrument or trustee administering the 
kingdom on His behalf." 


From Raamadhas to Samartha Raamadhas 


Since Raamadhas had the extraordinary capacity to do many great things, he came to be known 
as Samartha Raamadhas, the appellation Samartha meaning a man of versatile skills. There is an 
episode in his life which describes the context in which the title of "Samartha" was conferred on 
him. He used to dress himself and move about like Kodhandapaani (Raama armed with his bow 
and arrows). 


Once when he was walking along the banks of the Godhavari in this dress, some Brahmanas 
who were taking bath there questioned him whether he belonged to the community of Koyas 
(hunters belonging to a hill tribe were called Koyas). Raamadhas told them that he was 
Raamadhas (a servant of Raama) and not a Koya. Thereupon, they questioned him why he was 
dressed and equipped with bow and arrows like Raama if he was only a servant of Raama. They 
heckled him saying, "What is the use of merely trying to imitate Kodhandapaani in appearance 
only? Are you capable of wielding the bow and arrows as Raama did?" Just then a bird was 


flying fast at a great height across the sky above their heads. The Brahmanas pointed the bird to 
Raamadhas and asked him whether he could shoot that bird. With Rama's name on his lips, 
Raamadhas immediately aimed an arrow at the flying bird and brought it down right in front of 
the Brahmanas. Seeing the dead bird, the Brahmanas accused Raamadhas saying, "There is no 
harmony of thought, word and deed in you and therefore you are a dhuraathma (a wicked 
person); you chant Raama's name and at the same time you have committed the sin of killing an 
innocent bird, to show off your skill." When Raamadhas replied that he shot the bird at their 
instance only, they remonstrated, saying, "If we ask you to eat grass, will you do so? Don't you 
have your own independent thinking or discrimination?" Then Raamadhas gently replied, "Sirs, 
past is past. Kindly tell me what I should do now?" 


Raamadhas revives a dead bird 


They asked him to repent for his sin. Raamadhas promptly closed his eyes and prayed to God 
wholeheartedly, repenting for his sin and asking for His forgiveness. Then he opened his eyes 
and pointed out to the Brahmanas that the dead bird had not regained life, in spite of his 
repentance. The Brahmanas said reprovingly, "What a madcap you are! Repentance cannot, 
undo what you have done; but its purpose is to enable you to make up your mind not to repeat 
such misdeeds in future." "That is no repentance in my humble view," countered Raamadhas, 
"God and His name are so powerful that if we pray sincerely, His grace will bring the bird back 
to life." So saying, he picked up the dead bird, hugged it to his bosom, and with tears flowing 
down his cheeks, he wholeheartedly prayed, "O Raama, if I have been chanting your name with 
all my mind, heart and soul and if it is a fact that I have killed this bird out of ignorance and not 
with an intent to kill, may your grace either revive this dead bird, or take away my life also along 
with that of the bird." As he concluded his prayer, the bird fluttered in his hands. Then he opened 
his eyes, thanked the Almighty and released the bird into the sky. Astonished at this miracle, the 
Brahmanas exclaimed in one voice, "Revered sir, forgive us for not recognising your greatness. 
Since you have the capacity to kill a flying bird with a single arrow, and also the capacity to 
revive the dead bird, you will hereafter be known by the worthy name of 'Samartha Raamadhas.' 


Raamadhas' visit to Pandaripuram 


After this, Raamadhas visited Pandaripuram where he was an eye-witness to the ideal way in 
which a man by name Pundareeka served his parents as veritable gods, making Lord 
Paanduranga Himself wait in front of his house standing on a pair of bricks, till he completed his 
service to his parents. 


Then he visited Shivaaji and gave him three things as mementos to guide him in his royal duties 
one, a coconut to remind him that just. as our intention in buying a coconut is to consume the 
white kernel inside, so also the purpose of owning and administering the kingdom is that the king 
himself should lead a saathvik life and also to ensure that the saathvik quality prevails in his 
kingdom; second, a handful of earth to remind the king and through him his subjects, about the 
sanctity of Bhaarath, their motherland; third, a pair of bricks to symbolise that just as bricks are 
used to construct houses for the safety of the inmates, the king should use his powers to protect 
the people and promote their welfare and progress. 


Raamadhas' re-union with his mother 


At this time the memory of Pundareeka's devoted service to his parents at Pandaripuram was 
revived in Raamadhas mind and he hastened back home with the idea of serving his aged 


mother. When he reached home, his old mother could not recognise him, particularly because of 
his long beard and strange dress. He told her that he was her son, Naaraayana, who was 
popularly known as Samartha Raamadhas. Thereupon, his mother exclaimed ecstatically, "O my 
dear son, I have been hearing so much about Samartha Raamadhas and have been eager to see 
him for a long time. But I never knew that it is the popular name of my son, Naaraayana. I am 
proud of you and thank the Lord for making me the mother of such a great one. My life is 
fulfilled." So saying she breathed her last on her son's lap. 


Raamadhas duly performed the obsequies of his mother. Shortly thereafter, he heard about 
Sivaji's death in A.D 1680 (just six years after he was coronated by Raamadhas in A.D 1674). He 
went to the King's capital, installed Sivaji's son as the king and blessed him so that he might rule 
the kingdom, following the footsteps of his noble father. 


Discourse on 19-3-1993, at Thrayee Brindhaavan, when Bhagavaan gave a detailed account of 
the life of Samartha Raamadhas, the great Mahaaraashtra saint. 


11. Through Self-enquiry to Self-realisation 


The entire Cosmos is governed by God; 
God is governed by Truth; 

Truth is governed by the Supreme Wise; 
Such a noble one is equally Divine. 


THE entire cosmos is subject to the sway of the Divine. The cosmic Divine Lord is governed, by 
Truth. That Truth is governed by a Uthama (supremely wise person). Such a noble being is the 
very embodiment of God---"Uthamo para Dhevatha." 


God is the embodiment of Time. Time is eternal. It has no end. It is boundless. As against this 
eternal Time, the life-span of man is very limited. Because of his limited time-span, man is 
bound by the passage of time in terms of hours, days, months and years. All the latter are by their 
intrinsic nature transient. The Lord declares: "Akshaya Kaalah" (I am the Eternal Time). It is 
indeed a pity that this eternal time should be considered as a fleeting moment. Man's ‘actions are 
governed by the change in time and circumstances. 


In the procession of years, the present new year is known as "Shreemukha." The past year was 
known as "Angeerasa." To bid farewell to Angeerasa and to welcome Shreemukha are 
considered a natural action among common people. Not realizing the infinite and sacred nature 
of Time, men set bounds to Time and bid farewell to one year and extend welcome to a new 
year. In this context, all actions of men appear to be artificial. 


On this day; when one person meets another, he greets the other with the words: "Happy New 
Year!" The other man replies: "The same to you!" These words have no meaning at all. If, for 
one moment on one day one wishes someone happiness, will he secure happiness? People's 
entire lives are consumed by artificial behaviour. 


Moving Time and the unchanging mind 


Time is moving fast like a stormy gale. Man's life is melting away every moment like a block of 
ice. Months and years are rolling past in the Wheel of Time. Everything around is undergoing 
change, but man's mind and Buddhi (intellect) remain unchanged. Years are passing before our 
very eyes. How many eras are disappearing in our own epoch! 


Eras come and go, epochs roll on, but man's mind remains as before. What can the greeting 
"Happy New Year" mean in the context of such a human predicament? It appears to be a scene in 
a drama on the worldly stage. 


Elimination of desires leads to Mukthi 


The practice of offering worship and revering elders (on New Year's Day) also appear to be 
artificial acts in a play on life's stage. When the source of all happiness is within you, if you go 
about seeking happiness from others, it is unnatural. If you desire to elevate yourself and attain a 
higher level, you have to adopt the appropriate means. This does not mean trying to fly like 
birds. What you aspire for is Mukthi (Liberation). The Vedhas declare: Liberation will not fall 
from the sky. Nor is it to be found in the Nether World or on the earth. It can be got only by the 
elimination of desires which constitute knots in the heart. 


To take an illustration from daily life: Bits of paper or pieces of cotton float in the air because 
they are lighter than air. Man is unable to go up spiritually because he allows himself to be 
weighed down by the heavy loads of his Mamakaara and Ahamkaara (possessiveness and pride). 
Man is becoming heavier every day. His desires are getting insatiable. His selfishness and self- 
interest are reaching the skies. How can a heavy-loaded mind and over-burdened senses help 
man to attain liberation? This is impossible. 


A man seeking liberation cannot attain it by merely' revering elders or practising meditation. 
These are formal acts. By these artificial means one cannot realise the sacred, subtle and 
boundless experience of the Divine. 


Moksha (Liberation) is not a specific place. Nor is it something that can be got from any 
preceptor or other person. To realise one's own true Self is Liberation. Obsessed with the 
external world, preoccupied with the acquisition of external objects, man's life is becoming more 
and more burdensome every day. Only by getting rid of these burdens can one hope to ascend 
spiritual heights. 


Spirituality is associated today with exercises like attending religious discourses, reciting slokas, 
counting beads and conducting bhajans. It is imagined that by these means Liberation can be 
secured. This is not real spirituality. At the outset, the animality in man has to be got rid of. 
Getting rid of the animal qualities, entering into the human estate, man should embark on the 
realisation of the Divine. 


Man should be engaged in perpetual enquiry 


In every man, animality, humanness and Divinity are present. Today what is happening is the 
growth of the animal tendencies in man. As a consequence, qualities like kindness, compassion 
and sympathy are not to be seen anywhere. Selfishness and self-interest are animal qualities. An 
animal is only concerned with external objects. It has no internal vision or any power of 
discrimination. Man, however, is endowed with internal vision as well as the power of 
discrimination. 


Man, unlike an animal, is endowed with a mind, which confers on him Vichaarana Shakthi (the 
power to enquire into the how and why of things). Man, therefore, should undertake an enquiry 
into what is permanent and what is temporary, what is truth and what is false, what is bad and 
what is good. Only when man transcends the animal tendencies can he become truly human. 
Then, his divinity will manifest in due course. This Divinity is inherent in man. It is not got from 
outside from anyone. It has to manifest itself from within. 


Man's inherent quality is divinity. It has to be realised by him by his own efforts. The Aathmik 
principle is not derived from an external force. It is based on an internal source. 


Man should be engaged in perpetual enquiry. He has to realise his humanness. Because of the 
influence of the Kali age, humanness has declined. Wickedness, immorality, cruelty and other 
vices are growing beyond all limits. Men are behaving worse than animals. They are harassing 
the innocent and the ignorant. They are behaving as demons. 


Realise that the same spirit dwells in all beings 


To get rid of the demonic qualifies, man has-to embark on self-enquiry: "Who am I?" Scriptural 
scholarship is of no avail in this enquiry. Aathmik bliss (Aathma-Aanandha) can be realised only 
by recognising that the same spirit dwells in all beings. This realisation can be got only by 


spiritual enquiry. Conning the shlokas of the Bhagavath Geetha will not rid a man of his sorrow. 
The transformation must take place within. 


Today is celebrated as Yugaadhi because it is the first day in the first month of the new year, 
marking the beginning of Vasantha Rithu (Spring season). 


Of the four Yugas--Kritha, Thretha, Dhvaapara and Kali--the present yuga is called Kali yuga. 
In truth, it is Kalaha Yuga, the Age of Discord. There is discord everywhere--between husband 
and wife, between preceptor and pupil, and in every other relationship. What is the reason for 
this discord? The absence of mutual trust. No one trusts another. As a result, hatred and 
bitterness are growing in the social, ethical, political, economic and every other field. There is 
discord even in the scientific field. The lack of trust has blinded people towards each other. 


Believe in the sacred pronouncements of Vedhas 


People have belief in things which should not be believed, but do not believe that which they 
ought to believe. People are ready to believe in the statements of the author of an almanac or the 
predictions of a parrot kept by a pavement astrologer or a roadside palmist, but will not believe 
in the sacred pronouncements of the Vedhas. 


The Vedhas have declared: "Thath Thvam Asi," "Aham Brahma-asmi," "So-Ham" ("Thou art 
that," "I am Brahmam,""T am He"). The Vedhic dictum, "So-Ham," is confirmed by the inhaling 
and exhaling that go on in everyone. But no one believes in it. People believe in the films, in 
novels and newspapers and many other sources. But one does not believe in the truth of his own 
Aathma (Self). As a result, man is growing weaker and losing his humanness because of the, lack 
of faith in his own Self. A man without Aathma-Vishvaasa (self-confidence) is no man at all. 
Without self-confidence, how can he get self-satisfaction? Lacking self-satisfaction, how can he 
hope for Self-Realisation? This is impossible. 


Hence, the mansion of Self-Realisation has to be erected on the foundation of Self-confidence, 
with the walls of self-satisfaction and the ceiling of self-sacrifice. Confidence is at the root of it 
all. Live with faith and confidence. 


Beauty of Spring is called 'Vishnupriya' 


The New Year Day begins with Nature shining in all her glory, decked with flowers, with the 
tender leaves rustling in the wind and the cuckoo calling to its mate in mellifluous notes. 
Vasanhta Rithu (Spring season) has come in all its beauty and freshness. It is the season when 
nature presents her most beautiful and glorious appearance. The beauty of the Spring season has 
been dubbed Vishnupriya (Beloved of the Lord). Indeed, it is not merely dear to the Lord, it is 
the very form of the Lord. There are well-known sayings: "Alankaara Privo Vishnuh" (The Lord 
loves adornment), "Namasakaaro Arunaprivah" (The sun loves salutation). The Lord loves the 
advent of Spring when every tree is in bloom. 


Today we are welcoming this Spring. But it is not enough to greet it on one day. Some people 
figure the position of the planets at the commencement of the new year and try to predict the 
shape of things to come. The new year should not be judged by its name Shrimukha. It is well 
known that there are many who belie their names. "Shri" means happiness, honour, 
auspiciousness. The year makes its appearance with a happy, respectful and auspicious face. But, 
the prospects for the year are the very opposite of what the name suggests. 


Astrologers make their predictions on the basis of the relative position of the planets. The sun is 
expected to confer Sauryam (valour). The moon is said to confer prosperity. Rahu is expected to 
confer inner strength. Rohini will confer happiness. Sani (Saturn) will confer physical fitness. 
But during this year, the results will be contrary to these beneficial effects. 


The dangers that the country is to face 


One of the consequences is the thinning of the ozone layer above the earth. As a result, there is 
the threat of fire disasters. There are also threats from bomb blasts of the kind you have noticed 
in newspaper reports. The country is faced with such dangers from man-made calamities. 


These dangers can be averted if men realise the sacredness of human existence. People have to 
ask themselves how they are using the time that is given to them. In a year there are 3,15,36,000 
seconds. How is man using these precious moments? How many seconds is he devoting to 
respecting elders and honouring his parents? How many seconds does he spend for earning his 
food? And how many is he wasting on useless activities? How many is he devoting to seeing 
films and T.V? How many is he spending on reading meaningless novels? And how many on 
studying worthwhile books? How many does he devote to God? How many to rectify his inner 
feelings? 


If this sort of enquiry is made it will be found that the average man spends most of his time on 
mundane activities. Not even ten minutes or ten seconds are devoted wholeheartedly to spiritual 
enquiry or self-examination. 


All are ostensibly engaged in the pursuit of Truth, all are devoting their time to God. They go on 
pilgrimages. But even in these trips, they do not concentrate their thoughts on God for a few 
moments. They don't make any internal enquiry. 


To seek the Truth and experience God, there is no need to go out anywhere. By going to a forest 
or visiting temples, the inner being is not purified. Renouncing all worldly things, one must 
explore his inner life. This prescription of sacrifice is what the Vedhas recommended for 
attaining immortality. 


Practice is more essential than precept 


Those who claim to be Saadhaks (spiritual aspirants) are really striving for selfish ends. The 
Divine is omnipresent. To experience the Divine, you have to undertake an enquiry with a steady 
mind. People today pursue studies all their life, but hardly practise what they have learnt. 
Practice is more essential than the mere acquisition of knowledge. It is not accumulation of 
information that is important, but the transformation of himself. Of what use is all the 
information you have gathered? How much of it have you put to practical use? How much bliss 
you have derived from it? The answer will be a hero in gathering information; a zero in petting it 
into practice. In this way, life is being wasted rather than being purposeful’. 


The first step is for each one to comprehend his true Self. In many cases, as they grow in years 
and study more and more books, they develop doubts. Apart from filling their minds with 
bookish lumber, of what use is all their studies? There is no difference between books without 
consciousness and minds filled with bookish knowledge. Both are equally sterile. It is a case of 
"living death" for both. Book knowledge without practice may be useful for teaching others, but 
is of no value to the man himself. A man who does not practise what he preaches is wasting other 
people's time. To begin with, make right use of your time. In this context, I repeatedly advise 


students and others to reduce their talk. Engage yourselves in spiritual enquiry and practise at 
least a fraction of what you learn. 


Today we are supposed to bid adieu to the old year Angeerasa and to welcome the new year. But, 
in fact, we should not bid farewell to Angeerasa because the name suggests the presence of the 
Divine in every anga (limb) of our body. Welcome all the years. Don't give a send-off to any 
year. Develop equal-mindedness towards everything. Do not brood over the past. 


The joy experienced Will be in inverse proportion to your desires. The greater the desires, the 
less the happiness you will experience. Therefore, try constantly to reduce your desires. In the 
journey of life, as in a railway journey, the less luggage (desires) you carry, the greater comfort 
you will have. 


Meaning of true Moksha 


Embodiments of Love! Recognise what holiness is associated with human life. But because of the 
vagaries of the senses, man develops attachments to various objects and persons entirely for 
selfish reasons. All the love he professes is not out of affection for others but out of self-love. If 
this selfishness goes, there will be real oneness. Both love and hatred will be absent. There will 
be Samathvam (equal-mindedness). There will be no sense of separateness. That is true Moksha 
(Liberation). 


Moksha does not mean attaining some divine state. Divinity is within you. All you have to do is 
to manifest it. That which does not exist, will not come forth. That which exists will not go away. 
Everything is preseat here and now. Hence, there is no need for any search or for any saadhana. 
Whatever you do, do it as an offering to God. Do not make a distinction between "my work" and 
"God's work." When you make a division, you give rise to enmity, because of differences. Where 
there is enmity, there is no room for Divinity, purity or unity. 


When you install God in your heart, there is no room in it for anything else. But today's aspirants 
treat the heart as a musical chair. They go on from one "Svaami" to another and shift from one 
kind of saadhana to another. Of what avail is this kind of merry-go-round? It is a waste of time 
and of life itself. One heart, one-thought, one God, one Goal.. Whether you utter the name of 
Allah or Jesus, Buddha or Zoroaster, or Guruji (Naanak)---it is all the same. Today is sacred to 
the memory of Guru Naanak, who commenced the propagation of his teachings on a Yugaadhi 
day. 


Purity, unity and divinity 


We celebrate Yugaadhi today. But each one can choose his own day for celebration of the new 
year. God is one. All names are associated with the 'Divine. You should have no aversion to 
anything. You should develop this feeling of equality. Only then will you be aware of the unity 
that underlies the diversity. 


Today, you must concentrate first on purity. For this, you have to reduce your desires gradually. 
It is not practicable to give up all desires totally. But limit your desires to the essential minimum. 
Do not cherish excessive or endless desires in respect of wealth or other possessions. Promote 
Thrupthi (sense of contentment). The discontented man loses everything. Only the contented 
man can experience real joy. The man with endless desires is the poorest man. The man with no 
desires is the richest man. The rich man can have no sleep. You must no doubt earn enough to 
meet your reasonable needs. But excessive wealth is undesirable. 


Cultivate human values 


People have been listening to spiritual discourses. How far are they practising the teachings? 
Without the cultivation of human values, all studies and spiritual exercises are of no use. If each 
examines himself, he will find how far he has failed in this respect. Raamakrishna Paramahamsa 
once slapped Raani Rasmani on the cheek at a spiritual gathering when he noticed that while 
appearing to follow his discourse, her mind was thinking about some legal matters. Many 
resented Svaami Raamakrishna's action, but after his explanation, the Raani admitted her lapse. 
Today no one can inflict punishment on erring devotees. Each has to examine his own lapses and 
correct himself. 


It is not very important that you should rejoice over the advent of the New Year. You should 
develop new ideas and ideals. Feel your oneness with all, because the same Divine dwells in 
everyone. Do not hate anyone or any religion. 


Embark on self-enquiry to acquire self-knowledge. For the refinement of the heart, the first 
requisite is seeking Sathsangam (company of the good). It is because you have assembled here 
that you have been able to derive the benefit of Svaami's message. Along with good company, 
you must listen only to what is sacred. 


Discourse on 24-3-1993, Yugaadhi day, at Brindhaavan. 


Raamaayana and Mahaabhaaratha are very sacred books, which 
will directly tell us about many things, especially the ways in which 
we have to conduct ourselves. 


Raamaayana and Mahaabhaaratha will help us in our daily life, 
like our two eyes. We are not able to know the trite value of these 
jewels and we think that Mahaabhaaratha is merely a_ battle 
between the sons of two brothers, and that Raamaayana is a story 
wherein a demon stole away the wife of Raama and Raama again 
won her back. It is not like that and these two epics are like the 
heart and the head of India, are as vital to India as the heart and 
the head are to a human body. 


BABA 


12. The martyrdom of Mansur 


ABOUT 400 years ago, there was a man by name Mansur in the city of Benaras. By virtue of his 
good samskaaras (inherited tendencies) and his preceptor's teachings, he had developed firm 
faith in the Vedhic dictum: "Aham Brahmaasmi" (I am God). When people heard him always 
repeating this aphorism, they questioned him whether he was really God. He used to 
emphatically tell them thrice, "Yes, I am God." In course of time, he became the target of envy 
and hatred among the prominent men in Benaras, including Vedhic scholars and heads of 
religious institutions. They went in a body to the King of Benaras and complained against 
Mansur, saying that he had no knowledge of Sanskrith or scriptures but was going about 
shouting, "I am God," thereby insulting eminent scholars and pandiths. The King summoned 
Mansur to his court and asked him, "Who are you?" Promptly came the reply, "I am God." The 
King got him examined by medical experts and found that he was not insane. Then the King 
advised him to give up saying "I am God," in view of the complaints from scholars and 
Mataadhipathis that he was guilty of blasphemy. Mansur firmly refused to obey the King's 
command and declared that he would sooner give up his life than forswear his unshakable faith 
and firm conviction in his oneness with the Divine. He questioned the King boldly, "Why do you 
want me to give up truth? The truth is: Iam God; you are God; everyone is God." 


One with purity of heart will find God in all 


As he did not change his attitude despite all kinds of persuasions and threats, the King ordered 
that his hands should be cut off for the offence of disobeying the King. As the King's minions 
held Mansur tightly and raised their gleaming swords to cut off his hands, Mansur went on 
boldly shouting aloud: "Aham Brahmaasmi" unceasingly and smilingly. After severing both his 
hands, the executioners went to the King and reported that Mansur was fearlessly and smilingly 
repeating his declaration even after his hands had been cut off and he was bleeding profusely. 


The King went to the scene of Mansur's ordeal and found that the place was reverberating with 
the sacred sound of "Aham Brahmaasmi" coming unceasingly from the tongue of the smiling 
Mansur as well as from the blood flowing profusely on the ground from his hands. In a short 
while, Mansur fell down dead with a smiling and calm face and "Aham Brahmaasmi" on his lips. 


The King was deeply moved and he prostrated at the feet of Mansur. He sent for the scholars, 
priests, pandiths and heads of religious institutions who had complained against the saintly 
Mansur. On their arrival, he reprimanded them saying, "What is the use of your book learning? 
You could not recognise or understand the greatness of Mansur. He was a man who established 
unity in thought, word and deed. You don't practise what you read and teach. You are all a pack 
of conceited, book-worms, envious of truly great persons. Misled by your complaints, I have 
committed the sin of virtually murdering such a saintly person. However, he has become a 
martyr in upholding the highest truth of "“Aham Brahmaasmi." In order to teach you a lesson and 
to provide a source of inspiration to you and your progeny, I am building a memorial for Mansur 
in your Agrahaaram itself." 


The criterion for true devotion is not proficiency in scriptures or routine performance of so-called 
spiritual practices, but the realization of the divinity in oneself as well as in all others which can 
be attained only through steadfast adherence to truth, purity of heart and universal love. Where 
there is Chittha Shuddhi (purity of mind and heart), there will be Jnaana Siddhi (attainment of 


wisdom). One with Chittha Shuddhi need not go to the forest or pilgrim centres in search of God 
He will find God in. himself and in others too. 


Discourse in Thrayee Brindhaavan on 26-3-93 relating the story of Saint Mansur, who died as a 
martyr four centuries ago with the manthra, "Aham Brahmaasmi" on his lips. 


13. Sparks from the Divine Anvil 


Bhagavaan Baba gave discourses at "Sai Shruthi," Kodaikanal, from 5th April to 26th April 
1993, before a large audience exceeding three thousands including a considerable proportion of 
overseas devotees hailing from U.K., France, Germany, Italy, Holland, U.S.A., Latin America, 
Canada, Australia and New Zealand. Produced below are excerpts from discourses delivered 
from 5-4-1993 to 12-4-1993. 


HOSE who assemble here come for sathsang or good company so that they can advance in the 
spiritual path. They should shed some undesirable habits like smoking which retard their 
progress in the spiritual path. The fire in the cigarette is so mild that if you pile up two or three 
pieces of fire-wood on it that fire will be put out. But, when a huge jungle-fire is raging, it can 
burn even green banana plants that are thrown into it. The power of the physical body is like the 
fire in the cigarette tip while spiritual power is like the forest fire. Once you are advanced in 
spirituality even the association with evil persons may not affect you. But, when you have not 
developed your spiritual power you should avoid bad company just as you spit out unpalatable 
food even at the first taste. 


From concentration to meditation 


Devotees are generally confused about meditation. Just as you can't receive the radio programme 
broadcast from any station clearly unless you tune to the appropriate wavelength perfectly, even 
in meditation you will not get the desired communion with God until you attune yourself to the 
Divine perfectly. Some aspirants mistake concentration for meditation. Concentration is needed 
for every activity in your daily life such as reading, writing, walking, talking, eating, etc. 
Concentration is below the senses, contemplation is in the middle and meditation is above the 
senses. 


Meditation, in fact, is transcending the senses and the mind. During meditation, the mind is 
actively thinking of several things of the past, the present and the future. The thoughts are 
running fast. Scarcely does any one concentrate on the Divine even though one sits in the 
Padhmaasana (lotus pose) and closes his eyes. There is no need for sitting for meditation and 
wasting time in this manner. One can transform every act in daily life as worship of the Divine. 
Daily chores like making chappathis can be transformed into acts of worship of the Divine. Since 
the body is an instrument, you can make God happy through this instrument and enjoy happiness 
yourself in the process. In this way you practise meditation in your daily duties. 


Three phases of enjoying happiness 


There are three phases in the act of securing a desired object and enjoying happiness out of it. 
They are Priyam, Modham and Pramodham. Priyam is the desire to experience happiness from a 
particular object. Modham is the initial satisfaction derived from getting the desired object. 
Pramodham is the experience of Aanandha or happiness out of the object. It is not enough if you 
get the object which you desired to have, but you should experience the joy of using it. For 
example, you like to taste a mango fruit. The first phase is to buy it, the second is to hold it in 
hand (possessing it) and the third phase is to eat it. It is only while eating the mango that you 
derive the fulfilment of your desire. It is also described in the Bhagavath Geetha as Jnaathum 
(knowing), Dhrashthum (seeing) and Praveshthum (experiencing). 


For instance, you hear about Sai Baba and come to know that He is at Puttaparthi, situated in 
Andhra Pradesh in India. You make preparations to undertake the journey to the place and have 
His Dharshan. The fist phase is getting the knowledge about the place where He is and how to 
get there; the second phase is making the journey and coming face to face with Him (Seeing) and 
the third phase is Praveshthum, that is getting practical knowledge of and experiencing the 
Divinity. All the scriptures-of different religions (the Bible, the Quoran, the Geetha, etc.) explain 
how to reach the same goal but through different paths. 


Here so many of you have assembled in one place though you are coming from different 
countries like U.K., Italy, France, Germany, U.S.A, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, Madras, 
Delhi etc. Though all of you followed different routes to come to this place, all of you have the 
common goal of meeting here. You should realise that there is only one God who is 
Omnipresent, only one language, that of the heart and only one caste, that of humanity. You are 
all bound by one thing and that is Love. Love is God, live in love. The relationship with God 
breeds love alone and nothing but love. All other relationships with your mother, father, spouse 
or children are temporary. So you should have confidence only in the one relationship that is 
ever-lasting and that is with God. 


Excerpts from Discourse on 5-4-93. 


Vision should be good 


The paradox of human behaviour is that, having the power of discrimination to identify good and 
bad, man is not able to get away from bad pursuits. This is due to the weakness of the human 
mind, which is in. turn the result of desire and anger. Take the example of Raavana, who was a 
great scholar and master of many arts. Raavana looked at Seetha with a bad vision. The eye is a 
sacred organ. Good vision generates good thoughts. In Raavana, the bad look created bad 
thoughts, which led to his downfall. 


Desire is all right as long as it is within reasonable limits. For example, if you feel thirsty, it is a 
reasonable desire to seek water to quench the thirst. Not satisfied with water, if one seeks cool 
drinks it is tantamount to excessive desire. 


To illustrate the disastrous consequences of excessive desire. I will narrate a story. Once a 
wayfarer, who was making a long journey by foot in the hot sun, was feeling tired and sought the 
shade of a tree to rest for a while. It so happened that the tree was a wish fulfilling tree. Sitting 
under its shade, he wished for a cup of cold water for quenching his thirst. To his astonishment a 
cup of water was placed before him. After quenching his thirst, he felt that it would be good if 
he could get a bed to recline on and enjoy a siesta. Immediately a bed was provided from 
nowhere. Then he thought how nice it would be if his wife also was there. In a flash, he found 
his wife there. At this stage, he had a doubt in his mind as to how his wife, who 
was far away at home could come there and thought that it might be a demon in her form which 
might even devour him. As he thought in this manner, the woman turned into a demon and 
devoured him! This is the result of excessive desire, which is the enemy within you. 


Excerpts from Discourse on 6-4-1993. 


Will-power and Meditation 


Developing good thoughts fosters the Ichcha Shakthi (will-power). Ichcha Shakthi fosters 
Praana Shakthi (Life Principle), Medha Shakthi (Intellectual power), Grahana Shakthi (Power 
of understanding), Nirnaya Shakthi (Power of determination) and Vaak Shakthi (Power of 
Speech). 


One who uses one's will power in the right manner shines as a virtuous person, but one who uses 
it in the wrong direction becomes wicked. The will power increases as and when one reduces 
desires. When excessive desires are entertained, the will power declines. By reducing just one of 
your several habits like smoking or coffee addiction, you can experience an increase in your will 
power and intellectual ability. 


When the will power is weak, even when one sits in meditation he cannot steady his mind and it 
will only be a waste of time. One should reduce desires to progress in spiritual saadhana. 


Excerpts from Discourse on 7-4-1993. 


Ignorance is the cause of ego 


Man is bound by seven types of ropes. They are (1) Dheham (body); (2) Kaamam (desire); (3) 
Krodham (anger); (4) Ahamkaaram (ego); (5) Karma (fate); (6) Ajnaana (ignorance) and (7) 
Aviveka or Avidhya (lack of discrimination). Ignorance is the cause of ego, which breeds Raaga 
and dhvesha (attachment and hatred). For getting liberation one has to get rid of the ego, 
ignorance and attachment. The ego gives rise to Raaga (desire) which plunges man in Karma 
which, in turn, causes Janma (birth). 


Ego is like an inflated football. When one is inflated with the air of ego, both the good and bad 
qualities kick the body. The moment ego is gone, the kicking stops and one attends to his 
legitimate duties with the feeling that he does not do anything but is only an instrument. 


In spirituality, experience is the method of gaining wisdom while in science it is experiment. 
When you put some sugar in a glass of water you can't see it or touch it as it gets dissolved. But 
you can find out its presence by tasting the water. Similarly you can realise Divinity, which is 
present in every being and within you, only by experiencing Bliss by Saadhana. 


When fire on a piece of charcoal is left unattended for some time, you find that ash is covering 
the fire. This ash came out of the fire only because of negligence. If you blow off the ash you can 
see the fire. You are not bringing it afresh from outside. Similarly, Jnaanaagni (the fire of 
wisdom) in you is covered by the ash of Maaya (illusion) which obscures it from your vision. 
Just blow off the ash of Maaya, covering the fire of wisdom, by vairaagya (renunciation or 
sacrifice), you can realise the wisdom within you, which is constant integrated awareness. 


Everyone is busy in protecting, decorating and painting the chariot of the body but does not have 
any concern for the charioteer. How do you expect it to move without the direction of the 
charioteer? The senses are the horses of the chariot of the body, the mind is the rein to control 
them. 


The way to realise the Divinity that is in everyone is to cultivate love, which is the only divine 
trait. There are three sides to love forming a triangle. They are: (1) Love gives and never 
receives; (2) Love is fearless; (3) Love is changeless. The love that develops between a mother 


and child or a husband and wife is subject to change as it pertains to the body. It is only Bhrama 
(illusion). You should become Brahman shedding Bhrama. 


The divinity in you is changeless, blemishless, without beginning or end. Just as a dhoby 
removes the dirt in a cloth and restores its original whiteness by washing with soap beating it on 
stone, man should try to regain his vision of the pure effulgent Aathma by washing his heart in 
the water of love with the soap of Shraddha (earnestness) on the stone of Thyaaga (sacrifice). 
This is the way to realise one's Inner Reality, which is Sathyam, Jnaanam, Anantham and 
Brahma. 


Excerpts from Discourse on 8-4-1993. 


Shuka teaches Vyaasa 


Air is all-pervasive. It is within you and outside as well. Similarly God is pervading everywhere 
in the Universe. If you look at everything with the divine feeling you will not fail to see Divinity, 
pure and unsullied. If you see the idol of Krishna in this hall with a divine feeling, you feel you 
are seeing the form of Krishna. 


But if you are keen on finding out the material from which it is made, you see only the bronze or 
other metal of which it is made and not Krishna. You can realise that what you visualise depends 
on the nature of your vision--Dhrishti is Shrishti. If you look at the world with coloured glass 
you see everything differently and not in its real colour. The mind is the cause for feelings. If you 
see with the feeling that this Vishvam (Universe) is Vishnu Svaruupam (embodiment of God), it 
will be so! 


Every object has a Svaruupam (its own form) and Svabhaavam (its own nature). Man is 
completely unaware of his real nature, which is love and compassion. He is so much immersed in 
selfishness that he only does every action to further his own self-interest and accumulate 
possessions for himself. Even the love that man exhibits today towards other persons or objects 
is only with a selfish motive to gain something out of them and not for their sake. 


Once Shuka, son of Vyaasa, wanted to leave his home and go to the forest to undertake thapas. 
Vyaasa, overcome by parental attachment, entreated him not to go to the forest but to remain 
there and serve his parents as it was his duty to serve them. 


But Shuka told Vyaasa: "Oh! Vyaasa! you are not my' father I am not your son. We came from 
Bliss. Everyone wants to be blissful. I am going to seek the Bliss which is our common source. 
These names and forms and relationships are only ephemeral." By this he was referring to his 
Inner Reality which is the same in all beings. 


Excerpts from Discourse on 9-4-1993. 


Divine action 


Everyone should remember that the purpose of human life is to do one's duty without 'regard for 
results, which will automatically accrue. When there is rain, water will flow in the river and one 
need not pray for both. It is enough if you pray for rain. Man can't live without activity even for a 
moment, as blood circulation and breathing are going on non-stop as long as one lives, whether 


one is sleeping, walking or sitting. It will be folly to attribute these natural activities to 
man's efforts. It is Divine action. Krishna spells this out in the Geetha: "Aham Vaishvaanaro 
Bhuuthvaa Praaninaam Dehamaashrithah. Praanaapaana Samaayukthah. Pachaamyannam 
Chathur Vidham." God is in every being as Vaishvaanara, aiding digesting of all types of food. 


God is described as Eesha, Gireesha, Naresha, Paresha and Bilvesha. The term Eesha means 
sakala aishvarya sampanna (master of all types of wealth). Aishvarya includes not only 
property, movable and immovable, but also strength, knowledge, skill, intelligence and 
prosperity. Eeshvara is the master of all wealth. 


Gireesha: Gireesha means master of Girl or Hill. What does this signify? People often go to 
Thirupathi Hills and offer their hair in fulfilment of vows. The inner significance of this sacrifice 
of hair must be understood. God is not expecting your hair, which is of no value at all. Does He 
relish this lowliest of offerings? Certainly not! The head is the peak of the human body. 
Ignorance or Thaamasik quality is supposed to be dark or black. The black hair is enveloping the 
peak of the human body which is the head. By removing the hair on the head you expose the 
white surface of the peak. This is symbolic of surrendering the dullness or Thaamasik quality. 
This is an age-old practice, which is followed without comprehending its inner significance. 
Since God is the master of the light of wisdom, as opposed to dullness on the head at the top of 
the human body, He is termed as "Gireesha." 


Naresha: In the term Naresha (master of Narah) 'Na' means no, 'Rah' means ignorant of one's 
sacredness. Narah means 'man' who is not ignorant. He is not a sinner. He is the embodiment of 
pure Aathma. The Master of man is Naresha. 


Paresha: ‘Para’ means "above all." God transcends all. He is Akhanda (limitless) and 
Anirvachaneeya (beyond description by words). As God transcends the three stages of time-- 
past, present and future and transcends space, pervading everywhere, He is termed Paresha. 


Bilvesha: He is termed Bilvesha---the lover of the Bilva leaf which is having triple leaves in a 
single stalk, Thrinethra--one with three eyes and Thriguna---transcending the three gunas 
(qualifies of Sathva, Rajas and Thamas). His weapon is Thrishul, the three-pointed Javelin. One 
should 'offer the three qualities to God, symbolised by the offer of the triple-leaf Bilva for 
worship. One should do worship with full understanding of the inner significance of the rituals. 


Excerpts from Discourse on 10-4-1993. 


God realization 


You are all embodiments of Divinity, which is within you. God is in the form of Vaishvaanara to 
digest your food. You listen to such teachings many times but don't practise. Instead of having 
tons of knowledge an ounce of practice is enough. Saadhana is essential to realise divinity. Saa 
means Dhaivathvam (divinity). Dhana means wealth. The acquisition of the wealth of divinity is 
saadhana. Saalokyam is entering the world of God; Saameepyam is going nearer to God; 
Saaruupyam is acquiring the feeling that you are part of God and Saayujyam is final merging 
with God. 


You know there is butter in milk. But you have to subject it to the process of turning into curd 
and then churning it to get butter. Similarly, in the pot of the body there is the milk of Divinity. 


You have to chum it using Buddhi as churning rod and Bhakthi as the rope. Out of the churning, 
comes butter which is Self-realisation. You got it from what is already there inside you. 


You should never divorce spirituality from worldly life. The cloth in my hand (a kerchief) is 
spirituality. It is made up of threads which represent worldly life. The cloth is there only because 
of the threads. If you segregate the threads there will be no cloth. 


"Thvameva Maatha, Pithaa thvameva." We say, God is father, mother, friend, relative, 
knowledge, wealth and all. God is the energy which drives us to action. We should not waste our 
energy on useless things. 


Excerpts from Discourse on 1 1-4-1993. 


The senses and values 


The five values of Sathya (Truth), Dharma (Righteousness), Shaanthi (Peace), Prema (Love)and 
Ahimsa (Non-violence) are related to different inner instruments of the body. 


The value of Truth is expressed through speech or words. The value of Dharma is expressed 
through the body. This is related to the Annamaya kosha (physical sheath). Shaanthi can be 
experienced only in the mental plane--Manomaya kosha (Mental sheath). For Sathya, Dharma 
and Shaanthi one has to purify the instruments of speech, body and mind. This is called purity of 
"Mano, Vaak, Kaayam." Prema (Love) comes out of Aanandhamaya kosha (mental and bliss 
sheath). Ahimsa (Non-violence) comes from Bliss sheath. Prema flows as an undercurrent in all 
the inner instruments and purifies them. So all the five values are having relationship with the 
five sheaths. 


Now these values are mostly absent in human beings. Thinking in one way, talking in another 
way, and indulging in action not related to the talk or thought is the mark of a wicked person. He 
may be in human form but he is to be deemed to be a demon only. Because such people are in 
abundance, the world is in turmoil. Sathya is full of sanctity if one deeply enquiries into this 
value. Sath means Praana (life force). Ya means Aahaaram (food). "M" stands for Sun. It is a 
combination of life, food and sun. For life, food is essential and food comes from the sun. The 
greenery in the world subsists because of Sun's rays. It is the duty of man to make use of the food 
created by the Sun to sustain life. If you analyze this word Sathya in the reverse order ya stands 
for Yama, tha stands for thapas and sa stands for 'Sarveshvara'. It conveys the truth that by 
practising Yama and thapas one can realise the Almighty. Yama is not the God of death but is the 
five-fold discipline one should maintain. They are Ahimsa, Sathya, Brahmacharya, Astheya and 
Aparigraha (Non-Violence, Truth, Celibacy, Non-stealing, and Non-covetousness). 


God is said to be of blue colour. It does not mean that His skin is bluish! He is Jnaana 
Bhaaskara (the embodiment of wisdom or shining with the light, of wisdom). He is also 
Anantha---endless like the sky or fathomless like the Ocean. Since both are of blue colour God is 
also described as bluish. He is not born with blue-coloured skin. He is infinite and fathomless. 


The heart of the human being is like the sky in which the 'Self' is the sun shining constantly. Just 
as passing clouds obstruct the vision of the sun temporarily, attachment to world and worries and 
troubles will obstruct the vision of the Inner Self but once the clouds clear, you can have vision 
of the Inner Self which is resplendent within. By means of Dhyaana Shakthi and Praana Shakthi, 
you can experience Divinity in the Bliss sheath, which fosters the five human values. 


Shaanthi Comes from Manomaya kosha. 

Sathya comes from Vijnaanamaya kosha. 

Dharma comes from Annamaya kosha. 

Prema comes from Praanamaya and Manomaya kosha. 
Ahimsa comes from Aanandhamaya kosha. 


In these five sheaths are encased three types of bodies: Sthuula (Physical), Suukshma (Subtle) 
and Kaarana (Causal) shareeras (bodies). Annamaya Kosha represents physical body. It is like 
the tyre of a lorry. If you increase intake of food it grows and the weight of the body increases. 


Divinity is there in all the sheaths of the body. It is Constant Integrated Awareness in different 
forms in speech, action and feelings. 


Excerpts from Discourse on 12-4-1993. 


14. Trust in God : the Sole Protector 


A person who has a compassionate heart, 
Whose words spell truth and 

Whose body is utilised to serve others 

Will never be affected by any evil forces. 
Such a person's life will be truly sanctified. 


SANDALWOOD gives more and more fragrance when it is subjected to more and more 
grinding, so does sugarcane yield juice as it is chewed more and more. Gold gets refined when it 
is burnt and melted in fire. So also a true devotee will never falter in his love for God even when 
he faces troubles and obstacles in his life. God tests His devotees only to lift them up to a higher 
level in the spiritual ladder. A true devotee leads a sacred life which is sanctified when he faces 
the obstacles and problems with full faith in the Divine. The body is only for leading a sacred 
life. 


"I am the infinite Time" says Krishna. Time has no measure, and it is unlimited, infinite. It is 
experienced by man in his life by dividing it into years, months, weeks, days, etc. It is only to 
facilitate man to pursue his daily activity that time is brought under some convenient, standard 
division. 

God is as a spark in everyone 


"Mamaivaamsho jeevaloke jeevabhoothah sanaathanah." God is as a spark in every one. To 
recognize this Divinity man has to do some saadhana. A mitror though clean may not reflect 
your image if it is not having the mercury coating behind it. So also the heart may be pure but 
there should be the coating of love behind it to facilitate reflection of God. 


There are multitudes of waves in the Ocean which are not all alike and vary in shapes and forms, 
but there is no difference in the sea-water that is contained in every one of these waves. Similarly 
names and forms of people are different but the spark of Divinity that is Sathchithaanandha is 
the same in every one. Every one, in fact, is an embodiment of Sathchithaanandha. When we 
realise this, sacred feelings will prevail and no petty ideas will arise in the mind. 


God manifests in man in three forms described as, Bhur-Bhuvah-Suvah. Bhu is the padhaartha 
(material form). Bhuvah is Spandhana Shakthi or Praana Shakthi (Life Principle). Suvah is the 
form of Prajna. Prajnaa Shakthi is the radiation which, through Praana Shakthi (vibrating 
power) gives the material form represented by the body. God manifests in all these three forms. 
The body is a combination of water, iron, lead, phosphorus and other things which are but inert 
matter. The body is inert but is made to function actively through vibration or the Life Force 
Prajnaa Shakthi (radiation) causes vibration to act. This Prajnaa Shakthi is conscience. It 
occupies a special place in the body. God, in the form of conscience, activates the body. If only 
man understands this truth of spirituality he will never indulge in bad deeds. The functioning of 
the body is itself a mystery. 


Realise the effulgent divinity within 


We use old newspapers generally to wrap different types of articles purchased in a shop. If 
jasmine is wrapped in the paper, the paper smells sweet like jasmine. Another person may wrap 


some edible like pakoda and the paper gives that smell. If dry fish is wrapped, the paper emits 
the smell of dry fish. Though the paper has no smell of its own it takes on the smell of the thing 
with which it is associated. In the same way our mind, too, gets polluted because of the illusion 
of body consciousness and attachment. When you think of a material object, it gets object 
oriented but if you turn the mind towards the Life principle it makes the life sacred. If you turn it 
towards the world, it is binding you to the world. If you turn it towards Awareness, which is 
Brahman, you become Brahman. 


Embodiments of Love! If you enquire carefully you will find that the entire universe is pervaded 
by God: Vishvam Vishnu Svaruuopam. The human body is bound by time, karma (work) and 
duty. Everyone has the responsibility to do his duty. The effulgent Divinity within is not realised 
by man and he leads a useless life indulging in mundane pleasures. The entire universe is made 
up of matter which is transient and subject to decay. Therefore, one should develop devotion to 
the Lord who is the permanent Reality. 


Absence of self-confidence is the cause of all miseries and troubles man encounters in the world. 
One should have confidence in his own inner Self that is the Aathma. If one has this self- 
confidence, he will have self-satisfaction, which will lead to self-sacrifice. Self-sacrifice leads to 
liberation or Self-Realisation. Everything is based on "Self" and everyone is Aathmaswaruupa 
(embodiment of the Self). The body is just an instrument. There is water in the tumbler before 
me. Without the tumbler water can't be kept; the tumbler is the basis for the water which is 
needed to quench the thirst. So also the body is the vessel to hold the water of Divinity. To drink 
the water is Saadhana. Your thirst for realising Divinity is quenched by Saadhana. 


Significance of the New Year "Shreemukha" 


You call this day as New Year Day. There is nothing new. It is as old as any other day. We take 
it as a new year every time one year ends and another begins. The time is divided on the basis of 
the motions of Moon and the Sun. The former is called Chaandhramaana, which is followed by 
some people, and the latter is called Souramaana, which is followed by another section of people. 
Today, we bid farewell to the year Angeerasa and welcome the year Shreemukha. Shri means 
very sacred. It is the highest among the eight types of Aishvarya (wealth) of which God is 
described as the master. Shabda brahmamayee, Charaachara mayee, Jyothirmayee, 
Vaangmayee, Nithyaanandhamayee, Paraathparamayee, Maayamayi and Shreemayi are the 
eight-fold wealth of which Shri is the most important. In order to foster immortality in mortals it 
is customary to use 'Shri' as prefix to the names of males and 'Shrimathi' to those of females. 
Even when God comes down to earth as Divine Incarnation such as Raama and Krishna, the 
prefix 'Shri' is added to their names and we call them as 'Shri Raama' and 'Shri Krishna'. The 
purpose is to signify the immortality of God even when he assumes the mortal human form. 


God is the lighthouse for the ocean of life 


The name of this year is 'Shreemukha'. The name implies that it should give brilliance to all 
faces. But you will not find this year as favourable as its name indicates. One should not get 
discouraged by these prospects. You cannot always have pleasure. Pleasure is an interval 
between two periods of pain. They are like sunshine and shadow. You should make efforts to 
look on both with equanimity.-Man wants to get all that he desires and gets disillusioned and 
disappointed. The lighthouse of hope for this ocean of life is God, who is the only permanent 
entity. This lighthouse never fails. So you should engage yourself in Godly activities with 
unstinted devotion. 


God is omnipresent. He has hands, legs, mouth, faces everywhere and pervades the entire 
Universe. Where is the need to search for Him? Such a search may be termed as folly. All forms 
of God are in you. Any time is auspicious to realise this. You need not wait for the New Year. 
There is no need for a new religion or a new culture or a new philosophy, What is needed is only 
a pure heart. You should not give room for impurity or pollution in the heart. You can make your 
life sacred by following the golden rule: "Help ever; hurt never." 


Supreme Lord is the only one who can protect you 


Speak softly, sweetly and truthfully. There are two eyes to see different things, two ears to hear 
good and bad, there are two hands to do good and bad, but there is only one tongue to speak only 
the Truth. 


Real bliss consists in sanctifying the senses. The ornament for the hand is charity, that for the 
tongue is truth and that for the ears is listening to divine scriptural talks. What other ornament is 
needed than these! "Aanandhame Andhamu" (Bliss is beauty). It is the nectar of life. You should 
enjoy the sweetness of bliss. 


Embodiments of Divine Aathma! Spend your life in cherishing sacred thoughts, listening to good 
things, speaking good words, and doing good deeds. If all of you adopt this path, happiness and 
prosperity will reign in the world. No government or politician or any one in the world can 
protect you from troubles and disasters. There is only one who can protect you and that is 
Supreme Lord. To seek His protection, all of you must wholeheartedly pray "Lokaas- 
samasthaas-sukhino-Bhavanthu" (Let all people in the world enjoy bliss). 


Discourse at Sai Shruthi, Kodaikanal, on 14-.4-1993. 


15. The juice, the sugar and the sweets 


EMBODIMENTS of the Divine Aathma! From ancient times, the culture of Bhaarath has been 
upholding high ideals. Foremost among its teachings was the concept of reverence for the mother 
and the father as embodiments of the Divine. "Maa thru Dhevo Bhava! Pithru Dhevo Bhava!" 
(Esteem the mother as Divine, adore the father as Divine). 


Human life is indeed extremely sweet. Without this sweetness, life will be worthless. Man 
struggles in a myriad ways to secure sensual enjoyment, but there is sweetness which transcends 
these physical pleasures. This is the precious fruit of Bhaaratheeya culture. 


Realise the sacredness inherent in motherhood 


The mother sacrifices her all for rearing the child, protecting him and bringing him up well. 
Hence, the sweetness manifest in material love cannot be found in any other object or 
experience, "What greater sweetness is there in our land than a mother's love? One's honour is 
greater than one's life," goes the saying. Everyone should realise the sacredness inherent in 
motherhood. 


When Raama went to the forest with Seetha, one day he told her: "Bhuujaatha! In this world 
there are no greater adorable deities than one's mother and father. When one has near to him a 
loving mother, who cares for him continually and fosters his well-being, without adoring her as 
Divine, how can a man contemplate on a Being that is subtle and beyond his daily experience? 
The Divine transcends all human understanding. How can this be recognised? People who cannot 
comprehend the hearts of parents who are close to them, whose love they experience in daily life, 
how can they comprehend the Absolute, which the Upanishaths declare is beyond the reach of 
speech and the mind? Hence, the injunction that the mother and the father should be adored as 
Divine. It was my foremost duty to carry out the will of my father." 


However, if we wish to understand the Divinity that transcends the human understanding, we 
should seek to reach a level above the human. Till that is reached, we have to experience 
everything at the human level alone. Living as a human being, how can one recognize That 
which transcends the human capacity? 


Therefore, in the first instance, man must try to live as a human being. He has to recognise the 
divinity that dwells in the human form. Man has to cultivate faith in the truth and live 
accordingly. Leading a life of dedicated service, man must enjoy the fruit of Prema (Divine 
Love). The best way to love God is to love all and serve all. 


Svaami was telling the students the previous day that though the Divinity that resides in all 
human beings is one and the same, the capacities and personalities of various individuals are 
different. Depending on the ripeness of their experience on the cultural practices they have 
pursued, on the nature of their spiritual disciplines, and on their parental background, these 
individuals have a wide or narrow outlook. The attitudes of individuals are determined by their 
day-to-day experiences. Hence, people should engage themselves in good deeds. Only through 
hard striving can the Divinity in man be realised, like the fire that emerges from the rubbing of 
two sticks and butter from the churning of butter-milk. 


Aadhi Shankara's Adhvaitha 


Aadhi Shankara, at the age of five, after the performance of his Upanayana (spiritual initiation) 
ceremony, approached his preceptor and within three years was able to master the four Vedhas 
and the six Shaasthras. Through earnestness, anything can be accomplished. From his studies, 
Shankara realised that Ekathvam (oneness) is the essence of all knowledge. This is the doctrine 
of Adhvaitha. "Ekameva Adhvitheeyam Brahma" (The Absolute is one alone, not two). There is 
no second, but there is the appearance of an enormous multiplicity. How, then, can oneness be 
claimed? Here is an example. You have the number one and the number nine. Of the two 
numbers which is the bigger? The natural answer will be nine. But this is not so. One is really the 
bigger number 1+1+1+1..... up to nine, make up nine. Hence, the Vedhas declare: "Ekoham 
bahushyaam" (I am One; I willed to be many). Only the one exists. But it has assumed numerous 
forms. Shankara declared that Anekathvam (the many) is subsumed by the one this is the unity in 
diversity. There may be many stalks of sugarcane, but the juice from all of them has the same 
sweetness. Beings are many, but the breath is the same. Nations are many, but the earth is one. 


In this manner, Shankara proclaimed to the world the unity that underlies the apparent diversity. 
He used the analogy of the same sweet juice that is present in all sugarcane stalks. 


Vishishta-Adhvaitha and Dhvaitha 


Raamanuja asked the question: "How long can the sweetness of the juice last?" Not for long. If 
the sugarcane juice is converted into some other lasting form, it could be used for sweetening 
many things. The conversion should be in the form of sugar, which could then be used for 
making any sweet preparation. Without the sugarcane juice there can be no sugar. The sugarcane 
juice represents the Adhvaithic principle and sugar represents the Vishishta-adhvaitha principle. 


Then came the declaration of Madhva: "Pishtaadhi gunasamparkaath." The variety of sweet 
preparations is the result of the bringing together of Pishta (flour) and sugar. Without some kind 
of flour, the sugar by itself cannot appear in different forms. Flour of the sort or another, 
combined with sugar, can serve to produce any number of sweets. However, it is not the flour 
that is the source of sweetness. It is the sugar in the sweet that is made out of the flour which 
accounts for the sweetness. This is the analogy employed to explain Dhvaitham (the dualistic 
doctrine). 


Common sweetness in all the philosophies 


Shankara, as the exponent of Adhvaitha (Nondualism). Raamanuja as the exponent of Vishishta- 
adhvaitha (Qualified Non-dualism) and Madhva, as the expounder of Dhvaitha (Dualism), stood 
out as great teachers who taught the path of spirituality to the world. However, there is common 
sweetness in all the three schools of philosophy. 


Shankara insisted on the recognition of the unity that underlies all diversity. "Eesha, Gireesha, 
Naresha, Paresha, Bilvesha namo Saamba sadhaashiva Shambho shankara sharanam mey thava 
charanayugam," declared Aadhi Shankara, in praise of Shiva. In listing the different attributes of 
Shiva, the Aachaarya declared that Shiva is everything, by whatever name He is called. Thereby, 
the omnipresence of the Lord is proclaimed. 


The Adhvaithic doctrine of Shankara propagated the view that bodies are manifold, and in these 
separate bodies the one Divine is present. With regard to Adhvaitha, however, it is possible only 
to experience it as bhaava (a conscious feeling), but not to apply nondualism on carrying out 


one's activities in daily life. There is the divine in a tiger, a snake and a human being. You can 
recognise this as a concept, but on that account, you cannot go and embrace a tiger. The tiger 
must be treated as a tiger and a snake must be treated as a snake. The human being must be given 
the status that is appropriate to the human. You must have the faith that the same Divine dwells 
in all beings. This is indicated by the presence in all beings of three divine characteristics: Asthi, 
Bhaathi and Priyam, (existence, recognisability and utility). This is also expressed in other terms 
as: Sath-Chith-Aanandha (Being-Awareness-Bliss). Sath refers to That which is unchanging. 
This is a Divine attribute. Chith refers to total Awareness to know the complete nature of 
anything. When Sath and Chith are together, there is Aanandha (Bliss). This Bliss is unchanging. 
It is described as Brahmaanandham (Supreme Bliss). It is like mixing sugar with water, resulting 
in a syrup. 


Sath-Chith-Aanandha (Being-Awareness-Bliss) is Divinity that is unchanging. Forms and names 
are continually changing. They are transient and momentary. The forms of tiger or a snake are 
impermanent. They have, therefore, to be dealt with as transient. 


If you sustain a fall, your foot may suffer a fracture and you may have a bandage. But 
irrespective of the love your mother bears for you, she cannot bandage her leg to relieve you of 
your pain. She may feel sympathy for you, but she cannot take over your fracture by bandaging 
her leg. In the phenomenal world, such differences are inherent. 


Discourse at Kodaikanal on 26-4-1993. 


16. What great mothers mean to the nation 


The father, to teach the child the truth, 

May chide, reprove or beat. 

The mother may pinch the cheek 

To make the child drink the milk. 

Forget not at any time 

These marks of paternal Love. 

Doing good deeds, one will never reap bad results; 
Wickedness will never yield good fruits; 

Will the neem seed produce mango fruits 

Or the mango seed yield neem fruits? 


EMBODIMENTS of Love! The earth is one. But, if you sow neem seeds, you will get only bitter 
fruits. If you plant sweet mango seeds, you will get sweet mangoes. The earth makes no 
difference between them. Only the differences in the seeds account for the differences among 
the fruits. Likewise, the womb of a mother is like the womb of Mother Earth. The thought which 
prevails at the time of conception results in the kind of child that is born. If the parents desire to 
have virtuous, exemplary and noble children, they have to observe righteous practices and lead 
virtuous lives. 


Mothers should possess good qualities 


It was because Aryamba was a devoted and pious woman and observed sacred practices that the 
great world-teacher, Aadhi Shankaraachaarya was born to her. For Vivekaanandha to achieve 
world wide renown, his mother's sacred life was responsible. Raamakrishna Paramahamsa was 
able to preach the sacred doctrine of love to the world and achieve greatness because of his 
mother's good qualities. 


Gaandhi earned the appellation of "Mahaathma" because of the sacred "Kokila Vratha" observed 
by his mother. Gaandhi's mother used to observe everyday a vow ritual known as "Kokila 
Vratha". As soon as she completed the ritual, she would wait for the call of the Kokila (the 
Indian cuckoo) to have her breakfast. However, on one day, she waited for a long time, without 
taking food, for the call of the cuckoo. Noticing this, the young Gaandhi went out of the house, 
imitated the cooing of the cuckoo and then told his mother, "Now that the cuckoo has made its 
call, please, mother, take your food." Unable to contain her grief, the mother slapped on the 
cheeks of Gaandhi and wailed: "What sin have I committed that such a liar should be born to me! 
What a great sinner am I to have begotten such a wicked liar as son, Oh Lord!" She was 
shedding tears as she spoke. Deeply moved by his mother’s words, Gaandhi made a promise to 
her "In my life, henceforth, I will not utter falsehood." 


In those days, the mothers used to watch the behaviour of their children and strove to keep them 
on the right path. Gaandhi became a 'Mahaathma' because of the severe punishment meted out to 
him by his mother. 


Gaandhi's mother Putlibai, had a maid called Rambha. One day; Gaandhi came running to her 
saying: "I am afraid, I am afraid!" Rambha was a worthy maid of Putlibai. She told the young 
fear-stricken lad: "Don't have any fear. Whenever you feel afraid, repeat the name, 'Raam, 
Raam,' and your fear will leave you." That teaching was remembered by Gaandhi all his life and 
he died with the name of Raama on his lips. 


As is the seed, so is the plant 


Mothers of those days led a pure and pious life, cherishing sacred thoughts, fostering virtues and 
setting an example to the world. Parents today get up from their beds quarrelling with each other. 
When the parents wake up hurling abuses at each other, the children wake up levelling blows at 
each other. As is the seed, so is the plant. Parents today should ponder over the sacred ideas 
cherished by parents in the olden days. For all the bad ways followed by youth today, for all their 
wayward behaviour and bad conduct, the parents are to blame. If the mothers are good, there will 
be no room for bad behaviour by the children. Although parents may appear innocuous like fig 
fruits, they are responsible for the misbehaviour of their children, like the worms inside the 
fruits. 


Will of the Divine in shaping the children 


However, in some cases, through the grace and intervention of the Divine, some children are 
rescued from going astray and are guided on the right path despite the desires of their parents. 
'For instance, King Shuddhodhana adopted many methods to prevent his son Siddhaartha (who 
became The Buddha) taking to the path of Vairaagya (renunciation). But he could not prevent it. 
This is due to the Will of the Divine. It is only when human effort and Divine Will are in unison 
that the great consummation takes place. 


Ranthideva declared, "Jeevanam Sarva-bhuutheshu." He proclaimed the truth that he who 
regards food as the primary thing in life is ignorant, while the wise one is he who regards the 
Spirit as primary. How many of those who have plenty of food taken to wrong ways? Even with 
abundance of food, lacking the spiritual urge, these men have become destitute. Food may 
sustain the body, but it will not nourish the soul: 


Chaithanya, the son of Satheedhevi, once went to Puri and had dharshan of Lord Jagannaath. He 
worshipped Jagannaath with these words: "Oh Lord! You are not merely the Lord of the earth. 
You are the Lord of the Universe! You are the Lord of Life!. You are the Lord of Love! Svaami! 
I do not need wealth or vehicles. Even less do I seek devotion, wisdom or renunciation. I do not 
aspire for worldly pleasures or possessions. It is enough if I am endowed with the love to love 
you. If I have that love, all other things will come of their own accord. The only thing I seek is 
love towards you. Grant me this boon." 


Young people do not realise that there is this Divine spirit in human beings. They consider 
human existence as nothing more than living like birds and beasts. This they consider as the 
primary purpose of life. This is wrong. They should realise that beyond the Annamaya, 
Praanamaya, Manomaya and Vijnaanamaya koshas (the physical, the vital, the mental and the 
supramental sheaths associated with the body), there is the Aanandhamaya Kosha (the Sheath of 
Supreme Bliss). When do you attain this Bliss? 


The real meaning of Mahaaraaja 


He is not a great ruler who possesses all kinds of wealth. The real Mahaaraaja (great ruler) is 
one who has surrendered everything to the Divine. He is a thyaagi (renunciant), he is a yogi (one 
who is in communion with the Divine). It is for this reason that in Uttar Pradesh, whatever sacred 
shrine you visit, you will find pilgrims greeting the saadhus and ascetics as Maharaaj. They are. 
hailed as Maharaaj because they have renounced everything, taken refuge in the Lord, sought to 
merge in the Lord and practised spiritual disciplines for this purpose. 


Chaithanya declared: "My property is not 'Shri' but Hari. I value not Lakshmi (the Goddess of 
Wealth), but the Lord of Lakshmi (Vishnu)." If you aspire for the Lord, you will not suffer from 
any want. There is no greater wealth than love of the Lord. 


What gift is greater than the gift of food? 
Is there a greater deity than one's parents? 
What virtue is greater than compassion? 
What is more valuable than good company? 
Is there a worse enemy than anger? 
Is any disease worse than debt? 
Can any death be worse than infamy? 
What can be grater than a good name? 
What wealth is greater than God's love? 
It is to acquire this supreme wealth that man has taken birth on earth. 


There have been many mothers in the world who have sought, by their strenuous endeavours, 
noble thoughts and sacred practices, to bring up their children in the path of righteousness. In the 
city of Calcutta, there lived a mother and his son. For the education of the son, the mother made 
many a sacrifice. She, however, impressed on the son one lesson: "Dear son, do not be concerned 
about worldly education. The foolish ones acquire all kinds of scholarship, but have no 
understanding of what they are. By study alone, a man does not get rid of his lowly ways. 
Through scholarship, one learns only to engage himself in controversy but does not acquire 
complete wisdom. Why pursue studies which end up only in death? One should study that which 
frees him from death. Only spiritual knowledge can lead to immortality. It is enduring. Worldly 
knowledge is temporary. For earning one's livelihood, worldly education is necessary. But this 
education should be acquired only to lead an independent life, with limited desires. Therefore, 
dear son, while pursuing studies, embark also on the spiritual quest." 


Human life should be used for service 


Prahlaadha told his father that he had learnt the essence of all education, namely, to adore the 
name of Naaraayana. For the realisation of the four Purushaarthas, there is no need for any 
education. Maithreyee told King Janaka that there was no purpose in having a human birth, only 
to lead a sensuous life like that of birds and beasts. Human life should be utilised for service and 
sacrifice. The mother taught her son in this manner the true aim of education. 


The boy completed his education and took up a small job. One day, in that village, there was a 
folk festival (Jaathra). The womenfolk of the village donned their best clothes, and jewellery to 


attend the festival. The mother also went with tattered clothes. The son could not bear to see that 
sight. He said: "Mother, you have no good clothes or any jewellery. I am distressed to see you 
like this. Please let me know what ornaments you wish to have, mother!" The mother replied: 
"This is not the right time. I shall let you know at the proper time." 


The three ornaments sought by the mother 


Thanks to the good behaviour and diligence of the lad, he rose to higher positions in service. 
Once again, he returned to his mother and asked what ornament she desired. "I shall get them as 
far as I can," he said. The mother told him that she wished, three ornaments, but she would 
disclose what they were later on. 


The son in the course of years reached a very high position. Once again he entreated: "Mother, I 
have now some money. Please let me know what jewels you would like. I shall get them for 
you." The mother said "Dear son! I am now not in a state when I can wear jewels. However, 
there are some ornaments in which I am interested and I shall tell you what they are. 


Drawing the son nearer to her, she said, "In our small village, I am grieved to find that the 
children have to go to distant places for education. My first ornament I desire is that you should 
set up a primary school in the village. Secondly, our people have no facilities for medical relief 
even for small ailments. I spend sleepless nights thinking about their plight. If you set up a small 
hospital for the village folk, that will be your second ornament for me. The third ornament is 
something which you have to do by yourself. In the days to come, your reputation may grow. If 
anybody asks "who is your mother?" you may mention my name. Your conduct must be such 
that you will uphold your mother's name. You must share with others the benefits of the 
education you have received. Do not go after wealth. The worshipper of Mammon will not yearn 
for God. The seeker of God will not seek for wealth. Observance of this is the third ornament I 
desire from you." 


The young man who heard these words from his mother and later became famous and earned the 
people's esteem was none other than Eeshvar Chandhra Vidhyaasaagar. He earned a great name 
in Calcutta. 


The hall-mark of education is humility 


Once he was proceeding to a neighbouring village to deliver an address. People used to gather tin 
large numbers to listen to his lectures. A young officer, who wanted to listen to Eeshvar 
Chandhra Vidhyasaagar's lecture, got down from a train with a suitcase to go to the lecture-hall. 
Eeshvar Chandhra Vidhyaasaagar also get down from the same train. The young officer was 
calling for a porter to carry his suitcase. Eeshvar Chandhra went to him and said, "Why do you 
need a cooly to carry this small suitcase? Can't you carry it yourself and save the money?" He 
replied. "It is not in keeping with my dignity to carry my suitcase. I am an educated person." 
Eeshvar Chandhra told him: "The hall-mark of education is humility, not pride. If you cannot 
carry your own bag, how are you carrying your body? If, however, you cannot carry your bag, I 
shall do so." And Eeshvar Chandhra carried the officer's bag. He acted on the motto: "Plain 
living and high thinking." Eeshvar Chandhra left the bag where the officer got off. The young 
man wanted to offer money to his "Porter". Eeshvar Chandhra told him. "To serve you is my 
reward." 


The young officer left and was later proceeding to the venue of the meeting. There people were 
offering garlands to Eeshvar Chandhra Vidhyaasaagar to welcome him to the meeting. The 


young officer realised that the man who had offered to carry his bag at the station was none other 
than the respected lecturer of that evening, Eeshvar Chandhra Vidhyaasaagar. He felt ashamed 
that he had made such a great man carry his bag. He reflected: “What is his education and what 
is mine? I have behaved like a little monkey. I am like a glow-worm before the Sun." 


The joy of the mother 


Eeshvar Chandra's mother shed tears of joy when she realised the great fame her son had 
achieved. "Having begotten such a son, my life has been redeemed. It does not matter what 
happens to me hereafter," she said to herself. That is why, the saying goes: "The father does not 
rejoice merely at the moment of a son's birth." These days, the petty-minded people celebrate the 
birth of a son with the distribution of sweets, etc. This is not a sign of wisdom. It is said: "The 
father rejoices when people praise his son for his great qualities." The father may feel that a son 
has been really born to him when he hears the praises of his son for his character and good 
qualities. 


The Kali age has become the Kalaha age 


In this manner, from ancient times the relations between mother and children have been 
hallowed as a result of the purity, the virtue and the integrity of the children. The relationship 
was full of love, mutual esteem, intense devotion and nectarine sweetness. The children had deep 
love for the mother Today the children have no respect for the mother Mothers have also little 
concern for the children. With the result, the Kali age has become Kalaha age the age of discord. 


Who are responsible for this situation? The mothers are the root cause. It is because of the 
pampering of the children in all sorts of ways by the mothers that the children tend to go astray. 


After the Burma war (in the Forties), a mother and her son came to Madras as refugees. This son 
used to go out begging for food and bring it home for both of them to eat. Seeing the pathetic 
condition of the young one, the mother said that from the next day she herself would go out for 
getting food, leaving the boy in the shed. Moreover no mother would like to see her son going 
out as a beggar. For this reason also she decided to go out herself. For some days she went out 
begging, but could manage to get only a small amount of food. She gave the food to the child 
and starved herself, but told him that she had already eaten. After some time the woman was too 
weak to go out begging. The son started going out to beg for food and kept feeding his mother. 
Her condition deteriorated from day to-day. She could not bear the pangs of hunger. The son 
went out and begged for food at an officer's residence. The officer, who was glancing through the 
day's newspaper, heard the boy's cry for food to appease his hunger. The Officer brought some 
food and gave it to the boy and asked him to eat it in his presence. 


The boy said he would not eat there, but take the food home. The Officer questioned him why he 
would not eat there when he was hungry. "You are not really hungry. You are lying," shouted the 
officer. The boy was too weak to stand and dropped down at the feet of the officer with the food 
in his hands. The officer noticed that the boy was muttering some words to himself. He went 
close to the boy's mouth and heard him say: “First for mother, first for mother." Saying those 
words, the boy passed away. 


Children should abide by mother's injunctions 


What an example is this of the love of a mother and the devotion of a son. Even though he was 
hungry, he wanted to give the food first to his mother. Does this kind of feeling exist even a little 


among students today? Of what use is education or office, wealth or authority? Children who 
have no love for their mothers have no reason to live at all. 


We must have children who revere the mother as God. Abiding by the mother's injunctions, you 
may do anything. 


Bhaarath has become a prey to numerous troubles because of the lack of exemplary mothers. 
What is it the mothers ask for today? Not compassion, good character, integrity and such virtues. 
They want their children to get educated, secure a big job, marry a wealthy girl and lead a 
comfortable life. Is it this kind of animal existence that one should seek? "Earn a good name. 
Become an ideal son. Use your wealth in righteous ways. Develop compassion. Lead a just and 
moral life." This is what mothers should impress on their children. Such high-minded mothers 
have become rare these days. Integrity and morality are going down day be day in the country. 


Nation needs mothers who lead an exemplary life 


The nation needs noble mothers who lead an exemplary life. They should manifest in their life 
the great culture of Bhaarath. Then, the culture will be transmitted to their progeny. Many great 
men in the past brought up such worthy children and enhanced the name and glory of Bhaarath. 
Today the children are being spoilt only by the parents. If the children are brought up on right 
lines from childhood, they will grow up properly. The fathers today are behaving like 
Dhritharaashtra (the father of the wicked Kauravas). The mothers today are behaving like 
Kalakanthi (the woman who had Chandhramathi's son bitten by a serpent). The fathers, instead 
of chastising children who take to wrong ways, pamper them and encourage them. Children who 
misbehave should be severely dealt with. Youth today are forgetting God, revelling in sensual 
pleasures and ruining their lives. They have no reverence for the mother or the Motherland. 


After the war in Lanka, when Raama was entreated by Vibheeshana and others to crown himself 
as ruler of Lanka, Raama told them that the mother and the Motherland were greater than 
Heaven itself and nothing on earth would tempt him to give up his love for Ayodhya. How many 
today are observing the great teachings of Raama regarding love of the Motherland? There are 
today many sons who will deprive their mothers of their earnings and spend the money for their 
own pleasure. Are such sons human beings? They are not human at all. Their education is a 
waste. Of what use are they to the nation? 


Develop healthy patriotism 


Students today should develop a healthy patriotism. They must honour their mothers. Only then 
will they be ideal men. Today corruption and dishonesty are more rampant in cities with 
universities, high courts and all other paraphernalia than in forest areas where illiterate tribal 
people live. There is greater co-operative spirit among the hill tribes than among the denizens of 
metropolises. 


The spirit of sacrifice should grow among students. They should develop a broad outlook. 


Once Raama told Seetha, while they were staying on the Chithrakootha mountain, that as few 
could comprehend the subtle principle of Divinity, people should adore their parents as the 
visible embodiments of God. 


Only when there are good mothers and good sons will the nation be free from troubles. 
Otherwise, the nation will break into pieces. This is the lesson of the Mahaabhaaratha where the 
wicked Kauravas brought ruin upon their entire clan by their evil ways. 


What the nation needs today is not material prosperity or high education. It needs men and 
women of character. 

The people should develop faith in God, have concern for the good name of society, cherish fear 
of sin and dedicate themselves to Godly activities. Then the nation will enjoy peace and security. 
Every mother should be regarded as an embodiment of the divine. Then every son will enjoy 
peace and prosperity. 

Discourse in the Sai Ramesh Mandap, Brindhaavan, on 6-5-1993, Easwaramma Day. 


The act of service is not to be judged according to the cost or 
publicity it entails; it may be only the offering of a cup of water in 
the depth of a jungle. But, the need of the recipient, the mood of the 
person who offers--these decide whether the act is gold or lead. 


BABA 


17. Man, the mind and the Aathma 


STUDENTS and Teachers! Man struggles hard ceaselessly night and day for the sake of bodily 
pleasures. One who recognises that the Aathma (Spirit) is distinct from the body will not be a 
prey to any troubles. If, indeed, every person in the world recognizes the nature and purpose of 
human existence, these difficulties will not arise. The Upanishaths declare that if one, who is 
born as a human, grows up as a human in society, does not know the meaning of the term. 
maanava (man), he is worse than birds and beasts. 


wm 


Humanness is a marvellous thing. It is boundless. It is significant. The term "man" does not refer 
only to the physical body. A human being is a composite of body, mind and Aathma. To perform 
with the body, to understand them through the mind, and to have the Aathma as a witness to both 
these----these three constitute Maanavathvam (human existence). Action, Awareness and 
Realisation--these three manifest the inner meaning of human life. 


It is a sheer ignorance to equate human existence with the body alone. Students have to 
understand at the outset how a man should grasp the nature and aim of human existence and have 
to lead a meaningful life. 


First of all, there is the mind. Only the one with a mind can be called man. "As a man thinketh, 
so he becomes." 


The five sheaths that envelop man 


Man is enveloped by five sheaths: Annamaya (Food), Praanamaya (the Life Force), Manomaya 
(the Mental), Vijnaanamaya (the Integral Consciousness) and the Aanandhamaya (the Blissful). 
The physical body is sustained by food. Hence it is called sthuula shareera (the gross body). 
Next comes the Suukshma shareera (subtle body) which is covered by three sheaths of Life- 
force, Mind and Integral Consciousness. This subtle body is the basis for the pleasures and pains 
experienced by man. All experiences of man are based on this subtle body. 


Next comes Aanandhamaya Kosha (the sheath of Bliss). It is the base for the entire Cosmos. The 
Cosmic Consciousness that is present in the bodily sheath is called "body consciousness." This 
means that even in the gross body, Chaithanyam (consciousness) is present. The consciousness 
that is present in the Praanamaya Kosha (The sheath of the Life Principle) not only indicates the 
life-principle, but also proclaims the basis of the vital force. 


The third is the Aathmik Principle, which illumines the mind---Manomaya Kosha. The fourth is 
the consciousness in the Vijnaanamaya Kosha. This is the basis for the entire Cosmos. It is called 
Chith, the all-pervading Cosmic Consciousness 


Transcending all these is the Pure Divine Self--the Supreme Purusha. This is the source of all 
power. It is the embodiment of the Infinite Will. This is the power that protects the Cosmos. The 
ancient sages strove to explore the nature of the Aanandhamaya Kosha (the sheath of Bliss). 
They sought to discover how they can experience Bliss. 


Maanava means Aathma 


To begin with, the meaning of the term Maanava (man) has to be properly understood. It means 
Aathma (the Self). It is from the Aathma that the five basic elements (ether, air, fire, water and 
the earth) have emerged. Man has brought under his control these five elements. Thereby he has 
become their master. Failing to comprehend the basic nature of human existence, man today has 


become a slave of his senses. The Vedhaantha has declared that one can know everything if he 
knows his own reality. To discover who you are, you have to rid yourself of the external vision. 
All the experiences based on the sense perceptions are external impressions. These are merely 
reflections of internal responses. To regard these as real and permanent and to ignore the Divine, 
which is the permanent entity, is the cause of man wasting his life. Hence, man has to utilise the 
mind to realise his divinity. 


The mind is the cause (bestower) of man's joys and sorrows. It is also the means of man's Mukthi 
(liberation). It is the mind which leads man to progress from the human to the Divine and forget 
the ephemeral world. The very name, Nara, for man implies that he is imperishable. This is the 
Aathmik truth of man. Man, therefore, is not the body, but the immortal Self. 


Four levels of functioning of the mind 


The mind functions at four different levels. The first is Super Mind. The second is Higher Mind. 
The third is Illuminated Mind. The fourth is Over Mind. Man can comprehend his real human 
nature only when he understands these four states of the mind. 


Super-Mind: An internal enquiry has to be made to understand this. This calls for turning the 
external vision inward. When this is done, it is realised that the physical body is inert. The mind 
is a reflecting mirror. The Buddhi (Intellect), Chittha (Will) and Ahamkaara (Ego) are aspects of 
the mind. All these are subject to change. But they are based on something that is unchanging. 
The first conclusion to be drawn from the internal enquiry is that there is an unchanging divine 
entity in man. 


From this realisation, one proceeds to the awareness of a Cosmic Divine. This realisation comes 
out of the recognition that the Divine Consciousness experienced by the individual is also present 
in all other individuals. This is the Cosmic Power. The all-pervading Divine Power is one and the 
same. There is no second power. Bodies may be multifarious like electric bulbs. But the energy 
that makes them shine is one. When this truth is realised, you have the awareness of the Cosmic 
Divine. 

It is not enough for one to realise his true Self. He cannot seek his individual salvation. He must 


experience the oneness that underlies the multiplicity in creation. Only when that oneness is 
realised can the true meaning of humanness be understood. 


At present, all man's endeavours and enquiries are limited to exploring the physical, the vital and 
the mental. The journey ends there. Man has proceeded only upto the mind. But he has to go 
beyond it to the Over-Mind. 


How far can the mind take you? It can take you upto the extent comprehending the Jagath 
(physical world). The mind is needed for understanding the variety of physical objects and 
phenomena in the world. 


But as long as man confines himself to the powers of the mind he remains as a human being. 
But, to rise to a higher level, he has to become Amanaska--one who transcends the mind. He 
should progress towards the Super-Mind. 


The limitless potencies that man possesses 


The Super-Mind is related to the Suukshma shareera (subtle body). In the subtle body, the 
senses, the mind, the intellect, the will, the ego and the physical body are absent and only 
Chethana-shakthi (consciousness) is present. One has to proceed further to the Kaarana 


shareera (the causal body). The Causal body contains the power which can control the body, the 
senses, the mind, etc. 


This means that man possesses within himself all potencies, man's powers are limitless and 
astonishing. Nothing in the world is beyond his comprehension. Man today appears as a highly 
knowledgeable and vastly capable being. But these capacities only proclaim his powers over the 
physical forces of Nature. There is, however, an unseen, unknown, unmanifested infinite power 
within him. This is the Cosmic Power in man. It is all-pervasive. It is in every human being. 
Only when one goes by the form, there is an apparent distinction between the microcosm and the 
macrocosm, like the difference between the air in a balloon and the air in the vast atmosphere 
outside. But when the balloon bursts, the small air inside becomes one with the infinite air 
outside. 


Human bodies are like the balloon. The infinite potency within each body is regarded-as 
infinitesimally small. But this potency is a part of the universal Cosmic power. 


"Aanoraneeyaan Mahathomaheeyaan" (minuter than the atom and vaster than the vastest), 
declares the Upanishath. But the power in both is the same. 


However, though the thoughts of the mind, the actions of the body and the role of the Aathma as 
Witness appear as disparate, yet they are all integrally interrelated. The differences are in form, 
but the bliss that is experienced is one. Hence, the Upanishaths declared the truth of the One in 
the Many. 


Humanness and divinity are same 


Humanness is not separate from Divinity. Both are one. So, in the second stage, when you 
develop a broad vision, you experience the feeling of the oneness of the individual, of the 
Universe and God. This is called the Divine Universal Form. How do you cognise this? Not by 
perceiving the myriad diversities among objects, but by recognizing their underlying unity, the 
recognition of the divine in each of them. This means that human beings are not to be seen as so 
many innumerable separate entities. The Chaithanya (Consciousness) that is in each of them is 
one and the same Universal Consciousness. It is all-pervading. For example, the air that a man 
breathes is not exclusive to him. It is the same air that is breathed by others. The air that is all- 
pervading is inhaled by each according to his needs. 


Judging himself by the limitations of his body, man considers himself a weak and powerless 
being. Once he is conscious of his Divinity; he will realise his boundless potentialities. 


Cognition of inner reality 


Therefore, the first requisite is for man to realise his divinity. The students have to find out who 
they are (their inner reality). Modern education, however, attempts to teach everything about the 
world except what they are. This is sheer ignorance. Along with the stupendous progress of 
science, there is a corresponding growth in ignorance. Such lopsided growth of science can only 
result in ignorance of the reality. As long as men are immersed in differences and discord, they 
are only steeped in ignorance. 


Man must go beyond the lower mind to the Over-Mind. This is quite possible. There is nothing 
that is beyond human capacity if man has confidence in himself. But he is weighed down by the 
doubt whether he can accomplish anything great with his limited physical abilities. The body is 
finite, but man is not. When the limited body is placed next to the "I" (Nenu, in Telugu), the 


individual is lost in the limitations of the body forgetting the potentialities of the Self (the "I"). 
All doubts in man arise from this error. Man has to. realise the impermanence of the dheha 
(body) and the immortality of Dhehi (the Indwelling Spirit). That Spirit is the Divine. 


The human body is called Kshethra because the Indwelling Divine is Kshethrajna (the Knower 
of the Field). He is the embodiment of the Aathma. Students should understand the nature of the 
Kshethrajna, the Divine Knower, within each of them. Students should have self-confidence. 
This means that they should get rid of the barrier that separates them from the Self, namely the 
body-consciousness. Then they will experience the bliss that is beyond all the sheaths enveloping 
the human body. 


Students should realise the Cosmic power that is possessed by each individual. They should not 
be misled by the limitations of the form. If man did not possess great abilities, how could he have 
made so many wonderful discoveries? 


Spiritual development needed 


While man has made astonishing progress in science and technology--in the realms of nuclear 
energy and electronics--he has been steadily going down in the moral, social and spiritual 
spheres. You have economic development on one side. On the other, you have divisions of class, 
caste and creed, language and territory. Unrest among students is growing. It is the animal nature 
in man that breeds these divisions. There are in man four traits' the animal, the demonic, the 
human and the divine. Man is developing his intellectual abilities, but not his divine attributes. 


Man has to develop faith in himself and in God this is the secret of greatness. Students should 
not consider themselves weak and imbecile beings. Rely on your Conscience and not on the 
impermanent body or the fickle mind. Make faith your life-breath. 


Aathma is the source of all strength 


The Aathma (Conscience) is the source of all your strength. The reality is manifested in you by 
the "SOHAM" that is produced by every breath. This "SOHAM" is also known as Hamsa 
Gaayathri. Hamsa (the Swan) is credited with the capacity to separate the milk from the water 
with which it is mixed. Hamsa Gaayathri is recited to separate the body-consciousness from the 
Aathma. 


Gaayathri signifies the mastery over the senses. Gaayathri has two other names--Saavithri and 
Sarasvathi. Saavithri is the master of life. Sarasvathi is the presiding deity for Vaak (speech). The 
Gaayathri_ manthra, "Bhur-Bhuvah-Suvah," refers to the body--Bhur, life--Bhuvah and 
Awareness---Suvah. "Bhur-Bhuvah-Suvah" does not refer to three worlds outside man. All the 
three are in him. Hence, man is not an ordinary being. He is Chaithanya-Svaruupa (the 
embodiment of the Cosmic Divine Consciousness). 


This jewel of divinity is being bartered away by man for petty carnal pleasures. This is totally 
wrong. If one recognises his godliness, he will be engaged in godly' actions. This transformation 
must be effected in human attitudes. Man should transcend the mind and reach t. he state of 
integral--Chith. It is total comprehension of humanness. Out of that comprehension emerges 
Aanandha (Bliss). 


All the discord and violence in the world are due to differences arising from selfishness- This 
selfishness should go. This calls for adherence to universal truth, which is common to all 
humanity and valid for all time and places. 


The ancient sages proclaimed two eternal verities: "Sathvam Vadha' Dharmam Chara" (Speak 
the Truth; Adhere to Righteousness). These were regarded as two eyes for man. Today man has 
lost these eyes and is helpless. Man has to realise that he has emanated from the Divine Aathma. 


Students should develop a universal outlook and seek to serve all without regard to race or 
religion. That is the true purport of education. It must lend to realisation of the Self that is in 
everyone. Education should lead to elevation of the consciousness. Make use of Summer Course 
for the purification of your minds so that you may lead selfless lives. For this, there is no other 
path but the Spiritual. 


Discourse at the Institute Auditorium, Brindhaavan on the occasion of the inauguration of the 
Summer School on 20-5-1993. 


Service without the idea of self is the very first step in the spiritual 
progress of man. 


BABA 


18.Tame the mind and realise the Self 


EMBODIMENTS of love! To see the lamp that gives light you don't need another lamp. So also 
no other means of cognition is needed to realise the self-effulgent Aathma or Self. The Self is 
changeless. The Buddhi (intellect) has no light of its own but it shines by the effulgence of the 
Aathma. If the intellect is able. to apprehend and judge everything in the world, it is due to the 
power of the Self. Buddhi or intellect is based on Medha shakthi (intelligence). The power of the 
intellect is only a reflection, of Aathma Chaithanya (the effulgence of the Aathma). 


The mind has two aspects, as doer and experiencer. It is the cause of the sense of attachment and 
possession. Human action is more evident in the wakeful state than in the dream state or deep 
sleep state. In the deep sleep state, the Super Intellectual Consciousness is shining and the mind, 
senses and intellect are dormant. Just as a red hot iron glows more brilliantly than fire itself, 
though the fire is the cause thereof, the individual intellectual consciousness shines more because 
of the Cosmic Consciousness. When the mind is dormant in the deep sleep state, the Super Mind 
becomes active. In this state, man has no desire or fear or anxiety. 


Control the mind and rise higher 


Man is bound by the mind and the senses. In the pursuit of the spiritual path, first of all the mind 
should be brought under control. When the mind is steady, you reach the state of Super-Mind. In 
this state there is no room for physical or transient worldly feelings. As long as the mind is pure, 
no evil can enter the heart. When it is polluted with bad feelings," there is room for evil thoughts 
to breed. 


We have to recognise the fact that human life depends on the functioning of the mind. As long as 
one is governed by the mind one continues to be human. Once one goes beyond the mind, one 
can enjoy the vastness of the limitless expanse of Cosmic Consciousness. Here is an example: 
Suppose you construct a spacious house with a number of bed rooms, living rooms, dining room 
and bath room. The spacious house appears divided into a number of small rooms. This is 
because of the walls put up for partitioning into rooms. If the walls are pulled down, the house 
will be one vast mansion. Similarly, the body is the Upaadhi (wall) which limits one's perception 
to the narrow confines of the body. Once you get rid of this body consciousness, you will 
experience the vast expanse of the Universal Cosmic Consciousness which is all-pervasive. 


Just as the hands, ears, eyes and legs are all angas (limbs or organs) of individual human body, 
the bodies of all human beings are the limbs of society. Again, society itself is a limb of 
mankind. And humanity is a limb of Prakrithi (Nature)and Prakrithi is a limb of Divinity. One 
should understand this Anga-Angee-Bhaava--relationship between Divinity and human beings, 
in the proper perspective. 


Realise that the heart is the seat of Divinity 


Though man is endowed with Buddhi (intelligence), he is not able to master the senses. One 
should understand the great significance of human life, which is superior to that of all other 
species. Because of the body consciousness, man is forgetting his inherent divinity. You study a 
great deal about Prakrithi (Nature) and worldly things, and lead an artificial life, without 
realising that the heart is the seat of Divinity. If you allow bad feelings to enter the heart, it will 
be polluted and the Divine will have no place therein. 


The whole world today is replete with pollution of not only the individual senses but also the five 
elements. The air is impure; water is polluted and everything you see or hear or touch is polluted. 
How can you expect to have peace in the world? Vedhaantha teaches that we should go beyond 
the mind and realise the inner vision to prevent bad feelings entering the heart and polluting the 
seat of God. 


Raama, when questioned by Sage Agastya why he acted like a man, asked him "Am I God?" It is 
because of the body-consciousness that one does not realise his divinity. The body is just an 
instrument. We eat to sustain the body. We need food for the protection of the body and clothes 
for protection from cold and heat. The body is a source of all diseases arising out of thrishna 
(desire). Desire gives rise to Raaga and Dhvesha (attachment and hatred). There is nothing 
wrong in having desires for food, shelter and clothing. It is excessive desire that causes 
attachment and disappointment. Desire should be within limits. It should not become a hidden 
sickness. The desire to hoard is not there in birds and beasts, but it is rampant only among human 
beings. Man loses his human quality because of this greed for hoarding for selfish purposes. 


Refinement is needed for transformation 


How is man to be transformed? Here is an example. If there is a piece of charcoal, it cannot be 
made white by applying soap. You know that the charcoal came out of wood. The wood when 
put into fire became charcoal. When the charcoal is put back in the same fire, it burns fully and 
becomes glowing white. The charcoal was originally wood and when the wood was burnt, it 
turned into the middle form of charcoal and when it was further burnt, it reached the end form of 
ash, which is Vibhuuthi, representing the end-form of all beings. This teaches the truth that all 
materials in the world must be refined by fire and reach the final state of Brahman. The human 
body also reaches this end. But the inner reality of man is permanent. 


This is the significance of human life. God is "Sarvabhootha antharaathma"---the Indweller in 
all beings, but there is no change in the Aathma. Human lives will continue to be generated like 
the waves of the ocean. But the ocean of Cosmic Consciousness remains unchanged. 


The universe is the form of God 


Suppose you make am idol of Krishna in silver. All parts of the idol are silver. When you see the 
form of Krishna in the idol, you are not aware of the silver. When you want to see only the silver 
out of which the idol is made, the form is out of your view. Similarly when you turn your mind 
towards God, who is pervading the entire Universe, the mind will be wholly filled with God and 
you won't see the different forms of the objects in the world. If the mind is directed towards 
worldly objects, you fail to see the Divinity that pervades all objects. "Vishvam Vishnu 
Svaruupam"--The Universe is the form of God. God is the cause and the Universe is the effect. 
Failure to understand the cause and the effect results in delusion. 


The most precious human life is devalued. A beggar calls himself an anaatha (one without 
anyone to support him), while asking for alms. This is not correct. For everyone, God is the 
Naatha (support). It is only God who is Anaatha, because there is no one above Him. 
Thyaagaraaja considered Raama as his saviour and protector and did not care for the wealth of 
the world. He considered service at Raama's feet as the greatest treasure. Kabeer was a poor 
weaver and he used to share his food with others. When the King sent gold and provisions to him 
through his officials, Kabeer exclaimed: "For whom has the king sent all these?" They said: "The 
King sent these things to you as you are anaatha (helpless)." He replied: "I am not without 


support. Raama is my Naatha (master). You cannot say I have none to support me. It is only 
Raama who has none to support Him. Give these to Him." Kabeer said Anaatha means God. We 
should understand the correct meanings of words. 


Body comes and goes but the Aathma is eternal. 


Embodiments of the Divine! Have faith in Aathma alone. The body, mind and intellect are all like 
the dresses you wear. Do you cry when you change your old clothes to new? Death is a change 
of dress. Because of the long association you have established with the body, you cry at the time 
of death. If you consider the relationship as temporary, you won't cry. You must attach yourself 
only to God and not to anyone or anything in the world. God is permanent friend. 


After death, where does the Aathma go? This is a question on many people's minds. What 
happens to the Aathma after the body is cast off and how long does it take to be re-born? These 
are ridiculous questions. This can be explained by an example. If you put on the switch, the bulb 
burns because of the electric energy flowing through it. When the bulb is removed, nothing 
happens to the energy which is still there, though bulb is gone. Similarly, the body comes and 
goes but the Aathma is eternal. 


Embodiments of the Divine Aathma! You must get rid of all narrow ideas and attitudes. All 
worldly things are like passing clouds. There is only one that is permanent and changeless. That 
is Brahmathathva. It should be realised through the path of pure Love. 


Discourse on the evening of 20-5-1993 at the Sai Ramesh Hall, Brindhaavan. 


There are three categories of human beings. There are those who 
have faith in God, there are those who have no faith in God, and 
there are those who are indifferent. For instance, in a bush there is 
a flower, its fragrance goads those who have faith in God to 
search for its source. These can be termed as Aasthikas or 
believers. Then there are those who enjoy the fragrance but do not 
bother to question about the source---these can be termed as the 
believing non-believers. There are yet others who are neither 
looking for the flower nor perceiving its fragrance. They may be 
termed as non-believers. We presume that the non-believers are 
those who have no faith in God, but in fact it is not true. There can 
be no one who has no faith in himself. All people who have faith in 
themselves are believers. 


BABA 


19. Man, mind and the Cosmos 


EMBODIMENTS of Divine Love! The gross body is formed by the combination of Pancha 
Mahaa-bhuuthas (five basic elements) and the operation of Karma (past deeds). This body is the 
cause of both pleasure and pain. 


Only he is truly a man 

Who knows that by which 

Everything else is known, 

And without knowing which 

All else is not worth knowing, 

He is the knower of the Supreme Truth. 


In human, life, what every one should try to understand is the truth relating to the Sthuula, 
Suukshma, Kaarana and Mahaakaarana (Gross, the Subtle, the Causal-and the Super causal) 
bodies. Only then can man understand the phenomena in the world. He will then comprehend the 
nature of man, of the world and the relationship between God and man. 


Subtle body is associated with Maaya 


The physical body is inert, it is formed by the aggregation of physical constituents. The body is 
composed of elements like iron, water, phosphorus, calcium, lead, etc. Hence, the gross body is 
described as inert matter. 


The Suukshma shareera (subtle body) is Maaya svaruupa (illusory form). In the dream state, the 
mind not only creates itself but also experiences pleasure and pains, worries and fears. In the 
subtle body, these illusory creations of the mind are experienced. These experiences are felt to be 
real only at the moment. - Maaya is that mental state in which what does not exist appears to 
exist and what exists is not perceived as real. All the experiences in the dream state are seen in 
the waking state as unreal. The mansions witnessed in dreams-vanish when the eyes open. 


What is real and true must be that which exists in the waking, the dream and the deep sleep sates. 
Truth is that which is true and unchanging at all times past, present and the future. Hence the 
subtle body is associated with Maaya. 


Then there is the Kaarana shareera (Causal body). It is only an image or reflection. It is the 
image of the Mahaakaarana (Super-Causal body). The Mahakaarana represents the Supreme 
Principle. It is as a reflection of the Supreme--Parathathva--that the causal, subtle and gross 
bodies function. It follows from this that all these aspects are contained in the human being. The 
mind, the Super-Mind, the Higher Mind, and the Illuminated Mind are all present in these 
bodies. 


In the waking state, the mind functions in response to the sensory organs by seeing, listening, 
talking, etc. The mind is bound by the limitation of time and space. 


How the Super-Mind is active in dream state 


In the dream state the mind creates its own world. It is related to time alone. For example, you 
get into the train to night, and reach Bombay the day after tomorrow. In this you see the mind at 
work in respect of four things- the reason (for travel), the actual journey, the arrival at the 


destination and completion, of your duty. How did you go? You went by train. How long did the 
journey take? Thirty-six hours. What was your destination? Bombay. What was the reason for 
your journey? Some job to be' done in an office. Time, action, and result--all these are involved 
in the operation of the mind. 


At night you had a dream. In the dream, you reached Bombay and saw various things there. You 
were pleased. But in this dream, none' of the four things, experienced in the waking state were 
present--neither time, nor movement, nor objective, nor any consummation. In the dream, how 
did you travel, how much time did it take, for what purpose and what was the outcome? None of 
these things happened. All that took place, in the dream was over in five minutes. This is the 
mystery and the marvel of what happens in the realm of the mind. All that happens in the dream 
state, the experiences and events, occurs in fleeting moments. 


What is experienced in a life of forty years is covered in two minutes in the dream state. In those 
forty years, you have completed your education, got married, had a son, educated him and sent 
him abroad. The entire panorama of these events appear in your dream in a few minutes. But 
what you experience in a dream vanishes in a moment in the waking state. What is active in the 
dream state is the Super-Mind. It is more powerful than the ordinary mind, because it 
encompasses in a brief moment all that happens in space and time over long distances and 
periods. 


Higher Mind functions in the deep sleep state 


Next, you have the Higher Mind. This functions in the sushupthi (deep sleep state). In this state, 
there is no thought or worry. The mind is absent. The senses are not functioning. There are no 
experiences of any kind. But on waking from deep sleep, the individual experiences Aanandha. 
He declares that he felt extremely happy in sound sleep. This state confers a sense of bliss 
without any experience. This bliss is beyond the mind and the senses. In the deep sleep state, 
there is life, but no mind. Only bliss remains. In deep sleep, there is no pleasure or pain, because 
there is no consciousness of the phenomenal world. You are conscious of the world and 
experience pleasure and pain only when the mind is active. 


Because in the deep sleep state the ordinary mind is not present, the consciousness in that state is 
attributed to the Higher Mind. This is associated with the Kaarana shareera (Causal Body). Here 
you have the cause. But there is the Doer, there is action and there is a reason for action. The 
relationship between cause and effect accounts for all happenings in the world. The Divine is the 
cause and the Cosmos is the effect. 


Divine Causal Principle is called luminated Mind 


Who is this cause? Is it the Divine, who is Mahaakaarana (the prime cause)? This Divine Causal 
Principle underlies all that happens in the universe. This Principle is termed the Illuminated 
Mind. This is the Power that illumines everything in the world. To experience this cosmic 
principle, we need a divine form. That is the Super Divine Self. It is called Purushathva. This is 
a primary attribute of the Divine. 


Above the mind, the Super-mind, the Higher Mind and the Illuminated Mind is the Over-Mind. 
Purushathva is the over-Mind. It is Divinity. 


It is from this Purushathva that the sense of 'I-ness' emanates. This 'I-ness' is present in all 
beings, from the highest to the lowest. It is the index of the Purushathva (cosmic consciousness). 
Why is man-called Purusha? The human body is called Puram (a city), as he dwells in the body 


he is called Purusha. All bodies are the same, irrespective of differences in sex. The three states 
of consciousness are common to all. The effects of qualities (Sathva, Rajas, Thamas) are the 
same for all. In sorrow, one grieves, whether man or woman. Hunger and anger have the same 
effects on both men and women. The intensity of the experience may vary from person to person. 
The manner in which it is experienced may also vary. One may grieve in secret, while another 
may make a show of it. Such differences are relative to the individuals concerned. But the 
experiencing body is a common factor. 


In every body, the Mahaa Purusha Principle (the Super Divinity) is present. The entire cosmos is 
a reflection of the gross, subtle and causal bodies. The Kaaraka (primal Doer) is the Supreme 
Lord. The cosmos is the effect (creation). 


This relationship can be recognised in the daily life of every individual. There are Pancha 
bhuthas (five basic elements), Pancha koshas (five sheaths), Panchendhriyas (five sense organs), 
Pancha praanas (five vital airs), the mind, the Buddhi (intellect) the chittha (will) and the 
Ahamkaara (Ego). All these together make up twenty four principles. The Supreme who 
pervades all these twenty four entities is the Mahaa Purusha (the Supreme Person), the twenty 
fifth principle. Thus, the human body is made up of these twenty five constituents. Similarly, the 
entire universe is made up of these twenty five constituents. 


All differences are the handiwork of Maaya 


There is no difference between the dheha and dhesa (body and the world). But, when one looks 
at the external world with the physical vision, numerous differences appear. All these differences 
are the handiwork of the delusive power of Maaya. Not recognizing the mystery relating to this 
delusive power, man falls a prey to many difficulties. 


Maaya envelops man in its multifarious coils. The cosmos is made up of the twenty five 
constituents. All is subject to delusion. In the waking state, you see, you hear and you experience 
many things. In sleep, you are steeped in a dream. In that state, what happens to your experiences 
in the waking state? Everything is forgotten. You consider the experiences in the dream state as 
real. This lasts only till you wake up. Then you dismiss the dreams as of no account. What is the 
truth? The experiences of the waking state or the experiences in dreams? The former is a day- 
dream, the latter is a night-dream. Both are dreams. 


Once, the Emperor Janaka, a great Jnaani and Yogi, devoid of body-consciousness, was having a 
colloquy with his ministers after dinner at night. He fell into deep sleep. Some time later, he got 
up and started putting the questions: "Is that true or is this true?" (that is, whether what he 
experienced in the dream was true or whether his experience in the waking state was true). 


The Self is present in all the three states 


Nobody could give the answer. Seeing the agitated state of mind of the Emperor, the ministers 
tried to find an answer, but no one came forward to solve the riddle posed by the Emperor. "Is 
that true or is this true?" At last, the sage Vashishta was called and he, after yogic meditation, 
gave the reply to the emperor's question. "Your Majesty! Neither that is true nor is this true. You 
are the only reality. You experienced certain things in your dream and some in the waking state. 
In the waking state, there was no dream. In the dream, there was no waking state. But you were 
present both in the dream and the waking states. Therefore, you are the truth. You were the 
experiencer in both the states!" 


This means that the Self is present in all the states of every human being. It also means that the 
Self exists in the past, the present and the future. Humanness is thus associated with Divinity and 
is no ordinary existence. All the sacred pronouncements in the Vedhas and the Upanishaths 
apply to man. 


The Divine is described as possessing eight forms of wealth. In fact, man is endowed with all 
these Ashtaishvarya (eight forms of wealth)---Nirgunam, Niranjanam, Sanaathanam, 
Nikethanam, Nithya Shuddha, Buddha, Muktha and Nirmala Svaruupinam (beyond qualities, 
untainted, eternal, ever-abiding, ever pure, intelligent, liberated and immaculate). Out of a sense 
of weakness, man assumes that these attributes relate only to the Divine and not to him. This 
feeling should be totally eschewed. 


An individual, through considerable effort, acquires many kinds of knowledge. Wherefrom has 
this knowledge come? How did he acquire it? At the time of birth he was totally ignorant. But by 
Shraddha (diligent endeavour) anything could be acquired. 


Think of the society beyond your family 


Man today is preoccupied only with the concerns relating to himself and his family. Immersed in 
selfishness, he does not think of the society beyond his family. But what would happen to him 
and his family if society was not there? 


All man's desires are centred on his own welfare, even when he appears to desire the welfare of 
the world. But, in fact his welfare is bound up with the well-being of the world. Hence, one 
should proceed from the 'T,' to the family, to the society and to the world at large. All the world's 
problems arise out of the obsession with selfish interests and lack of concern for the well-being 
of society. If every individual strives for the welfare of society, all these problems will cease to 
exist. Millennia ago, the Vedhas declared "Lokaa samasthaas-sukhino Bhavanthu!" (Let all the 
people of the world be happy). 


When men get rid of the narrow egoistic feelings born out of ignorance, they will experience the 
Divine, as declared by the Vedhic seers. The Vedhas summoned human beings to strive together 
in unity for achieving the highest goals of life. The essence of the Vedhas is summed up in one 
phrase, the sense of Ekaathmabhaava (spiritual unity of all human beings). This is the realisation 
of the Divine. This is true Adhvaitha (Nondualism). 


Unity in spiritual oneness of all beings 


Declarations like "Aham Brahmaasmi" and "Tath-thvam-Asi" are cited as pronouncements 
proclaiming nondualism. But this is not correct. These statements themselves refer to two 
entities--Aham and Brahma; Tath and Thvam ('I' and the Absolute; That and You). The 
recognition that the one and same Aathma dwells in all beings is true Adhvaitha. The bulbs may 
be of different sizes, colours and wattage, but they are illumined by the same electrical energy. 


It is because the doctrine of human unity based on the spiritual oneness of all beings, is not 
propagated in the right manner that we have today so many divisions, giving rise to conflicts. 
Differences between people professing different faiths are not due to differences in the teachings 
of the different religions but in the mental attitudes of those belonging to these faiths. 


All religions teach the 


same good ideals. 


Understanding them, men should 
learn to live in harmony. 


Those who preach hatred on the basis of religion are verily men with perverted minds. The broad 
vision of Bhaaratheeya culture, the infinite sacredness of Bhaarath, the unfathomable faith in 
unity--all these proclaimed the glory of the Divine and upheld the fundamental oneness of 
humanity. Today; because unity has been lost, humanness has reached its nadir Morality and 
integrity have disappeared. This is the progress humanity has made! 


This is not progress. What we should seek is spiritual progress, progress in righteousness and 
morality. People today talk about saving the world and safeguarding their nation. There is no 
need to protect the world or the nation. If you safeguard Sathya and Dharma (Truth and 
Righteousness), the nation and .the world will be automatically protected. This is the profound 
message of the ancients: "Speak the Truth; follow Righteousness." 


Recognise the Omnipresence of the Divine 


The Divine is the basis of everything in the cosmos. The integral relationship between the Divine 
and the Universe should be properly understood. 


Through many lives people have tended to identify themselves with their bodies and pursue 
wrongful practices. The Omnipresence of the Divine from a piece of stone to a mighty emperor 
should be recognized. Man should be grateful for the innumerable benefits 'provided by the 
Divine. Raamakrishna Paramahamsa was an illiterate person. But he achieved world wide fame 
by his pursuit of Truth and his realisation of the Divine. Self-realisation is the goal for every 
human being. This is the message of the Bhaagavatha. 


Today almost every person is wedded to untruth. Once a year they perform Sathyanaaraayana 
Puuja. But every moment should be employed in the worship of Sathyanaaraayana (the Lord of 
Truth). This calls for unity in thought, word and deed, which is the form of Truth. 


Transcend the feeling of smallness 


Men think that to reach the spiritual height is an arduous adventure. Svaami assures you that this 
is not so. The spiritual journey is much easier than the worldly struggle in which men are 
engaged. Men should aim at reaching the Supreme state instead of carrying on their wrangles 
upto the Supreme Court. Man has all the divine potencies for realising the Divine Self. His 
consciousness can comprehend the cosmos, even as a mirror can reflect the firmament. The heart 
is a mirror in which one can see the entire universe. Realise from this moment that man is the 
embodiment of the Divine. Transcend the feeling of smallness. As you think, so you become. 
Therefore, divinise yourselves by constant reminder of your inherent divinity. 


Discourse at Summer School in Brindhaavan, on 21-5-1993. 


20. Beyond the Mind 


What can the evil forces, of Kali do 
To the man whose heart is filled with compassion, 
Whose words are immersed in love, 


And whose body is dedicated to the service of others? 


Knowledge of all the shaastras and Vedhas 
Will not serve to remove the curtain of the mind 


Which stands between the individual and God. 


This curtain makes it appear 
That God and man are separate 


Though both are one. 


Only when the mind is subdued 
Will God and man, Nature and God, 
The Cause and the Effect become one. 


EMBODIMENTS of Divine Love! The mind is responsible for differences in opinions, likes and 
dislikes, and diversity in attitudes. The world is perceived through the mind. The world is 
permeated by the mind. Without the mind there can be no world and no attachments and hatred, 
no joy and sorrow. 


It is because of hatred and attachment that man today is plunged in misery. As the mind is the 
root cause of all this, man has to go beyond the natural infirmities of the mind to the over-mind 
to be able to recognise Divinity. 


In the three states of waking, dream and deep sleep, man is bound by the mind. When man 
transcends these three states by developing his Inner Vision, he can progress from the human to 
the Divine. 


The seed and the tree are not different things 


There is a Sanskrit saying: "Yaddhrishyam thannasyam" (That which is seen is subject to 
extinction). "Yathpindam thath Brahmaandam" (what is in the microcosm is in the macrocosm) 
is another saying. All that appears in the microcosm 'are miniature replica of the macrocosm. It is 
like the tree that is latent in the seed. The seed and the tree are not different things. When the tree 
emerges, the seed disappears (becomes formless). In both the form and the formless, the 
principle of Sath (Being) exists as one and the same. When one looks at the seed, the tree is not 
visible. But all that are seen in the tree, the branches, the leaves, the flowers and the fruits, were 
immanent in the seed. When you enquire into-the divinity inherent in man, this profound and 
sacred reality can be recognised. 


As long as man sees only with his external vision, he can experience only the external. When 
man develops the internal vision and experiences the Divinity within, the cosmos will appear as a 
reflection of the Divine. This is called realization of the Cosmic Divine. What is the difference 
between the Cosmic Divine and the Inner Divine? There is no difference between the two. But 
when it is experienced by the individual, it is described as Inner Divine. When the individual 
experience is extended to the entire universe, it is called Cosmic Divine. The Individual Self and 
Paramaathma (the OmniSelf) are one, like the rind of a fruit and the juice inside. 


The differences one notices in the world arise not from the nature of creation but from the 
perspective .from which one looks at the world. Man's view of the world has to change. This 
cannot be done by intellectual argument. When the mind is subdued, the oneness of the Jeevi 
(Individual) and the Divine will be experienced. 


Beautify your heart by good qualities 


From the time he wakes, up, till he goes to sleep, man looks at everything externally. He hardly 
spends a few moments to develop his inner vision. All the external objects can only confer 
momentary pleasure. Pursuing these pleasures, man wastes his precious and sacred life. He can 
never achieve peace in this way. 


Man devotes considerable time and energy to decorating his home, expecting to derive joy from 
it. But how long can this last? What he should seek to beautify is his heart. This is not visible to 
anyone, but the beauty of a pure heart is beyond description. What s it that lends beauty to the 
heart? The heart is beautified by qualities such as love, forbearance and compassion. These 
qualities confer enduring bliss on man. Such a man's words and actions are sweet. He is worthy 
of adoration. Every man should aim at becoming such an ideal human being. 


What does adoration of the Lord mean? It is not mere offering of worship with the paraphernalia 
of rituals. It is an attempt to merge in the Divine, experiencing the bliss of oneness with the 
Divine, recognising unity in diversity and the Divinity that is present in all beings. 


Triple pollution that affect the eyes, ears and tongue 


Nature will not give real bliss as long as it is viewed from a physical and worldly point of view. 
The pleasure to be derived from any object in the world depends on the condition in which it is 
enjoyed. For instance, a mango will be tasteless if it is tender, sour if it is half-ripe and sweet 
when it is fully ripe. Likewise Nature is a sweet fruit. But if it is seen from purely sensory point 
of view, it will give only bitter taste. But when it is viewed as a manifestation of the Divine, its 
unique sweetness will be apparent. 


Thoughts influence the vision, which, in its turn, affects the mind. Thoughts assume good and 
bad forms. Good thoughts, good speech and good actions make a man truly human. This is the 
message of the three monkeys pictured as one with closed eyes, another with closed' ears and 'the 
third with a closed mouth--"See no evil, hear no evil, speak no evil." 


Today the entire environment is polluted by evil things which offend the eyes, the ears and the 
tongue. Everyone should free himself from this three-fold pollution. The mind has to be turned 
towards God. 


Proceed from the mind to the Over-mind 


To enjoy the fragrance of the sandalwood, it has to be rubbed on the grinding stone vigorously. 
Likewise, to experience the great fragrance emanating from Nature, its unity with the Divine has 


to be realised. For this, it is necessary to transcend the limitations of the ordinary mind and 
proceed to the Super-Mind, the Higher-Mind, the I!luminated Mind and the Over-Mind. 


It should not be presumed that this is a difficult task. In fact it is quite easy. For instance, people 
feel that adhering to truth is difficult. Actually it is uttering untruth that creates difficult 
problems. All kinds of plans have to be made to cover up a lie. But to stick to the facts as they 
are is easy. Men should realise that it is easy to be good. It is going astray that causes difficulties. 
One cannot always avoid committing a wrong. But one should learn the lesson from it and avoid 
repeating it. That is saadhana. 


When it is admitted that God is in all beings, one should strengthen that conviction and act on 
that basis. On the contrary, men who profess to believe in God, do not live up to their belief 
because of their attachment to useless trifles. Here is an illustration from the life of Shri 
Raamakrishna Paramahamsa. 


Shri Raamakrishna Paramahamsa used to ecstatically enjoy himself in the worship of the 
Goddess in the temple built by Raani Raashmani. One night thieves broke into the temple and 
carried away all the jewels on the idol of Krishna in the temple. With a view to carrying on his 
regular priestly duties, he went to Raani Raashmani's nephew, Mathuranaath, and told him, "Sir, 
thieves have stolen all the jewels on the idol." Mathuranaath was angry and proceeded with 
Raamakrishna to the temple. Losing his temper and balance of mind, he burst out in anger: "Oh 
Krishna! Are you not ashamed of yourself? If you are unable to protect your jewels on your own 
idol, how are you going to protect the whole world? Were you paralysed when the thieves were 
carrying away the jewels? Or were you asleep? This is a disgrace to your Divinity." 


Do not rebuke God, change your vision 


Hearing these words, Shri Raamakrishna said: "Mathuranaath! Shut up your mouth! For the sake 
of your petty jewels and trinkets, is this the way you should berate God? When the Goddess of 
all wealth, Lakshmi, is the Consort of the Lord, why do you get so agitated over the loss of a few 
trivial ornaments? The Lord can have no such petty feelings. You are feeling so much for the 
action of a few thieves who loved some jewels and came to the Lord to get them. It is because of 
your love for jewels that you are getting distressed so much. But the Lord has no desires. He is 
ready to give Himself away. God is prepared to offer Himself. Such a One, will he be worried 
about this petty loss? Hence, change your vision. Don't comment on God." At these words 
Mathuranaath felt ashamed of himself. 


Then, Raamakrishna sat near the idol of Shri Krishna and prayed: "Oh Krishna! As long as one is 
caught up in the coils of the world, he will speak like an intoxicated man. Only when he gets 
immersed in God will he become oblivious to himself. Therefore, do not let me get intoxicated. 
Confer on me the boon of self-forgetfulness." This is what is meant by the saying: "The knower 
of the Brahman becomes Brahman himself."" When one experiences the Divine, he sees the 
Divine in everything. 


When does man experience the pure Divine Self? It is in the Thureeya state--the fourth state of 
consciousness beyond the waking, dream and deep sleep states. This is the state of the Over- 
Mind. In that state man is one with the Divine. He has no attributes. Therefore, He is all- 
pervading. 


Nature is bound by the five qualities of sound, touch, form, taste and smell (these are the 
qualities of space, air, fire, water and earth--the five basic elements). With the loss of each 


quality, starting from smell, a process of expansion takes place. Finally, we have Akaasha (ether 
or space) which has only one quality, sound, and is all-pervading. That being the case, how much 
more pervasive must be the Lord, who has no attributes. 


The mind perpetually seeks comfort 


If man asks the question, "I am posing this query to the entire world. I have nothing to do with 
the world. Am I the Truth or not?," the answer that he is the Truth will be evident in a few 
words. We see before our eyes many persons dying, being cremated or buried after death. In 
spite of this, everyone has a desire, "I must live for ever." What is the inner meaning of this 
desire? You are eternal and the idea of immortality arises in you because of this. The body is 
impermanent, but you are eternal. This truth has to be properly grasped. Whatever one may see, 
one always declares to himself, "I must live, I must live," and does not say, "I too must pass 
away one day." Even if this idea occurs, it is followed by the desire to live a little longer. Even a 
hundred-year old ailing man tells the doctor: "Please give the injection gently and don't cause 
any pain." The mind perpetually seeks comfort. 


Truth, Bliss, Beauty are forms of the Divine 


Truth, Bliss, Beauty are forms of the Divine. They are also known as Sathyam, Shivam, 
Sundharam. These represent the true form of man. Shivam is that which has no death. Sathyam is 
that which is not subject to change (on account of time, place or circumstance). Sundharam 
(Beauty) is the form of the Divine. Vishnu is described as Alankara Priyah (a lover of beauty). 
Man is described as Bhojana privah (a lover of food). What is this food? This gross body 
flourishes on food. But it is bound to perish some day. But the subtle body, made up of Praana 
(the Life-Force), Mahaa (the mind) and Vijnaana (intelligence) lasts longer. But, for how long? 
Only as long as the mind lasts. When the mind is absent, what happens? This state is described as 
Sushupthi (deep sleep state). In this state, there is only the Kaarana shareera (causal body). 
There is no mind. This is a state of bliss. 


Hence, it is essential to understand the functioning of the mind. Man and mind are not separate. 
To treat the mind as something apart and becoming subject to it is wrong. It has to be treated as a 
servant as long as the body-mind consciousness remains. Then the mind obeys you. Today man. 
follows the dictates of the mind. 


Everyone should acquire the Divine Will Power 


Dear students! It is not easy to subdue the mind immediately. But you must begin to bring it 
under control. When the mind desires something, you must immediately set the Buddhi 
(intellect) at work. Why? So that the intellect may give you the proper advice. The mind has to 
be taught the lesson: "Oh Mind! Don't play your petty pranks. Examine your desire, using the 
power of discrimination to find out whether it is good or bad, right or wrong. Do not wish to 
acquire whatever you desire." When you try to teach the mind in this manner, it loses its potency 
(the keenness to acquire what it wants). 


This Vijnaana is full of intelligence and common sense. It is called Divine Intellectual Will. The 
Divine Will Power has to be-acquired by everyone. Only then, they can realise their true human 
nature. It is through this Will Power that the Cosmic Divine nature of the universe can be 
recognised. 


This Cosmic Power has to be seen with the eyes, experienced mentally, practised through the 
body and made an integral part of one's being. Do not speculate whether this is possible or not. If 


one has the determination anything is possible. If an ant has determination it can travel any 
distance. But, even an eagle, if it has no will to fly, will be confined to the ground. Resolve to 
accomplish what you want to with a firm determination. 


Develop the feeling: "I and God are one." This should not be purely a verbal exercise. You must 
realise the implications of the manthra you recite such as "Soham" (I am He) and live up to it. 
That is true concentration. 


Most students do not listen attentively to the discourses. How can they ever practise the 
teaching? The eyes are turned towards Svaami, but the ears do not absorb Svaami's words. How 
can such persons put into practice Svaami's teachings? A few may benefit from these discourses. 
Even if one or two practise the teachings, that is good enough! 


Four steps to experience ineffable bliss 


Listen carefully. Ruminate over whatever you have heard. Put into practice whatever you have 
absorbed. This is the meaning of the Upanishathic injunction: "Shravanam (listen), mananam 
(ruminate), Nidhidhyaasanam (practise)." Just as there is no meaning in preparing delicious food 
unless it is consumed and digested, it is useless to listen to discourses unless you put into practice 
what you have learnt. Only then can the bliss of learning be experienced. Metaphysical lectures 
alone will not transform the mind. What is learnt must be put into practice. This is the real 
Vedhaantha you have to learn today. This is the spirituality that is .vital for you. The Lord's 
name on your lips, thoughts of God in your mind, seeing the Lord with your eyes and meditating 
on the Lord 'with love--these four will give you ineffable bliss. Strive to experience this bliss. 


Discourse in the Sai Ramesh Mandap, Brindhaavan, on 22-5-1993. 


21. Thought waves make up the Cosmos 


God has endowed mankind 
With the great weapon of the Mind. 
Only the one who subjugates the mind 
can achieve victories on earth. 
We cannot imagine anyone who is a salve of 
the mind and has attained happiness or peace. 


EMBODIMENTS of Love! Human existence can become meaningful only when man, at the very 
outset, recognises the nature of the mind and bases his actions on that understanding. The mind is 
extremely powerful. It runs at great speed. It is subtler than the sky and even more subtle than 
electricity. When such a mind is turned to bad purposes, a man becomes a prey to all kinds of 
sorrow. 


The mind can run faster than light. Just as you are able to hear a broadcast of music from a radio 
station in Delhi simultaneously in Whitefield, the mind also operates like radio waves. Thought 
waves emanating from the mind have also got properties of radio waves. There is no end to the 
waves arising from the ocean of the mind. 


The power of thought is immense. Thoughts outlast the human body. Thought waves radiate very 
much like heat waves, radio waves and light waves. The thought waves are the cause of man's 
joy or sorrow, health or disease, birth or death. The potency of these waves has to be understood 
by man and his conduct has to be based on this awareness. 


The whole cosmos is made up of thought waves; hence, the scripture declares: "The mind is at 
the root of the cosmos." There is no place, or form or action wherein the mind is absent. Hence, 
all thoughts of man should be turned in the right direction. 


Our fortune is linked to our thoughts 


When good thoughts, good feelings and good intentions are developed, the mind becomes pure. 
Only when the mind is pure, can the action be pure and the fruits thereof be pure. 


Today we sow the seed of thought--karma--and reap the fruit of action. From the seed of karma 
arises svabhaava (the fruit of behaviour). Out of the seed of behaviour comes the fruit of 
character. The seed of character yields the fruit of adhrishtam (fortune). Thus, from thought to 
fortune, the chain of human progress can be perceived. Our good and bad luck are thus linked to 
our thoughts. The mind immerses man in impenetrable darkness through bad thoughts. The same 
mind can lift man to sublime heights by good thoughts. Thus, thoughts are supremely important 
for man. They constitute his very life-breath. Without understanding this truth, man allows evil 
tendencies like anger, envy, hatred and conceit to fill his mind and thereby courts disaster. 


A man seeking to harm others nourishes many evil thoughts in his mind. But these thoughts 
cause him ten times the harm they do to others. He is not aware of this truth. Consequently, he 
indulges in abuse of others and in doing harm to them. But there are no "others," but only 
manifestations of the Divine. Not realising the divinity in others, man tries to harm them. But 
whoever wields the sword against others, will perish by the sword. The harm which he does to 
others will be the undoing of himself. Whoever abuses others, will also be the target of abuse by 


others. As are the thoughts, so is the outcome. The entire human existence is based upon 
thoughts and their results. 


Face is the index of the mind 


Man perpetually tries to conceal his faults like the ostrich which buries its head in the sand 
hoping that thereby the-hunter will not see it. In fact, the ostrich becomes an easy target for the 
hunter. Likewise, a man filled with ego and wickedness imagines that his thoughts are not known 
to anyone else. But a man's mind is like a gramophone record. His good and bad thoughts are 
reflected in his face, though he does not notice it. But any outside observer can observe it well. 
The face of a man filled with evil thoughts appears like that of a man with pimples. The face 
becomes like a board indicating what goes on in the mind. 


As thoughts lead to actions, man's behaviour, speech and conduct affect the tendencies of the 
mind and give rise to good or bad impulses. Man imagines that no one can know his thoughts. 
While entertaining evil thoughts about others, he acts as if he rejoices in their company. But in 
fact, he is not deceiving others, but deceiving himself. He is only nourishing evil thoughts and 
degrading himself. 


The natural state of a man's heart is pure. But by letting in the poisonous snakes in the form of 
evil thoughts, he is inviting trouble. 


How can a man have peace in his home if there is a snake in it? Bad thoughts in the mind are 
worse than poisonous reptiles in the house. Absolutely no room should be given for bad 
thoughts. 


Good company leads to the Divine 


By our thoughts we can even cure the ills of others. When the friendship of good persons is 
acquired through good thoughts, the union of the good leads to the realisation of the Divine. 


One's thoughts determine the kind of people with whom one associates. A drunkard seeks the 
company of drunkards, a thief joins the company of thieves, a lawyer with lawyers, and so on. 
So, good-intentioned persons should associate only with like-minded persons. If they get into the 
company of evil-minded persons, even their good thoughts may get polluted. 


Men do not realise today the prodigious powers of the mind. The five elements, the five life- 
breaths, the five sense organs, the five sheaths are all based on the mind. It is because the 
immense power of the mind is not recognised, human life is ruined. By belittling the mind, man 
is dehumanising himself and behaving either like an animal or as a demon. When man broadens 
his mental vision, he can realise his Divinity. 


If the nation has to improve and progress, if you want to experience the Divine that pervades the 
cosmos, you have to cultivate good thoughts. Do not treat thoughts as trifles. A giant banyan tree 
grows out of a small seed. There is a saying in Thelugu that even a small serpent has to be beaten 
with a long stick. In the same manner, even a small bad thought has to be rigorously eschewed. 


Discourse to the Summer School at Brindhaavan on 23-5-1993. 


I do not recommend the giving up of Karma, for it is not possible. 
What is generally meant by Karma-Sanyaas is the giving up of 
rites and rituals prescribed by the Scripture. 


BABA 


22. From the Mind to the Over-Mind 


Can life be redeemed merely 
by performing Japa? 
Only when the mind is subdued, 
can man become sublime. 


THE mind proclaims its astonishing uniqueness to the world by its capacity to express feelings, 
recognise forms, appreciate the beauty of colour, enjoy different smells, as well as its power of 
thought. As the world is permeated by these qualities of the mind, these five qualities are all- 
pervasive. The mind is highly powerful. Once the powers of the mind are understood, the nature 
of the whole world can be comprehended. When you taste a single drop of sea-water, you know 
the taste of all the water in the ocean. The drop and the ocean are the same. Likewise, the mind is 
the world and the world is the mind. 


In this vast world, there are today more than 500 crores of human beings. There may be 
differences among them in name and form and in their food and recreation habits. But when you 
view them from the physical point of view, all human beings are one. In every human body, 
there are four forms, which can be understood through proper Tathva (enquiry). In this enquiry 
into truth, Tath refers to Paramaathma (the Omni-Self). The Omni-Self is infinite and 
immeasurable. 


To understand the infinite Paramaathma you have to pursue one of the innumerable paths. 
Vedhaantha laid stress on nine of these paths- Shravanam (listening), Keerthanam (singing the 
glories of God), Vishnuh naama smaranam (remembering the names of the Lord), Vandhanam 
(offering salutations), Archanam (ritual worship), Paadhasevanam (Service to the Lotus feet of 
the Lord), Dhaasyam (service), Saakhyam (friendship) and Aathma-Nivedanam (total surrender). 
All these nine paths of devotion have been prescribed to enable man to experience their varied 
novelty. 


Constituents of physical and subtle bodies 


To begin with, there is the physical body. It is visible to the eye. The body is made up of twenty 
five constituents: five Karmendhriyas (organs of action), five Jnaanedhrivas (sense organs), 
pancha-praanas (five life-breaths), pancha Thanmaathras (five sensory faculties). In addition, 
there are four inner instruments: the mind, the will, the ego, and the Anthahkarana (Inner 
Motivator). All these total twenty four. When these are associated with the Life-Force, you have 
altogether 25 constituents. As these twenty five constituents have emanated from the cosmos, the 
embodied being is called Vishva. The physical body is cosmic in form. It is not something that is 
individualistic. The human state is a manifestation of the collective. 


The second body is Suukshma dheham (the subtle one). This is made up of seventeen 
constituents: the five sensory faculties, the five senses and the five vital airs. Together with the 
mind and the intellect, they make up seventeen constituents. As these constituents have the 
quality of Thejas (luminescence), the subtle body is called Thaijasa. The results of man's good 
and bad actions are experienced by this subtle body. All the pleasant and unpleasant happiness in 
the world are experienced by the subtle body. This body is also Yaathana (experiential) body 
because it is a prey to various experiences. 


States of awareness and forgetfulness 


The third is the Kaarana shareera (causal body). It is made up of only two constituents: Chittha 
(will power) and Prajna (Constant Integrated Awareness). Because of its association with 
Prajna, this body is called Prajnaanam or Praajna. 


The fourth one is Mahaakaarana (the Over-Mind). This is self-luminous and effulgent in its 
original form. This is called "Uniki," (a Being that is self-knowing). Because of its capacity for 
self-knowledge, it is also called "Eruka” (Awareness). As against Awareness, there is its 
opposite, forgetfulness. The physical, subtle and. causal bodies belong to the latter (of 
forgetfulness). The three states of Jaagrath (waking), Svapna (dream) and Sushupthi (deep sleep) 
also belong to the state of forgetfulness (or non-awareness of the true Self). 


Hence, the true form is Awareness. Awareness is the subtle base. Forgetfulness is gross. But in 
both the subtle Awareness and the gross Forgetfulness there is a Divinity that is present equally. 
This is described in metaphysics in a different way. The Jeevaathma is present always in all the 
three states of Consciousness and in Awareness as well as Forgetfulness as the Inner Being. 


Matter and energy are inter-related 


In every padhaartha (object) in the world, the Paraartha (transcendental) is immanent. The 
padhaartha is perceptible. The paraartha is present in it as energy. Although padhaartha 
(matter) and Paraartha (Energy) appear to us as two different entities, their unity constitutes the 
Divine principle immanent in the cosmos. Energy is the subtle base, matter is its gross 
expression. They are inextricably inter-related. The Geetha has described this relationship as the 
one between Kshethra (the Field) and Kshethrajna (the Knower of the Field). The whole of 
Nature is Kshethra. The Kshethrajna is the One who pervades the whole of Nature and animates 
it. Without the Kshethrajna (the Knower), the Kshethra cannot exist. Without the Kshethra, the 
Kshethrajna cannot be perceived. In the Bhagavath Geetha, Krishna declares: “Know me also as 
the Knower in the kshethra. " 


In this context, it should be realised that it is by the power of the mind that creation, sustenance 
and dissolution take place in the cosmos. This truth is expressed in the Brahma Suthra as: "Thath 
Jalaan." "From That everything is born, is sustained by it and merges in it." Thath (That) is also 
called Akshara Purusha (the indestructible Supreme person). 


Kshara and Akshara contain the secret of life 


Akshara in common parlance means that which is indestructible. Kshara means that which is 
liable to change. The secret of life is contained in the terms Kshara and Akshara. The body is 
subject to decay. The Aathma (Self) is indestructible. The word Akshara contains both the 
indestructible and the perishable. "A" refers to the Aathma, which is indestructible. Kshara is the 
perishable body. Akshara represents the unified form of the perishable body and the imperishable 
Self. "A" also signifies that which is Anantham (Infinite) and Amritham (Immortal). Kshara is 
that which is impermanent and unreal. 


From the Akshara emerges the effulgent Divine, which is a combination of both Paramaathma 
(the Omni-Self) and Prakrithi (Nature). The Divine is immanent in Nature. The One is present in 
both. This was what Prahlaadha proclaimed when he told his father, Hiranyakashipu, 'Do not 
have any doubts that He (God) is here and not there" Prakrithi is not inert. It is by the union of 
Nature and the Divine that humanness acquires its effulgence. 


Here is a match-box in my hand. The match-box does not bum my hand. I keep it in this towel. 
The towel is not burnt. We know that there are match-sticks in the box. When you strike the 
match-stick, a flame bursts forth. This flame will cause a burn if we hold it in our hand. It can set 
fire to a towel. Where does the fire lie? In the match stick or the coating outside the match-box? 
It is in both. But only when the match-stick and the outer coating are brought together does the 
flame emerge. Likewise, there is divinity in the mind and in the heart. But only when the mind 
and the heart unite does the radiance of Divinity shine. 


When the match-stick is dipped in water, you cannot produce fire by striking it, because the fire- 
producing element in it loses its power. Likewise, when the mind is immersed in the waters of 
sensuous desires, it loses its power to radiate the Divine effulgence. When will it recover this 
power? When it is rid of its dampness by going through the drying process of Vairaagya 
(detachment). It is only when this detachment grows in one that he can experience the bliss of 
oneness with the Divine. 


Be aware of your true essence 


As long as man. is immersed in sensuous pursuits, he cannot experience the effulgence of his 
true nature. When man cultivates detachment by realizing the transience of sensory pleasures, 
then he begins to be aware of his true essence. All forms of ritualistic worship are of no use 
because they are rooted in duality. Man has to outgrow this state and realise his oneness with the 
Divine. 


Man is continually seeking to have a vision of the Divine. But he fails to realise that the Divine is 
present everywhere in the cosmos. Failure to see the Divine in the visible universe is a mark of 
ignorance. Everything in the phenomenal universe is pervaded by God. When you see Nature, 
you see only its worldly aspect. When you mind is centred on God, you see the Divine in 
everything. The fault lies, therefore, in your dhrishti (outlook) and not in srishti (creation). 
Transform your perspective. 


Therefore, from the outset, you have to view everything as a manifestation of the Divine. The 
difficulty in recognising the truth about the Divine was expressed by the Saint Surdas when he 
said, "Oh, Krishna! How can I recognise you? You are subtler than the atom and vaster than the 
vastest. You are present in the eighty-four lakhs of species in the universe, permeating 
everything in the cosmos, from a blade of grass to the vastest thing in creation. How can I 
recognise your infinite form?" The great ones experienced God in this infinite form, recognising 
that the Divine was present even in the wicked and the evil-minded. 


Waves are essentially the same as the ocean 


The infinite number of human beings in the world are like the waves of the ocean. The waves 
may differ in form. But however innumerably the waves, each of them is essentially the same as 
the ocean. From the ocean of Sath-Chith-Aanandha (Being-Awareness-Bliss), endless waves of 
human beings arise. Each of them has the attributes of Sath-Chith-Aanandha, the Divine. You 
may be a drop in the ocean of Sath-Chith-Aanandha. But the difference is only in quantity (size) 
and not in quality. The divinity present in man and the divinity in God are one and the same, just 
as bulbs may vary but the current that makes them shine is the same. The differences in 
luminosity are related to the wattage of the bulbs and not to the current that flows in them. This 
applies equally to the differences among human beings. When a person is filled with narrow 
feelings, he appears inferior to one who is more broadminded and good-hearted. A man may 


consider himself ignorant, foolish or stupid. But this is utterly wrong. He is, in fact, not ignorant 
or foolish. He is intelligent, well-intentioned and wise. All that he needs is a change in attitude to 
experience these inherent capacities. You have to make the divine effulgence in your heart shine. 


Broaden your mind and your vision 


People often recommend that one should enlarge his heart. But enlargement of the heart will 
compel you to go to a cardiologist! What you have to do is to broaden your mind, your vision. 
The heart, meaning not the physical heart but the spiritual heart, is inherently broad. It is one 
with cosmic consciousness. There is no need to broaden it. Only a broad mind is needed to 
recognise the vastness of the spiritual heart. Narrow-mindedness should go. Narrow ideas of 
"me" and "mine" should be totally given up in all forms. 


On the contrary, starting from the "I", you should go on expanding your consciousness to 
embrace your family, your village, your nation and the entire world. Then your divinity will 
shine forth in all its brilliance. This is described as having the vision of one's own true universal 
Self. This is called the Mahaa-purushathva (Infinite Divine). You have to become this Infinite 
Divine. You are Divine even now. But this is only a temporary phase as a result of your 
devotion. What you should aim at is the Infinite Divine that is" unchanging. This divinity is 
within you. You do not need to acquire it from outside, from anyone else. It is inherent in you. 
Strive to realise it. When can you realise it? When you have got rid of the consciousness of the 
waking, dream and deep sleep states, then you can recognise the Mahaakaarana state (the state 
of the Super Causal Consciousness). 


You have to transcend the gross, the subtle and the causal bodies and realise the Super Causal 
body. By this process you proceed from the Super-mind, the Higher Mind and the Illuminated 
Mind to the Divine, which is called the Over-Mind. This is the state beyond the mind; it is called 
Amanaska(where the mind is absent). It has also been described as the state of Vidheha (where 
the body consciousness is absent). The mind is associated with the body. The world is associated 
with the mind. And the world is bound up with pleasure and pain. All these are sources more of 
bondage than of Bliss. Bliss can be experienced only through the Over-Mind. 


Four kinds of offerings to reach the Over-Mind 


How is one to reach the Over-Mind? Vedhaantha prescribed the offering of four things as the 
means' Pathram, Pushpam, Phalam, Thoyam (a leaf, a flower, a fruit or water). The Lord is not 
secured by offerings of wealth or by flaunting one's power or position. The proper significance 
of the four kinds of offerings mentioned in the scripture should be understood. Out of the selfish 
desire to secure Krishna entirely for herself, Sathyabhama made an offering of Krishna to sage 
Naaradha and tried to buy Him back by offering all her wealth and jewels to be weighed against 
Krishna. But all of them did not equal Krishna's weight. Then Rukmini was brought and she 
taught a wise lesson to Sathyabhama regarding the power of devotion. Something, however 
small, has to be offered to the Lord to secure his grace. This is evident frown the experiences of 
Dhraupadhi and Kuchela. This is also the rationale for the Bhaaratheeya practice of taking some 
flower or fruit as offering to the Lord when one visits a temple. 


In reality, the mere name of the Lord is equivalent to the form of the Lord. When Rukmini 
invoked the name of Krishna, that was enough to balance the two sides of the scales, in one of 
which Krishna was seated. Narada said that something more should be offered to lift the scale in 
which the offering was being made to him. Rukmini then placed a thulasi leaf above the jewels 


and prayed: “If it is true that an offering of a leaf, a flower, a fruit or water by a devotee will win 
the favour of the Lord, Oh Krishna, submit yourself to this thulasi leaf." The scale in which the 
thulasi leaf was placed, uttering the name of Krishna, went down immediately. 


The body, the heart, the mind and the tears of joy 


What is the inner significance of the reference to the four kinds of offerings? Pathram refers not 
to some kind of leaf which is subject to withering. Your body is the leaf that has to be offered. 
Pushpam refers to the flower of your heart. Phalam refers to the fruit of your mind. And Thoyam 
signifies the tears of joy flowing from the devotee's eyes. These are to be offered to God. 


When one offers these things to the Lord, he enters the state of the Over-Mind. This devotion, 
moreover, should not be a part-time exercise. It should be present all the time, through weal or 
woe, pleasure or pain. "Sathatham Yoginah," declares the Geetha. The yogis are in constant 
communion with God. To be yogis in the morning, bhogis (lovers of food) at noon and rogis 
(victims of disease) in the evening are the ways of men today. 


The true devotee is immersed in the Lord all the time and performs all actions as offerings to the 
Lord. Any action you do, as a teacher or a student or an employee, when you do it in the name of 
the Lord, it becomes a pious offering. This is the easiest way to sublimate the mind. When you 
consider your body as gift from God, you will not do. any sinful act. When you consider your 
wealth as a gift from God you will not misuse it. You will make the right use of it. Likewise, 
when you regard all your talents as endowed by God, you will use them in the service of the 
Divine. 


The four-fold programme on ceiling of desires 


In the Sathya Sai Organization, a fourfold programme of ceiling on desires has been laid down. 
This enjoins on everyone not to waste food, money, time and energy. Avoiding waste of these 
four forms of gifts from God is spiritual saadhana. It is the means to Self-realisation. 


Spirituality consists in forgetting worldly concerns and immersing oneself in God. This means 
sanctifying every action in life, whether it be talking or walking or anything else. Reading and 
writing are also forms of meditation, because they call for concentration. Everything in life can 
become a form of meditation. 


Avoid doing anything in a hurry. It is not difficult to attain the state of the Over-Mind if one has 
the determination to realise it. Crores of rupees are being spent on exploring space. But very little 
effort is made to explore the heart within one's self. 


When everyone tries to act according to the dictates of his conscience, he will realise the sublime 
consciousness within him. There are two basic elements in man, the head and the heart. When 
these two are put to right use, the hands will act in the right way. 


Discourse to the Summer School at Brindhaavan on 24-5-1993. 


Bhakthi and Jnaana are like the pair of bullocks for the cart; both 
have to pull in unison. Each must keep pace with the other and 
help to drag weight quicker. Jnaana has to help the increase of 
Bhakthi; Bhakthi has to contribute to the growth of Jnaana' 


BABA 


23. Follow the intellect: not the mind 


O foolish man, why do you seek God outside 
like the ignorant musk deer? 
Like the fragrance in a flower, 
God is right inside you, 
if you look with insight. 
God is in many; nay, man himself is God. 
But strangely and foolishly man searches 
for God in the outside world. 
However just like the ash that 
covers the fire on the charcoal, 
Desire and hatred envelop this divinity in man. 
Even as the fire is revealed 
when the ash is blown off, 
The Aathma will reveal itself to man 
when he gets rid of desire and hatred. 


EMBODIMENTS of love! One and the same man plays different roles in his family and society 
as the husband of his wife, the father of his children, the child of his parents, the boss of his 
employee or vice versa, depending on physical relationship, mental attitudes and inclinations, or 
other circumstances. Love is showered on the daughter but not on the daughter-in-law. The son- 
in-law does not enjoy the same affection as the son. One does not have the same attachment for 
one's mother as for one's wife. What is the reason for such differences based on temporary bodily 
relationships, giving rise to all kinds of attractions and aversions, likes and dislikes, joys and 
sorrows? It is because man's mind is subject to five types of Kleshas (distortions or complexes) 


The five types of mental complexes 


Avidhya klesha (Ignorance Complex): Man becomes a prey to several afflictions due to narrow, 
deluded feelings such as, "I am the body," "I am a Jeeva,” and "I am separate and different from 
God." This is called Avidhya Klesham (Ignorance Complex), which demeans the status of man 
and results in many kinds of sorrows. 


Abhinivesa klesha (Attachment complex): The mind is the abode of all desires, sorrows, likes, 
dislikes, attachment and aversions. In spite of knowing that the mind is the culprit, which causes 
attachment to Samsaara (transmigratory existence and attendant miseries), man is unable to 
detach himself from his mind or otherwise control its vagaries and thereby to escape from 
sorrows and suffering. This is termed as Attachment Complex. 


Asthitha Klesha (Vacillation Complex): The world is full of various vishayas (sense objects) 
which entice the weak-minded persons who go on flirting from one sense object to another, not 
realising that these Vishayas (sense objects) will ultimately turn out to be Visham (poison) which 


deprives them of all sense of discrimination and dispassion. As a result of this men are plunged 
in endless suffering throughout their lives. This is termed as Asthitha Klesha (the Complex 
caused by mental unsteadiness). 


Lobha Klesha (Greed Complex): Labouring under the delusion that the goal of life is to acquire 
gold, wealth, vehicles, mansions and the like, man toils ceaselessly from dawn to dusk, to 
acquire and hoard such possessions beyond his needs. In the process he foregoes even food and 
sleep, thereby endangering his health. In spite of knowing that all such possessions are 
temporary, he pollutes his mind by excessive greed and falls a victim to untold suffering and 
sorrow. This is known as the Lobha Klesha (Greed Complex). 


Dhvesha Klesha (Hate Complex): For his own selfish ends, man gets trapped in a maze of 
unending desires of various kinds. And when his desires are not fulfilled, he unreasonably 
blames it all on other men as well as on God Himself and thus he develops hatred against both 
man and God. Hence this is designated as Dhvesha Klesha (Hate Complex). 


All these complexes are nothing but mental aberrations which are injurious to man himself. 
Having become a victim of such aberrations, man forgets his real Aathmik nature and falls a prey 
to all kinds of sorrow and misery. In this world we find very few people who are always blissful. 
A large majority of people are found to be swinging between joy and sorrow. There are some 
others who are always sad and depressed and have never tasted bliss even once. There again, are 
some others, who are not bothered about anything and who lead a sort of mechanical life like 
animals. What is the reason for such a state of affairs? It is not due to Prakrithi but due to the 
different ways in which man is influenced by his own mind. 


Four categories of human beings 


Based on their mental predisposition, human beings may be classified under four categories as 
follows: 


Dheva-maanava (Godly man): "Brahma Nishttha Ratho Dhevah," it is said. This means: He is a 
godly person, who rejoices in communication with Brahman, and is ever established in 
Brahman, dedicating all actions to God, looking upon all things as His manifestations and 
joyfully experiencing all forms as reflections of the Divine. The Godly man finds self-fulfillment 
in his life. 


Maanava-maanava (The human man): "Sathya Dharma Ratho Marthyah"--He alone is a man 
who takes delight in truth and righteousness having faith in the scriptural injunction, "Sathyam 
Vadha, Dharmam Chara" (Speak the truth and practise righteousness). He conducts his life 
according to the twin principles of truth and right conduct. He considers duty or responsibility as 
more important than rights or privileges. He is endowed with virtues such as kindness, 
compassion, generosity, charity and forbearance Thus, the human-man leads the peaceful life of 
a he, use-holder. 


Maanava-dhaanava (Demonic man): "Madhyapaana ratho Dhaanavah" (A demon is one who 
takes pleasure in drinking intoxicating liquors). The demonic man spends his time in such 
Thaamasik activities as eating, drinking, sleeping, etc. He is concerned solely with his own 
selfish interests and enjoyments, and never with the happiness of others. Kindness and 
compassion are alien to him. Not even a trace of discrimination and dispassion could be found in 
him. It is his nature to deride, abuse and hurt others. What is worse, the very sight of great and 


holy men will arouse in him feelings of jealousy and hatred. A person whose mind is filled with 
such evil thoughts and feelings is called a "demonic man." 


Maanava-pashu (The animal man): This type of man wastes his life in seeking only sensual 
pleasures from birth to death. In this respect he is worse than beasts, because the latter are at least 
governed by instinct while there is no consideration of reason and season for the human brute 
who has no control over his ever-growing evil qualities. 


Discipline the mind to achieve the goal 


The mind is at the root of all such perversities. If the mind is properly understood and disciplined 
and is applied to get, rid of wicked qualities based on selfishness, it will lead to a purposeful and 
fruitful life. It is basically owing to selfish thoughts that one fails to achieve the goal of human 
life. 


We should first, of all have firm faith in the inherent divinity of man. On the one hand, there is 
the manifested world, which attracts the attention of our body and senses and also entices our 
mind, and on the other hand there is the unmanifested divinity, which is the substratum of the 
manifested universe. The two are only aspects of one and the same divine principle of Sath- 
Chith-Aanandha (Being-Awareness-Bliss). Since all is Sath-Chith-Aanandha, the Upanishaths 
have declared: “Puurnamadhah, Puurnamidham etc.," meaning that both the unmanifest and the 
manifest aspects are fully divine. Although man's essential and true nature is Sath-Chith- 
Aanandha (Being-Awareness-Bliss), he is perpetually haunted by all sorts of problems, 
difficulties and sorrows. What is the reason? It is because he follows the mind and not the 
Buddhi (intellect). 


Follow the guidance of the intellect 


To live as maanava-maanava (human man) is only a mediocre life. Man's aim should be to live 
as a Maanava-Dheva (Godly-man). But man today is leading the life of an animal because of 
desires and hatred only. Non-fulfilment of one's desire results in hatred. The true nature of man 
is neither joy nor sorrow, but it is Sath-Chith-Aanandha (Being-Awareness-Bliss) that transcends 
both joy and sorrow, which are transient. Hence man should endeavour to experience this Sath- 
Chith-Aanandha. Living in this vast universe, you should try to cultivate correspondingly broad 
feelings. But, misguided by the mind, people are harbouring narrow feelings and thus making 
their lives miserable. The solution to this is to follow the guidance of the intellect, eschewing the 
vagaries of the mind. 


The foolish man who relies on his mind 
will degrade himself, 

By becoming worse than a brute. 

While the wise person who follows the 
guidance of his Buddhi 

Will become Pashupathi. 


Why is there this importance for the intellect? Because the sense organs are superior to the body, 
the mind is superior to the sense organs and the intellect is superior to the mind. The Aathma (the 
Self) is superior to the intellect. Thus it can be seen that the intellect is the nearest of all to the 
Self and hence it has the advantage of receiving the maximum potency and effulgence from the 


Self. Therefore, man should utilise his intellect to understand and experience the Self and lead a 
blissful life. 


Man owes to God all his achievements 


From birth to death, man is spending his time and energy for the sake of food and sleep. Is this 
an achievement befitting the status of man? Some may boast about their scholarship or their 
pilgrimages or about the worship and rituals performed by them and about the high offices held 
by them. To think high of themselves based on such achievements is a sin. 


Only when people recognise whole-heartedly that they owe all such achievements to God's 
grace, they would be true to their salt. Man is degrading himself into the state of a demon by 
thinking one thing, saying another thing and doing quite a different thing, violating the much- 
needed harmony among these three activities. 


Once Aadhi Shankaraachaarya reached the holy city of Kaasi (Benaras) after the successful 
completion of his Digvijaya Yaathra (country-wide campaign)of philosophical debates. There, 
while having dharshan of the presiding deity of the place, Vishvanaath, he offered the following 
prayer: "O Lord! I have come to you for the expiation of my sins." How strange? 


Aadhi Shankara explains his three "sins" 


Aadhi Shankaraachaarya had sanctified his short span of life by studying all the scriptures of the 
land as well as writing many volumes of brilliant expositions and profound commentaries on the 
Vedha, the Upanishaths and other texts. Also he had conducted his life on the lines laid down in 
the scriptures. Because of his glorious achievements, he is acclaimed, as the very incarnation of 
Lord Shiva. It may, therefore, seem strange and even paradoxical that a great person of his 
standing should have prayed like that. What, then, were the sins committed by him? He himself 
gave the answer as follows: 


"O Lord Shankara! My first sin is that in spite of my knowing (and also teaching others) that 
God is beyond mind and speech, I have tried to describe you through the several sthothras 
(hymns) composed by me. This betrays lack of conformity between my thought and my word." 


"Next, having been convinced of the scriptural savings that God pervades and permeates 
everything in the manifested universe, I have been preaching this truth to one and all. 
Nevertheless, I have come to Benaras to have your dharshan. This shows that my thoughts, 
words and deeds are at variance with one another This is my second offence." 


"Thirdly, I have firm belief in the teachings of the scripture that one and the same Aathma (Self) 
is immanent in all beings and there is no difference between the so-called Jeevaathma 
(Individual Soul) and the Paramaathma (Over-Soul). While I have been proclaiming this truth in 
all my discourses, I have now come here to stand before you as if we two are separate and 
different from each other. This is my third lapse. Hence I pray that I may be absolved of all these 
three sins, of which I am guilty." 


The true meaning of "sin" 


From the above episode in the illustrious life of Shankaraachaarya, we have to learn an important 
lesson. The popular notion is that indulging in activities like accusing, abusing or physically 
hurting others alone are to be considered as sin. But contrary to this notion, thinking one thing, 
saying another thing, and doing quite a different thing, constitute a sin which is committed by 
most people. Only when man gives up this kind of sin and ensures harmony and unity in his 


thought, word and deed, can he be considered Puurna Maanava (a perfect man). This is why the 
Upanishaths have declared that a Mahaathma (great-souled person) is one who practises purity 
and unity of thought, word and deed, whereas he whose thoughts, words and deeds are at 
variance with one another, is a Dhuraathma (wicked one). In this connection, the mind plays a 
crucial role, and it can either elevate a man to the greatest heights or degrade him to the lowest 
depth. We should be master and not slaves of our mind. Proper mastery over the mind is the 
challenging task confronting mankind today. 


Man should develop high and noble ideals and feelings in all spheres of life--physical, moral, 
religious and spiritual. He must not be content with sensual pleasures which are temporary and 
leave a trail of misery. It is the mind that is responsible either for one's upliftment or downfall. 
One should not hastily rush into action, based on the whimsical dictates of the mind. It is only 
after considering whether the action is good or bad, right or wrong, that a person with a 
disciplined mind acts. Such a man will ultimately reach the goal of self-realisation. 


Discourse to the Summer School at Brindhaavan on 25-5-1993. 


A cleansed heart is the most appropriate altar. In that fragrant 
bower the Lord will establish Himself: At that instant another 
incident too will happen: the group of six vices that had infested 
the place will quit without so much as a farewell. When these vices 
quit, the wicked retinue of evil tendencies and vulgar attitudes 
which thrive on them will also break camp and disappear, without 
even leaving their addresses! Then man will shine in his pristine 
splendour of Truth and Love, and finally succeed in merging with 
the Supreme. 


BABA 


24. Essence of the Shad-Dharshanas 


THE Shad-Dharshanas are six great works (Philosophical systems) that shed light on Indian 
culture, which many consider to be based on blind belief. Explaining the Vedhas explicitly, they 
share with the world the wisdom contained therein. 


The six texts are based on (a) The Vedha (b) Non-belief and (c) Inner Vision. They explain 
incidents and events that pertain to all the three times of past, present and future. They have 
taught man how to do away with suffering, restlessness etc., and lead a good life by removing the 
dirt in him. They explicitly state that the Vedhas, the Vedhaantha and the knower of Vedhas are 
all one and the same. They explain the nature of the mind which is responsible for all 
intelligence, intellect and discrimination. These six great Dharshanas (texts) are: (a) Nyvaaya (b) 
Vaisheshika (c) Saankhya (d) Yoga (e) Puurva-Meemaamsa and (f) Utthara Meemaamsa. 


Nyaaya Dharshana forms the life for other dharshanas 


Nyaaya Dharshana was given by Sage Gauthama and hence it is also called Gauthama 
Shaasthra. This forms the life for the remaining five Dharshanas. We have measures to judge 
the quantity and volume of material in the world. Even in respect of Divinity, a measure must be 
available by which the proof may be obtained. Vedhas speak of four kinds of proofs. They are 
(1) Prathyaksha (direct perception), (2) Anumaana (inference), (3) Upamaana_ (comparison)and 
(4) Shabdha (sound). 


Prathyaksha pramaana: This is called direct proof, as it is perceived by the sense organs. These 
organs are only instruments. The mind enters them and helps them to function. There are some 
limitations on the senses like disease and imperfection, that make proof obtained by this method 
to be infirm. For example, a normal eye can see all colours, a jaundiced eye sees everything as 
yellow. Though the /addu is sweet, the tongue of a malaria patient classifies it as bitter. Here, 
there are two points of view. From the point of view of the matter it is sweet. But from the point 
of view of the senses it is bitter. It can be concluded, therefore, direct proof is not complete 
evidence for real justice. 


Padhaartha and paraartha: Students must remember that the findings of ancient Indian sages 
were based on extensive investigations that went beyond the four regions of mind and even the 
Over-mind. They were the expositions of saints who had the vision of the Divinity. 


Many scientists today are anti-God and are proud that they have discovered something our 
ancient sages could not. How wrong! Out ancient seers concluded that all these findings of today 
pertain to the Low-mind and are associated with Padhaartha (matter). Their findings were based 
on the study of the Over- mind, associated with the Paraartha (Supreme Source) and were hence 
of a highly elevated nature. Before the shining splendour of these, today's investigations and 
discoveries look like glow worms. 


Investigation of the heart is the real proof 


Any enquiry made with machines is subject to errors just like the machine itself. It is the 
investigation of the heart that will vouch as real proof. 


These four methods of obtaining proof is very important because all religions attach great 
importance to justice. It was said of Mohammed the Prophet, that when his son committed a sin, 
he was awarded the 100 strokes by whip prescribed by the religion for that particular mistake. 


When he died after 50 strokes, the Prophet ordered that the remaining 50 be carried out on his 
son's grave! 


Anumaana pramaana: This is based on doubt and inference. One sees cranes in the distance, for 
example, and infers that water Could be available there. Similarly, one infers about fire by seeing 
the smoke, from the Svabhaava (natural traits), one. makes out about the Svaruupa (the real 
form). 


Upamaana pramaana: This kind of testimony is based on comparison. It enables us to 
understand many things that cannot be otherwise easily understood, by comparing them to some 
others that can be. By studying the Praathibhasika (apparent reality) and the Vyaavahaarika 
(empirical reality), one can infer about the Paaramaarthika (transcendental). For example, by 
studying the foam (empirical reality) that originates from the waves (apparent reality), one can 
understand the reality of the Ocean (transcendental reality). This is possible because both the 
foam and the waves originate from the Ocean, and mirror its character in them. This is the 
example cited for all beings emanating from the Ocean of Divinity as waves. 


Shabdha pramaana is the ultimate proof 


Shabdha pramaana: It is the proof garnered on the basis of sound. It is considered to be the 
ultimate proof. It is based on the testimony of the sound that the Vedhas, Vedaangas, 
Upanishaths and the Bhagavath Geetha came into existence, But, to be able to perceive this 
testimony, one must be properly attuned and extremely careful. It needs one to travel beyond the 
mind and the senses. At this stage of Samaana chittha (mental equanimity), sound becomes the 
very form of God. The eight forms of God are Shabdha Brahma mayee (sound), Charaachara 
mayee (All pervasiveness), Paraathpara mayee (Transcendental nature), Vaang mayee (speech), 
Nithyaanandha mayee (blissful), Jvothir mayee (Effulgence), Maaya mayee (illusion) and Shree 
mayee (prosperity). 


Another significance in this is that God is most pleased with sound in the form of Saama gaana 
(songs in praise of God). It is said that Lord Vishnu once told Naaradha that He would always 
instal Himself wherever his devotees sang his glory with a full and devoted heart. This is the 
actual sound--the songs that contain the glory of the Lord. 


In this way, Nyaaya Dharshana lays down the four methods of gathering proof. 


Students must listen to sounds that are Divine in nature. Nyaaya Dharshana declares that it is the 
human conscience that is the best judge. Conscience is beyond the mind, it is the vibration of 
life. 


Words originate in the mind. But, when it comes to the tongue (body) it appears different under 
different situations. When it goes beyond the mind, the word becomes Truth itself. Vedhas call 
this truth as Bhur. It is the radiation. In the materialization of body, this truth is all-pervasive and 
is the vibration of that truth which is the conscience. Hence from Radiation comes Vibration; 
from Vibration comes Materialization. 


The Vedhas and their form 


It is said that the word is itself Rig Vedha. It is all effulgent. The mind is the Yajur Vedha and life 
is itself Saama Vedha. Life gives breath. From this breath comes the song. Hence Saama Vedha 
is the form of life itself. The Yajur Vedha is the form of the Manthras that originate in the mind. 
The three Vedhas hence collectively state that God who is the effulgent One (as stated by Rig 


Vedha) must be prayed to and worshipped with the Manthras (as stated in Yajur Vedha) and 
pleased by sweet songs that are most endearing to Him (as said in the Saama Vedha). God is 
most pleased by songs alone and not by words or speeches. 


Once you understand and follow the six Dharshanas, you need not do any other saadhana. 
Without understanding such lofty ideas, Indians are today groping in ignorance. Our ancient 
truths are eternal. You must know that they are based upon investigations of a kind unattained or 
unattainable in the world today. 


Vaisheshika dharshana speaks about speciality of atoms 


Sages and seers, in a state of deep dedication understood and grasped the spiritual reality in all 
matter. They hence gave little importance to the kind of secular education seen today. They 
understood that the same five elements within the human body constituted the tree, mountain and 
the entire creation. Only the forms differed. 


The saints propounded that matter is constituted of atoms, but each atom was unique in itself. 
The difference between two atoms is the Vishesha (speciality) and the Vaisheshika Dharshana 
(that which brings out the speciality) speaks about this speciality. 


Matter and nature are reality: Matter is unchangeable. It is only the form that changes; for 
example, the mud and water are creation of God; they are matter. The pot made out of mud and 
water may assume various shapes. It may break and splinter but the mud and water remain. 
Hence matter being unchangeable, is reality. 


Nature consists of the five elements that are unchangeable. For example, sound is of different 
kinds, but the Primordial Sound, Aum is unchanging. A// the Sapthasvaras--Sa, Ri, Ga, Ma, Pa, 
Da, Ni are Vikaaras of the Omkaara (the different forms of the Primordial Sound). Matter and 
Nature are hence both unchanging. 


Equality of men and women: This is another truth propounded by the Vaisheshika Dharshana 
Men and women differ only in gender and one is not weaker than the other. Just as woman 
cannot work without man's help, man also cannot function without woman's help. Basing its 
aadhaara (proof) on the world, this Dharshana also states that society is in trouble when it does 
not accept this equality and attempts to diversify the essential unity in both men and women. 


Do good to the society: When man constantly asks for happiness, he expects the society to give 
it to him. He asks for peace and expects the world to give him peace. How is it possible? If he 
asks himself the question what he has done for the good of the society, there is no answer If he 
asks himself the question what he has done to promote peace in the world, there is no. answer. 
Only if one does good to the society and strives to promote peace in the world, can he expect 
good from the society and peace from world. This is another Vishesha (speciality) expressed in 
the Vaisheshika Dharshana. 


Inherent unity of all humans 


This Dharshana explains there is enormous power in the microcosm that man can harness by 
learning with discretion. It is this kind of study that explains the differences in the past, present, 
future and also the truth that remains the same in all the three times. 


The Shukla Yajur Vedha has made an exhaustive study of unity in diversity. The same shows up 
in the Vaisheshika Dharshana, which states "All are birds of the same house (family); all men 


are children of the same mother; all are flowers of the same creeper; all are citizens of the same 
nation." 


1. The first statement is: "All are the birds of the same house." The house is the body. It is like a 
nest that restricts the bird. The bird remains in the nest till it acquires wings. It then leaves its 
nest and flies away to freedom. In the same way, with the wings of Antharjnaana (Wisdom), 
man can develop detachment and fly away to liberation. This much is common in all men. 


2. The second statement explains: "All are children of the same mother." This mother is 'Mother 
Earth.’ All of us are born from earth, as we are composed of mind. A newly born baby is bathed 
and made to sleep in the cradle. But yet, in the baby's hand can be found mud, after a few hours. 
This is ample proof that man's body is made of mud. 


3. The third statement is: "Flowers of the same creeper" This creeper is the heart. The flower is 
the sweetness of the heart-to-heart relationship that each man has with another All hearts are thus 
inter-related. 


4. The fourth statement is: "All are citizens of the same nation." We are all members of the 
human race. Ours is a nation of men and not animals or rocks. We form the human society. Just 
as the waves originate from the ocean, all the different forms come from the Sath-Chith- 
Aanandha. 


Vaisheshika appeals not to fight over petty matters 


With these explanations, the Vaisheshika Dharshana points out the essential unity among all 
men. Thus the Vaisheshika appeals to them not to fight over petty matters. 


Nimitthaadhaara and Muulaadhaara: There is nothing good or bad in creation. But, as long as 
body consciousness exists, one has to experience both. It is said: 


For one who lacks intelligence and wisdom, 
detachment becomes a burden. 

For one who lacks knowledge, the body 
becomes a burden. 

For one who lacks love, the mind 
becomes a burden. 


Man must develop discrimination to be free from all these burdens. It enables him to understand 
the Truth or the basis of everything. What is this truth? One must know two things: The 
Nimitthaadhaara (instrumental) and the Muulaadhaara (basis). Muulaadhaara is the basis on 
which the Nimitthaadhaara (instrumental) builds something. Example: Mud and water are the 
Muulaadhaara---the basis. The potter becomes the Nimitthaadhaara, who uses them and makes 
pots of different shapes and sizes. 


Man must control senses to the extent possible 


The child Prahlaadha told his father Hiranyakashipu "O father! you have earned victory over all 
the three worlds, but are a slave to your senses." Such a one who knows not himself and is a 
slave to his senses, has no authority at all. He who succumbs to the enemies within, can never 
defeat the foes without. 


Man must control his senses to the extent possible. Otherwise, he will suffer grief. Man must not 
commit the blunder of resigning everything to his fate.. With enquiry and determination, one can 
achieve anything. But today, man is becoming a slave to the mind. Man is the master of mind. 
He alone is a real man who understands the reality--that the microcosm is in the macrocosm and 
the macrocosm is in the microcosm. 


Saankhya dharshana is related to numbers 


It was Sage Kapila who gave to the world this philosophical text. Saankhya Dharshana is also 
called Kapala. Elucidating that only a person with sense control is true man, it states that it is 
impossible otherwise for man to live in this physical frame with infinite powers. 


At sight, this Dharshana appears to refute the statements in the Nyaaya and Vaisheshika 
Dharshanas. It argues that nature is a combination of numbers Saankhya (and hence the name) -- 
-and is full of conflicting forces. It explains how to reach God with the help of numbers. 


Divine exists in this Nature like oil in the oil seeds and fragrance in the flowers. Like the seeds 
and the flowers, Nature is just the external form of the Divine. This truth is called Saankhya or 
Thathvam. It is the power of enquiry that shows the Truth. 


Yet another testimony to this cause-effect theory was also placed forward by Saankhya 
Dharshana. Creation can only be made by a combination of two forces. These two forces are 
God and Nature. 


This Dharshana says that Nature is composed of twenty-four aspects--the five organs of 
knowledge, the five organs of action, the five senses, the five life breaths, Manas (mind), Buddhi 
(intellect), Chittha (reflective mind) and Ahamkaara (ego). Each one appears as a conflicting, 
unique force. For example: where there is fire, there can be no water. But yet the Saankhya 
dharshana splits these conflicting forces into just three subheads to facilitate an easy 
understanding--that of the Jeeva (individual), Prakrithi (nature) and Paramaathma (creator). But 
the Saankhya does not stop with the Creator. It says that: "When, to the 24 numbers is added the 
Self, the number becomes 25. While the 24 numbers are matter, the 25th is the Self--the Creator. 
The process of evolution of the human soul begins with all the 24 numbers of matter, crosses the 
25th (Self) as well and finally merges in the Shiva aspect--the 26th. 


While the 'Self’ forms a part of the human being in the heart, it is also in the Nature. He is only a 
noble one who can see the two-in-one aspect of the Self being within as well as in the Nature. 
Man is like a bridge between the visible Nature and the invisible all-pervasive Divinity. He is 
hence called madhyama---the middle one. What we consider as invisible is what is actually 
guiding the consequences contrary to our belief. 


Mind is a white paper on which is recorded the life-records of several births of ours. It is called 
the Chittha. He who is hidden in this and does the recording is called Chithraguptha--the hidden 
recorder. This power is also called the Prajna Shakthi--the Radiation. This Radiation vibrates the 
Life force (Vibration) that helps this body to be alive and function--Materialization. 


What is Moksha? 


It is not something that needs to be specially earned. The Saankhya Dharshana explicitly states 
that actually, no special effort need be made to attain liberation. When man realises his true 
form, he is liberated. When man destroys all the desires in him, he is /iberated--Moha Kshaya is 
Moksha. \n terms of numbers, the Dharshanas explain that as long as man identifies with 24 


numbers and the Purusha (Self) aspect, he can never realise that he is the truth. It is only when 
he travels beyond to the Super-mind that he can fathom the Truth. That is the Divine mind. It is 
sacred, and, from this stage, one can step on to the Illuminated-mind from where is visible only 
the Higher-mind and nothing else. 


When the roof is removed, one can see the sky from where he is sitting. Similarly when the roof 
of the Lower-mind is removed, one can see the Higher-mind, and finally the Over-mind. In this 
way, by showing the numbers, this text helps in guiding man from Nature to God. 


Start the process now to reach the goal of life 


Yet another fact elucidated in the Saankhya Dharshana is the relation between man and Aathma. 
Aathma can never be obtained by investigations of the secular kind. It is natural and all- 
pervading, whether the body is present or not. For example, though one cannot see the electricity 
flowing through the wires, the moment a bulb is connected to a socket attached to the wire, the 
bulb glows, proving the presence of electricity. Similarly, the Aathma stays permanently. Only 
the body comes and goes. 


Saint Thyaagaraaja sang that however high a bird flies, it will have to come down and rest on a 
tree at some time. Similarly man has to submit to Divinity one day whatever be his reservations. 
That is the goal of life. Instead of realizing it at some later stage of life it is better to do it now 
and start the process. 


This Dharshana states that it is a demonic quality to forget God. Man must remove the demonic 
quality, develop the human quality and reach divinity. Just as one blows off the ash to see the 
latent fire, one must blow away the ashes of bad qualities on the self with the air of 
Naamasmarana. Just as one removes the moss on the water with-the hands to reveal crystal clear 
water, man must remove the moss of sensual pleasures with the hands of good-acts. 
Naamasmarana is the best way prescribed for the Kali age to attain liberation. 


When man submits to illusion, man himself becomes illusion. This illusion is an aspect of the 
25th number. When we understand the secret between the illusion and Divinity, we ourselves 
become the 26th aspect Divinity. One cannot gather all the five organs of action and knowledge, 
and the five senses together. But exercising control and following some limits, Divinity maybe 
realised. A scrupulous adherence to discipline is essential. 


In England, it was discovered that when a farmer fed and milked the cows at erratic times due to 
some tensions in the family, the quality of milk was much poorer than what was originally 
obtained when feeding and milking was done on a strict schedule. That is the importance of 
sticking to discipline in life. 


Nature does not deceive 


Man must never neglect anything however small. Tiny termites may destroy an entire block of 
wood. 


The Nyaaya dharshana states the differences between two atoms. But the Saankhya dharshana 
states that the entire creation is in the microcosm an atomic structure. So. why talk of a separate 
atomic structure? God is this microcosm. That is the significance of the Vedhic statement: 
"Anoraneeyaan Mahatho Maheeyaan" (Smaller than the smallest, mightier than the mightiest). 


Pathanjali's eight-fold yoga 


Sage Pathanjali has prescribed eight kinds of Yoga in his text for man to enjoy health and 
happiness. These eight are Yama, Niyama, Aasana, Pranaayaama, Prathyaahaara, Dhaarana, 
Dhyaana and Samaadhi. It states explicitly that Yoga is not just for the ochre clad monks, 
renunciates in the forest and celibates. Modern investigations show that in today's machine age, 
it is the ordinary man who actually needs Yoga. 


Man struggles the whole day to feed and foster his family. This exertion and motive makes him 
restless and robs him of his sleep. He then resorts to artificial means to induce sleep and rest to 
the body, like taking sleeping pills or taking intoxicating drinks. This artificial induction has 
disastrous side effects and combined with the lack of rest, causes heart diseases, blood pressure, 
etc. Research has hence concluded that Yoga is ideally suited for all these problems. 


The sacred texts were all born in India. But due to the rise of blind beliefs that are consequences 
of modern education and civilization, Indians show scant interest or belief in these works of 
brilliance. It is the misfortune of Indians that today, these sacred texts are much more fostered 
and believed abroad, who were quick to realise their importance. They investigated and 
understood that due to lack of rest, the body weakens. This causes the breathing process to speed 
up. This in turn spoils the lungs. As the blood circulation also speeds up, a stage arrives when 
blood pressure sets in. Medicine cannot cure it completely and hence Yoga is prescribed. 


This was a finding, supported by researchers at the International University in America and some 
others at the University of Hawaii. Some of these researchers even reversed their views on Yoga 
after they saw the results of their studies. 


A healthy mind and body is essential 


It was shown that the bliss and vitality enjoyed after two hours of sleep, could be got by just 
twelve minutes of Yoga. Though man can adjust without food, he cannot do the same without 
sleep and rest. Lack of sleep is a common problem in several countries, including India. This 
extracts a heavy toll on one's health. To achieve the four goals of life--Dharma, Artha, Kaama 
and Moksha--a healthy mind and body is essential. 


In old Mexico, an experiment conducted on the inmates of a prison showed amazing results. 
While previously the inmates were all restless and sick, after the practice of Yoga, within two 
months, they were all hale and healthy. 


Yet other investigations resulted in inducing addicts of drugs, smoking, drinking, etc. to give up 
their habit. It is currently estimated that about 3 to 4 lakh students abroad practice Yoga. 


In India, the birth-place of Yoga, there is not much progress or interest. Devaki was said to have 
lamented that though she had suffered the birth pangs, it was given to Yashodha to enjoy and 
foster the Baby Krishna. In the same way, though Patanjali gave up his life to experience and 
share this great Yoga in India, it has only fallen on barren soil. The main cause for this is the lack 
of Shraddha (Interest) and Bhakthi (faith) in not only Yoga but also in all the scriptures. 


Importance of discipline 


Pathanjali prescribes some major disciplines as prerequisites for deriving the benefits of yoga, 
notably with respect to diet. The food taken is to be both Mitha and Hitha, (limited and 
nutritious). Since food and water are only medicines to cure the ailment of hunger and thirst, they 


should be taken in that spirit. Taste should not be the yardstick to eat food, for it is only to 
protect the body that one eats, after all. 


Foreigners realised this and found that by reducing chilies, sai.t, tamarind etc. from their diet and 
by eating limitedly, they could stay healthy. Pathanjali states that excess food weakens the 
nerves, causing blood pressure problems. Man becomes prone to excitement easily. 


Lack of health among men also causes agitations and restlessness in society. In Germany, a 
research conducted on monkeys showed that the primates, when practised sitting silent for 3 to 4 
hours daily, soon became very intelligent, developed their memory and were highly enthusiastic- 
-In some cases, even more than man! 


A similar experiment on a student considered a dullard and roguish, showed that with the help of 
Yoga, in just a few months, the boy became one of the most intelligent and well-behaved boys. 
Encouraged, even the boy's 70-year-old father took to Yoga. Soon his body was functioning with 
the vitality of a 50-year-old man! 


The importance of Praanaayaama: This Yoga consists of three parts, each to be done one after 
the other. It starts with Puuraka, then Kumbhaka and finishes with Rechaka. 


Puuraka: This is the inhalation of breath. One must note carefully the time taken for this process, 
the duration of time can be justified as per the capacity of the person. Care must be taken to see 
that gasping and such kinds of exhaustion must not occur during the process. 


Kumbhaka: The breath taken in must-be retained for the same duration as it had taken for the 
inhaling process. 


Rechaka: Once thus retained, it must be exhaled in the same time limit as that taken for inhaling 
and retention. 


Caution to be exercised while doing Praanaayaama 


While doing Praanaayaama, one must not concentrate or aim to hold the breath for as long as 
possible. One must instead concentrate on assuring that all the three processes take the same 
amount of time. Otherwise, this process spoils the lungs. Doing the same under an inexperienced 
teacher also can prove to be disastrous. 


The next step is to breathe in through the right nostril alone. This is the Ida. One must then retain 
the breath at the Sushumna (between the eye-brows) for the same time duration as that taken for 
inhaling, then release the breath through the left nostril only, again taking same time. This last 
step is Pingala. 


The Yoga Dharshana combines with the Nyaaya and Vaisheshika Dharshanas in many of its 
contents. Through the Nyaaya Dharshana, one understands that a proper decision ought to be 
made regarding the measure to be appropriately selected for the Yoga. This is evident in the way 
caution is advised in limiting the time factor during the Praanaayaama, taking into consideration 
the individual capacity. 


These good thoughts are Divine thoughts and Yoga prescribes a process called Angaarpanam as 
the method to achieve this end. Angararpanam means to offer all of one's limbs and organs to 
the Lord. It does not mean to cut them off and place them at the Lord's feet. It means to use these 
limbs and organs only in actions that will please God. This is where, the importance of 
discrimination is stressed in Yoga. 


When such Angaarpanam is done, real Aanandha results. Bliss is related to the heart. When used 
in pursuit of sensual pleasures, only happiness results. This is called Santhosha, as it means some 
+ thosha - limited happiness. This Santhosha is related to the head, the centre of responsibility. 
One must hence take care to think well, contemplate on the thought and then put. it into action. 
This is the real 3 HV's---the values of Head, Heart and Hands. It is the unity of thought, word 
and deed. 


Dhaarana can be done without doing Praanaayaama 


Students must cultivate tolerance to the extent possible. Though difficult at first, it will become 
second nature to you with constant practice, as stated in the Bhagawath Geetha. Even if students 
find Praanaayaama difficult, they can still do Dhaarana. It is the singlepointed concentration of 
some chosen object. It is not very difficult. If practised well, it leads us on to Dhyaana 
(meditation) easily. It is said that with the power of Yoga, one can control anything, including the 
evil from. entering the mind through the senses, in any form. Senses are like doors to houses, 
where only authorised personnel may enter. Yoga helps strengthen this guard. This absolves us 
of animal qualities like ego, restlessness, fickleness, anger, jealousy etc. 


In the first place, if you see God in each form, within three days. you can feel the Divine feelings 
latent in you beginning to develop. Otherwise, even 30 generations of saadhana will be of no 
use. 


Puurva meemaamsa and Utthara meemaamsa 


Sage Jaimini's concentrated and persistent life-long efforts resulted in this work. Meemaamsa 
means enquiry. It is called Puurva because it was in existence even before the Vedhas. 


The Puurva Meemaamsa deals with the regulations and methodologies of devotion and wisdom. 
Both are related to the Karma kaanda (the field of action). It traces the route to realising 
Brahman as first starting with Karma, then on to Dharma and finally to Brahma. This is 
mentioned as Karma Jignaasu, Dharma Jignaasu, and finally Brahma Jignaasu. 


Karma Jignaasu: It pertains to all the actions performed by man. Even breathing and blood 
circulation are described as a kind of Karma. In terms of worldly explanations, it may be 
compared to the mixing together of ingredients like salt, tamarind, chilli, etc. to prepare chutney. 
Just as the ingredients must be mixed in correct proportions, the actions in daily life must also be 
in ideal proportions. 


Dharma Jignaasu: This may be compared to the tasting of the chutney made. Tasting brings out 
any defects in it. This. may hence be compared to the identification of defects. 


Brahma Jignaasu: Having identified the lapse, rectifying it is the Brahma Jignaasu state. It may 
be said that experiencing worldly life is the Karma Jignaasu; Understanding that there is no 
permanent joy obtainable from this world is the Dharma Jignaasu and introducing this bliss into 
daily life through introspection is the Brahma Jignaasu. 


Man is unable to absolve himself of all worries and anxieties despite worshipping all the deities. 
This is because he has forgotten moral and ethical living methods and takes the. body to be the 
real self. When questioned as to one's identity, he introduces himself by his name first. When 
asked for more details, he gives his profession next. When probed still further, he names his 
country. But man is not the name or the profession or the country. He is the Aathma. The correct 


answer is "I am Aathma." One may assume an alias; one may change his profession or even 
migrate abroad in search of better living. But, his true self is changeless. 


Shivam without Aathma becomes shavam 


When a person keeps saying "I" and "Mine," "I" actually is related to the Aathma; "Mine" is 
related to the body--Dhehi and Dheham. It is only when all the organs and limbs combine 
together that a body results. Similarly, the Aathma is a combination of Mind, Intellect and 
Samskaara. \t is the Aathma that enters and prompts the organs and limbs to operate. A body 
with Aathma in it is hence called Shivam (auspicious). When the Aathma leaves the body, all 
organs and limbs come to a stand-still. The body becomes inert. Hence such a body is called 
Shavam (dead-body). 


Aathma is a combination of Mind, Intellect and Samskaaras (tendencies). The mind thinks, 
reflects and forms thoughts based on the promptings of Aathma. The intellect, endowed with the 
triple power of discrimination, analyzing and deciding also functions due to Aathma. 


Samskaara means elevating culture and is the basis of rebirth. Our present actions become seeds 
of samskaara that decide the fruit in the next life. It is hence advised that doing good and 
constant contemplation of God, will enable one to be peaceful at the end of one's life. This can 
surely be achieved by constant practice, as is stated in the Bhagavath Geetha. Good actions lead 
to good samskaaras, that confers a good birth. 


Selective adherence to Karma kaanda 


Jaimini investigates the paradox that though the body is temporary, why emphasis is laid on our 
Karma (bodily action). This, he concluded, was necessary to purify the mind. Hence the body 
must enter into actions. But today, people take from this Karma kaanda whatever part is useful 
to them and discard the others. A story is said about a lazy celibate, who came to a house to beg 
for alms. The kind lady, though it was an odd time, did not want to break a family tradition. She 
requested the celibate to have his bath and ablutions at the river nearby, while she cooked 
something for him. The lazy person answered that "Lord Govindha's name is itself a hearty 
bath." The wise lady saw through the fake saadhu (mendicant) and countered: "Very well then! 
The same Govindha's name will also be your food." 


It is because of this kind of selective adherence to Karma kaanda, that man has become so 
impure. 


People argue that Nature is a natural entity, in the sense that, no one has created it. Matter and 
energy need someone to combine them. Oil, wick and container may be present. But it needs 
someone to strike a match and light the lamp. Though the subject and intelligence are present, a 
teacher is needed to impart a proper guidance for being educated. Jaimini states that good 
education must impart good habits, ideals, truth, responsibility and discipline besides intellectual 
knowledge. 


Puurva meemaamsa deals with anger control 


To achieve all these, Jaimini advises purity. Without this inner purity; Divinity is a distant 
illusion. Clouds arise from the sun and cover the. sun itself. But, it is a temporary effect. Man 
must also have patience to wipe away the ignorance that covers his self. Patience is another 
virtue mentioned in the Puurva Meemaamsa. 


Method to control anger: The text advocates a very logical method to counter obstacles. For 
example when grief strikes, it advises that one must think of joyful incidents. This gives joy. It 
also conducts enquiries into the fields of Ajnaana-Prajnaana. 


Control of anger and overcoming the obstacles in daily life, is also dealt with. The Puurva 
Meemaamsa states that one must slowly analyze the situation when angry. By the time a 
conclusion is reached, tempers cool down considerably. One may also do any one of the 
following to control temper: (1) drink a glass of cold water; (2) see the mirror, where your 
distorted features will repulse you enough to cool you down; (3) walk fast and alone. This speeds 
up your circulation that draws away anger; (4) open a tap and watch your pitch of song with that 
of the falling water. In all these attempts, the time and attention definitely help cool tempers. 


Do not give in to excitement 
One must try to involve Utthara Meemaamsa into practice as well, to the extent possible. 


Man must not give in to excitement. Arjuna was highly perturbed when Krishna was leaving to 
make peace with Kauravas, as a last ditch attempt. He entreated that a war was best suited as the 
Kauravas would not concede the demands of the Pandavas. But, the same Arjuna collapsed at the 
sight of his grandfather, teachers, cousins, relatives and friends lined up to do battle. He did not 
want to live with their blood on his hands. 


Hence students must stay calm and composed. You need not become excited to acquire 
something. If it is destined to reach you, it shall be delivered to you wherever you are. You must 
remember meanwhile to concentrate on protecting your righteousness; which in turn will protect 
you. “Dharmo Rakshathi Rakshithah," it is said. Hence, while following your daily routines, 
contemplate always on God. Wherever you are, whatever you do, do it with divine feelings. 


A summary of discourses from 27-5-1993 to 31-5-1993, to the students of Summer School in 
Indian Culture and Spirituality at Brindhaavan. 


25. Jealousy the root cause of evil 


THE main purpose of human life is to realise one's true identity. It is only when you recognise 
the sacredness of human life that you can realise the Divine. It is sheer ignorance to consider 
man as made up of merely the body, mind and sense, which are only upaadhis (instruments). To 
identify yourself with the body is as absurd as to consider yourself as the house in which you 
dwell or the car in which you travel. It is essential to realise the truth of your divine identity 
through the instruments of the body, mind and intellect. The Inner Self of Divinity is referred to 
by several synonyms such as Dhrishta (Seer), Chith (Awareness), Chaithanya (Consciousness), 
Sath-Chith-Aanandha (Existence, Knowledge and Bliss) and so on. It is Paripuurnam (complete 
or whole) and Sthiram (permanent). You may enquire whether the Inner. Self is the subtle, causal 
or super-causal body, whether it is Bhakthi (devotion) or Jnaana (wisdom), whether it is inert or 
awareness, whether it is Hiranyagarbha (cosmic mind or womb) or Vishvam (cosmos), whether 
it is Pinda (microcosm) or Brahmaanda (macrocosm), whether it is the beginning, the middle or 
the end. The answer is in the negative. All these are related to duality, while the true Self is non- 
dual. "Ekameva Adhvitheeyam" (There is only one and no second at all). 


However, when you perceive the principles of Pramedhya, Prameya and Pramaana, you can 
understand this Supreme Principle. Pramedhya is reflected in the individual awareness. Prameya 
is that which is reflected in Prakrithi (Nature). Pramaana is the nature of Chittha (the mind 
intellect principle). These constitute the triple aspects of seer, seen and the act of seeing. 


How to realise the sacred Inner Self 


The question is how to realise the sacred Inner Self. Even in worldly things, Divinity is present. 
We see endless waves emanating from the vast ocean. Though the ocean is one, the waves are 
innumerable and apparently not of the same form. But all the waves contain the essence of the 
ocean and its quality, whether they are big or small. Similarly, though there are infinite forms of 
beings in the world, each of them contains the essence of Divinity within. The same Divinity is 
everywhere. This Divinity existed in the past, is in the present and will continue to be there in the 
future. It is, therefore, beyond the three categories of time and is eternal. 


Every human being is a combination of Brahma thathwa and Jeeva thathva (Omni Self and 
individual Self). The waves in the ocean are caused by the wind blowing over it. Similarly, 
Maaya (illusory power) causes the diversity of names and forms in the world. The original basic 
entity, Sath-chith-aanandha, is the only one that exists and all the variety of beings in the world 
are all like the waves of the ocean. This Sath-chith-aanandha is termed as Asthi, Bhaathi and 
Priyam, which are changeless, while name and form will always be changing. This phenomenal 
world is called Jagath, which implies, it is "coming" and "going." The only one that is ever- 
present is the collective form of Divinity. Human life emerged from the Divine, is sustained by 
the Divine and merges in the Divine. 


Birth and death go together 


Though the body is transient, it is given only to do Dharma (righteous deeds) and reach the goal. 
"Shareeram Aadhyam khalu Dharma-Saadhanam" (The body is essential for realising Dharana). 
Birth and death go together. Death follows birth like a shadow. One cannot say when, where and 
how death will occur. It may be in childhood, youth or old age, in a house or outside, in a town, 
or a forest, on the ground, in water or in the sky. One should realise that death is natural 
phenomenon and avoid worrying about it. 


Since you are provided with the faculty of discrimination, you should use it in the right way and 
not with-selfish motives. When you use it for collective benefit, with social awareness, it is very 
beneficial. It is because, man is using his intellect for selfish purposes, he is not happy. If it is 
used for the common benefit of all, one can enjoy real happiness. 


Sujnaana, Vijnaana and Prajnaana 


Raavana was a most powerful king, fully accomplished in all the arts, with mastery of the 
Vedhas. He had performed a severe penance. But, because he used all his talents for his selfish 
Purposes, he met with an ignominious death. He was warned by his wife Mandodhari, who was a 
paragon of virtue, standing for Sujnaana (right knowledge), that he was not following the 
righteous path as he had stealthily kidnapped Seetha, wife of Raama. She questioned him 
whether he would keep quiet if his wife had been kidnapped. She thus taught Sujnaana 
(beneficial wisdom). But Raavana ignored her advice. 


His brother, Vibheeshana, tried to teach him Vijnaana (discriminatory wisdom) by telling him 
that he was not using his Buddhi (intellect) in the right way and was doing a reprehensible act 
which was unbecoming of an emperor like him. Raavana ignored this too. 


Later, Hanuman advised him in terms of Prajnaana (Supreme Wisdom). He told Raavana that in 
spite of his Vidhya (vast scholarship and knowledge), he had failed to recognise the Aathma as 
the reality of an individual and with body consciousness he was indulging in a despicable act 
losing control over his senses and mind. He had brought Seetha, the Mother of the Universe, 
with a base motive. 


Raavana paid no heed to the three types of advice and as a result courted disaster. The life of one 
who acts out of selfish motives is in the hands of others, while the one with a pure heart and 
selfless motive, seeking the welfare of the world, has his life in his own hands. Raama was an 
example of this. A really virtuous human being will see divinity in himself and also in others. 
Human life is nothing but a reflection of Divinity. It is ignorance to consider God as living 
elsewhere in a remote place. When you are yourself the embodiment of Divinity, of what avail is 
it to seek the Divine elsewhere? You are the Supreme Brahman. Forgetting the truth of man's 
inherent Divinity, worrying themselves about what is happening somewhere, people lose their 
moorings. These worries are not natural, but acquired from outside. All have to realise that death 
is the end of everyone who is born. Birth is what is important. When the meaning of birth is 
realised, one transcends birth and death (Janma-raahityam). Therefore, in human life, one should 
understand this Para thathva (transcendental truth) and seek to realise the Divine. That is the 
main task of the aspirant. 


Jealousy is the cardinal evil 


However, many kinds of aberrations are appearing in human life. The root of all the evils arising 
in the world can be traced to the operations of "One hand." When something untoward happens, 
people try to attribute it to some foreign "hand" or to the hand of some religious sect. These are 
meaningless speculations or wild conjectures. They are exercises in untruth. 


There is a "hand" indeed. But what is that hand? It is the hand of Asuwya (jealousy). This is a dire 
malady which has entered all spheres of life in the world today. There is a remedy even for the 
dreaded disease of cancer. But there is no way of curing the malaise of jealousy. The final end is 
the only cure for it. 


Today the malady of jealousy has invaded every field of activity. As a result, such gruesome 
events occur from time to time. There are three offsprings for Asuuya (Jealousy). They are 
Dhvesha, Krodha and Lobha (hatred, anger and greed). There are three children begotten by 
Anasuuya (The one who is totally free from jealousy). They are: Brahma, Vishnu and 
Maheshvara, symbolising Sahana (forbearance), Prema (Love) and Saanubhoothi (compassion). 
This is the difference between Asuuya and Anasuuya. The former gives birth to demonic 
qualities. The latter begets Divine qualities. The demonic qualities produced by Asuuya 
(Jealousy) result in the destruction of the discriminating power and lead men to have no sense of 
what is temporary and what is permanent. Consequently they pursue evil ways. 


Asuuya is the reason for June incidents 


We often ask what is the reason for a particular action or event. There is no need to search for 
reasons. Just as hunger arises out of digestion, jealousy arises out of the disappearance of noble 
motives. The jealous man cannot bear the sight of a noble person or of one who is handsome and 
attractive. He cannot bear to look at one who is getting a good name or who has secured an 
eminent position. This jealousy has "no reason or season." Those afflicted with this malady begin 
to entertain many evil thoughts. 


In the world today, Sai's name and achievements are getting known the world over. To 
counteract this and to diminish it by some means or other, envious persons are resorting to 
certain types of propaganda. These propaganda campaigns will not affect My reputation in any 
manner. My purity is the root cause of the glory of My name. It is not due to any publicity or 
propaganda. My all-pervading selfless love is the cause. No one can affect this pure love. I have 
no ill-will towards anybody. Svaami has done no harm to anyone. How can anyone harm 
Svaami? It is impossible. 


"All activities of Sai are utterly selfless" 


These happenings should be attributed to jealousy. Devotees should not be perturbed by such 
events. Those who have true and firm faith will. not be shaken in any way by these happenings. 
You have listened to the speeches of Goldstein, Sinclair and Haksar. What has impelled them to 
make these declarations? It is their firm faith. Although they are living in far off places, they are 
sustained by their firm faith. For those consumed by envy, only the false is apparent. They 
cannot have even a glimpse of truth. 


So, whatever may happen, this Sathya will remain unmoved., Adhere, therefore, to truth. 
Observe purity in life, embark on a life of selfless service. Believe it or not, there is not a trace of 
selfishness in Me. No one is qualified to point-a finger at My purity. How can anyone recognise 
the grandeur of My divine purity? Only an intelligent person can recognise another's intelligence. 
How can a fool recognise intelligence? 


My goodness is the cause of My invulnerable purity. It is not that I want to glorify Myself. It is 
because the time has come when I have to speak out. 


All activities of Sai are utterly selfless and aimed at the well-being of the whole world. You are 
aware that we built the Super Speciality Hospital. In this Hospital, we have given a fresh lease of 
life to many mothers and fathers and many children were enabled to enjoy the love of their 
parents. Who could do this? What great good fortune is it that this small, obscure village has 
found a notable, place on the world map? This is a source of jealousy. 


Nobody can fully comprehend the significance of Sathya Sai's actions, whether small or big. 
Human beings cannot accomplish such things. Only those who do not choose to come here, see 
and find out the truth about what is being done here, and derive joy from that experience, are 
preaching all kinds of things, to the world, sitting in their air-conditioned rooms. Are these 
persons qualified to preach to the world? People whose minds are polluted should be ashamed, to 
claim that they are striving for the welfare of the world. Let them enter the social arena, do good 
deeds and engage themselves in selfless activities. Only then can the truth be understood. 


On the contrary, if one is filled, with envy, his words and preachings will be meaningless. Truth 
is the life of the spoken word. A word without truth is lifeless. 


Sanctity of Sathya Sai Central Trust 


All the propaganda that is being done is false. It is a form of cheap publicity. Do not be affected 
in any way by such publicity. Adhere to your truth and your purity. 


There are some other matters on which I have to speak because of the large gathering here and 
what you may have read in the media. Fire cannot burn our Sathya Sai Central Trust. It is such a 
sacred trust. We alone know with what sacred concern we are spending every naya paisa. The 
world cannot know this. For the past twenty years, the members of the Central Trust have been 
rendering selfless service. When they have to go to Madras. Delhi or other places, they travel at 
their own expense, pay their hotel bills and do not draw a single paisa from the Central Trust. In 
the case of other trusts, the members submit their bills even for their conveyance charges. The 
Sathya Sai Central Trust members are using the funds in such an utterly sacred manner. Reports 
have been published that the trust members are after power and position. They are not interested 
in office. They have not lacked positions in life. They have come out of love for Svaami, and not 
for any position. 


Pure manner in which Trust Funds are handled 


You must also note how the funds of the Trust are drawn from banks. During the past 20 years 
not once have we drawn any cash from the bank. All payments are made only by cheques. Our 
Institute teachers are paid their salaries not by cheques but by the amounts beings credited to 
their accounts from month to month. The accounts are being maintained in this strict manner. It 
is because the funds are handled in this pure manner that we have not sought or have had any 
need to solicit donations. 


This body is now 67 years old. Not once have I stretched My hand to seek any donation. What is 
the reason? When we are engaged in sacred task, there is no need to seek funds. Our purity will 
bring in funds of its own accord. There is a dearth of men of integrity. Where there are such 
persons there is no problem at all in securing funds. 


I do not misspend even a single naya paisa of Trust money. Nor is there any room in our Trust 
for anyone else to draw money. Every cheque has to be signed by two persons. On every cheque, 
nobody can sign without My signature on it. 


It is a sin to level charges against the Trust 


There are reports that some crores of Trust funds in cash have been swallowed by some persons. 
This is totally false. We do not handle cash at all. If anybody offers cash, we see to it that the 
money is given to the bank manager in the presence of a Trust official in the residence of the 


donor himself. Therefore, no one can point an accusing finger at the way our trusts are managed. 
In these circumstances, it is a sin to level such charges against our Central Trust. 


In the whole world, you cannot find any Trust that is being managed in this pure manner. That is 
why our institutions are growing ceaselessly. Not now alone, but as long as the sun and moon 
last, there is no danger to our institutions. 


This propaganda stems from the frustration born of jealousy. In the peaceful atmosphere that was 
pervading here, such propaganda has caused perturbation. This is highly sinful. It is not good to 
indulge in such acts. Do good if you can, but if not, remain silent. You will be rendering help if 
you don't do any harm. But it is not good to do harm. 


Some may ask why Svaami had so far refrained from answering the traducers. For everything 
there is a right moment. The Kauravas, for instance, were harassing the Paandavas in many 
ways, insulting and humiliating them. The Kauravas were well aware of the Paandavas' divine 
potencies. Each of the Paandava brothers was a man of great prowess. But they did not make use 
of their strength. They bore their troubles in silence. The Kauravas attribute this silence to 
cowardice and weakness. But this was not so. No one can realise the strength that underlies 
forbearance. Likewise The Sathya Sai Trust chose to maintain forbearance. This forbearance 
represents courage, strength, truth and non-violence. 


Our students are like pure refined, gold 


And, now, about our students; you may compare them with anybody, you cannot find anyone 
like them anywhere. It is now 28 days since the events of June 6th happened. Our students have 
been offering prayers every day, observing fasts, and thinking day and night, without, food or 
drink, as to how they can remove the stain that has been caused by this episode. They are in 
anguish and distress. 


Are there not likely to be a few stones in a bag of rice? In an big group there may be a few black 
sheep. On account of a few miscreants, it is an outrage to blacken the entire body of students. 
Our students are like pure refined gold. They are prepared to do anything for Svaami's sake. 


You have all listened to the song sung by a young lad at the beginning of the function. He sang; 
"We are ready to offer our lives to you Bhagavaan." It is not proper to blame all for the crimes of 
a few. We have to put up with this situation for some time. Have patience. When you go to sleep 
at night, one or two mosquitoes may bite you. The next day you use Flit to get rid of all 
mosquitoes. It is because of the association of other mosquitoes with the troublesome one that 
they also get killed. Hence the advice. 


"Thyaja durjana Samsargam" (Give up association with wicked persons), Never get into bad 
company. You must gain good company. You have to put up with calumny. A good man 
becomes a victim of calumny even if he is remote from bad people, just as a moth damages all 
kind of cloth, whether it is ordinary cloth or valuable silk, because it cannot discriminate 
between what is useless and. what is precious. So also an envious person does harm to good and 
bad people alike. 


"Whatever I say is for your good" 


By forbearance, good people will achieve their objectives in due course. Hence, do not worry 
about what has happened. Such things happen in the world from time to time. There is one other 
matter about which I have not spoken to any one so far. 


There are many devotees who ask why, when such things were impending, Svaami did not warn 
Raadhakrishna or try to save him. I am explaining the matter from the spiritual aspect and not 
from the mundane viewpoint. 


Both of us took our meals at 7.00 p.m. Raadhakrishna was sitting in the ground floor. Svaami 
told him: "Raadhakrishna, let us go upstairs. Don't sit here." "Svaami, if I go there, I cannot get 
sleep at 7 o'clock itself," said Raadhakrishna. Svaami asked him: "If you cannot sleep, what are 
you going to do here? You can do in upstairs what you intend to do here. I don't ask you to go to 
sleep. Get up immediately. Come, come," I insisted repeatedly. 


See how things happen. Death overtakes one, in whatever way you attempt to circumvent it. At 
last Svaami assumed an angry tone and rebuked him: 


"Your misfortune is your stubbornness." I pretended as if I was very angry with him. He felt 
pained. Svaami retired upstairs. He reflected for some time. He had been with Svaami for 22 
years. He knew that whatever I said was for his good. He went to the kitchen and brought a 
tumbler of buttermilk. He came smilingly. "Svaami, you have been angry with me. Please drink 
this buttermilk and calm down." "Raadhakrishna! It is not anger, I have said everything for your 
good." said Svaami. Raadhakrishna said, "Svaami has perhaps some doubts that I may go out 
somewhere and talk to others." I replied, "If I have such doubts, will I keep you with me? Not at 
all. There are no doubts. I am saying this for your good." 


And then I said; "I am not used to drinking buttermilk at night. Why have you brought it for the 
first time to night?" He replied: "I felt like giving buttermilk to Svaami tonight and hence I 
brought it." "It is good that you got this idea. I shall take it, but, on one condition. I shall take the 
buttermilk as desired by you, but you must give me your word that after going down to place the 
tumbler in the kitchen, you will return upstairs." He said: "I will certainly return." 


I do not take buttermilk at all. I took a little quantity and told him, "I have taken buttermilk to 
please you." He had a pure heart. He asked me: "Svaami! Can I drink the rest of the buttermilk? I 
said: "Why throw it away? You may drink it." He drank it there itself. Svaami said: "But put 
back the tumbler and come up." He went down. He had given his word. But, he had perhaps the 
doubt that if he remained downstairs Svaami might call him. This kind of stubbornness is one of 
the traits of young people. 


They will not listen to the words of elders. If only they listen to their words, no danger will befall 
them. Apprehending that if he remained downstairs I might call him, he placed the tumbler in the 
kitchen and went to his sister's house. The messenger of death dogged him at 10.00 p.m. This is 
how it has happened. Whatever I say is for the good of others. 


I say only sacred things and nothing that is unholy. Whether you believe or not, I may tell you 
that all the time I only think of what good I can do to better the lot of the people. Svaami never 
thinks about Himself. 


The three 'desires' of Svaami 


After the Summer Course was over, Indulal Shah, V. Srinivasan and others came to Me with 
plans for various projects to be carried out in the next three years. Each year they wanted to carry 
out one project. I told them: "You should not do anything for Me. You may do anything you 
desire for the sake of the people, the society and the poor." I told Srinivasan: "I have three 
desires." 


Even I have some desires, not for My sake. "Today, middle class farmers are experiencing 
difficulties in cultivating their fields. Owners of five or six acres are not able to get labourers to 
work on their farms and do not have cattle for ploughing the fields. Therefore, you get 70 
tractors to be presented to small farmers on My Seventieth birthday in 1995." Action followed 
right in the wake of my words. The Escorts people were immediately contacted on the phone and 
the tractors were brought for the selection of those that would be suitable for small farmers. As 
Svaami was offering the tractors free to small farmers, the Escorts people offered a concession in 
price Orders were placed immediately for 70 tractors. 


Srinivasan asked what was Svaami's second wish. Svaami said that young people were going 
about in Puttaparthi without any occupation and taking to bad ways. Some useful work should be 
provided for them. The Super Speciality Hospital is far from the township. Even the Post Office 
is at a great distance. Many people are having difficulty in going to these places. To provide 
employment to these unemployed youth and provide an essential amenity for the public, Svaami 
suggested that 70 autorikshaws may be provided to the unemployed. "If these young men are 
given these vehicles, it would please me," I said. Orders have been placed for these 
autorikshaws. 


Svaami's thoughts are devoted to the good of others 


The third wish was this: There are a number of women belonging to good families, who have no 
independent means to sustain themselves and are not in a position to take up jobs outside. I felt 
that such women should be taught tailoring and given a sewing machine so that they can earn 
some income independently. Immediately 70 sewing machines have been purchased. 


A fourth wish: Marriage should be performed for 70 poor couples without regard to caste or 
creed. The marriage should be such that they should feel happier beyond all their previous 
experiences in life. It is not enough to give them wedding clothes and the Mangala-suuthram. 
The Mangala-suuthram should be attached to a gold chain. In addition, to enable them to lead a 
life of ideal householders, each couple should be provided with a home. 


In this manner, all My thoughts are devoted to promoting the good of others. Is any Government 
or wealthy person thinking along these lines? None at all. 


Jealousy rears its head in envious folks 


When such sacred things are being done, jealousy rears its head in some persons. This is the 
outcome of their sins. These envious folk will not do anything good themselves, nor will they 
allow others to do good. This is not a human quality. A true human being should be filled with 
large-hearted sentiments. 


The truth can be known only when one comes and sees what is being done here. Instead, if men 
whose hearts are filled with the poison of envy indulge in all kinds of slander from remote 
places, it can be described only as demonic conduct and not that of a human being. Nowhere in 
the world can you see the kind of work that is being carried on here. Is Free Education offered 
elsewhere in outside India on the lines offered here? One has to spend at least Rs. 20000/- to get 
a child admitted in the Ist Standard. Here, from kinder-garden to post-graduate studies, education 
is totally free. 


As for heart surgery cases, in hospitals outside, no patient will be admitted unless Rs. 4 to 5 
lakhs are deposited in advance. In our Hospital, we are spending one crore of rupees a month 


(Rs. 10 million). Which Government or millionaire is doing such a thing? Them are some such 
persons who spend 10 lakhs of rupees in a Hospital with the hope of earning Rs. 10 crores. 


They are making it a business. Here, we are not charging anything. There is no place for 
business' here. It is not proper that such good and sacred work should be misrepresented. 


"T am in the heart of devotees as well as the wicked" 


Sai's heart is as wide as the sky. Even the sky may have its limits. Sai's heart is boundless. Some 
say Sai is in the hands of some persons. Yes, I am indeed bound; bound by the devotees as well 
as by the wicked. In my view, I have. more love for the wicked than for the good. The good 
devotees remember Me only occasionally. But the wicked remember Me all the twenty four 
hours. I am thus in the hearts of the devotees as well as the wicked. I cannot be caught in the grip 
of anyone. 


In regard to every matter, my thoughts are always sublime and exemplary. You must note that 
Svaami's life is in His own hands and not in those of anyone else. If I will it, I can live for as 
long as I please. I can also terminate it at will. It is my will that decides and not any other person. 
The reason is My purity, selflessness and divinity. What other testimony is called for? The life of 
the pure hearted is in their own hands and not in those of others. 


Embodiments of the Divine Aathma! Today is Gurupuurnima. Who is a Guru? Truth is the 
Preceptor for the whole world. Uphold truth with steady mind and a pure and selfless heart. That 
truth will be your protector, your armour and your unfailing companion. There is no Dharma 
higher than Truth. Dharma protects its protector. If you protect Dharma, that Dharma will 
protect you. 


Therefore, without being cowed down or shaken by these incidents, you must go forward with 
faith and fortitude. Keep truth as your ideal. Fill your hearts with purity and love all and hate 
none. Then Divinity will manifest itself in you. 


An inspiring and reassuring discourse to a vast gathering of devotees from all parts of the world, 
who had assembled in the Puurnachandhra Auditorium on Gurupuurnima Day, 3-7-1993. 


Your devotion to God is best expressed by achieving the control of 
the senses. For the senses rush towards the temporary and the 
tawdry; and they foul the heart. I require from each of you no 
other gift, no more valuable offering than the heart I have endowed 
you with. Give Me that heart, as pure as when I gave it to you, full 
of the nectar of Love I filled it with. 


BABA 


26. The Divine and destiny 


The Goddess of Wealth flourishes at the tip of the tongue. 
Friends and kinsfolk grow from the tip of the tongue; 
Bondage and realisation emanate from the tongue; 

The tip of the tongue makes death certain. 


EMBODIMENTS of the Divine Aathma! Speech constitutes the wealth of the world. Speech 
promotes friendship and kinship. It is speech that lends sweetness and affection to all 
relationship. Speech, again, leads the way to death. 


Speech is endowed with immense power. The power and potentialities of speech represent the 
Divine feelings of man. Hence, one has to be very vigilant in speech. 


The mysteries of creation are marvellous. When two persons meet at any time or place, the 
differences between them are patent. Their forms and manners differ. They differ in their 
cleverness and intelligence. Their opinions also vary. Without understanding what underlies 
these differences, the materialist thinkers emphasize the differences. Today, growing numbers of 
intellectuals, ignoring the unity that underlies the diversity, propagate the cult of differences. The 
good persons who realise the unity behind the apparent diversity are dwindling in numbers from 
day to day. This is highly unfortunate. 


Lay stress on unifying factors than differences 


Man's foremost task is to recognise the unity that underlies the multiplicity. If one enquires into 
the matter with a pure and unselfish mind, one will see what is common to all beings. Birth and 
death are common to all men. Hunger and thirst are experienced by every person. These are 
truths that apply to all persons, whether they are destitutes or millionaires, whether they are 
scholars or ignorant men. 


Every human being has a body and a Spirit. Consequently everyone enjoys a certain degree of 
freedom. This is described as "Free Will." Not comprehending the nature of this freedom, men 
tend to stress the differences rather than the unifying factors. 


Man is a combination of two kinds of traits. One is the animal nature. The other is divinity. 
Swayed by evil qualities like lust, anger, greed, delusion, conceit and egoism (the six enemies of 
man), he degrades himself to the level of the animal. On the other side is the one who makes 
right use of the good qualities conferred by God such as intelligence, wisdom and virtue, pursues 
the path of truth and righteousness, engages himself in divine activities and ultimately realise the 
Divine. Man can choose either the path that leads him to animality or to Divinity because the 
potentialities are common. What is important is the path one chooses. "As the thoughts, so the 
outcome." The mind determines the goal one pursues. Hence it is essential to divert the mind on 
the right path and realise the true nobility of human existence. If you have a knife, you can use it 
for slicing vegetables and preparing a good meal. The same knife can be used for taking away 
another person's life, behaving in a demonic manner and ceasing to be human. 


State of the mind depends on nature of thoughts 


Thus, the same mind is responsible for either animal or divine behaviour. In Vedhaanthic 
parlance, this is stated as: "The mind is the cause of human bondage or liberation." The state of 


the mind depends on the nature of the thoughts with which it is filled, even as the smell of a 
paper depends on what is wrapped up in it, flowers, fish or potato chips. When the mind is used 
properly, man achieves fulfilment. 


Men perceive the world in terms of diversity. But, as the scripture declares-"There is only the 
One. The wise call It by many names." People experience heat and cold, joy and sorrow, 
darkness and light, profit and loss. All these are opposite aspects of the same thing and not two 
different things. For instance, darkness helps one to enjoy light. If there were no darkness, light 
would have no value. Darkness is absence of light. Light is absence of darkness. Darkness lends 
value to light. Sorrow contributes to the value of happiness. Likewise, censure has its value. It 
enhances the value of praise. Censure is the stepping stone to praise. The two are inter- 
dependent. 


For all the experiences in the world relating to pleasure and pain, joy and sorrow, the cause is 
one. All the troubles one experiences are stepping-stones to happiness. This is the essence of 
Vedhaantha. 


Hence, for man, the proper spiritual saadhana consists in cultivating equal-mindedness, without 
succumbing to grief or getting elated over a happy event. In daily life, people experience all 
kinds of happiness and distress. The scripture declares: "Treat joy and sorrow, profit and loss 
alike." 


Peace, Truth and the Self 


Embodiments of Divine Love! What is the purpose of your joining the aashram? What is its inner 
meaning? You have come to lead a peaceful, sacred and blissful life dedicated to the Divine. 
This peace does not lie in the external world. Peace is your very form. Truth is equally so. It is 
folly to think that you have to search for Truth somewhere. To know one's Self is Truth. To 
experience the Self within is Peace. Peacelessness is caused by involvement in external 
experiences, ignoring the Self within. 


All things, good and bad, in the world are related to man's actions. Your well-being is based ion 
your conduct. Your wealth is dependent on your actions. You will secure peace and prosperity 
when your conduct is good. This calls for Sahana (forbearance). The Upanishathic prayer says: 
"Let us have forbearance towards each other. Let us rejoice together. Let us all strive together." 
Forbearance is a potent instrument. Dharmaja (the eldest of the Paandavas) was able to score 
many victories with the asthra (weapon) of forbearance. Forbearance is not a sign of weakness 
or cowardice. No other weapon has the power of forbearance. It should not be used only as an 
individual instrument. It has to be experienced collectively also. That is the reason why the 
scripture has commended collective forbearance at the very outset of the spiritual quest. What is 
its inner meaning? "Let us live and move in harmony. Let us grow together. Let us cherish the 
wisdom that we have acquired together. Let us live in complete harmony without any 
misunderstanding." Therefore, do not have any misunderstanding amongst you, All of you 
should live in amity as the children of one mother. 


Human effort is necessary to enjoy God's grace 


God is all-powerful. But, at the same time human effort is also necessary. Without it, man cannot 
enjoy the benefit of God's grace. It is only when you have both Divine grace and human 
endeavour that you can experience bliss, just as you can enjoy the breeze of a fan only when you 
have both a fan and the electrical energy to operate it. 


In the great drama of cosmic life, the Cosmic Director, God, is also an actor. The Cosmic play is 
governed by certain rules and regulations. Because He is the Almighty, God cannot behave in an 
arbitrary manner. His actions have to be in accordance with His role in the cosmic play. There 
are certain rules as to how one should act according to the time, the place and the circumstances. 
He cannot behave according to His whims just because He is all-powerful. For instance, the 
officer who lays .down the rules for controlling traffic cannot disobey them on the ground that he 
is their author. Likewise, the Creator has to conform to the rules laid down by Him for creation. 


Every place is a temple for God 


Not recognizing this truth, men, who are involved in worldly ways, ask questions as to why in 
certain situations God did not use his limitless powers to avert certain untoward events. These 
arise out of a narrow conception of things, without understanding how the Divine operates. They 
are concerned only about themselves and their interests. They ask: "Here is a sacred temple. How 
could something unholy occur in such a place?" They see things from a narrow perspective. 
They do not realise that for God the entire universe is His temple. So, whatever happens 
anywhere, happens in God's temple. The Cosmos is the form of God (Vishnu). God is immanent 
everywhere in the cosmos. When a temple is constructed on a piece of land, if becomes a temple, 
if it is knocked down, it becomes mere land again. For God, every place is a temple. "His feet 
and hands, his mouth and eyes and His ears are everywhere. Encompassing all, He remains 
pervading everything." (Stanza from the Geetha). 


When things are seen with this broad perspective, it will be. recognized that anything can happen 
to anyone at any place or any time. No one is competent to determine where a certain thing 
should take place. Life may end in a town, in water or in a forest. Each one's life will end in the 
place, the manner and at the time prescribed for him. This is inescapable. This is according to the 
operation of Nature's law based on the pairs of opposites in life--the concept of dhvandhva 
(duality). There is a continual conflict between these opposites (pleasure and pain, birth and 
death, etc.) 


Krishna's role as envoy of the Paandavas 


By way of illustration, here is an episode from the Mahaabhaaratha. Krishna was all-powerful. 
He was aware that peace parleys with the Kauravas would be of no avail because of their 
stubbornness. He knew that war was unavoidable. But, in the context of worldly affairs and 
having regard to public opinion, he had to make an effort to promote peace. Consequently, he 
went as an envoy of the Paandavas, made a vain effort to convince the Kauravas to accept a 
peaceful settlement, acted as if his peace mission had failed and told the Paandavas that war was 
inevitable. All these were scenes in his play. 


It is asked, when Dhraupadhi was being humiliated in various ways, when Dhuryodhana was 
unabashedly behaving in a wicked manner in pursuance of his evil intentions, why did not 
Krishna intervene to prevent them? Why did not Krishna destroy the wicked Dhuryodhana? The 
reason is the time had not yet come for it. Bheema was the destined instrument for slaying 
Dhuryodhana. Dhuryodhana had to meet with his death at the hands of Bheema and not of 
Krishna. Krishna was waiting for the appropriate time. 


Therefore, whatever has to happen, how, at what time and in what manner, has been 
predetermined and the mere fact that I am nearby will not serve to alter them. 


In Duryodhana's audience hall, Sishupala was hurling abuses at Krishna. But Krishna waited. 
The appropriate time had to come. Only when the cause, the time and the necessary action are in 
fruitful combination will the event happen. Krishna was patient till the time was ripe. When the 
moment for action came, Krishna put an end to Sishupala. 


The Lord observes His rules and regulations 


The Lord always adheres to His laws, the rules and regulations laid down by Him. Man does not 
always abide by the rules when he faces trouble. But, whatever the situation, the Lord observes 
His rules and regulations. Therefore, no one can determine what limits and laws govern the 
Lord's actions. 


Jesus Christ declared: "I am the Son of God." But when he was crucified, God did not come to 
his rescue. Christ even cried out in anguish: "Oh Father, Why are you not coming to save me?" 
But the Lord acts having regard to the time, place and the circumstances. He accords to each 
person the honour and esteem that is due to him. Christ became a glorious figure in the moment 
of his crucifixion. 


Thus by a certain action, in a certain context, a person achieves name and fame. For instance, d 
pleaded with his mother to be allowed to fight his way through the maze Padhmavyuuha, 
organised by the Kauravas. The mother tried to dissuade him in all possible ways. 


In the last resort, she told him: "The maze is a dreadful trap. The great Bhishma is commanding 
the enemy's hosts. Neither your father Arjuna, nor your uncle Krishna is near. Your wife is 
enceinte. It is not proper in these circumstances for you to embark on this perilous adventure." 
She spoke all this as a mother. 


But Abhimanyu had to speak out from the son's point of view. "Oh Mother, is it right for you to 
ask a lion's cub to refrain from attacking a herd of petty animals? You should have ordered me to 
go and fight them like a warrior and return victorious. Instead, is it not infamous if I am asked to 
keep away from the fight?" Saying so, he left for the battlefield. 


Abhimanyu could not refrain from going to the battlefield. No warrior can fail to respond to the 
challenge for a fight. Death is preferable to the infamy of cowardice. Recognizing the validity of 
Abhimanyu's reasoning, his mother permitted him to go. "Son! You may go. May all the 
goddesses protect you even as they blessed their sons when they set out to fight the demons. 
Above all, let Shri Raama be your protector." All these blessings did not save Abhimanyu. 


The Lord is a witness to all happenings 


Abhimanyu was destined to die in the Padhmavyuuha (the Lotus Maze). Could the blessings 
save him? Because he died in the Padhmavyuuha he found a place in the Paradise reserved for 
heroes. Such fame is not got by dying in an accident or from a disease or old age. For every kind 
of fame, there is a specific form of death. 


Death however, is born together with birth. And death must come in the way it is bound to come. 
The Lord, however, is a witness to all happenings. In some instances, He gives prior 'indications 
and warnings. When these are heeded, the person concerned gets sanctified. When one 
disregards them, he forfeits his sanctity. One, therefore, should do his duty. The Lord's heart is 
boundless. He is concerned about the collective well-being of all. 


Man, however, tends to have a narrow and limited perspective. A narrow outlook can lead only 
to a limited result. God makes no distinction between one group and another. He loves all 


equally. He blesses all. He wishes good for every one. "Let the whole world be happy, is His 
benediction. Whatever people's desires are, they will be fulfilled by God only according to their 
deserts. One cannot go to the Ganga with a small tumbler and hope to get more than a tumblerful 
of Ganga water. But when one acts according to the Lord's command, the capacity of the 
container may get enlarged. 


In the Mahaabhaaratha, Krishna wished to avoid the charge that he had done nothing to prevent 
the great battle. Hence, he chose to go as an ambassador of peace to the Kauravas, though Arjuna 
expostulated with him in strong terms that there was no use in having peace parleys with the 
wicked Kauravas. 


Overcoming calumny manifests glory of the Divine 


The noble and the pure have been subject to calumny in all ages. From ancient times to the 
present, the evil minded have assailed the high-souled men who have sought to serve their 
fellowmen. Such untoward events happen from time to time. Only when these attacks are faced 
and overcome does the glory of the Divine become manifest. No great man has ever achieved 
eminence without overcoming abuse and calumny, trials and tribulations. Gold acquires greater 
brilliance by being heated in the crucible. Likewise a diamond becomes more brilliant when it is 
cut to produce more facets. Trials and tests are stepping stones to fame for good people. 


Devotees should develop firm faith 


The world is steeped in trouble because of the divisible forces which have broken up human 
society on various irrational grounds. Devotees should develop unwavering faith, disregarding 
whatever happens in the world. Those who have pure and unselfish hearts will remain unshaken 
in their faith like an iron ball which remains unmoved even in a storm. But those who are swayed 
by mundane desires will waver like a dried leaf blown by a slight breeze. Let your devotion be 
firm. It is good for you. 


Consider for a moment where you are and for what purpose you have come here. You have come 
to this aashram (hermitage) to fill your hearts with sacred thoughts. Not the aashramites alone, 
but everyone has to develop fraternal feelings and eschew hatred altogether You have to develop 
equal-mindedness and face all situations in life with equanimity and fortitude. Anger, hatred, 
ostentation and pride are animal qualities. Love, kindness, forbearance, compassion and sacrifice 
are natural human qualities. Spirituality does not consist merely in offering worship, doing 
bhajans. It calls for the' elimination of the animal qualities 'In man and striving for the realisation 
of oneness with the Divine. "Adhveshtaa sarva bhuuthaanaam" said Narasimhan in his speech 
earlier. Bear no ill-will towards anybody. 


The means to prolong or shorten one's life lie in one's own hands. Your life-span is prolonged 
when you are full of joy, when you are calm and filled with pure thoughts. When you are filled 
with envy, anger, hatred and conceit your life-span gets shortened. The envious man gets no 
sleep at all. Sleeplessness ruins the health even more than lack of food. Envy torments a man all 
the time. These troubles lead to shortening one's life. As for hatred, the man filled with it cannot 
even bear the sight of his enemy. He suffers from hallucinations which consume his body and 
spirit. 

True devotees should always be smiling 


Anger is the cause of destroying the divine potencies in man. Hatred ruins a man's circulatory 
system. Envy drives the man crazy by depriving him of his sleep. In that condition he cannot 


relish his food. Thus, these three evil qualities--hatred, envy and anger---are wasting diseases. 
When you consider yourselves as devotees of God you should get rid of these three evil qualities. 


Lead peaceful and pure lives. To call yourselves devotees but to look with envy at others is 
totally unbecoming. True devotees should always be smiling. Exude joy always. That joy will 
manifest itself when you experience your oneness with the Divine within you. If you are 
unhappy, it is because you have not experienced the Divine. 


Don't worry about what has happened, what is happening or what-is to come. Let things happen 
in their due course. You have, however, to learn lessons from what has happened. "Thasmaath 
Jaagratha! Jaagratha!" (Therefore, be vigilant, be vigilant). In many matters people tend to be 
careless. Troubles occur from time to time to warn us to be on our guard. Recognise the truth that 
whatever happens is for your good. Realise that even what seems to be bad is for your good. 
Even calumny is a precursor of greater renown. Alongside of censure, praise also grows, as in 
the digging of a pit, when a mound rises by its side. Look up to the good name that is in store for 
you. Do not bother about the trifles that happen. Nor should you blame others or revile at them. 
Be vigilant and foster your good nature. Share your goodness with those around you and 
experience the joy that results from such sharing. 


A good man sees good even in what is bad 


Our young students are tender hearted. As Sainath, (a student who spoke earlier) said, the 
students have been resorting to paaraayanas (reciting scriptures), fasting, prayer and other such 
practices by way of atonement for what they regard as their lapses. They are a prey to all kinds of 
apprehensions and fancies. They should not bother about what is past or what is likely in the 
future. They must concentrate on the present, which is a product of the past and the parent of the 
future. Live in the present and be happy. Entertain only happy thoughts. Behave like brothers. 


Keep way from bad company. Even a noble and a generous hearted warrior like Karna suffered 
grievously because of his association with the evil-minded Shakuni, the wicked Dhuryodhana 
and the malicious Dhussaasana. 


You must cultivate good company. How do you decide who is good and who is bad? Think over 
the matter deeply. The one who sees the bad in what is good is a bad man. The one who sees 
good even in what is bad is a good man. Therefore seek the company of the good alone. 


Man, it is said, is a combination of Truth and Righteousness. Truth is God. Righteousness is 
Divine. Verily there is no greater Righteousness than adherence to Truth. We must live in the 
mansion of Peace, whose foundation is Truth, whose walls are Righteousness and whose roof is 
Love. 


Act according to promptings of your conscience 


Dear Students! You are yourselves the exemplars of your pure hearts and unselfish lives. You 
are feeling sad because of the feeling that a slur has been cast on the good name of the Institute 
students. Don't give any thought to this. When you are free from blame why should you worry? 
In a bag of rice there many be a few grains of paddy. You should not feel that because of the 
misbehaviour of a few, the taint affects all students. Act on the conviction that no blame attaches 
to any of you. Act according to the promptings of your conscience. That will lead you to 
Divinity. 


Carry on the Saadhana which you have taken up. You are bound to earn a good name and bring 
credit to your parents. Even the Institute will be vindicated. As youth, your journey is long. You 
must stick to the path of Truth and lead ideal lives. 


Devotees also should conduct themselves with fortitude. Fear sin. Show gratitude to the Divine. 
When you have fear of sin and love of God, you are bound to observe morality in society. Carry 
on your activities with zeal and faith. 


Svaami will return soon to Prashaanthi Nilayam and fill you all with joy and enthusiasm. Never 
cease to meditate on God. Cultivate a spirit of broadmindedness. Devotees, men and women, 
tend to magnify trifles. Avoid commenting on others. Love all, greet everyone with a smiling 
face, eschew harsh language. A soft answer turneth away wrath. 


Recognise first of all that the Divine is in every one. Understanding others is the key to 
adjustment. 


Discourse in Prashaanthi Mandhir on 21-7-1993. 


In all lands the true sense of values has to be restored, and faith in 
the divinity of man has to be implanted. This is the work for which 
I have come. The world has to be saved from the consequences of 
limited knowledge, and from the blinding pride that precedes a 


fall. 
BABA 


27. Inscrutable are the ways of the Lord 


"Kleem  Krishnaaya, Govindhaaya, Gopeejana-vallabhaaya 
Svaaha!" Kleem means the earth. Krishnaaya means water. 
Govindhaaya means fire. Gopeejana-vallabhaaya refers to air. 
Svaaha refers to ether. Krishna's name encompasses the five 
elements: earth, water, fire, air and ether. This signifies that the 
Cosmos is permeated by the Divine. 


EMBODIMENTS of Divine Love! "The Cosmos is under the sway of the Divine. God is subject 
to the sway of Truth. Truth is subject to the Uthama (noble one). The Noble one is the 
embodiment of the Divine" explains a Sanskrith shloka (verse). 


It is not easy for all to recognise the truth about the Divine. Only the person who can 
comprehend the inner meaning can recognise the nature of the Divine. The Divine, which has 
both an internal and external significance, cannot be understood by exercising the imagination 
alone. 


Every person born on earth should recognise his inherent divinity and make his life meaningful 
by leading a Godly life. This is the primary goal of life. Only that person has redeemed his life 
who recognises every moment, the Divine in every atom and in every cell and who inspires in 
others this consciousness about the Divine. It is not enough to secure a vision of the Divine. One 
has not only to lead a Godly life himself but help others to live likewise. This is the supreme 
purpose of human existence. 


Man does not devote any thought as to how he should make his life meaningful. The human 
heart is the seat of the Divine. Every devotee should adore the Lord seated in the heart. The 
spiritual aspirant should fill his heart with divine feelings and lead a life of fulfilment. 


The Chathaka bird and gopikas 


You have the example of the Chaathaka bird. It is in continuous search of pure rain-drops falling 
from clouds. There is no lack of water on the earth. But the Chaathaka bird desires only the pure 
unsullied rain drops falling from a cloud and will go through any amount of trouble to secure 
them. It has no use for any other kind of water associated with the earth. Likewise, the true 
saadhaka, devotee or disciple, will only desire to secure the nectarine love of the Lord and for its 
sake will be prepared to go through any trouble or sacrifice. 


The Gopikas exemplified such deep devotion in their love for the Lord. They offered all they had 
in the service of the Lord and performed every act as an offering to the Divine. The term "Gopi" 
is derived from the word "Gup". The term "go" means the Vedhas. It has another meaning, "the 
earth." It also refers to the cow. The Gopikas used to chant the Vedhas. They protected the cows. 
They sanctified the earth. Not understanding this sublime aspect of their nature, people have 
misrepresented them in various ways, regarding them as ordinary women, Even their devotion 
was misconstrued because of the failure to understand the true nature of their love for the Lord. 
On account of their narrow-mindedness, these critics could not grasp the deep significance of the 
Gopikas' devotion. 


God is the master of eight-petalled Hridhaya Kamala 


In every human being, there are what are known as the Shatchakras (the six centres of life 
energy). Among them, two are important. One is the Hridhaya Chakra the Chakra relating to the 
heart. The other is the Sahasraara Chakra--the Chakra relaiting to the head. The Hridhaya 
Chakra is described in Vedhaanthik parlance as Hridhaya Kamala (the Lotus of the Heart). This 
"lotus" has eight petals. Every petal is called Prakrithi (Nature). All the eight petals are under the 
sway of the Lord. This means that God is the Adhipathi (master) of the eight petals. Because 
Krishna is the Pathi (husband) of these eight petals, he is said to have eight "Queens," according 
to the scriptural text. Those who did not understand the esoteric meaning of all this, described 
Krishna as having eight queens and as having sported with 16000 Gopikas. The real meaning of 
the reference to Krishna's "eight queens" is that he is the Lord of the lotus of the human heart. As 
such, he holds sway over the heart. When this is rightly understood, the supreme greatness of the 
Divine will be apparent. 


The symbolic attributes of the Divine 


God is called in His Cosmic form as Vishnu, who permeates everything in the cosmos. God is 
the cause and the cosmos is the effect. You must try to understand the various attributes of the 
Lord. Vishnu is depicted as having a conch in one hand and a wheel in another. In a third hand 
he carries a mace and in the fourth a lotus. What is the esoteric significance of all this? The 
conch is a symbol of Sound. Hence, God is described as the embodiment of Sound. The Chakra 
(wheel) symbolises Kaalachakra (the Wheel of Time). The Lord is the master of Time and 
Sound. The mace signifies strength or power. This means that the Lord holds in his hand the 
strength of all beings. The lotus in the Lord's hand is a symbol of the heart. This means that the 
Lord holds in His hand the hearts of all beings. Because the symbolism of these attributes of the 
Divine was not properly explained by the commentators on the scriptures, a great deal of 
misunderstanding and confusion came to prevail in later years. 


As regards the Sahasraara Chakra in the head of the human body, it is a thousand-petalled lotus, 
each petal having sixteen Kalaas (phases). There are thus 16000 kalaas in the Sahasraara. These 
phases were symbolically described as the wives of the Lord. The inner meaning of these 
expressions should be properly understood. 


Going only by the superficial and literal meaning of these terms, the nature of the Divine is 
misconstrued and misinterpreted. 


The Lord confers freedom 


It is necessary to get at the inner meaning of what is said in the Raamaayana, the Bhaagavatha or 
the Bible or any other scriptural text. The good is liable to be misunderstood and construed in 
perverse ways. There is need for protecting carefully what is good and sacred. A beautiful parrot 
is kept in a cage. No one bothers to safeguard the crow. Likewise, the wicked are without 
restraint. Only the good are subject to restraints, ordeals, tests and difficulties. 


Krishna was born on Ashtami (the eighth day of the Lunar month). From the moment of birth, He 
was subject to troubles. But whoever cherished the name of the Lord in the heart was free from 
bondage. Vasudeva was a prisoner. But the moment Dhevaki placed the infant Krishna on her 
husband's head, he became free. The moment the Lord touched his head, Vasudeva's fetters 
dropped away. As long as he carried Krishna on his head and till he deposited the child in 
Repalle, he was free. He placed the child in Yasoda's house. Then he returned to his prison and 


became bound as before. What is the meaning of this episode? As long as Divine thoughts fill 
our minds, there is no bondage. But when you give up the Lord, you get bound in every way. 


There are deep inner meanings for the actions of the Lord. Kamsa tried every conceivable means 
to .kill Krishna. But the Lord is beyond the grasp of anyone. Small-minded persons, consumed 
by hatred and jealousy, may entertain such designs. But these evil plans only recoil on the 
plotters and can cause no harm to God. They will only enhance His, glory 


The foes of Krishna 


There were reasons for Kamsa's hatred. An ethereal voice had declared that Kamsa would meet 
with his death at the hands of the eighth child of Dhevaki. Out of the selfish desire to save his 
own life, Kamsa sought to do away with Krishna by various means. All his efforts were of no 
avail. Kamsa carried out a slaughter of the children in Repalle in the hope of killing Krishna. 
Krishna eluded his grasp. A man's intellect turns crazy when he is facing destruction. Because of 
his wicked actions, Kamsa came to a disastrous end. 


This, however, is not the end of the story. Two other wicked men, Sishupala and Dhanthavkra, 
rose against Krishna. After these two had been slain by Krishna, Jaraasandha came forward. 
Many demons in human form sought to eliminate Krishna. They all failed utterly. They brought 
disaster upon themselves. Thus, from aeon to aeon, the Divine is confronted with such hostile 
elements. Happiness cannot be got without going through difficulties. Fame is the product of 
blame. 


Such incidents happen in the life of every Avathaar and in every age. They serve to promote the 
greatness of the Avathaar and not to tarnish it. 


Is it possible for any ordinary individual to make his appearance simultaneously in numerous 
different places? If it is stated that the same person appeared simultaneously in the homes of 
16000 Gopikas, not only will people today disbelieve in it, but many will ridicule it. But this is 
the reaction of petty, unthinking people, who have no spirit of enquiry. If one enquires into the 
truth, it will be seen that even in modem times such a phenomenon is taking place. The broadcast 
of music programme from Delhi is heard in millions of homes in its completeness, all at the same 
time in a myriad different places. A person speaking on T.V. can be seen in a million homes. If a 
man made yanthra (contrivance) can have such a far-reaching power, why should it not be 
possible for the power of manthra to reach millions simultaneously? 


How God's grace operates 


The image of Krishna could appear in the hearts of the Gopis, though they were far away from 
Him. What is necessary is to purify the heart. The image of the Divine will not be reflected in an 
impure heart. There is no limit to the power of the Divine. Only the small-minded have limited 
power. God alone knows to whom, in what circumstances, at what time, to what extent and in 
what form His grace should be showered. 


For example, take the case of Dhraupadhi. In his vast audience-hall Dhuryodhana was inflicting 
humiliation on Dhraupadhi. Unknown and unseen by anyone, Krishna was giving to Dhraupadhi 
an endless number of saris. How are ordinary persons likely to view the situation? They might 
ask: "How is Krishna tolerating this kind of disrobing of Dhraupadhi? Why does he not reduce 
Dhuryodhana to ashes that very moment? Why does He not put an end to his life? When the 
devotees are in agony, should the Divine merely look on?" The ignorant may tend to react in this 
fashion. 


But the Divine, who is the embodiment of peace, love and truth, has to take note of Kaarana, 
Kaarya and Karthavya (the cause, the remedy and the task to be done). In the great cosmic 
drama, the Lord is also an actor. The time should be ripe for the role He has to play in a 
particular sequence of events. His action should be appropriate to His role. He cannot act other- 
wise. 


God's role in the great cosmic drama 


For instance, if Krishna decided to kill Dhuryodhana at the moment of Draupadi's humiliation, 
He would be going against His role in the play. He has to play His specific part. Krishna knew 
that Dhuryodhana's end lay in the hands of Bheema and not in His. It would be against his 
dharma if he did what Bheema had to do. Bheema alone should slay Dhuryodhana with his 
mace. This is the law of creation. Krishna waited for the ordained event. 


Likewise, in various situations, the Lord remains as a witness. Is the Lord powerless or is the 
devotee's prayer ineffective? This sort of doubt arose once in the mind of saint Thyaagaraaja. d 
elder brother subjected him to many ordeals. Resenting the action of Thyaagaraaja in rejecting 
the treasures sent by the ruler of Thanjavur to the saint, the elder brother cast into the river the 
idols of Raama and others worshipped by him. Thyaagaraaja made a frantic search for the 
missing idols. Although a great devotee, Thyaagaraaja felt frustrated. He asked the Lord, "Oh 
Raama! why are you subjecting me to these difficulties? Is it because my devotion has 
weakened? Or has your power declined?" Thyaagaraaja felt that his devotion had not diminished. 
So Raama's power must have weakened. But, pondering over it further, he realised that Raama's 
strength remained undiminished. He began to sing a song in praise of Raama's prowess. 
"Without Raama's power, could a monkey have been able to cross the ocean? Or would the 
Goddess of wealth have chosen to be his consort? Or Lakshmana serve him? Or the supremely 
intelligent Bharatha revel in beholding him and worshipping him?" Thyaagaraaja ecstatically 
extolled the infinite prowess of Raama and blamed his own ignorance for having doubts about 
Raama. 


Many devotees, out of their worldly pre-occupations and narrow-mindedness, tend to develop 
doubts about the Lord. The Lord, however, always remains at the same supreme level. He is not 
elated by praise or depressed by censure. The Lord is unchanging. 


Lord's concern for the well-being of the world 


The Divine, therefore, has to be viewed from a wide perspective. Whatever the Lord does is for 
the well-being of the world. His sole concern is the welfare of the world. 


It was this which made Bhaarath declare from ancient times, "Let all the world's people be 
happy." From early times Bhaarath held forth great ideals to all other countries in the realms of 
ethics and spirituality. With the passage of time, faith in these ideals has waned. Man today is 
plagued by scepticism. He is racked by doubts. The combination of these two is the cause of all 
troubles. 


In the Mahaabhaaratha, Shakuni represents Anumaana (doubt). Kama symbolises Avishvaasam 
(lack of faith). When these two come together, Asuuya (envy) in the form of Dhuryodhana 
emerges. Envy is accompanied by wickedness in the form of Dhussaasana. When the four came 
together, the fate of the Kauravas was sealed. The Kauravas represent bad thoughts, bad 
intentions, bad actions and bad attachments. 


Krishna clearly foresaw the fate of the Kauravas long before the Kurukshethra war. He told 
Arjuna: "Get up. Be prepared for war Justice will prevail. Selfishness will suffer disaster. This is 
the Dharma of every age. The parents of these wicked ones will have none of their children left 
to offer them the last rites. That is the decree of fate." Krishna concluded His call to Arjuna with 
the declaration that there has to be a downpour of arrows to ensure world peace after the wicked 
Kama, Shakuni and others had been destroyed in the fires of hate stirred up by them. 


Over the ages, the wicked have behaved in the manner of the Kauravas and have met with the 
fate they deserved. There is no escape for anyone from the consequences of his actions. Death 
may come at any time,, in any place, in any form. No one can tell time or manner of anyone's 
death. It is pre-ordained. There is no meaning in analyzing the pros and cons of such happenings. 
Even good devotees sometimes develop doubts and argue over trifles. 


How anger reduces one's strength 


Once Krishna set out to kill Jaraasandha. But whenever Jaraasandha came out of his city to fight 
Krishna, the latter would flee from the battlefield. Was Krishna afraid of jaraasandha? Not at all. 
But Krishna wanted to find out the appropriate means of slaying Jaraasandha. Krishna had a 
strategy. Each time Krishna went to challenge Jaraasandha, he would get enraged. He would 
come out to pursue Krishna. Krishna would go on retreating. By repeating these tactics several 
times, Jaraasandha was made to expend his strength in futile rage. 


A man's strength is considerably reduced by his anger. A man's life-span is cut to pieces by the 
shears of envy, anger and hatred. Envy is the main cause of shortening a man's life; when a man 
gets angry, his whole body trembles. His blood gets heated. It takes three months for the blood to 
get cool again. One moment of anger may consume the energy got from six months of eating. 
This is the way anger debilitates a person. By systematically weakening Jaraasandha in this way, 
ultimately Krishna managed to slay him. 


The Lord is not visible to the non-believer 


Consider the cases of Hiranyaaksha and Hiranyakashipu. They were not ordinary men. They 
were the incarnations of Jaya and Vijaya, the divine guards at the gate of the Lord's mansion (in 
Vaikunta). Hiranyakashipu developed bitter hatred towards Vishnu as the slayer of his brother, 
Hiranyaaksha. He searched for Vishnu in every conceivable place--in the ocean, deep in the earth 
and in the sky--but could not find Him. Had Vishnu run away from Hiranyakashipu out of fear? 
No. He was omnipresent. But He could not proclaim it Himself. He made Hiranyakashipu's son 
Prahlaadha declare it. He asked Prahlaadha: "You simpleton! You go on praising Hari. Where is 
that Hari? Show him to me. I have explored every particle of the Universe. I have not found him. 
Hence I am the Lord whom you should worship." Prahlaadha replied: "How can I worship the 
enemy of Hari? Hari is everywhere." "Can you show Him?" asked his father. "Certainly," replied 
Prahlaadha. "Is he in that pillar?" "Yes, he is," said Prahlaadha. The Lord came out of the pillar 
to confirm his devotee's faith. Prahlaadha had affirmed the omnipresence of the Lord and the 
Lord testified to the truth of his belief. The Lord is not visible to the non-believer. 


Lord observes the rules of the Cosmic game 


Whether the Lord makes his presence felt in certain situations or not should not be judged by 
narrow human considerations. The Lord will reveal His powers only at the appropriate moment, 
when the time is ripe. Just as a fruit takes time to ripen, God also bides his time. It is improper to 
speculate on the nature of the Divine's actions. Even the omnipotent and omniscient Lord has to 


respect the time factor. He has to observe the rules of the Cosmic game. He cannot violate His 
own rules and regulations even as a traffic authority cannot transgress the traffic rules made by 
him. 


For instance, God has endowed a lamp with the power to shed light and the wind with the power 
to blow out the lamp. When a lamp is exposed to the wind, the Lord will not direct the wind not 
to blow out the lamp. Everything in creation has to act according to the laws of its existence. The 
five elements are governed by laws which they have to observe. 


The Bhaagavatha relates many episodes which give rise to questions. The answers to these 
questions may vary according to the understanding of the persons concerned. But no one can 
fully comprehended the ways of the Lord. Whatever is destined to happen must happen. No one 
is competent to ask of God why he has not prevented something. God alone can decide this 
matter. 


Few can account for the actions of the Lord. For five thousand years, men have been exploring 
every kind of phenomena in this Universe. But no one has been able to unravel the mystery of 
the Divine. God is all-powerful, all-knowing and all-pervasive. But whatever happens in the 
Universe is governed by cosmic laws. Their working cannot be easily understood. That is why a 
devotee said: "Is it possible, Oh Krishna, to recognise your mystery? You are subtler than the 
atom and vaster than the vastest thing in creation. You are present in the 84 lakhs of species in 
the Universe and permeate every place in the cosmos. You are present in the good as well as the 
wicked and make them play their respective roles. You .are in the accuser and in the accused. 
How can anyone understand your Divine mystery?" 


When men declare their belief in the idea that God is one, irrespective of differences in names, 
they should act upto their belief by developing equal-mindedness towards everyone. This is the 
cardinal principle of Bhaaratheeya culture: to treat joy and sorrow, loss and gain with equal 
serenity. 


Submitting to God's will leads to bliss 


Realise that it is not possible to comprehend fully the ways of the Divine. Strengthen your faith 
in God, carry out the Lord's injunctions, experience the bliss derived therefrom and redeem your 
lives. Do not indulge in futile speculation or controversy. All are aspects of the Divine. Whatever 
happens is for your good. Fill your hearts with this conviction. Consider everything as coming 
from God for your good. God knows what is good for you even as a loving mother knows what a 
child needs. No one can expect to receive whatever he prays for, because in his ignorance he 
may ask for what is not good for him. The wise man will not seek anything from God, but leave 
everything to God. 


Chaithanya's firm faith in the will of the Divine 


Chaithanya exemplified this quality of unquestioning faith in the will of the Divine. When he 
was going about in his native village Navadhweep, chanting the name of Krishna, some envious 
persons attacked him and took away the cymbals from his hands. Chaithanya accepted the loss as 
a sign of grace from Krishna and continued singing, using his hands for clapping. He said; "Oh 
Lord! I am using these hands you have given to me for clapping, while singing your praise. I can 
do without the cymbals." The miscreants then bound his hands to prevent him from clapping. 
Chaithanya exclaimed: "Lord! I shall keep the rhythm of my chanting with. my voice. Your love 


will be my tune. I know no yoga. I have done no penance. I do not care for the treasures of the 
world. My greatest and only wealth is your love. Confer this wealth on me." 


Of what avail are japa. and penance without the love of the Lord? They are like preparing an 
excellent food in an untinned vessel. The entire food gets poisoned. Likewise, one may practise 
the nine forms of devotion, but without love of God in the heart, they are useless. Chaithanya 
declared. "Oh Lord! I want your love alone and nothing else." 


At his birth, the name given to Chaithanya was Gauraanga, because of his fair complexion. But 
as he was always chanting the name "Krishna, Krishna," he got the popular name "Krishna 
Chaithanya" (one who was immersed in Krishna consciousness). The moment he repeated 
Krishna's name he used to lose his consciousness. 


In this manner, there are many great ones who have the names given to them at birth and the 
names by which they get known later on. The lives of these great ones should be regarded as 
ideals for the rest of mankind. 


Strive continually to develop Divine Love 


Embodiments of Divine Love! It is not enough if you merely celebrate this day as a festive 
occasion because it is Krishna's birthday. Krishna was the very embodiment of love. He attracted 
every one by His love. He melted the hearts of one and all. He made the lives of many 
meaningful. Love was at the root of all He did. 


All must strive continually to develop love. In earlier ages, men had fear of sin. The Lord's 
command was: Fear sin, love the Lord. Unfortunately, today in the Kali Yuga (the present age of 
discord), people love sin and abhor God. Why should anyone fear God? Those, who ought to be 
afraid to commit sin, are having fear of God. Instead of loving God, people are loving sin. This is 
the reversal of what ought to prevail. People are leading lives opposed to what is proper. 


The Chaathaka bird will not shrink from being near a cloud to catch the fresh raindrops even if 
there are dreadful thunder and blinding lightning. It prays constantly for the pure unsullied 
raindrops. This is the attitude saadhakas should cultivate today. They must be prepared to face 
any kind of censure, criticism, trouble or obstacle. They should adhere to their goal regardless of 
anything. The Gopikas exemplified this type of devotion. They had no fear of any threats or 
abuse. They were totally unaffected. 


Love God and fear none 


Hence, stick to your truth. Love God and fear none. Only the guilty need fear. Why fear when 
you are innocent? Without any fear in your hearts, meditate on God. This is the royal road to the 
Divine in the Kali Yuga. 


There is no protector like the Divine. This was demonstrated in the case of Dhraupadhi, when 
none of her valiant husbands or others came to her rescue and Krishna alone saved her from 
humiliation. 


The Lord alone is the saviour of the helpless and the forlorn. Do not waver in your faith in the 
Lord in any circumstance. Go ahead with your tasks with faith and determination. 


God tests people in many ways. They are intended only to promote your spiritual progress. None 
can affect God in any way. Why lose your faith in Him? They are signs of weakness. Give no 
room for such unfortunate doubts. Strengthen your faith and realise God by your devotion. 


Discourse in the Sai Ramesh Mandap, Brindhaavan on 10-8-1993, Gokulaashtami Day. 


28. Bhaarath : then and now 


What greater misfortune can there be 
Than the failure of Bhaaratheeyas to know 
The unique greatness and sacredness 

Of Bhaarath's ancient culture? 


EMBODIMENTS of Divine Aathma! In ancient times, the spiritual culture of Bhaarath spread the 
message of peace and harmony to various countries in the world. Then, as well as now, the 
Aryan tradition has proclaimed to the world the benediction: "Lokaas-samasthaas-sukhino 
bhavanthoo!" (Let all the world be happy!). This tradition was upheld even at the sacrifice of 
their lives by the ancient kings, the savants and the noble women of the land. 


Today the rulers as well as the citizens are caught up in worldly concerns and are forgetting this 
great cultural heritage. In the sphere of the physical and the material, man has achieved many 
significant victories. But he has not made the slightest progress in the fields of morality, 
spirituality and wisdom. What is the reason? It is the deep-rooted selfishness in human beings. 


Reign of selfishness in today's world 


All of man's thoughts, desires and actions are saturated with selfishness. Man today has become 
a puppet in the hands of selfishness. Whatever object one desires, he does not seek it for its own 
sake. When he loves anyone, it is not for that person's sake. He loves the other for selfish 
reasons. 


Those who have not understood the sacredness of Bhaaratheeya culture cannot realise the sacred 
nature of love. The ancient Bhaaratheeyas were votaries of truth and practioners of 
righteousness. They stood for justice. Today the people have forgotten this legacy. This is the 
calamitous influence of Time. It is only when, spiritually and morally, the character of the nation 
is developed will Bhaaratheeya culture come into its own. 


Our youth today are unable to appreciate the value of this ancient culture because its values are 
not being properly propagated among the people. With the waning of the hold of this culture on 
the people, humanness itself is being undermined. If human values are not upheld, of what use is 
the human birth? As a human being, a man should manifest human values. 


Moreover, human beings can realise their inherent divinity only when they recognise the unity 
that underlies the apparent diversity. There are today many intellectuals who propagate divisive 
tendencies, but there are very few good men engaged in promoting unity. 


All men belong to one human family 


Despite differences in names and forms, in food habits and in speech, all men belong to one 
human family, of which God is the Father. Not realising this truth, men are victims of divisive 
forces. 


Every man has to develop the divine faculties in him. God is the embodiment of Love. Love is 
His nature. Such sacred love is in every man. Even as God is manifesting to the world His 
selfless love, every man should manifest his unselfish love to everyone. Man is not apart from 
God. The Lord has declared in the Geetha: "Every human being in the world is a fragment of My 


Eternal Self." This implied that man is not an aspect of Nature or of the physical elements. He is 
Divine in spirit. This is the repeated declaration of the Lord. 


The ancient sages described this Divine Love as Aathmavaan, implying that Love is the form of 
the Divine. This is called Svashakthi, meaning the power of the Aathma. Today people are 
oblivious to this Aathmik power. Relying on the strength of physical and the material world, men 
are forgetting the boundless power of the Aathma. The physical body is perishable. Only Dhehi 
(the indwelling Spirit) is Divine. 


Today, there is great need for propagating the doctrine of Love. Divine love is beyond 
comprehension by the mind or description by words. Love is the very form of Brahman (the 
Absolute). When men forget love, are they not forgetting the Divine Itself? 


People speak about freedom, calling it Svechcha. What is this Svechcha? Knowledge of 
Brahman is Svechcha. It is Absolute Bliss--Brahmaanandham. Instead of seeking this kind of 
spiritual freedom, people today are going after freedom in worldly terms. In the place of the 
pure, sacred, eternal Divine Love, men are lost in transient and momentary attachments. 


Need for people to cultivate good thoughts 


The Divine cannot be realised through wealth, scholarship or by any other means except love. 
This sacred love is being fragmented in many ways out of worldly attachments and is being 
treated as a trivial thing. This is the manner in which people today reject truth and welcome 
falsehood and go afar to consume alcoholic drinks while refusing wholesome milk and curds 
offered to them at their doorstep. It is the bad feelings within them which make them behave in 
this way. Hence, there is great need for people to cultivate good thoughts and good feelings. 


Love can be promoted only by the grace of God's love. The world has no dearth of wealthy men, 
intelligent men, or powerful men, but there are few spiritually realised persons. What is it that 
great emperors like Harishchandhra, Nala and Raama took with them when they left the world? 
What is in store for the men of wealth and power today? What is it that they will take with them? 
Nothing. God alone is the eternal truth that will accompany the lover of God. 


Bhaaratheeyas got their freedom in 1947, but did not achieve unity. True education consists in 
teaching people to live in peace and harmony with a feeling of common fellowship. Life today is 
riddled with differences and discord. Hatred reigns everywhere. Of what use is our Svathanthram 
(freedom)? Sva-than-thram really means freedom of the Spirit (Sva). It is not related to the 
physical. People speak about "Independence." What is this Independence? It was meant to 
convey the idea that freedom means not depending on any outsider. But are we really self-reliant 
today? We are dependent on many in several respects. How can we claim we are independent 
when we are dependent on others? There is only one difference between the old British days and 
now. In those days we used to accuse the white men of oppressing the coloured natives. Today 
the natives are oppressing the native population. Did we achieve freedom only to inflict suffering 
on ourselves through our own men? Is it to besmirch our culture that we got our freedom? 


Spiritual freedom is the true freedom 


We must certainly safeguard our freedom. But essentially that freedom is spiritual freedom. Any 
other kind of freedom is not freedom at all. 


Youth today have no sense of patriotism. In the pre-independence days, many young men made 
great sacrifices for the sake of freedom. This was because the leaders of those days also made 


great sacrifices for freedom and inspired the youth to do likewise. However, leaders today talk in 
one way and act in another way. They deliver lectures on Bhaaratheeya nationalism. The 
moment they get down from the stage, they talk about caste and creed and promote divisions 
among the people. How, then, can youth develop a genuine feeling of nationalism? The result is 
there is hardly any sense of national love and pride among the young people. 


Dear students! Whatever anyone may say, regard this country as the land of your birth. It is your 
Motherland. It is your own native land. Love of the country must get firmly rooted in our young 
persons. You have to take a firm resolve to protect your Motherland. 


Be prepared to sacrifice yourselves for your Motherland 


Once, Aurobindo asked a group of students in Calcutta: "For what purpose are you studying? If 
you are going to make use of your education for the benefit of the nation pursue your studies. 
Otherwise, you better burn your books. If you are studying only out of selfish motives, the 
education is of no value at all. If you are intent only on earning a living, you may as well beg 
from door to door. You must be prepared to sacrifice yourselves for your Motherland." 


"Breathes there the man with soul so dead 
who never to himself has said' 

This is my Motherland; this is my mother-tongue. 
To love my country is my religion." 


A youth who is not prepared to sacrifice his life for his country is as good as dead. Service to the 
nation is the greatest thing one can think of. All religious practices are worthless without service 
to one's fellowmen. Without the spirit of service, holding any udhyoga (office or position) is 
meaningless. Udhyoga (official position) must stem from Yoga (realisation of the Divine). 


True Bhaaratheeya culture consists in developing a spirit of service, with a feeling of all- 
embracing love. A man can get on without many things in life. But he cannot get on without 
love. Love is at the root of all action. This love is Divine. It is unchanging, pure and unsullied. It 
is unaffected by joy or sorrow, loss or gain. Feeling elated in a moment of joy and getting 
depressed in a moment of grief is the mark of worldly love. 


Divine love is spiritual and is infinitely precious. It is not fickle and changing from moment to 
moment. One who is immersed in the ocean of Divine love will have no words to express its 
greatness and sweetness. He will speak in the language of silence. He will keep away from idle 
talk or debate. Those who experience the bliss of Divine love will be filled with an inner joy, 
whatever the external troubles they may encounter. 


Eliminate pollution of air by Naamasmarana 


It is only when we cultivate this kind of love that we can claim to have achieved real freedom. 
Today there is no unity in the country. In its absence, enmity has taken its place. Where there is 
enmity; there is no purity. Today, the air is polluted. Even the sound vibrations in the ether, air, 
fire, water and earth are polluted. How are they to be purified? Everyone should purify and 
sanctify the atmosphere by doing Naamasmarana (chanting the name of the Lord). Every sound 
emanating from man enters into the radio waves in the atmosphere and gets permanently 
recorded. If the sound waves in the world today are polluted, it is because of the unsacred words, 


uttered by people. By chanting the name of the Lord, the. sound waves in the atmosphere must 
be sanctified. 


Thereby, these waves can bring about a great transformation. The world, it is said, can be 
destroyed by an atomic bomb. Sacred sound waves can achieve greater things for the world. 
They can create a new world. 


The power of Consciousness is all-pervading 


Man has to understand the power of three kinds of potencies: Ichcha-Shakthi, Jnaana-Shakthi 
and Kriya-Shakthi. Ichcha Shakthi (the power of the will) should combine with electrical energy. 
There is, for instance, an aura round My thumb. If this energy were not in the body, it cannot 
move at all. This is called Chaithanya (the power of Consciousness). 


This Consciousness is all-pervading. From this Consciousness, every individual derives what is 
called Conscience. This Conscience, when it functions through the sense organs, brings about the 
conscious state. All actions belong to the conscious state. All functions of the mind are related to 
the Conscience. All that is done through Buddhi (intellect) is related to Chaithanya 
(Consciousness). 


The Consciousness that is all-pervading is present in the human body from top to toe. In spite of 
the presence of this Consciousness, men are misusing it or making no use of it. Just as barely 2 
percent of. the energy coming from the sun is used by the world, hardly a minute fraction of the 
power of the Divine Consciousness in man is being properly used. Make use of it to help society. 
Do not live only for your own sake. When you use your energies in the service of society, the 
Divine power in you gets surcharged. It will not diminish to the slightest extent. 


Consider every human being as the embodiment of the eternal Divine. The very name Nara for 
man means that his essence is imperishable. It also means he is the embodiment of the Aathma. 
Born as the immortal Spirit, if 'man leads the. life of an animal, there can be nothing more 
disgraceful. 


"Svathanthram" means freedom of the spirit 


We celebrate what we call our Svathanthram--the freedom of the Spirit (Svaa). Svathanthram 
relates to external freedom. Svathanthram is concerned with inner freedom. It is through the 
internal that we enjoy the external freedom. Hence, the first requisite is purity of the heart. If the 
heart is pure, all that you think and do will be pure, just as water from a tank filled with pure 
water will be pure in any tap. If your thoughts and actions are impure, you are the cause of their 
impurity because you have polluted your heart. You are the cause of your joy and sorrow. Do not 
blame others for your troubles. It is a sin. Blame yourself for your condition. Self-punishment is 
as important as Self-Realization. Through self-punishment you get self-satisfaction, which 
promotes self-sacrifice. That is the prelude to Self-Realization. 


You must engage yourself in a constant process of self-enquiry into determine whether you are 
right or wrong. This is a spiritual exercise. It enables you to understand the true nature of 
freedom, namely, harmony in thought, word and action. Essentially freedom consists in 
maintaining complete accordance between thought, word and deed. 


It is supremely important to have good feelings. One ends his life in a good way if he entertains 
always good feelings. Those who are racked by doubts, and suspicions are ultimately a prey to 


their own doubts. It should be realised that death is more important than birth. The manner of 
one's death indicates the way he lived. 


Therefore, fill your hearts and minds with good feelings and thoughts. What is good? It is love 
alone. Eschew hatred, envy and other vices. Fill your hearts with love. Students today tend to fill 
their minds with all sorts of stuff about the world. What is necessary is to fill the heart with love 
and the head with wisdom. Engage the hands in service. This alone will manifest the significance 
of human existence. 


Consider your body as a home 


To lead a peaceful life, you should bear no ill-will towards others. Cultivate unity as the key to 
peace in the home or outside. Consider your body as a home. The mind, the tongue and the limbs 
are like members of a family. If they all function harmoniously, there will be peace. But if the 
three are at variance with each other, there can only be discord and disharmony. Therefore, in 
unity lies strength, peace and success. 


This was the lesson that Dharmaja taught when he declared that as against the rest of the world, 
they were 105 (the five Paandava brothers and the 100 Kaurava brothers), but when they had. 
internal differences, they were five against hundred. When the country is faced with an external 
threat, all parties should come together. They should not divide the country. You may fight 
among yourselves tooth and nail, but when the nation is in peril, you should act as one. You must 
protect the security and integrity of the nation. That is the way to cherish our freedom. 
Unfortunately, today, this unity is lacking. There is too much struggle for the loaves and fishes of 
office. How can the nation progress in this situation? The parties that have mushroomed in the 
country are tearing the nation to pieces. 


This is utterly wrong. You must all live in unity. All are children of Bhaarath. All are equally 
entitled to a share in the patrimony. You have to earn your right to this patrimony by your love 
for the country. Without earning the right, people are fighting over the spoils. They are not 
entitled to this right. 


Pray for the welfare of the nation and the world 


Dear students and devotees! Cultivate love and cherish divine feelings and pray for the welfare 
of the nation and the world. Bhaarath has always upheld the concept of universal well-being. All 
the five hundred odd crores of human beings in the world are the children of one God. Don't 
foster narrow regional loyalties. The world is one vast mansion. Countries like America, Russia, 
India are rooms in that mansion. The national barriers are like walls. Once the barriers are 
removed, humanity will be one family. National attachments should be got rid of. Differences of 
race and religion should go. Then alone will peace reign on earth. Therefore, develop love. 


Discourse in the Sai Ramesh Mandap, Brindhaavan, on 15-8-1993. 


My glory is spread daily through those who call themselves My 
Bhakthas. Your virtue, your self-control, your detachment, your 
faith and your steadfastness are the signs by which people read of 
My Glory. 


BABA 


29. A Righteous emperor and Virtuous subjects 


Anapekshah Shuchir-Dhakshah 
Udhaaseeno Gathavyathah 
Sarvaarambha Parithyaagee 

Yo Madhbhakthah Sa Me Priyah. 


ANAPEKSHAH means one who is free from any kind of Apeksha (desire or expectation). Is it 
possible in this vast world for any man to be free from Apeksha? This is not possible. Some 
things may be attractive to some persons and some high aims may interest others. The objects 
that are desired are sensual pleasures and comforts and things of the world. The Sreshtha (higher 
aims) relate to the non-sensual, non-physical and ultramundane. Almost all desires fall into one 
or other of these two categories. How, then, is it possible to be rid of both kinds of desires? This 
is possible. 


In the Bhagavath Geetha, the Lord has declared that he is present in all righteous actions. 
Therefore, those who perform righteous actions can develop anapeksha (desirelessness). This 
means that when a man performs all actions as offerings to the Lord, they become anapeksha 
(desireless actions). The Lord is one who, from within, makes a person act, speak, listen, see and 
do many other actions. He is the doer and the enjoyer. If a person performs all actions with the 
conviction that the Indwelling Lord is the real Doer, then his actions become desireless. Hence 
every saadhak should regard his actions as offerings to the Divine. 


Shuchih: This means purity. This term does not merely refer to the external cleanliness of the 
physical body. Saadhakas need internal purity also. What are the implications of inner purity? 
All the actions a man does issue from internal impulses and not from external forces. They are a 
reflection of his inner being. It is only when man has pure feelings within him that his actions 
can be pure. When he is polluted within, all his actions will be impure. 


How is purity in speech achieved? 


How are the internal impulses to be purified? These relate to the mind, speech and the body. Of 
the three, speech is the most important. How is purity in speech to be achieved? 
"Anudhvegakaram Vaakyam Sathyam privahitham cha yath," says the Geetha. Every word you 
utter should be free from Anudhvegakaram (causing excitement or agitation). It should be 
Sathyam (true) and priyam (pleasing). There are four factors which account for the pollution of 
the tongue. One is, uttering falsehood; two, excessive talking; three, carrying tales against others; 
four, abuse or criticism of others. The tongue is prone to indulge in these four types of offences 
in speech. Unfortunately, in this Kali age, all these four are rampant. Untruth has become 
ubiquitous. People freely indulge in slandering others. Tale-bearing goes on. Indulgence in 
loquacity is widespread. It is only when one gets rid of these four evil tendencies can his speech 
become pure and unpolluted. Hence, the first task is to purify one's speech. 


How to purify the mind and body 


Next comes the mind. The mind is polluted by wrong thoughts and bad feelings. Man should 
strive to keep away all bad thoughts from invading his mind. When a man is ceaselessly filled 
with bad thoughts, he can only reap bad consequences. To purify the mind, all bad thoughts have 


to be expelled. No room should be given to them. Bad feelings should be banished from the mind 
Only then the mind will get totally purified. 


Then comes purity of the body. One must have a body that is free from the taint of Himsa 
(violence or harm). Men commit many acts of violence and many sinful acts with their hands. 
The body has been given to man primarily for practising Dharma (righteousness). Such a sacred 
gift should be used only for rendering service to others and doing Godly actions. This is the way 
to purify the body. Therefore, when speech, mind and the body are purified, internal purity is 
ensured. Shuchi, thus, calls for internal purity as well as external cleanliness. 


Dhakshah: This means that one should have firm determination in performing actions. The 
determination should be confined to actions that are pure, helpful to others and sublimate man. 
No man can refrain from action of some kind or other even for a moment. In no circumstance 
should one engage himself in an impure act. This is the way to achieve purity through firm 
determination. Only such a person can be called a Dhakshah (a resolute person). 


Udhaaseenah: This means freedom from attachment to anything. It means remaining serene and 
unruffled by fame or blame, peace or sorrow, loss or gain, pleasure or pain, not elated by 
prosperity or depressed by failure. One should not succumb to calumny. Nor should one exult 
over fame. Fame and censure are like passing clouds. One should look upon them as a mere 
witness. They should be treated with Udhaaseenah (equanimous feeling). To treat them seriously 
is to give rise to agitations in the mind, which may lead to demonic tendencies. 


Be free from worries 


Gathavyathah: Vyathah represents the greatest weakness in man today. Man ignores the duties 
he has to perform in the present. He broods over what has happened in the distant past. He is 
constantly speculating over what is likely to happen in the future. Why worry about the future or 
about dead past? The past is beyond recall or remedy. Forget the past. The future is uncertain. No 
one can be sure about what is likely to happen the next day. Don't think about the future, as you 
cannot be sure about it. Concern yourself with the present, which is the child of the past and the 
parent of the future. This attitude is represented by the term Gathavyathah. Brooding over the 
past and speculating about the future, man is failing in his duties in the present. This is the cause 
of his misery. Make right use of the present and a good future is assured. The aspirant should 
bear this truth in mind and concentrate his attention on the present. Mental worry about the past 
or the future is a Raajasik quality. It should be got rid of. 


Sarvaarambha parithyaagi: This quality calls for the renunciation of Ahamkaara (egoism) in any 
form. The ego is rooted in the Mamakaara (possessive instinct). When egoism and 
possessiveness come together in a man, he is utterly ruined. Hence, one should be free from. 
egoism and attachment. 


The aforesaid six qualities are sacred virtues. The opening stanza declares that a devotee with 
these six qualities is dear to the Lord. 


The six enemies of man 


Apart from these six good qualities, man has six vices: Kaama (lust), Krodha (anger), Lobha 
(greed), Moha (delusion), Madha (conceit) and Maathsarya (envy). These six enemies of man 
have to be got rid of and the six good qualities should be cultivated. Only then human life can be 
made meaningful. 


Emperor Bali was one who was endowed with these noble qualities. For this reason, the Lord 
came down to the earth and sought a gift from Bali. There are many philanthropists in the world. 
There are persons who make gifts of land, or of cows, or food, or clothes, or gold, but few can be 
found who are prepared to make an offering of themselves. Emperor Bali was one who was 
ready to give himself away as a gift. "I am offering to Thee, Oh Lord, everything that is mine, 
my wealth, and family. Only the Aathma remains. Save me, who is taking refuge in Thee," 
explains a shloka. "J gave my word to you. I am giving my kingdom to you. At this instant, I am 
offering my body to you." Declaring thus, Emperor Bali bowed before Vaamana. 


In ancient times, there were many such noble and high-minded rulers. Bali was wedded to Truth. 
He cared only for the welfare of his people. He was a protector of Truth. He practised Dharma. 


Such a ruler was reigning over Kerala at that time. He derived all his multifarious virtues from 
his grand-father, Prahlaadha. However, Bali's father, Virochana, was engaged in wicked thoughts 
and bad deeds like Hiranyakashipu, Prahlaadha's father. All three belonged to the same clan. 
Virochana attempted to make Bali pursue wrong paths. But, good and bad ways cannot be 
imposed on others. The marks of good behaviour of persons reflect their inherent goodness. 


Prahlaadha was an impartial and fair judge 


Once, there was a contest between Virochana, the son of Prahlaadha, and Sudhanva, the son of 
the Sage Angeerasa. It was agreed that whoever lost the contest should forfeit his life to the 
winner. Both of them prayed to Prahlaadha to act as the judge for the contest, being convinced 
that he would be totally impartial and fair. Prahlaadha agreed to act as judge because he was 
pledged to uphold truth, without any other consideration. After watching the contest, Prahlaadha 
declared Sudhanva as the winner and his own son, Virochana, as the loser. 


Unable to control his joy over the verdict, Sudhanva embraced Prahlaadha and _ said: 
"Prahlaadha! It is because of unflinching upholders of Truth like you that the world shines in all 
its glory. If there were no meritorious people on earth, how can there be light in the world? 
Prahlaadha! Because of your adherence to truth you gave the verdict against your own son." 
Prahlaadha knew that whoever lost the contest should pay forfeit with his life. But that did not 
deter him from pronouncing the verdict against his son. There is no greater Dharma than Truth-- 
"Sathyaanaasthi Paro Dharmah." Prahlaadha was not swayed by any sense of paternal love. He 
shed no tears. He watched the outcome of his judgment with a sense of fulfillment. 


Recognising the utter dedication of Prahlaadha to Truth and Righteousness, Sudhanva declared: 
“Prahlaadha! your devotion to Truth will restore the life of your son. I am not claiming his life as 
the reward for my victory. I am giving back your son's life to you. 


Dharma protects its protector 


"Dharma eva Adharmo hanthi. Dharmo Rakshathi Rakshithah" (Dharma destroys the one who 
harms it. Dharma protects its protector). "Prahlaadha! You have stood by Dharma. Thereby you 
have saved your son." In this manner Sudhanva praised Prahlaadha. 


Prahlaadha's life exemplified innumerable virtues and ideals. Because of such great and virtuous 
rulers in those days, the world was blessed with peace and prosperity. Today everywhere 
disorder, discontent, distrust, injustice, indifference to what is good and indulgence in what is 
bad, excessive attachment to sensuous pleasures, selfishness and self-centredness, are rampant 
among people. It is unfortunate that Bhaarath, which was once famous for its morality and 


righteousness, its dedication to Truth and Dharma, should have degenerated to this level today. 
This is a blot not only on the country but a matter of shame for the people of Bhaarath. If we 
have a look at the state of the society, we find that all activities in society are related to self- 
praise, abusing others and duplicity in speech. These triple vices are now ubiquitous. 
Bhaaratheeya society, which was once so glorious, is now plunged in darkness, enveloped in 
discord, agitation and pollution. 


Pollution of heart is of great concern today 


Man considers the air as polluted, water as impure and the sounds reaching him as intolerable. 
Even the food is polluted. The Government also considers the entire environment as polluted. 
Enormous sums are being spent on purifying the environment. It is not the environmental 
pollution about which we should be concerned. What is of concern is the pollution of Hridhaya 
(the heart). Man's mind is polluted. Man's heart is polluted. All his feelings are polluted. It is 
because of this basic pollution, all other things appear polluted. 


The primary need today is to eradicate the pollution in the human mind. How is this to be 
accomplished? The mind today is immersed in worldly desires and pleasures As a result, there is 
mental dissatisfaction as well as bitter frustration. The mind should be turned back to the source 
from which it came. A fish out of water has to be restored to the water for it to regain its life. Can 
it survive if it is placed on a couch and fed with coffee? It will regain peace and life only when it 
returns to its native home. Likewise, man's mind has to be restored to its original home in the 
Aathma (Self). Without doing this, how can peace be got? Thus, mental peace has to come from 
the Aathma. This calls for turning the mind towards the Aathma by the use of the conscience. 


Follow the conscience with full self-confidence 


Don't rely on the body. It is a water bubble. Don't rely on the mind, which is like a mad monkey. 
Follow the conscience. When you follow the conscience with full self-confidence, you can 
accomplish anything. 


Emperor Bali was one who had such self-confidence. When his preceptor, Shukraachaarya, 
wanted to dissuade Bali from making the gift which Vaamana asked, pointing out that the young 
lad was no ordinary Brahmana but the incarnation of Vishnu Himself, Bali declared: “If the 
young lad is Vishnu Himself, as you say, that is all the more reason for me to stand by the offer I 
have made when the supplicant is the supreme Lord. Is it not my great good fortune to be in the 
position of a giver to the Lord? All human beings seek favours from the Lord. When such a 
Divine approaches me with a request for three foot-lengths of land, how fortunate am I? This 
opportunity has come to me because of my good deeds in previous lives. I am ready to go against 
the injunctions of the preceptor, but I will not transgress the commands of the Lord. The plighted 
word stands. You may see two objects with the two eyes and listen to two different things with 
the two ears. But the tongue is one. The word that is given must be honoured. I cannot go back 
on it. The man who does not fulfill his promise is dubbed a sinner. I am determined to keep my 
pledge. God is the Supreme person and Lord of all beings. I will abide only by His words." 


Emperor Bali was such a resolute ruler. Thereby, he secured a glorious opportunity. However, 
Bali had one special attachment for his subjects. The subjects also were equally attached to the 
emperor. The people bore devotion towards the ruler. The ruler was attached to his subjects. 
Their mutual relationship was intimate and indivisible. It was because of such a ruler and such 
subjects that the country was happy and prosperous. 


Significance of Onam day 


Unwilling to forsake his subjects and at the same time, unable to go back on his promise to the 
Lord, Bali gave a pledge to the people that he would visit them once a year. This Onam day is 
the auspicious day of Bali's annual visit to the earth. It is the sacred day on which Emperor Bali 
returns to bless his people. In the month of Shravana, when the moon is nearest to the 
constellation Shravana, Bali said he would make his appearance. Today that auspicious 
combination is present. As Sri Eradi said in his speech earlier, this is the twenty fifth year in 
which the Onam festival is celebrated in Bhagavaan's presence. What is the lesson to be learnt 
from this Silver Jubilee of Onam? Over the past twenty four years you have been listening to 
Bhagavaan's discourses experiencing His presence and enjoying the celebration. How far are you 
practising Svaami's teachings? Every human being has a heart. This heart is filled with love. 
With how many are you sharing the love in your hearts?. With none at all. What, then, is the use 
of that love if it is not shared? You must share with all the love in your hearts, not with humans 
alone, but with all beings in creation. Love, which is the gift of God, has to be shared with 
everyone in the world. 


Share your love with one and all 


All human troubles arise out of the failure to share this love with one and all because of 
selfishness. Everyone repeats the benediction: "Lokaas-samasthaas-sukhino Bhavanthu!" (Let all 
the people of the world be happy). To how many are you giving happiness? You are repeating 
the words mechanically, but are you praying from your hearts for the well-being of the world? 
No, not at all. You are concerned only with your selfish interests. The day you root out 
selfishness from within you, divinity will blossom in your heart. 


People talk about Saakshaathkaaram. What is it? It is not something external. Saakshaathkaara 
is contemplation of the Divine at all times and in all states within one's self. "Sarvadhaa, 
sarvakaaleshu sarvathra Hari Chinthanam" (Thinking of God at all times, in all places 
continuously). People do recite the name of Raama incessantly. But will liberation be got by this 
repetition? To gain liberation, to win Rama's grace, it is not enough to repeat His name, you have 
to act upto Rama's principles. Raama sacrificed everything for the sake of Dharma. You have to 
make a similar sacrifice. Keep Dharma as your ideal. Engage yourself in righteous. activities. 
Only then will Raama shower His grace on you. If, on the contrary, you perform no Dhaarmik 
acts but only repeat Rama's name, it is tantamount to abusing Raama. 


Likewise, there is no meaning in repeating Krishna's name. What the devotee should do is to 
experience the ecstasy of Krishna Consciousness. Nor is that all. You should develop the equal- 
mindedness of Krishna. Krishna maintained the same serenity of mind whether he was in a Yoga- 
Bhuumi, or a Yuddha-Bhuumi (battlefield) or Smashaaana-Bhuumi (a cemetery). He was always 
in a state of bliss. You should aspire to experience such bliss. Only then can you be said to 
experience Krishna consciousness. Whatever deity you may worship, you should experience the 
lessons of the deity within you. 


Experience Sai truths by filling yourselves with love 


Svaami's main teaching is Prema thathva (the Love principle). You are all experiencing this 
love. With how many are you sharing it? All around there is only hatred. Only egoism is present 
all the time. Equally ostentation is displayed all the time. How then, can you be deemed to have 


experienced the Sai truths? Whoever has imbibed those truths must be filled with love. That is 
the true mark of devotion. 


Emperor Bali was one who was filled with the sense of justice, with forbearance, compassion, 
Truth, Dharma, and devotion to the people. Are you cultivating at least one of these good 
qualities? Bali gave his promise to the people to appear before them every year because his 
people had all these qualities. The people of today are different. How can anyone know whether 
Emperor Bali is appearing? People celebrate Bali's visit as a festival but Bali is not coming. 
Why? Because the qualities of the people of those days are not present today. Doubtless, Bali 
loves his people. But the people today must have the power to draw him to visit them. 


They should be like a powerful magnet which can attract a heavy block of iron. They will then 
be able. to move and melt the heart of the Divine. You are doubtless magnets. But you have to 
purify yourselves to increase your magnetic power. That purity consists in the triple purity of 
mind, speech and body. 


Reasons for merger of the wicked in the Lord 


Whatever anyone may do, there can be no deficiency in the Divine. Whether you praise or blame 
God, neither affects Him. In the Mahaabhaaratha once Dharmaja watched with anguish the 
abuses levelled against Krishna by Sishupaala and which Krishna tolerated for quite sometime. 
Then he hurled a plate at Sishupaala which severed his head. Dharmaja saw the blood from 
Sishupaala's body flowing towards Krishna and a divine flame from his body merging in 
Krishna. 


Dharmaja asked Naaradha how the soul of a wicked person like Sishupaala could merge in 
Krishna. Narada explained that good and bad, fame and blame relate only to the body and not to 
the Aathma. The merger in the Divine of devotees who have worshipped the Lord in many ways 
takes place after a long period of trials and tribulations, but it lasts eternally. In the case of the 
wicked, who remember the Lord constantly out of hatred, the merger takes place quickly but 
remains only for a short spell. The merger of soul in the Divine takes place for different reasons. 
In the case of Kamsa it was fear of Krishna, which made him always remember Krishna; hatred 
in the case of Sishupaala and Dhanthavakra, maternal affection in the case of Yashodha, who 
merged in Krishna through love. The Gopikas merged in the Lord through single-pointed 
devotion and Radha merged in the Lord owing to Bkaathma bhaava (sense of spiritual oneness). 
All attained merger. But in each case, it was up to a specific level. 


Cultivate the spirit of sacrifice 


Do not follow the body. Follow the mind and the Aathma. The one who follows the Aathma is 
the real spiritual seeker. 


Contemplating on God with all your heart, chanting his name and surrendering to him, redeem 
your lives. The name and fame of God are not derived from outside. They are not the creations of 
newspapers and pamphlets. They do not change because of any circumstance. The Lord's name 
and fame grow out of their sacredness and love. Therefore, do not bother about anything. 
Develop your love. Promote your divine nature. Cultivate the spirit of sacrifice. 


Discourse in the Sai Ramesh Mandap on 30-8-1993. 


The tongue is liable to four big errors; uttering falsehood, 
scandalising, finding fault with others and excessive articulation. 
These have to be avoided if there has to be Shaanthi for the 
individual as well as for the society. 


BABA 


30. Role of the Avathaar in the cosmic play 


Like oil in the thil seed 

Like ghee in milk, fragrance in a flower, 
Juice in a fruit, fire in wood, 

Divinity is everywhere. 


EMBODIMENTS of the Divine Aathma! From ancient times, the questions, "Where is God?" and 
"How does he appear?" have been agitating the minds of people. The answers have been sought 
by different ways of investigation, The believers, non-believers, those with doubts and others 
have not been able to get clear answers to these questions. To comprehend the truth, one should 
look within oneself. This cannot be learnt from text-books or from teachers. Chaithanya 
(Consciousness) is there in the mind and pervades everywhere. The power of vision in the eye 
and of taste in the tongue are derived from this Chaithanya. People are using the sense organs 
but do not know the source of the power which activates them. 


Chaithanya cannot be comprehended by the physical vision. It is within everyone in very close 
proximity. People undertake external exercises and spiritual practices in vain to find it. The 
entire Creation is a manifestation of the Divine Will Prakrithi (Nature) is the manifestation of 
God. Man is also part of Prakrithi and thus has the Divine power in him. 


Chaithanya is the seed of entire Universe 


A seed germinates and grows into a plant and then into a tree with branches, leaves flowers, etc. 
The seed of the entire Universe is Chaithanya (Pure Consciousness). It is Sath-chith-aanandha. 
It grows in full bloom in the human being and blossoms into the flower of Awareness. Thus God 
incarnates in man. To understand this truth is the goal of human life. It is the mind that stands in 
the way of this realisation. The mind is perverted when it is centred on the ego (body 
consciousness) of a person but when it is directed towards the Aathma, it becomes sublime. One 
puffed up with ego forgets Divinity. Thinking on the physical plane and looking at the external 
world, man is not able to understand the Divinity within him. 


It is wrong to think that spirituality has nothing to do with worldly matters. The physical world 
also reflects Divinity. There are two entities, Svabhava and Prabhaava the former emanating 
from the True Inner Self and the latter from worldly pursuits. Because man forgets his true 
Divine nature he is wallowing in troubles and tribulations. He is reflecting only animal qualities 
in his actions. Only when one enquires within, one has the chance of realising Divinity. 


Today we are celebrating Ganesh Jayanthi, the birthday of Vighneshvara. Who is He? What is 
His greatness? What has He taught to the world? We celebrate the javanthi but do not make any 
effort to understand the thathvas (principle) behind it. His supreme teaching by His own example 
is oneness of the Universe. When He was asked to go round the universe to get a prize from his 
parents, He just circumambulated His parents Lord Shiva and Paarvathi and claimed that He had 
completed the trip around the universe by going around them, as Lord Shiva and Paarvathi 
represented the Universe. 


Unity in a family is the basis of unity in society 


The vehicles of Shiva, Paarvathi, Ganesha, Subrahmanya and the objects worn on their bodies all 
get on harmoniously though they are in their original nature antagonistic to each other. Take the 
examples of the lion, the vehicle of Paarvathi, living in peace with the elephant, the form of 
Ganesha, and the bull, the vehicle of Shiva, the peacock, the vehicle of Subrahmanya, bearing no 
enmity towards the snake, the garland of Shiva. 


Unity in a family is the basis of unity in society. Though there are lots of common features 
among mankind, people are not able to visualise their unity, but promote only their differences. 
The cause for the lack of peace in the world is the absence of harmony in thought, word and deed 
in each individual, which is reflected in the lack of unity among different individuals. 


Spiritual values have been given up, resulting in the turmoil that we see today. Ganapathi taught 
that one should respect one's parents and thereby win their grace and secure bliss. 


The form of Ganapathi cannot, by any human standards, be termed as handsome. He has a small 
head, big stomach and uncouth form. But still we are captivated by His form and like to see Him 
more and more and worship Him. Beauty does not lie in the Aakaara, the external form but can 
be experienced even in Vikaara (apparent uncouthness). Ganesha sacrificed his own tusk and 
used it as a pen to write down the Mahaabhaaratha to the dictation of Vyaasa, for .the benefit of 
humanity. Man worships God only for selfish purposes. No one is prepared to sacrifice anything 
for getting Divine Bliss, while men are prepared to go to any length for worldly pleasures. Your 
mind and heart should be rendered pure to worship Divinity. You should see unity in diversity. 


Role of the Divine in the cosmic drama 


In the cosmic drama, the Divine has His own role to play. When one takes up a role in a drama, 
he should act according to the role and not according to his state in real life. Behind the screen he 
comes into his own. You should understand this truth clearly. A man may take up the role of 
Raama in a drama. Then he has to adhere to the principles of Sathya, Dharma. Shaanthi and 
Prema which governed all Raama's actions, though in actual life, the actor may not be righteous. 
Similarly God assumes a role in the drama of the world in human form. He has to behave as a 
human being only. This should be clearly understood by all. 


Avathaar will not transgress rules and regulations 


Krishna was Paramaathma (Supreme power) and Sarvajna (All-Knowing). Though He was very 
close to Dhraupadhi, at the time when she suffered humiliation in the court of Dhuryodhana, who 
ordered that she be disrobed, Krishna made an endless supply of saris to protect her honour. 
Some persons ask why Krishna did not punish Dhuryodhana on the spot when he was 
perpetrating such a heinous crime against a noble woman who was so devoted to Him. No doubt, 
Dhraupadhi was highly devoted to Krishna and Krishna had also the power to punish 
Dhuryodhana. But in this drama several more scenes had to be enacted. Dhuryodhana was 
predestined to be killed by Bhima in the war that was yet to come. So Krishna could not 
interfere. 


Kamsa's life was in the hands of Krishna and Raavana's life was in the hands of Raama. Both 
Raama and Krishna are forms of Vishnu. But each had to play His specific role in His 
incarnation. For every incarnation there are certain rules and regulations which the Avathaar will 
not transgress. Mere mortals cannot understand the ways of the Divine. 


In the Divine family of Lord Shiva, we should understand that Shiva represents Energy, 
Paarvathi represents Prakrithi. Buddhi (intellect) and Siddhi (fulfilment) are symbolic of 
Ganapathi and Subrahmanya, their sons. They are all one, though conceived in different forms. 
All the five fingers in the hands are not alike but different in size and shape. But when you do 
any work, they join together to give maximum effect. If all are of equal size, it will not be 
conducive to effective functioning. This is one of the secrets of God's creation. 


Realise the wisdom of the Divine 


There was a mathematician taking rest under a tree, who wondered why a pumpkin creeper bore 
such a huge fruit, while the huge banyan tree over his head bore only tiny fruits. He was 
doubting the sense of proportion of God. During his sleep some fruits from the banyan tree fell 
on his body. On waking up he realised that if the huge tree which attracted people to take shelter 
under its shade, had big fruits, like pumpkins, their fall would be harmful to those resting under 
it. This experience made him realise the wisdom of the Divine. 


You should try to have complete knowledge of anything. Partial knowledge is dangerous. You 
should study the nature of the heart. God thinks of Loka-Shreyas (the welfare of the whole 
world). He has a broad vision, while human beings have a narrow selfish outlook. 


You should also expand your heart---not the physical heart, which may call for surgery if it 
expands. I am speaking about the spiritual heart. It is called Hridhaya, meaning one which is 
filled with dhaya (compassion). It is all pervading. If you think of America, your heart goes there 
at once. The physical heart is like a machine with limited scope. The heart with dhaya 
(compassion) is Dhaivam (God). If one has no dhaya his nature is devilish. Compassion is the 
most essential quality of a human being. Without compassion, man is inhuman. A compassionate 
heart reflects divinity. 


God has no birth or death. He remains an Eternal Witness. How to realise such an entity who is 
Aprameya and Apramana (beyond description and beyond proof)? He responds only to Prema. 
You should understand God through love and spend your life with love. 


Discourse on 19-9-1993 at Sai Ramesh Hall at Brindhaavan. 


You have been born for one purpose: to die. That is to say, to kill 
the "I". If Brahma dies, you become Brahmam, or rather, you know 
that you are Brahmam. All literature, all effort, all Yajna, all 
teaching is just to hold a mirror before you, so that you may see 
Yourself. 


BABA 


31. Glory of the Lord's lotus feet 


Observance of right conducts has declined; 
Dharma has been endangered; 

Morality has nowhere to abide; 

What can I say about human existence? 
Morality and ethics are confined to books; 
The heart has become a foul dust-bin. 


EMBODIMENTS of the Divine Aathma! Wetness is the natural trait of water. Hardness is the 
attribute of stone. Sweetness is natural to sugar. Heat is the quality of fire. 


These are the Dharma (natural behaviour) of substances. For the individual, Vaancha (desire) is 
natural. Because man is sustained by desire, it is considered a Dharma (natural trait)of man. 
"Dhaarayathi ithi Dharmah" (Dharma is that which sustains). Man is sustained by desire. Man's 
primary duty is to offer all his desires to God. 


This means that the practice of Dharma calls for the offering of all worldly desires to God and 
developing the inward vision. “Sarvadharmaan pariththyajya maamekam sharanam Vraja"-- 
Renouncing all Dharmas, take refuge in Me alone--says Krishna in the Geetha. This implies that 
man must make it his primary aim to offer to God all external sensory, physical desires and 
cultivate spiritual thoughts centred on the eternal. 


Purity of heart is essential for spiritual wisdom 


To develop such a spiritual outlook and to inspire it in others, one has to possess Chittha suddhi 
(purity of heart). Spiritual wisdom can dawn only when there is purity of heart. Just as removal 
of weeds, tilling the land, sowing the seeds and watering them, are required before the crop can 
be harvested on a plot of land, the field of the human heart has to be cleared of bad thoughts and 
bad feelings, watered with love, tilled by spiritual practices and the seeds of the divine Name 
sown. Only then one is entitled to reap the harvest of Jnaana (Divine Wisdom). 


Today the spiritual exercises are confined to listening to talks and not to practising the teachings. 
Listening has become a kind of disease. Merely after listening, men go about bragging that they 
know everything. This crazy boastfulness is deepening men's ignorance. 


One should ruminate over what has been heard. After rumination, one should do Nidhidhyaasa 
(put into practice the lessons). Only then there is the triple purity of thought, word and deed. 
Today people are content with mere listening to discourses. This will not lead to Realisation. 


Srinivasaraghavan referred to the practice of "Naama Likhitha japam" (repeated writing of the 
Lord's Name as a spiritual exercise). This practice promotes harmony in thought, word and deed 
(first thinking about-the Name of the Lord, then uttering it and then writing it). All these three 
processes should be carried out with a pure heart. 


"Sathyam" indicates the true form of man 


Total purity is essential for all Saadhanas (spiritual disciplines). To achieve this purity one has to 
understand the difference between Shreyas (spiritual well-being) and Preyas (mundane 
happiness). True humanness consists in knowing the nature, of the Aathma (the Indwelling 


Spirit). Vaak (speech), Manas (the mind) and Praana (the life-force) together constitute the 
Aathma. The three syllables contained in the Sanskrith word Sathyam indicate the true form of 
man. Sath represents food, ee represents water and Yam represents Surya (the Sun). The implied 
meaning of the term is that the Sun provides the water which helps man to grow food. When 
Sathya is interpreted in the reverse order, it means that the Reality is realised by the penance and 
control of the senses (Sath for Reality, Tha for Tapas--penance, and Ya for Yama and other 
forms of control over the senses). 


Control of the senses and the desires arising from them is almost impossible. What can be done, 
however, is to turn all the desires towards the Divine. This will be rendered possible when one 
realises that all the sense organs---the eyes, the ears, the nose and the tongue---derive their 
functional capacities from the Aathma (Indwelling Spirit). It is the Chaithanya (the aathmik 
consciousness) that animates the sense organs and enables the eyes to see, the ears to hear and 
the tongue to taste. The role of consciousness is like that of the 'current, which enables a bulb to 
shed light. It is because this Aathmik consciousness is present in all beings, it has been described 
as Brahman. 


Human body is an instrument to realise the Divine 


Caught up in worldly desires, man does not realise his Divine nature. He identifies himself with 
the body, not realising that it is temporary and perishable. The human body is nothing but an 
instrument for realising one's inherent Divinity. Man tries to know all about the universe but 
makes no attempt to know who he is. Man is leading an artificial life because of his ignorance of 
his reality. Man's foremost endeavour must be to realise his divine nature. He is not a mere 
human being. He is truly Divine and has to realise this basic truth. 


Man has to realise that all the limbs in his body function because of the divine power animating 
them. Too much importance should not be attached to these limbs intrinsically. Are not blind 
persons able to live without eyes? Are not deaf and dumb persons able to get on without the 
powers of hearing or speech? What matters is how these organs are used. 


The saint Suurdhas wails in a soul-stirring song, 'Oh Lord! Inspite of being endowed with eyes, 
people are not able to see your beauty. Inspite of having ears they don't hear your melodious 
voice." Men hear only useless gossip. They do not listen to auspicious and sacred things. Having 
eyes, they look upon people with hatred and jealousy. 


Monkeys, donkeys, dogs and pigs also have the same power of sight as humans. What is the 
difference between these animals and human beings? Animals eat, sleep and procreate. If men 
are also doing these things, what is the difference between them and human beings? Animals 
love their young ones, but that love is temporary but human love can last one's entire life. 


How can one sanctify the body? 


Man has to understand what it is without which he cannot exist. He can get on without eyes or 
ears or other organs, but not without Praana or Aathma (life). This is called Praana prathishttha 
(the installation of' the divine Life-Force in man). In the mirror of the human body, the image of 
the Divine is reflected. Man foolishly considers the mirror as the Chaithanya (Reality). It is this 
consciousness that accounts for all that one is able to do and not the physical body. 


How, then, is this body to be sanctified? By involving the body in actions related to the Aathmik 
consciousness. This lesson was taught to Vibheeshana by Hanumaan. Hanumaan told him that by 
mere repetition of Rama's name, the vision of Raama cannot be experienced. Only by dedicating 


himself to the service of Raama, together with chanting His name, can he (Vibheeshana) 
experience Saayujyam (oneness) with Raama. 


Of what avail is it to recite all the 700 shlokas of the Geetha, if one does not practise even a 
single teaching of the Geetha? "Adhveshtaa Sarva bhuuthaanam" (Do not bear ill-will towards 
any living being), proclaims the Geetha. This is the primary injunction of the Geetha to mankind. 
This. is based on the dictum that one Aathma (Divine) dwells in all beings as the Antharaathma 
(Indweller). What use is there in reciting the Geetha if one has hatred towards others? You 
worship the Divine and hate the Divine in others. Your worship and your hatred cancel each 
other out and nothing remains to your credit. 


Follow Lord Raama's injunctions 


The Raamaayana is regularly read and Raama is worshipped by the vast majority of the people in 
Bhaarath. There is a Raama temple in every village. But how many are living up to Raama's 
commands? Raama chose to go to the forest to comply with His father's promise. How many 
today obey their fathers injunctions? Raama sacrificed the Kingdom and all comforts for the sake 
of upholding Truth. He said his sole aim was to promote the people's welfare. He sought to serve 
the people in whom he saw the image of God. 


No penance, no pilgrimages to sacred rivers, 
No study of scriptures nor the recitation 

Of the Lord's name will be of any use 

For crossing the ocean of Samsaara 

Without service to sajjana. 


Sajjanam refers to those in whom Sath, the Aathma, dwells. As the Aathma dwells in all beings, 
Sajjnana refers to one and all. When you serve Sath, which is the Reality in every being, you get 
the Awareness of Chith (Consciousness). With this Awareness, the heart is filled with Aanandha 
(Bliss). 


Annamaachaarya hailed the feet of the Lord as those which had been washed by Brahma himself 
which are of Brahman Itself, which bear the burdens of the entire universe, and the burden of all 
human bodies. How is this done. The Divine is Puurna-Svaruupa (All-encompassing form). Just 
as the feet of the individual bear the burden of the human body, the subtle body of the Divine 
bears on its feet the entire universe. Without the feet the body cannot move. 


Significance of greatness conferred on Lord's feet 


Recognizing that the macrocosm and microcosm are constituted by the same five basic elements, 
man should realise that the Divine is present in everything. Hence, man should chant the name of 
the Lord from the core of his heart and take refuge in the feet of the Lord. Annamaachaarya 
declared: "Oh mind! Take refuge in the lotus feet of the Lord. They will relieve you of all your 
miseries and lead you to the Divine." 


When Bharatha enthroned the Paadhukas (sandals) of Raama, Ayodhya was really protected by 
Raama's sandals. Bhadhraachala Raamadhas also sang in the .same strain. "Oh Raama! I am 
holding on to your feet. I will not let you move even one step until you assure me your 
protection." 


Thyaagaraaja, in a similar vein, declared that he would not allow himself to he tempted by the 
treasures offered by the Raaja of Tanjaavur and he preferred the lotus feet of Shri Raama to all 
the wealth of the world. 


"Feet" do not mean sandals made in silver or 'gold. Feet refers to the Divine that sustains 
everything. Why is such greatness conferred on the feet? Viewing the matter from the point of 
view of science, it will be noted that .blood flows from the feet upwards to all parts of the body. 
It is this blood which sustains the entire body. The feet that bear the burden of the entire body are 
essential for life itself. When you seek refuge in the Lord's feet, you can secure a vision of the 
Divine form. 


Yashodha catches Krishna through His footprints 


Here is a small example from the early life of Lord Krishna in Gokulam to show what the Lord's 
feet mean. Krishna was known as one who used to steal butter from all houses and feed his 
friends and playmates too. As there were a lot of complaints about this naughty child, Krishna's 
mother Yashodha caught hold of him one day as he was running away and asked him: "Why are 
you stealing butter from other houses while I offer you so much at home? Your mouth always 
smells of butter. Give up this habit. Otherwise, I will tie you to a mortar to restrict your 
movement. How do you do such things, being so small a child?" He smiled and ran away. 
Yashodha went from house to house in search of Krishna. He played a small trick. Yashodha 
could not move fast as she had a heavy body. She was in a fix how .to trace him. 


Krishna dipped his feet in milk in a house and ran from there, leaving behind the trail of his 
footprints caused by the milk. It was only with the help of Krishna's own footprints that she was 
able to catch him. In fact, because she was so eager to get at him, Krishna himself helped her to 
trace him. Yashodha was able to catch the Lord only through footprints of HIS Feet. 


The Lord's feet are glorious in many ways. But they will confer blessings only if they are sought 
with real faith. The Lord's feet contain the Divine insignia, of Shankha (Conch) and Chakra 
(Discus). Shankha symbolises Shabdha Brahman (the CosmicDivine sound). The discus 
represents the Wheel of Time. The Sound and Time together represent the different cosmic 
aspects of the Lord. The entire universe originated from sound vibrations. These vibrations are 
related to Time. Sound and Time are inseparable and interdependent. 


It is a common practice among rural folk to advise anyone who has committed a wrong to hold 
the feet of the person whom he has wronged. Once a man holds the other's feet, it means that he 
has sought and secured the latter's forgiveness. Nowadays, with all the Courts and legal 
processes, no one attempts to hold the feet of anyone. In the old days in the villages, if a man fell 
at the feet of another, the latter had no options but to forgive the supplicant. 


Seeking the Lord's feet is seeking forgiveness 


The inner meaning of seeking the Lord's feet is that thereby the Lord will forgive the sins of the 
penitent. But mere holding of the feet is not enough. One must be genuinely repentant and 
declare that he will not commit similar offences again. Only then he will secure atonement. ' 


Embodiments of the Divine Aathma! Different persons pursue different kinds of Saadhana. To 
realise the benefits of this Saadhana, they go to Aashrams. They adore elders and offer worship 
to them. As long as egoism remains in them, all these exercises are of no avail. Your egoism may 
even lead to your expulsion from the Aashram. Hence suppress the ego, bury the sense of 
possessiveness and develop attachment to the Aathma to realise your true humanness. Envy, 


hatred and anger are causing havoc among men. Even residents of the Aashram are filled with 
anger. Anger has been described as incense offered to sin. Therefore while you are worshipping 
the Lotus feet or writing the Lord's name, you have to get rid of these three evil traits. 


Destroy the ego, do your duty and help mutually 


At the outset, the ego has to be destroyed. Then anger will subside. Do your duty. Do not project 
your ego. Develop mutual helpfulness. Carry on your work with joy. Be friendly towards each 
other. It is only when you behave in this manner that you will realise the benefits of Likhitha 
Japam and worship of the Paadhukas (Lord's Sandals). 


In the Sai organizations, the primary requisite is unity and mutual trust. Only with unity can you 
promote the well-being of the world. If there is discord within the organization, how can you 
serve others? Make forbearance your ornament. Through love, eliminate your bad traits. Leading 
members of the Sai organization, who undertake sacred activities such as Naama Likhitha Japam 
and Paadhuka Seva should develop sacred qualities. 


In Tamil Nadu, in numerous villages devotees are engaged in Naama Likhitha Japa and offering 
worship to Paadhukas. Together with these they should also purify their hearts. Today in many 
parts of the world Nature is causing various disasters such as earthquakes, famines, floods and 
volcanic eruptions. What is the reason? The spiritual lapses of man account for these calamities. 
Disturbances in the heart (human heart) are reflected in earthquakes. Fill your minds with good 
thoughts and engage yourselves in good actions. Chant the Lord's name. When the ether is 
surcharged with the vibrations of the Divine name, the entire environment gets purified. Those 
who breathe this sanctified air will have pure thoughts. Purify the atmosphere, which is now 
polluted. 


Discourse in the Puurnachandhra Auditorium on 7-10-1993, the day of Paadhuka Prathishttha. 


Man should become the very embodiment of love. When he is filled 
with love the entire world will be transformed into a love-filled 
world. As long as he is filled with hate the world will appear as a 
hate-filled world. It is only when love is developed that the dualism 
of good and evil can be transcended and the joy of oneness with 
the Divine experienced. 


BABA 


32. Bhaarath's glorious Vedhic heritage 


There is no greater eye than knowledge. 
There is no greater penance than Truth. 
There is no worse misery than greed. 

There is no greater happiness than sacrifice. 


KNOWLEDGE is the real eye. Truth is real penance. Penance does not consist in forsaking food 
and drink and roaming in a forest, Seeking the eternal Truth is real penance. Desire is the main 
cause of grief. Desire will go on multiplying. As and when one is fulfilled, it gives rise to another 
and this goes on endlessly. True Bliss consists in controlling desires. Sacrifice gives the greatest 
and lasting happiness. That is why the Vedhas have declared that it is not by work, progeny or 
wealth, but by sacrifice alone, one can get immortality. 


Sacrifice is the life-force of a human being. The Vedha teaches Thyaaga, Yoga and Bhoga 
(sacrifice, spiritual practice and material pleasure). The word Vedha itself has many meanings. It 
means intelligence, knowledge, awareness, etc. To lead a meaningful life man has to follow 
certain. Niyamas (regulations of discipline). It is also necessary to know one's own Inner Reality. 
Mere intelligence and acquisition of knowledge are not enough. Knowledge should foster 
wisdom leading to awareness. This is what the Vedha teaches. The word Jnaana, which is 
translated as wisdom, contains two syllables! Jna and na. That which is not true at all times--past 
present and future---cannot be termed Jnaana. Adhvaitha Dharshanam (Awareness of oneness) 
is the real Jnaana. 


The Truth is one, it is infinite and it is Brahmam. "Sathyam, Jnaanam, Anantham, Brahma," is 
the Upanishathik declaration. 


Vedhas confer security on humanity 


The Vedha should not be treated as mere Manthra. It helps to realise full knowledge and wisdom. 
The sages in ancient times had the inner vision and experience of the Divine and they gave 
expression to this revelation through the Vedhas. They are applicable to entire humanity for all 
times. They confer security on humanity and show the way to happiness and peace. The goal of 
human life is to sacrifice desires and realise the Divine. 


Since the Vedhas are Anantham (infinitely vast), it is difficult to master them within the short 
life-span of human life. That is why Vedha Vyaasa divided them into four sections. He compiled 
the Riks into one part and called them Rik Samhitha. He put all the Yajus together and named the 
collection as Yajus Samhitha. All the Saama hymns were presented in the Saama Samhitha. 
Other manthras were complied in a fourth section termed Atharvana Samhitha. The Yajus 
Samhitha was further divided into Shukla Yajur and Krishna Yajur Vedha, bringing the actual 
number of Vedha samhithas to five. 


The division of Vedha Samhithas 


Each Samhitha was further divided into three parts, namely, Brahmana, Aaranyaka and 
Upanishath. The first part is full of manthras for rituals, and for doing acts of charity and other 
sastraic rites. Manthra has Life-Force in it and, when properly interpreted, every manthra is 
related to Divinity. The second part, Aaranyaka, relates to the chanting of manthra during 


Vanaprasthaashrama, when one finishes his Grihastha-ashrama (family life) and retires to the 
forest to lead a life of austerity. 


The chanting of manthras should always be synchronised with practising of the prescribed 
Karma. By such practice one can realise the Divine. By merely listening to manthras and failing 
to practise, one can never get happiness or peace. In order to realise the Divine, you have to 
practise the precepts prescribed in the Vedhas. No doubt, even listening to the recitation of the 
Vedhas is itself capable of purifying your mind. It is Shabdha Brahman. Sound is the first 
attribute of God. Vedha Shabdha is all-pervasive. 


Today a great deal of wickedness, troubles and turmoils are prevalent in the world because of the 
decline of the influence of the Vedhas. Water, air, food, noise are all tainted by pollution. We are 
forced to lead a polluted life. When the air we breathe is itself polluted, how are we to lead a 
pollution-free life? The environment and the elements should be pure to ensure purity of heart. 
The cause of this pollution lies nowhere else except in our own actions. Whatever words we 
utter, they spread to the entire atmosphere. We can purify the atmosphere of the world by 
chanting the Vedhas and singing the glory of God. 


Cherish the Vedhas for sublimating your lives 


The Rishis in ancient times used to move to forests and chant the powerful Vedhic Manthras to 
purify the atmosphere of the whole world. These Vedhas are neglected today. The people of this 
great country of Bhaarath have not understood the infinite potency of the Vedhas. It is a pity they 
have not tasted the sweetness of the Vedhas. The Vedhas should be cherished for sublimating life 
and not to earn a living. 


The Upanishaths, which are termed as Vedhaantha or the concluding part of the Vedhas, detail 
the method of achieving the Purushaarthas (four fold goal of life), namely Dharma, Artha, 
Kaama and Moksha. These can be achieved by one's own efforts through Vidhya (acquisition of 
right knowledge), which is of two types: one is Para Vidhya (the Higher Knowledge) and the 
other Apara Vidhya (lower knowledge). Para Vidhya shows the way to Moksha (Liberation), 
while Apara Vidhya deals with worldly pursuits, which cause bondage. 


For acquiring spiritual wisdom this worldly education is not necessary. Sathyadhrishti (the vision 
of Truth) is the only requisite for spiritual pursuits. Since ancient times Bhaaratheeyas have 
taken to spiritual pursuits as their goal in life. 


Nine different appellations for the Vedhas 


There are nine different appellations for the Vedhas. They are: Shruthi, Anusmara, Thrayee, 
Aamnaaya, Samaamnaaya, Chandhas, Svaadhyaaya, Nigama and Aagama. 


Shruthi: The Vedhas were taught by teacher to disciple by oral recitation, adhering to the right 
swara and tune. There were no gadgets such as tape recorders or gramophone records in those 
ancient times. The students used to learn the text only by constant repetition with intense 
devotion day and night and get manthras by heart. Even if the words are missed the svara or tune 
of the chanting should be without the slightest blemish, since svara is its basis. Hence it 1s called 
Shruthi (that which is learnt by hearing). 


Anusmara: Since the Vedhas were leant by memorising and constant chanting, they got the 
name of Anusmara. 


Thrayee: Originally there were only three Vedhas Rig, Yajur and Saama, which formed the basis 
of all rituals, the manthras for Yajna and musical notes. Hence they were termed as Thrayee (the 
three). 


Aamnaaya: It means practice. The practice of chanting and memorising was followed even in 
the dream state and deep sleep state, apart from the waking state. So it is called: Aamnaaya. 


Samaamnaaya: As the Vedha is preserved in the heart of the students it is called Samaamnaaya. 


Chandhas: The Saama Vedha lays down the basic meter for the Vedhic manthras, meter which 
is Chandhas. Hence the Vedhas are termed as Chandhas. 


Svaadhyaaya: The Vedhas were learnt by son from father or disciple from teacher. Thus it was 
passed on from generation to generation, from grandfather to grandson. Since it is preserved only 
by constant self-study and practice after learning, it is called Svaadhyaaya. 


Nigama and Aagama: As the study of the Vedhas is related to inhalation and exhalation, it is 
called Nigama and Aagama. For example, when one inhales the air the sound is “So” While 
exhaling, the sound is "Ham" With every breath this Soham meaning "I am He,” is being 
repeated. This goes on 21,600 times per day. This is verily the practice of the Mahaavaakyas of 
the Vedha, "You are That"---"Thath Thvam Asi." This goes on all through life by every human 
being in the breathing process. When breathing stops life will be extinct. 


Transcend body-consciousness to realise Inner Self 


Many sages and saints did penance for realising Divinity. They said, "Vedaahametham 
Purusham Mahaantham" (We have seen God Almighty). Where did they see Him? "Aadhithya 
Varnam Thamasaah-Parasthaath" (We have seen God beyond the darkness, of ignorance). This 
darkness is the identification of oneself with the body and attachment to the senses. To realise 
the Inner Sell you have to transcend the body." consciousness and attachment to sensual desires. 


Vedha teaches many things with emphasis on unity and purity. Some say that the Vedha 
discriminates between people, declaring only some that are qualified to chant the Vedha. This is 
totally wrong. In the Shanthi Shloka, the Vedha says, "Sahanaa Vavathu; Sahanau Bhunakthu 
Sahaveeryam karavaa Vahai, Thejasvinaavad-heethamasthu; Maa Vidhvishaavahai." What is 
the meaning of this? "Let us grow together; let us live together, let us study together, let us 
develop knowledge together, without conflict, with friendship, with broadmindedness." While 
this is the teaching of the Vedha how can any one say that it discriminates against some? The 
Vedha teaches a subtle form of equality and equanimity. 


Only a fraction of the Vedhas remains now 


Each Vedha has many branches. The Rig Vedha has 28 branches, of which 26 have faded out of 
memory and only two remain now. The Yajur Vedha had 17 branches out of which only two are 
in vogue, while the Saama Vedha had 1000 branches of which 998 are lost. Even with this 
fraction of the original Vedhas existing now, the world is progressing at least to the present 
extent. Imagine how powerful this planet would have been if all the branches of the Vedhas were 
in vogue now! 


This sacred land of Bhaarath, which was reputed to be the Thyaaga Bhuumi (land of Sacrifice) 
and Yoga Bhuumi (land of Spiritual communion), has now become a Roga Bhuumi (land of 


diseases). The reason is people are turning to Bhoga (worldly pleasure) forgetting Yoga and 
Thyaaga. People should learn to live in Yoga. 


The Vedhic injunctions have infinite meaning. All may not be able to comprehend the inner 
meaning of the teachings. The truth that the earth has a gravitational force was there since the 
world was created. But it was discovered only by Newton after some experiments. Similarly? the 
truth hidden in the Vedhas was perceived by the Rishis after intensive penance and Saadhana. 
They have given to mankind the Eternal truth which was revealed to them. The vibrations of 
their spiritual Saadhana have spread throughout the Universe. They are not limited to Bhaarath 
or any particular place. 


This can be practised anywhere in the world, whether in America or Australia. This is Sathya 
Svaruupa (Embodiment of Truth). It cannot change according to time or place. It is beyond time 
and space; that is why it is called the Transcendental Reality. Some people think lightly of the 
Vedhas and even make fun of them. 


Learning the Vedhas give immense benefits 


Embodiments of love! Even if you cannot chant the Vedhas, if only you listen to the sounds with 
devotion they will elevate you to a higher level. Though the child does not know the meaning of 
the lullaby sung by its mother, it is induced to sleep hearing the tune. Similarly, listening to the 
chanting of the Vedha with undivided attention will give you immense benefit. If you ruminate 
over it and practise it in your life, you can imagine the magnitude of the bliss you will attain. The 
hymns of the Vedhas constitute Naadha Brahman (God in the form of sound), which is highly 
potent. Devotees who go to a temple ring the bell. The general belief is that it is intended to 
attract the attention of the Deity. Does it mean that God is asleep and you have to awaken Him 
by ringing the bell? God is always awake and is listening to the prayers of everyone. It is just like 
a visiting card which you present to any important person whom you want to meet any favour or 
help. Ringing the bell is only to draw the attention of the Lord towards you. The sound of the 
Vedha 1s also like ringing the temple bell. 


Omkaara is the correct address of the Lord 


Sound emanates from the Primordial Pranava, which consists of the three syllables A, U And M. 
The correct address of the Lord is Omkaaram. The sound of the bell and the sound of the Vedhas 
also radiate Omkaara naadha. The uttering of Omkaara should be done in a sweet and smoothly 
progressive way starting with the sound of "A" which should come from the navel, and then the 
sound "U" from the throat, and finally conclude with "M" from the lips. It should resemble the 
sound of an aeroplane when it is far off, gradually increasing in volume as it approaches the 
aerodrome and finally subsiding after landing. (Svaami demonstrated the correct way of chanting 
the Omkaara). The Vedha teaches this very clearly. 


The Vedhas lift the individual to higher levels. People are not realising this truth. Many Vedhic 
scholars send their wards to convent schools and seek to impart to them a secular education 
without caring to pass on to them the sacred legacy of the Vedhas, which will protect them. 
Because of lack of encouragement and proper propagation and promotion, knowledge of the 
Vedhas is declining day by day in this great country, which is the home of this sacred treasure. 


Svaami expects the people to foster the Vedhas and is showing the way by making all the 
thousands of students of the Sai educational institutions, right from the primary school, to learn 


Vedha chanting. You have watched the children of the primary school, ranging from 5 to 8 years, 
chanting the Vedhas at the commencement of this meeting. There is actually no compulsion to 
learn the Vedhas. All the students willingly come forward on their own to learn Vedha chanting. 
There are Vedha paathashaalas (Vedhic schools) elsewhere where they impart this teaching, but 
the students discontinue the chanting later on. You should make the children learn the Vedhas 
with enthusiasm, without compulsion. They should be made to realise the greatness of the 
Vedhas by sweet persuasion. 


The Vedhas have protected our country from ancient times. Since the Government has not cared 
to realise the beneficial influence of the Vedhas in contributing to the welfare of the nation, the 
country is facing a lot of troubles. The propagation of Vedhas should be taken up by the people. 


The essence of the Upanishaths is given in the Bhagavath Geetha and the Brahmasuuthra. 
Several saints have related stories to explain clearly the import of the Upanishathic truths. The 
Eeshavaasyopanishath is the first among the Upanishaths. It declares that God pervades the 
whole universe. Because people have neglected the study of Sanskrith they are unable to enjoy 
the treasures of knowledge contained in the Upanishaths. 


Inaugural Discourse in the Puurna Chandhra Auditorium on 18-10-1993 at the Vedha Purusha 
Sapthaaha Jnaana Yajna which was revived after three years. 


33. The message of the Upanishaths 


The Dashara celebrations in October, during which Bhagavaan revived the Vedha Purusha 
Sapthaaha Jnaana Yajna after a break of three years were made immensely significant for 
spiritual aspirants as well as Sai devotees in general by the series of discourses on the 
Upanishaths which He gave for seven days at the Puurnachandhra Auditorium. The discourses 
from 19-10-1993 to 23-10-1993 are given below in a condensed form. 


ONE may study all the scriptures, perform all types of sacrifices, go on extensive pilgrimages, 
master the eight types of knowledge, but it is not easy to control the senses and the mind, direct 
one's vision inward and maintain equanimity of temper. In ancient times, the sages and seers 
maintained purity in thought, truth in words and righteousness in deeds. But in this Kali Age to- 
day, people have forgotten human values and exhibit animal qualities such as lust, anger, greed 
and hatred. Purity of heart and selflessness are the hall-marks of the human life which one gets 
after passing through several births. Foolishness, pride, covetousness and other such qualities are 
a hang-over from their previous lives as sheep, buffalo or cat. One who is in the habit of 
attacking and harming others out of hatred reveals the tendencies in his previous birth as a dog. 
One who lacks steadiness of mind and constantly jumps from one thing to another, reflects the 
quality of the monkey from which he has evolved. It is to get rid of such bad qualities that Yajnas 
(Sacrifices) are undertaken. 


Mind is the altar of the Yajna 


In Thretha Yuga, Vishvaamithra took the help of Raama to ensure the conduct of the Yajna 
without hindrance from the demonic forces. His Aashram was called Siddhaashrama. Actually 
the heart of every human being is a Siddhaashrama. The moment evil thoughts or bad feelings 
arise in man, that is the beginning of all sins. When the heart is polluted with such sinful 
thoughts, one should seek the help of Aathma Raama, just as Vishvaamithra sought the help of 
Raama to put an end to the ogress Thaataki. If you think of God and pray to Him with sincere 
devotion, every deed done by you will be a Yajna. The mind is the altar of this Yajna. You must 
offer all the evil qualities at the altar of the mind. That is the ideal internal Yajna to be performed 
by every person as distinct from the external Yajna done ritualistically. 


The Raamaayana as allegory 


The allegorical meaning of the Raamayana story should be properly understood. Raama stands 
for Yajur Vedha, as he was the embodiment of Dharma. Lakshmana esteemed Raama's words as 
law and followed him. He was always chanting the name of Raama. He represents Rig Vedha. 
Bharatha represents Saama Vedha, as he was always singing the glory of Raama. Shathrughna 
represents Atharva Vedha. Thus the four sons of Emperor Dhasharatha of Ayodhya represent the 
four Vedhas. Dhasharatha's capital, Ayodhya, symbolises a place where no enemy can enter. 
Dhasharatha symbolises rite karmendhriyas (five organs of action) and the Jnaanendhriyas (five 
organs of cognition). The three queens of Dhasharatha--Kaushalya; Sumithra and Kaikeyi-- 
represent the Saathvik, Raajasik and Thaamasik Gunas (qualities of Goodness, Passion and 
Inertia). If the inner significance of the Raamayana is properly understood, it will serve as a 
manual of ideal living for all mankind. 


If the principle underlying the Yajna is understood, it will be realised that the Divinity pervading 
everywhere is within you too. “Antharbahischa thath sarvam vyaapya Naaraayanasthithah." 


Through the conduct of a Yajna one can understand the immutable permanent Reality in a fast- 
changing world. 


Fire has an important role in the Yajna. Fire for the Yajna is created by churning two wooden 
sticks placed together. The top stick is the mother and the bottom piece is the father of Agni 
(Fire). Immediately after birth, Agni devours both father and mother. Fire is the presiding priest 
or Brahma (for the Yajna). He takes the offerings and acts as a courier to convey them to the 
Gods. Yajna has, moreover, many significant inner meanings. Those who do not know them 
make fun of it or deride it. 


Since people have forgotten the real significance of such holy rituals performed for promoting 
the welfare of mankind, humanity is suffering from all sorts of tribulations and miseries. In the 
ethical, physical, scientific and all other fields today man has given up his Svabhaava (true 
nature) and is keen only to earn Prabhaava (fame). Fame is like passing cloud. Today one may 
be a Prime Minister, full of fame and power. But when he steps down from that post no one will 
care for him. 


Upanishaths proclaim the real nature of man 


What is the true nature of man? A term for man in Sanskrith is Nara. Nara means Aathma (the 
Self). The five elements have come from Aathma. They are called Naaramu. The term 
Naaraayana has come from this. Nara does not refer to the physical form of a human being. He is 
the Aathma and should behave in keeping with his reality. A man without human qualities is like 
a flower without smell, a fruit without juice and a cow that cannot give milk. 


The Upanishaths explain this truth. They stress the importance of man knowing his own Reality, 
transcending the body, the senses, the mind and the intellect. They proclaim that the real nature 
of man is love, compassion and selflessness. But people have forgotten their original nature and 
are nourishing unnatural qualities. How can Dharma be sustained in such circumstances? People 
are mainly engaged in selfish pursuits. They use their sense organs in wrong directions, instead 
of seeing good, hearing good, speaking good and doing good, which is the godward path. When 
there is no trace of any good quality in human beings, how can one expect purity of heart? 


Power of the Divine 


Yajnas with sacrifice as the basis provide the royal road to Self-Realisation as opposed to the 
perilous path of self-destruction, in which people are engaging themselves now. Yajnas are 
designed to invoke the power of the Divine for the welfare of mankind. Divine power is limitless 
and beyond the comprehension of the limited intellect of man, who is labouring under the 
delusion that he is all-powerful and can achieve anything. Even the great saint musician and 
composer Thyaagaraaja once doubted the power of God when he was subject to great misery and 
suffering, but recovered his faith immediately after he recollected how, without the power of the 
Divine, a monkey (Hanumaan) could cross the ocean or Lakshmana do service at Raama's feet or 
Bharatha worship His sandals or Lakshmi, the Goddess of wealth, serve at His Lotus Feet. He 
blamed himself for doubting the power of the Lord and regretted the lapse in his devotion. 


The significance of the offerings made in the holy fire of a Yajna is that whatever is offered is 
converted into Amruth (Divine Ambrosia) and conveyed to the gods. When. man sacrifices his 
bad qualities, he is transformed into the Divine. With this in view, the Upanishaths declare: 
"Lead me from untruth to Truth, from ignorance to Knowledge, from death to Immortality." 
Thus the Yajna helps man to progress to the summit of eternal bliss. 


The Yajna is not for passing time. The cosmic energy issuing from the Manthras will go up in 
the fire from the Yajna hearth and spread all over the world and purify the atmosphere. Some 
agnostics may criticise this as wasting food, ghee and other valuable articles by throwing them 
into the fire. This is as foolish as the criticism of an ignorant person that a farmer wastes good 
quality seeds by casting them on his farm. He does not realise that one small measure of the seed 
will yield several bags of grain as harvest. The Yajna is done not for selfish purposes but for the 
welfare of the entire world. It reflects the noble ideal of service and sacrifice before self. 


Excerpts from Discourse on 19-10-1993. 


The quest for happiness 


There is no penance other than Shaanthi (stillness of the mind). It is the ornament adorned by 
saints and it is what every one yearns for in his heart. Saint Thyaagaraaja sang that there is no 
comfort or happiness without peace "Saaanthamu leka soukhyamu ledhu." 


Sukham (the state of enjoyment of happiness) is like heaven. The pleasures derived by the senses 
from worldly objects are transient, while real happiness lies in experiencing the bliss from the 
Inner Self. People are unhappy because of Thrishna, or the insatiable thirst for worldly pleasures. 
Desires are always multiplying endlessly. The only way to overcome misery or grief is to put a 
curb on desires. 


Dhaya (compassion) is inherent in every human being. But few are prepared to share this with 
their fellow-beings. Man is deluded by the trivial pleasures from mundane things and is filled 
with greed and lust. This is the main obstacle in the spiritual path. 


Basis of adhvaithik principle is Ekaathma bhaava 


The Vedhas deal with rituals and worship, which imply a dualism between the worshipper and 
the object worshipped. Vedhaantha spells out the principle of Adhvaitha (non-duality). It is 
interpreted in different ways, but the real basis of the Adhvaithik principle is Ekaathma bhaava, 
that is the feeling that there is only one Aathma pervading everywhere and none else. “Adhvaitha 
Dharshanam Jnaanam" (Wisdom lies in the perception of oneness). The Upanishaths preach this 
oneness, based on the concept of unity in diversity. Upa means "near," ni represents "nishtha" 
and shath means "sit". Upanishath means that one should sit near the preceptor to acquire the 
Supreme Spiritual Wisdom. 


The Upanishaths originated during different periods of time. That is why we find that the 
teachings of the different Upanishaths are not based on the circumstances obtaining at one 
particular time, but they are applicable universally at all times as they teach only what is vital for 
the welfare of humanity. 


"Eeshaavaasyam Idham Sarvam" says the Eeshopanishath. There is no place in the universe 
where God is not present. Just as air is everywhere even though we cannot see it with our eyes, 
Divinity is all pervasive. But for this Divinity, the Sun and the Moon cannot shine, rivers will not 
flow, crops will not grow. The Divine governs the whole universe. All things in creation are for 
the use of the entire world. No one can claim exclusive right over these gifts of Nature. 


The Eeshaavaasya Upanishath teaches man how to combine Bhoga with Thyaaga (enjoy the 
world with an attitude of sacrifice). One imbued with the feelings of Thyaaga (sacrifice) will not 


revel in mundane pleasures. Sacrifice and sensual pleasures cannot co-exist just as water and fire 
cannot co-exist. What, then, is the inner significance of this directive that man should enjoy 
Bhoga (pleasurable experiences) with Thyaaga (renunciation)? 


It means that though one is not interested in mundane things, he has to do his duty. He cannot 
escape doing karma. He should shed his ego while doing his work and should not consider 
himself as the doer. He should do his duty without any desire for the fruits thereof. Because man 
is filled with ego and is not interested in experiencing the real bliss, he suffers from Roga 
(disease). When work is done with a selfless attitude there is no difference between bhoga and 
thyaaga. We find today in the world only rogis (persons afflicted with disease) and not bhogis or 
thyaagis. You should give up attachment to worldly things and direct your attachment to the 
Divine only. Sage Yaajnavalkya taught his wife Maithreyi this principle of oneness. The same 
Parabrahman (Supreme Self) is present in everyone in the form of Awareness. 


Desireless action leads you away from misery 


The Eeshaavaasya Upanishath teaches that this Sathyam (Truth) is changeless. It is the basis of 
the Sanathana Dharma that has been followed in Bhaarath. Man cannot live without Karma 
(action). But he should do it without the feeling of ego and desire for reward. When the seed is 
sown, the tree will grow and yield fruit whether you like it or not. The desire for fruit is the cause 
of misery. The Upanishaths teach the way of getting rid of the ego. 


Prakrithi is like a mirror which reflects whatever object is placed before it. When you look into 
the mirror there are three entities--yourself, the mirror and the reflection. But if you remove the 
mirror, there is only one left and that is 'you.' The reflection is gone. Because of worldly feelings, 
you look at the reflection. Remove the worldly feelings, you see your Inner Self which is the 
Reality. When you get rid of the feelings of I and Mine everything becomes one. 


The Upanishaths taught the difference between pleasure and pain. If you shed your ego and 
experience Divinity you will get rid of your pain and enjoy lasting bliss. The Upanishaths teach 
through stories the subtlest truths. You should understand their inner significance - and taste the 
nectarine sweetness. This is possible only when there is Bhaava-Shuddhi (inner purity). Purity of 
heart leads to Siddhi---Self realisation. 


Qualities that are Nature's gift to man 


It is unnatural for man to behave like animals with selfishness, anger and jealousy. A 
compassionate heart is Nature's gift to man. It is a pity that man does not make any effort to 
realise that the Divine is closer to him than his own parents. One should search within, and not in 
the external, for God. 


Love, Compassion, Self-Confidence and Sacrifice are the real human qualities. You are 
Amrithaputhra (Son of Immortality). Purity in thought, word and deed is a basic requisite for 
man. Under any circumstances, man should not allow this threefold purity to be affected. 
Patience is another ideal quality one should develop. Whatever troubles or obstacles one may 
meet with while doing his proper duty, he should bear with them. One should not get depressed 
when others blame or abuse him but should stick, to the path of truth. The third quality is 
perseverance which is indeed a prime need for any one in any field but more so in the spiritual 
path. 


Once you have taken up a vow to do a good thing, you should not go back on it under any 
circumstance. You should fulfill it even at the cost of your life. This is the hallmark of a true 


devotee. In ancient times, people had this determination and became good souls. The Paandavas 
had to spend their lives in forests feeding on leaves and fruits. Still they never gave up their 
adherence to the plighted word. In the Kali Yuga devotees have to face a lot of trials and 
challenges, but they should not waver even a wee bit in their devotion to God. 


Just as gold has to be heated, hammered and subjected to many processes before it can be made 
into a jewel, devotees have to pass through ordeals ordained by the Divine. 


The divinity in man 


With Premabhaava (feeling of pure love) you can realise your oneness with the world. Every 
object has five attributes, namely Asthi, Bhaathi, Priyam, Name and Form. The first three-- 
Existence, Cognisability and Utility ----- are permanent and changeless, while Name and Form 
are subject to change. Human beings with different names and forms are just like waves on the 
ocean of Sath-chith-aanandha. They are also ame Sath-chith-aanandha. The essence is the same 
in all names and forms. The realisation of this truth is spirituality. This is the message of the 
Upanishaths. It does not matter if you cannot understand every word of the Upanishaths. It is 
enough if you realise the truth that you are embodiments of the Divine. 


When you get some troubles, you cry in a state of despair and even blame God. There is no need 
for you to feel aggrieved at all. All troubles are passing clouds. The clouds cannot hide for long 
the effulgence of the Sun which is permanent. Similarly the Aathma cannot be affected by 
anything. If you identify yourself with this Reality you will have no cause for grief at all as you 
will be embodiments of bliss. 


Excerpts from Discourse on 20-10-1993. 


Descent of the Divine 


The same Supreme Being who saved Prahlaadha by appearing from the pillar and punishing his 
demonic father, the same Supreme Being who came to the rescue of Kuchela, the same Being 
who descended from Vaikuntha to save Gajendhra, the Lord of the elephants, has now come to 
the world as Sath-chith-aanandhamurthi, presiding over the hearts of all as Puttaparthi 
Chakravarthi. 


You should realise that I have come to remind you of your Reality, that in fact everyone of you is 
an embodiment of Sath-chith-aanandha. 


Excerpts from Discourse on 21-10-1993. 


Unity in diversity 


Though the Upanishaths are termed as Vedhaantha (the end of the Vedhas) they are actually the 
Siras (head) of the Vedhas. The Eeshaavaasya Upanishath emphasises that man is bound by 
action and purity of heart is the basis for right action--"Chitthasya Shud-dhyaye Dharmah." 
Right action has to be done for achieving purity of heart. When you get rid of bad feelings, evil 
thoughts and evil deeds, you can experience your Inner Self. 


As long as one is puffed up with the pride of education, wealth, status and position one cannot 
comprehend the Aathma. You must turn your mind away from all these transient mundane 


pursuits and redirect it towards the Inner Self to realise the Aathmabhaava, which is eternal and 
changeless. This is the basis for all the changing phenomena of the mundane world. (At this 
stage, Bhagavaan materialised a gold chain by a wave of His hand and went on to explain that 
the basis for all gold jewellery is gold). The gold chain can be melted and turned into solid gold 
from which other ornaments can be made bearing different names and forms. Similarly, the basis 
for all the different forms and names of beings in the world is Divine. 


The Eeshaavaasya Upanishath stresses the unity in diversity. It teaches that the mind and the 
body will change but the Aathma is the unifying, changeless and permanent entity. Man, in his 
ignorance, considers all changing objects as true and does not look into the common basis which 
is changeless. 


Excerpts from Discourse on 22-10-1993. 


Man and the Divine 


The Vedhic invocation says "Puurnamadhah Puurnanuidham," meaning "That is whole and this 
is whole." This implies that Divinity and humanity are not different. The same constituents are 
there in both. In fact there is only one Supreme Power which manifests itself in multitudes of 
forms. 


If you take the Gaayathri Manthra, it starts with "Bhur Bhuvah Suvah," in which Bhur is the 
Bhuuloka (this world where we live), Buhvah is the other world and Suvah is the world of 
Radiation. All the worlds are within every human being. Man is an embodiment of the three 
phases of time (past, present and future) and the three powers of creation, preservation and 
dissolution. He is thus the embodiment of the Prajna (principle of the Supreme Consciousness). 


The five vital airs, Praana, Apaana, Udaana, Samaana and Vyaana are the constituent elements 
of Naadha (the primordial sound). Bindhu represents steadiness of our body, mind and intellect. 
Kala represents the Aathma. The Eeshaavaasya Upanishath deals with the different aspects of 
Naadha, Bindhu and Kala. It says that these Three are like a triangle with the Self as the apex 
and the body and mind as the two points at the base. The body is gross, while the Self is subtle 
and the mind is a combination of the two. Just as Naadha, Bindhu and Kala are everywhere, the 
mind is also all-pervasive as stated in the Eeshaavaasya Upanishath. The mind is the cause of 
pain and pleasure, happiness and misery, bondage and liberation. It should be properly directed 
towards Prajna (Awareness). The body is inert matter and cannot function without the Prajna 
principle, which is radiation. Praana (vibration) animates the whole body. All the three are 
constituents of Sath-Chith-Aanandha. Man experiences Aanandha in the deep sleep state-- 
Swapna-Avastha and perceives worldly things in the waking state---Jaagratha-Avastha. 


The body houses the immovable Aathma 


The Upanishaths point out that there are three entities: the Kshara, Akshara and Kshraakshrara 
(Immovable, movable and movable-immovable). The movable body houses the immovable 
Aathma. One who understands this principle of Akshara will have nothing to do with the world. 
The body is given only for knowing the Aathma principle, but man is using it for other purposes 
and thus abusing it. 


The human body consists of eyes, ears, nose, tongue, etc. These are but instruments that help one 
to make the journey of life. There are three elements in all actions' the Kartha (doer), Karma 


(action) and the Kaarana (purpose of the action). The Upanishaths declare that if all the three are 
in harmony one will achieve success. All the limbs and sense organs in a man can function only 
when the life force is there. That is Chaithanya Shakthi. It comes from the Self, which is Prajna, 
Aathma Shakthi or Radiation. Even scientists are aware that matter cannot move on its own 
without energy. But they are not able to recognise the Aathmashakthi which was recognised by 
the ancient Rishis. The moment one becomes aware of this truth he can be considered to be free 
from the bondage of the phenomenal world. 


Socrates told his disciples that the Universe is governed by truth, goodness and beauty. These are 
the same as Sathyam, Shivam Sundaram, the terms used by the Bhaaratheeyas to describe 
Divinity from time immemorial. The truth that transcends the categories of time is the Real 
Truth. Man is an embodiment of this Truth. But people have forgotten this today. People relish 
only untruth. Truth is not palatable to them, while untruth seems sweet, though it is poisonous. 
"Speak the truth, do righteous acts" is the motto of Bhaarath, as declared in the Vedhas. But 
people today kill truth and jettison Dharma. How then can they have peace? 


The Kenopanishad proclaims that the basis of every action should be Truth which is Divine. The 
Rishis did not compile the Upanishaths as a pastime. They gave this valuable treasure for the 
welfare of mankind. 


Devotees’ failure to know what Svaami wants 


Several persons holding high positions come here to get Svaami's blessings for achieving higher 
positions or for other personal benefits. Big businessmen and traders come here to take Svaami's 
blessings and return. Those in the teaching, legal and other professions come here. Theists come 
here, participate in Bhajans etc., and go away. All of them come to Svaami to get their desires 
fulfilled. No one comes to know what Svaami wants. How many strive for Svaami's sake? 
Everyone comes only with selfish motives. I want to point out that enjoying benefits and failing 
to show gratitude is grievously wrong. In ancient days the devotees of the Lord sacrificed their 
lives by engaging themselves this divine quality of selflessness. It is only by sacrifice you can 
achieve immortality. You should love all without distinction and serve society. 


"Sacrifice and share Divinity with every one" is the message of the Upanishaths. You should not 
bother about your close relations alone, as these relationships are only temporary. You should 
develop Vishva Prema (Universal Love). 


You may wonder why I am telling this repeatedly. Though I have been telling you all this for 
several years no one seems to change for the better. So I have to emphasise the need for your 
getting rid of too much attachment to your kith and kin. Love your children but do not get 
excessively attached to them. You must make use of your body for doing your duty, but do not 
get too much attached to it. 


Act according to your role in life 


Every person has to play his role in life. How this should be done is illustrated by a story. Once 
an actor went to the court of Bhoja Raja to exhibit his talents and get a reward. First he went in 
the role of a renunciant wearing saffron robes. When the king offered him some gold he declined 
to accept it. When questioned whether what he gave was not enough, the actor replied he would 
come again the next day. 


The next day he came in the guise of a dancing girl and gave a fine performance which pleased 
everyone. When he was offered some gold coins in a plate by the king, the actor said what was 


offered was not enough. When the king questioned him as to why he had refused to take 
anything on the previous day, but was asking for more that day, the actor replied that he had to 
behave in a manner befitting the role he took. The previous day he had come as a renunciant and 
had to decline the gold offered to him. But on that day he was in the role of a dancing girl and so 
could demand more money. The moral of the story is: Students should behave as students and 
devotees as devotees only. Every person in any field has to uphold certain values appropriate to 
the role he has taken up. When I say devotees should do selfless service to humanity as a way of 
serving God, it is only in your interest and for your spiritual uplift. Discriminate between what is 
permanent and what is temporary and pursue the path leading to permanent bliss. Do not hanker 
after trivial transient pleasures. Speaking the truth, do your duty. This is the message of all the 
Upanishaths. 


Excerpts from Discourse on 23-10-1993. 


Love is the vital force. Love is the governing principle. It is only 
when the precious diamond of love is shining in one's heart that 
sacred and divine thoughts about God will arise in the mind. 


BABA 


34. Significance of Yajnas 


Neither Charity, nor the performance of sacrifices, 
Neither penance, nor the highest knowledge, 

Nor any other thing can be equal 

To the power of control of the senses, 

Whatever enquiry or investigation one may make. 


FEW men in the world are able to recognise what is the primary goal of life. Many are not even 
worried about this inability. 


What is life? What is its highest goal? Man has to enquire into these basic questions. Man's 
highest aim, however, appears to be to obtain food, clothing, shelter and progeny. All these are, 
no doubt, necessary to some extent. But these are related to mere living and have no relation to 
the supreme goal of life. Along with leading one's ordinary life, one has to take note of the great 
aim of life. Man must recognise the immense preciousness of human life. Every householder has 
to consider not only his duties as a householder living in the Grihasthaaranyam (forest of family 
life) but also about Brihadhaaranyam (the message of the Upanishath of that name). Those 
living in the jungle of the family, need to know about the life envisaged in Brihadha-aranyaka. 


Brihadhaaranyaka Upanishath 


What is this Brihadhaaranya? It is the Immense (Brihath) hermitage. This aashram is the 
combined expression of the mind, speech, and life. Thejas (effulgence), symbolises vaak 
(speech). Mind is represented by food Annamaya. Praana (the Life-Principle) is Rasamaya 
(essential sweetness). The effulgent speech, in association with the mind as food becomes the 
essence of the Life-Principle. This truth was proclaimed by the sages in the Upanishathik 
declaration: "Raso vai Sah" (He, the Divine, is all sweetness) the form of Brahman. 


The Rasa principle is present only in Praana (the Life Principle). The cosmos is based on life. 
There is, however, the aathma, which transcends the Life Principle. 


The Brihadhaaranyaka Upanishath is the unified form of Vaak, Manas and Prajna. As the sages 
in the forest contemplated on this form and realised the bliss of experiencing the Divine, this got 
the appellation Aaranyaka (Forest). As fire arises in forests, Agni (Fire) got the name Aaranya. 
Man's life originates in fire, grows on fire and ends in Agni. Born from the warm womb of the 
mother, sustained by the fire of his digestive organ, man ultimately ends on the funeral pyre. Fire 
is thus the basic cause of human birth and death. 


Agni is an embodiment of the Divine. Fire is effulgent. It nourishes the whole world. But it needs 
to be kept under control. "There is nothing great without restraint." 


Rationale behind sacrifices 


The ancients started performing Yajnas and Yaagas (sacrifices) to propitiate the Divine in the 
form of Fire. The sacrifices were performed not to secure personal benefits or to get desires 
fulfilled, or to get over difficulties. They embarked on sacrifices only to secure 
Aathmaanandham the (Bliss of the Spirit). 


Once, Emperor Janaka performed a big Yajna. Many scholars participated in the sacrifice, 
including scholarly women. Among such women were Maithreyi, Gargi and others. At that 
Yajna a pandith called Ashvala started putting questions to the sage Yaajnavalkya. "How many 
deities are there?" he asked. Yaajnavalkya, being a very shrewd person, took the cue from the 
word "here." He answered "There are 3306." The entire assembly was taken by surprise at this 
figure. They wondered whether there could be 3306 deities present at the Yajna. 


What lay behind Yaajnavalkya's reply? He considered everyone present at the Yajna as divine. 
"God appears in human form." Hence, in those days, men were not regarded as mere human 
beings at Yajnas and Yaagas. Every individual was considered as a manifestation of the Divine. 


Ashvala then posed another question to Yaajnavalkya. He asked: “Is it possible to reduce this 
number of deities?" "Yes, it is possible," said Yaajnavalkya. There was no mention of "here" in 
the second question. Yaajnavalkya answered: “Thirty three deities." Asked whether he could 
state who these deities were, Yaajnavalkya said: “There are eight Vasus, eleven Rudhras, twelve 
Aaadhithyas, Indhra and Prajaapathi. All these together make 33." 


Yaajnavalkya reduces the number of deifies to one 


The assembly was satisfied with the answer. Then, Gargi got up and asked: "Venerable sage! Is 
it possible to reduce this number further?" "Certainly yes," declared Yaajnavalkya. "There are 
six: Agni (Fire), Bhuumi (earth), Vaayu (the Wind-God), Aadhithya (the Sun God) Amarathvam 
(Immortality), and Adhvara." These six are the true deities, he said. 


Ashvala got up and asked whether the number could be reduced further, Yaajnavalkya said the 
number could be reduced to three: The Past, the Present, and the Future. The answer was 
accepted by the assembly. 


In answer to further questions whether the number could be further reduced to the most 
important deities, Yaajnavalkya said; "They are two: Food and Praana (Life)." 


Asked whether the number could be further reduced, he said that it could be reduced to one-and- 
a-half and he explained that the all-pervasive Vaayu (the Wind God) is known as Adhyartha (one 
and a half). Asked whether a further reduction was possible he said it could be reduced to one, 
namely, Praana (Life). 


When enquiries from the scientific, the spiritual and other points of view are carried out to find 
out the ultimate divine entity, Praana, the presiding deity of Life, emerged as the only one. 


Where does this Life Principle dwell? The answer is' it has no specific place or time. It is 
everywhere. The purpose of the Yajna is to propitiate this all-pervading Life-Force. 


Yajna means acquiring the highest wisdom 


What is Yajna? It is not merely offering oblations to the sacred fire, homam. Yajna means 
acquiring the highest wisdom by Yama and Niyama (control of the senses and practice of 
spiritual discipline). This wisdom is not related to worldly knowledge. All the knowledge 
acquired through the intellect is illusory. It is based on dualism and is tantamount to ignorance. It 
may serve to score debating points; such debates also promote discord. 


The knowledge that transcends all controversies and is related to the eternal verities is the 
Aathma-Jnaanam (Knowledge of the Self). It is for acquiring this supreme knowledge that the 
ancient Rishis performed Yajnas and Yaagas. 


Practices like reciting the Lalitha Sahasranaama cannot be considered Yajna in the true sense. 
Only when one embarks on the internal quest for the realisation of the Self within can he acquire 
Aathma Jnaana (Knowledge of the Self). 


For this purpose there is no need to study any books. Only by direct experience and one's own 
spiritual Saadhana can this awareness of the Self be realised. Man has to understand that he is 
the cause of his own happiness or misery and that all that he seeks or loves are not for their sake, 
but for his own sake. Hence, he has to understand his own true nature. Realising. the 
ephemerality of all worldly objects, man should recognise that enduring happiness can be got 
only by developing love for God. 


A great sage like Yaajnavalkya declared that the whole cosmos is a manifestation of the Divine. 
The Divine is omnipresent. This awareness of the Divine has to be experienced by everyone. 


Sense of oneness is the message of Pranava 


The Brihadhaarnyaka Upanishath pointed out that this oneness is proclaimed by the all- 
pervading sacred Pranava "OM". This pervasiveness can be experienced in a myriad ways, 
above all, in the sound that can be heard when one is alone and closes his ears. Man has to realise 
the redemptive power of Pranava Manthra. It is the means to overcome the vicissitudes of life 
and realise union with the Divine. The body is like a water bubble that originates in water, grows 
in water and merges in water. The body is the water bubble and Naaraayana is the water. It has 
come from Naaraayana and has to merge in Him. 


The Yajnas and Yaagas are designed to teach such spiritual truths. But human beings, caught up 
in the coils of worldly life, are a prey to all kinds of troubles and tribulations. Some of them are 
always prone to doing harm to others. They convert even the good to evil. For such persons there 
is no end but utter destruction. Everyone, therefore, has to know something about human life and 
the Divine life. There are many who cannot see anything good, but see only what is bad. There 
are others who always see what is bad, but consider it as good. Both these ways of looking at 
things are false. The man with a godly outlook sees the good always. 


In human life, one should not have any kind of bad thoughts. Even when someone reviles you, 
you should practise self-restraint and remain calm. There is no power equal to such self-restraint. 
Everyone should develop such tranquillity (or peace). The more peaceful you are, the greater 
your longevity. People today easily lose their peace. They get enraged on the slightest 
provocation. There are four types of men who view the good and the bad in different ways. Of 
these, worse than demons are those who deride all that is good and picture it as evil. These 
perversions are a reflection of the bad times confronting mankind. Such attitudes are indications 
of impending disaster. 


Portents of the Kali age even before its dawn 


Once Krishna and Balaraama were engaged in a lively conversation. Balaraama asked Krishna: 
"How is it many untoward things are happening today? Apart from the differences between the 
Paandavas and the Kauravas, discord is rearing its head even among our own Yaadhavas. There 
are growing conflicts amongst them. Bitterness is rampant. Enmity is growing." Krishna 
smilingly replied: "This is a manifestation of the power of Kali. The Kali Age is dawning. These 
are its portents. These evil tendencies are an indication of the disasters to come. 


All the evil tendencies that are manifest today are indication of the impending disasters. The 
future is in your hands. To avert disaster, all evil thoughts have to be eschewed. You have to 
develop always peaceful thoughts. When any thought of doing harm to somebody arises in your 
mind, examine whether it is right or wrong. If you wish to make any public statement examine 
whether it is true or false. Don't broadcast any kind of bazaar gossip. Investigate the truth. Do not 
be in a hurry. Wait till you have got all the facts. To draw conclusions in haste on the basis of 
imperfect information is a sign of stupidity. 


A lesson to be learnt from the Mahaabhaaratha 


Why do untoward events happen? Only to promote what is good. They have a cleaning effect. 
Rise and fall are 'natural events. When any such thing takes place in relation to the Divine, it 
must be regarded as the prelude to something elevating and sublime. 


Here is an illustration from the Mahaabhaaratha. The battle between the Paandavas and Kauravas 
had gone on for nine days. On all the nine days, the Paandavas were the losers. Yudhishtira and 
Arjuna were dejected. 


At that time Krishna told them: "Why are you getting so impatient? Unrighteousness score some 
victories in the beginning. Gradually; it declines and the forces of righteousness, peace and truth 
gain the upper hand. Therefore, do not have any worry. Get up, Dhananjaya (Arjuna). Dharma is 
bound to win. Selfishness will be destroyed. Alas! the parents of a hundred sons will ultimately 
have not' even one to perform their obsequies. What a fate! What is the reason? It is the result of 
the crooked stratagems of evil-minded men. They are full of low cunning. They have the worst 
traits in men, Such persons bring ruin on great royal dynasties. Only a rain of arrows can bring 
about peace." Krishna thus roused the drooping spirits of Dharmaja and Arjuna. 


The Kauravas were unable to tolerate the popularity and good name of the Paandavas. The 
Paandavas were the very embodiments of Righteousness. They were totally wedded to truth. 
Were it otherwise, would valiant heroes like Bheema and Arjuna remain inactive when 
Dhraupadhi was sought to be disrobed? They allowed events to take their inevitable course. 


Hence, mishaps in life should be regarded as happenings which serve to further one's spiritual 
progress. 


Uniqueness of Sai Seva activities 


Today when the Sai Seva organisations are rendering glorious service all over the world, there 
are some. persons who, like the Kauravas, are consumed by envy. They have their abettors and 
accomplices like Shakuni, Dhuryodhana's uncle. Such men cannot be considered as educated or 
intelligent persons, If they were really educated, they would not indulge in such mean tactics. 
But what is the outcome of all this? The maligners will be defeated by their own weapons. 


Very soon the glory of Sai will spread to every part of the world. It will increase a thousand-fold. 
The reason. is the essential goodness of the Sai Mission. It is totally free from any taint. Every 
act is done out of the purest of motives. Everything that is said is based on truth. All activities are 
conducted without depending on any outsider. Hence, there is no room for fear. 


After the harvest when the sheaves of grains are winnowed, the wind blows away all the chaff, 
leaving only the grains behind. Through this process, the true devotees will remain steadfast. The 
wavering puppets will drift away. This is the process of winnowing. 


Hence, adhere firmly to the truth of your convictions. Be prepared to meet any challenges. Life is 
a challenge, meet it. Be ready to face any situation. How is this to be done? Not by tit-for-tat or 
blow-for-blow. You have always to be truthful. Do not accuse anyone. You have no need to 
harm anyone. Adhere to the truth and esteem it as the life-breath of a true devotee. Strengthen 
your faith in God. Envious people invent all kinds of stories. They feed the flame of hatred in 
others. All these belong to the evil breed of Shakuni. And where do they find their moorings? In 
the company of evil-minded men like Dhuryodhana and Dhussasana. They will never go near 
righteous men like Dharmaja (the eldest of the Paandavas). There is only a bad end for such 
persons. The good will never come to grief. Good causes are bound to flourish. Hence establish 
your life in truth. 


Carry on the good work 


Embodiments of love! Good opportunities come rarely. Once lost, they may' not recur. Making 
good use of the present opportunity, see that the Sai organisations grow from day to day. Every 
street must reverberate with the name of Sai. Every heart should be purified. Every mind should 
be full of happiness. Love even your enemies. Treat even the one who hates you as friend. Then, 
there will be no need to accuse anyone. When you adhere to your truth and live upto it, you are 
bound to be successful. Truth is one. That is the truth which should be the sheet-anchor of your 
life. 


As many are gathered here, I wish to inform you that the programme for the Seventieth Birthday 
is being drawn up. Whatever may happen, these celebrations will go on. Sai's resolve will be 
fulfilled. Even if the heavens fall, Sai's resolve will not alter. We do not speak about these 
resolves, nor are they broadcast among the public. In the world only goods that are not easily 
sold, are advertised. Goods that have a ready market are not advertised. 


Important events for Seventieth Birthday 


During the next two years, many important events are going to happen. Programmes are afoot to 
help the poor and the needy. On November 18th, 70 marriages will be performed. People often 
talk about mass marriages. They are rather simple affairs. The marriages we intend to perform 
will be different. The weddings will be such that the married couples will say: "We never 
imagined that such a thing could happen in our lives!" Each bride will be given a wedding 
medallion (bottu) in a gold chain. The bridegroom will receive a gold ring. A set of cooking 
utensils will be presented along with some provisions. The brides will be given valuable 
Kanjeevaram saris. The couples will also be given houses in due course. 


It is also intended to provide sewing machines to women who are confined to their houses and 
cannot support themselves by working outside. 


All are our people. The Divine is in all. But owing to their past actions, and their misfortunes, 
some of them entertain silly ideas. They are transient and not lasting. Even Dhuryodhana and 
Dhussasana praised Krishna .in the end. Therefore, do not have ill-will towards anyone. Love 
everyone and pray for everybody's well-being. To the extent possible, take part in the work of 
Sai Organisations. Today there is no nobler work in the world. 


I shall not speak about the numerous other organisations in the world. But the purity that obtains 
in the Sai Organisations cannot be found anywhere else. Gossip mongers may talk as they please. 
But so far as our organisations are concerned their watchword always is "Help! Help! Help! 
Serve! Serve! Serve!" This is their primary aim. 


I do not have any differences based on race, caste, or creed. The weddings will be performed 
without regard to any of these considerations. Every couple will be blessed with happiness and 
inducted into the right code of conduct for householders. Those seeking to get married should 
abide by the laws of the country. 


Valedictory Discourse at the Vedha Purusha Sapthaaha Jnaana Yajna, on Vijayadhashami Day, 
in the Puurnachandhra Auditorium on 24-10-1993. 


Those who seek to know God, must steel themselves to bear insult, 
injury and torture, with a smile. 


BABA 


35. Education should develop human values 


Education confers beauty on man; 

It is his secret treasure; 

It confers pleasure, fame and happiness; 
It is the’ teacher of teachers; 

It is one's kinsman-when abroad; 

It confers supreme vision; 

In a royal assembly it is learning alone, 
Not wealth, that counts; 

A man without learning is an animal. 


STUDENTS and teachers! Today neither students nor teachers are aware of the true meaning of 
education. Education should foster morality, righteousness and character. Man today has 
acquired prodigious knowledge in the fields of science and technology. But this serves only to 
promote a material civilisation and teaches only knowledge of the external worlds to students. 
What man truly needs today is not this external knowledge. He needs refinement of the heart. 
This can be got only by internal culture. 


It is not enough today to make a man a mere human being. He has to be transformed into an ideal 
human being. Education makes a man compassionate. That is the fulfilment of the purpose of 
education. Education should not be equated with book knowledge or the acquisition of skills for 
leading one's life in the world. The modern student is unable to determine what is the basis of his 
life and what is important in it. Hence, he loses confidence in himself. Because they lack the 
patriotism, born out of love for the country, and the devotion to God, which instills a spirit of 
sacrifice, students today have lost all self-confidence. 


Loss of self-confidence is the cause of all troubles 


Most of the troubles tormenting the world today stem from loss of Aathma-Vishvaasa (self- 
confidence). 


Devoid of the fear of sin and love for God, 
Mankind today is plunged in a grave crisis. 


The eternal verities proclaimed in the scriptures have assumed bizarre forms. Sacred nature is 
divorced from humanity. The ancient wisdom is in eclipse. Perverted knowledge is growing. In 
such a situation, how can ethical and spiritual values appeal to youth? 


The entire educational system should be changed. The true purpose of education should be 
understood. 


Reading and writing cannot make a man educated. 
Are those acquiring degrees scholars? 
Without right knowledge and proper conduct, 


Can one be deemed educated? 


If learning for earning a living is esteemed as education, 
Are not birds and beasts able to live without learning? 
Education is the life-breath of human beings 


Education should be the life-breath of human beings. By converting education into a means of 
earning a livelihood, people are forgetting the meaning of life. Character determines life. It is 
pure and holy. Without character how can man lead a worthwhile and sacred life? For this 
reason, from ancient times, Bhaaratheeyas fostered a life-style based on ethics. Students are 
forgetting this ancient culture of Bhaarath. Pursuing worldly, ephemeral knowledge, they do not 
understand the nature of life. 


Man should recognise the cosmic basis of education. Education today is based on mechanical 
skills. Students should strive to promote blossoming of the heart together with development of 
the intellect. Intellectual knowledge alone cannot suffice for the conduct of life on right lines. 


It is true that Bhaarath is lagging behind in the economic sphere. But what harm does this do to 
the world? There is a greater danger from another source. This arises from the fact that people 
are immersed in material pursuits, ignoring moral and spiritual values. Unless this process is 
reversed, education cannot make headway. 


Two hundred years ago, scientists in other countries started exploring the powers of nature and 
experimented with control of the five basic elements (ether, air, fire, water and earth). They 
invented dreadful bombs and envisaged terrible wars. This is a wholly misguided effort. 


Role of science in promoting human welfare 


The arrogant claim that they have achieved scientific progress is utterly unwarranted because this 
is not true science at all. Does knowledge of how to cause mass destruction merit the name of 
science? Cannot their scientific investigations be devoted to causes which promote human 
welfare and betterment? 


All the scientific discoveries of today were excelled by the achievements of Hiranyakasipu. The 
powers obtained from them are prone to be misused. Deluded by their scientific and 
technological progress, the nations are losing their wisdom. What is the purpose served by these 
discoveries? While they promote temporary pleasures, they virtually destroy the sources of inner 
strength. The education that we must aim at is one which will direct the children towards the 
right path and promote the well-being of the nation. Only when mankind realises this need will 
world peace be a reality. 


Man needs today a mind free from attachment and hatred, speech that is untainted by falsehood, 
and a body that is totally free from violence. Of these, truthful speech is most essential. 
Unfortunately, man is not free from these taints. Hence, students should receive an education that 
produces purity of mind, speech and body. 


Of what use is man's conquest of the external world if he cannot realise, his own true nature? 
Scientists are only helping to satisfy man's selfish desires. They are keen on securing accolades 
for themselves, but are not concerned about, the welfare of society or the goals of life. How 
glorious will be their achievements if their discoveries are useful to the people and promote the 
prosperity and welfare of nations? 


Today every step of man is marked by unrighteousness. Every word is tainted by untruth. His 
thoughts are not free from evil. All his desires are rooted in selfishness. Caste and religious 
conflicts are rampant. Parochialism is growing. In short, humanness has reached its nadir. How 
then, can man be called a human being, when there is no harmony in thought, word and deed? 


Bad example set by elders make students go astray 


Moreover, there are no ideal leaders today. Even exemplary parents are not to be found. Nor are 
there ideal teachers. In olden days, the leaders, the parents and the teachers led exemplary lives. 
It is because such persons are absent today that students are without ideal examples to follow. 
There is a Thelugu saying that the calf follows the cow. Because the elders set a bad example, 
the students also are going astray. 


The students are not to blame. They are inherently good hearted and good natured. But they take 
to bad ways because of the elders. Therefore, the first requisite is for the national leaders and the 
parents to understand how the educational system should function. They should realise that 
education should aim at developing good qualities in the children and should not be regarded as a 
means to acquire wealth. Character is based on good conduct. Only a young man with good 
qualities can become a good leaden He must take part in social service as a preparation for 
leadership. Everyone should realise that his happiness is bound up with the happiness of society 
as a whole. Parents and teachers should develop such attitudes in the students. 


Despite all his achievement in the physical world, how far has man been able to develop his 
human qualities? This is the question facing the world today. If people study the ancient history 
of Bhaarath, they will realise the importance which the ancients, attached to Truth. 


Need for unity to protect national interests 


There may be differences at the individual level, but when national interests are involved, these 
differences should be forgotten and all should act in unity. This was the attitude of Dharmaja in 
respect of his Kaurava cousins. At the individual level, Dharmaja said that the five Paandava 
brothers might be ranged against the hundred Kauravas. "But if the nation is in peril, we are 105 
against the rest. It is our duty to protect the nation." 


Unfortunately, today, each party is ranged against the other and there is discord among the 
people. This should go. All should bear in mind the interests of the people. 


Education today is not inculcating in the students the spirit of compassion and kindness. Once 
Gandhiji told a foreigner that he was feeling sad because education was making students 
heartless and lacking in fellow-feeling. Students do not show any sweetness in speech. They 
have no sense of gratitude. Of what avail is such an education? The foremost quality students 
should have is humility. They must be free from conceit. They must be unselfish. Without these 
a student lacks lustre. Students today lack these qualities. They have little concern for the plight 
of their parents. But, there are also parents who pamper their children like Dhritharaashtra, the 
father of the Kauravas. If parents do not correct their children, who will correct them? How can 
parents cherish children who misbehave and earn a bad name? 


The birthday that should be celebrated is the day when good qualities are born in one. You must 
become ideal students. Students must work hard. They have to be grateful to their parents for all 
that they have received from the latter. Children who cannot please their parents, how will they 
serve the nation? 


The five life-breaths for a student 


Every human body is sustained by the five life-breaths--Praana, Apaana, Vyaana, Udhaana and 
Samaana. What are the five life-breaths for a student? They are: Truth, Righteousness, Peace, 
Love and Non-violence. All these five principles have to be rigorously observed to sublimate 
one's life. Each one should cultivate the qualities of compassion, patience and oneness. These 
qualities will promote the unity of mankind. These are based on the love-principle. Without love, 
there is no life. Love gives rise to truth. Love begets peace. When you have love, you practise 
non-violence. Love is the under-current in all these. 


Education has to be reformed. But Ministers are only trifling with changes. Reports of 
Committees are gathering dust in shelves. Educational reforms should be related to the five basic 
human values, without which education has no meaning and life itself is devoid of purpose. A 
student today has no conception of the value of Thyaaga (sacrifice). He has to learn to do his 
duty without expectation of any reward. This is a form of Yoga (Spiritual discipline). 


Knowledge is to wisdom as lightning is to cloud 


Dear students! Giving up the craze for going abroad after the completion of your studies, take a 
resolve to dedicate yourselves to the service of your village, your state and your nation. Act 
according to your conscience. In your heart shines Aathma-Vidhya (the knowledge of the Spirit). 
Knowledge should beget wisdom like the lightning in a cloud. 


Everyone of our students should stand forth as a shining example to others. The light of their 
example should spread all over the world and bring about spiritual unity among mankind. 


All changes in the educational syllabi or other changes in the economic and political spheres are 
of little value. There should be change in the mental attitude of the people, as the prelude to a 
change in the national scene. Transform yourself first and then preach to others. 


True science should foster the well-being of the people and promote unity amongst them. Unity 
will lead to purity and both will lead to Divinity. Today there is none of these. We have only 
Community (caste). It is this communal feeling that is the cause of conflict. Giving up all 
differences based on caste or creed, people should regard themselves as the children of one 
human family. There is only one religion, the religion of humanity. Students should develop 
this spirit of unity. 


Truth and Righteousness are inter-related 


Students! The future of the country, for good or ill, depends on you. The older generation cannot 
reform the nation. Only a disciplined and well educated younger generation can serve the nation 
well, as future leaders. Treat the whole world as a vast mansion. Strive for the well-being of all 
nations equally with Bhaarath. 


The Sri Sathya Sai Institute has been established to promote sacred ideals among students. 
Adhere to your principles and beliefs regardless of what others may say. Have the example of the 
Gopikas in mind. Their devotion to Krishna was firm and unwavering. Consider truth as your 
life-breath. If you speak the truth and practise righteousness, you will attain the highest state. 


Truth and Righteousness are inter-related. Together they constitute humanness. Bear in mind the 
glorious example of Harishchandhra, who sacrificed everything for the sake of truth. 


Adhere to truth in earning a living or in experiencing anything in life. Ill-gotten wealth will be 
lost in the same way. Engage yourselves in some kind of socially useful activity in the 
educational, medical or other fields. Sacrifice is more important than earning money. Students 
imbued with this spirit of service may go to any country. Do not use your diplomas as begging 
bowls for jobs. Make proper use of your education to render service to the nation and to lead 
noble lives. This is my benediction to all of you. 


Address to the Convocation of Sri Sathya Sai Institute held in the Vidhyagiri Stadium on 22-1 1- 
1993. 


36. Purity, patience, perseverance: steps to Divinity 


In this sacred land of Bhaarath 
Forbearance is our best wealth; 

Of all forms of rituals, the highest 

Is the observance of Truth and Morality; 
Of sweetness of disposition 

The greatest is maternal love; 
Jettisoning the national ideal 

That honour is greater than life itself, 
What a pity people have 

Fallen a prey to exotic practices! 

What can I say about 

The plight of Bhaarath! 

Like the elephant unaware of its strength 
Bhaaratheeyas have become docile today. 


WHEN the heart is filled with compassion, the hands are dedicated to 'the service, of others, the 
body is engaged in constant help to others, the life of such a person is sacred, purposeful and 
noble. 


The entire Cosmos is based on the bedrock of Truth. Wealth and Welfare and all comforts and 
pleasures are dependent on Truth. Wherever you turn, Truth shines effulgently. The Goddess of 
Wealth, Lakshmi, dwells in the abode of Truth. The world cannot exist without Truth, just as the 
rays cannot exist without the sun. Truth is the Cosmos and the Cosmos is Truth. 


The entire Cosmos is permeated by the Divine Eeshaavaasyam idham Jagath. It is foolish to 
imagine that the natural, physical and mundane is unreal and them is something else that sustains 
it. The Cosmos is Vishnu and Vishnu (the Supreme) is the Cosmos. The Cosmos is a 
manifestation of the Divine. 


The Universe is a Divine manifestation 


Considering this universe, composed of the five basic elements, as a Divine manifestation, the 
ancient sages embarked on a spiritual enquiry and realised the Truth. It is because this profound 
and eternal Truth has been forgotten by man that the world is a prey to all kinds of troubles and 
difficulties. 


Among the five elements, the primary one is the earth. It is all-pervasive. All the mountains, 
rivers, villages, towns, etc., are based on the earth. The scientists found that the earth is revolving 
round itself. In that case, all the objects on the earth should also be revolving. But that is not so. 
The earth has a divine power of attraction. This power of attraction holds all the objects' 
together. Hence, the earth alone cannot be regarded as the basis for all the objects. If we enquire 


more deeply, it will be found that even the earth is supported by something else. The earth is 
based on a higher power, the Divine power. 


The Divine remains steady and unchanging 


Thus, the Divine is firm, pure and changeless. Without this Divine power, nature and the 
physical world cannot function well. If, for instance, the rails on which a locomotive runs, were 
also to move along with the train, the results would be disastrous. Likewise, if. the road were 
also to move along with the car running on it, there will be accidents. It is the car that moves and 
not the earth. In this manner, many objects are in motion in the universe, but the Divine remains 
steady and unchanging. 


The next is the water element which is present everywhere. Whether we perceive it or not Life is 
impossible without water. 


The next one is Fire. This fire element is present in every living being including humans, as 
Jatharaagni (the digestive fire). This fire is not only on the earth, but is even in space. When 
clouds clash against each other, fire is generated in the form of lightning. When two inert flint- 
stones are struck against each other, fire emanates from them. Likewise when two sticks are 
rubbed against each other, fire emerges. Thus, fire also is an all-pervading power. 


Then, there is Aakaasha (space or ether). It pervades everything. There is Vaayu (air). There can 
be no life without air. You experience the presence of air during a storm or a whirlwind. But air 
is present all the time everywhere. 


When the five elements have such immense power, you can imagine what must be the potency of 
the Divine which sustains them. The five elements are Paramaathmasvaruupa (manifestations of 
the Supreme Omniself). No one can deny Its existence, whether one is a theist, an atheist or an 
agnostic. Today, these five elements are not being properly used. Instead, they are very much 
misused. Their misuse is the root cause of all the travails of the world. As the five elements are 
based on Truth, the ancient rishis observed restraint in speech so that they may adhere to truth. 
Restraint in speech nourishes truth. Excessive speech is the cause of great unrest. It is essential, 
therefore, for everyone to recognise the basic role of the five elements and live in consonance 
with that awareness. 


Religion is the reflection of belief 


The mind demonstrates the nature of the five elements. Mathi (belief) has emerged from the 
mind. Matham (religion) is reflection of belief. Religion is not what it is normally understood to 
be. There are many engaged in destruction of religion. If religion is destroyed, belief or faith will 
be destroyed and then the mind itself will be destroyed. Religious hatred has to be got rid of, not 
religion as such. Adherents of all faiths recognise the power of the five elements and worship 
them. 


Bhaaratheeyas have upheld unity in thought, word and deed by their conduct. The Vedhas have 
proclaimed that the Divine is present in all five elements. This truth is accepted by the adherents 
of all faiths. But while professing belief in this truth and proclaiming it, they are not acting upto 
it in practice. Only the Bhaaratheeyas practised this truth and experienced the bliss derived from 
it. Bhaaratheeyas adored hills, birds and trees Adherents of other faiths ridiculed such practices. 
This is due to thoughtlessness and is not a sign of sanity. All people say that God is in all beings 
and all things. But to deride Bhaaratheeyas, who act on that saying, is sheer folly. How can one, 


who acts according to his words, be regarded as a fool? Should not the one who does not live up 
to his words be treated as a fool? Let the wise determine the right answer. 


The Supreme Reality is one, which is God 


Bhaaratheeyas are known to act upto their words. People of other faiths may profess one thing 
and practise differently. We need 'not criticize any religion. 


All religions teach only what is good. 
People should lead their lives on this basis. 
If the minds are pure, 

How can religion do any harm? 


People are spoiling their minds. Religion is not at fault. Today what is needed is transformation 
of minds and not of men. When the minds are reformed, men will automatically change for the 
better. Men's lives are based on how their mind thinks. Today men should develop mental purity 
and sacred feelings. 


The Supreme Reality is one. It is God. Men of all faiths--whether they are Hindhus, Christians, 
Muslims, Paarsis or others----have recognized that God is one. It is only when men develop 
feelings of forbearance, compassion and unity, that men will have fraternal feelings towards each 
other and foster equality and justice. It is only when men develop Ekaathmabhaava (oneness in 
Spirit) that bitterness and discord will cease. Men must act on the conviction that the same 
Divine dwells in all beings. 


From the body to the Omni Self 


The Cosmos is an organism with multifarious limbs. A human being has eyes, ears, mouth, etc. 
All these organs are limbs of the human body. The body is a limb of society. Society is a limb of 
humanity. Humanity is a limb of Prakrithi. Prakrithi is a limb of the Paramaathma (Omni Self). 
This shows the relationship between the sense organs in man and the Divine. Therefore, one 
should make proper use of the senses, comprehend the nature of the Divine that sustains them 
and lead a meaningful life. 


There is the body. There is the world. There are forests, trees and many other things. In referring 
to all these, we use the word "is"---that it exists. This term "is," signifying existence, proclaims 
the fundamental fact about man. There is only one thing that exists. But man forgets this Divine 
Reality because of his selfishness and self-centredness. The latter reflect his egoism and 
ostentatiousness. It is only when the last two are extinguished, will man's inner Divinity manifest 
itself. 


The bad traits which are found in man are the result of his food and other habits and do not arise 
from his Aathma. Vices like lust, anger, envy and pride are the outcome of bad food and 
improper associations and are products of external factors. They do not arise from within. 
Qualities like love, compassion, consideration for others arise from within one's self. These are 
human values. Forgetting these values, following animal qualities, men are leading an animal 
existence. This is wrong. Men should lead lives based on their human estate. 


Divine love is permanent and imperishable 


Wealth may come and go. Strength may grow or decay. All things in the world may pass away. 
But there is one thing that is imperishable and unchanging. That is permanent Divine Love. All 
other forms of love are not real love at all. They are temporary, worldly attachments, based on 
physical, communal or other desires. 


True love is related solely to the Hridhaya (heart). Man today is not cherishing such an 
unchanging and enduring love. He is wasting his life, pursuing temporary allurements. 
Wandering about aimlessly in the pursuit of evanescent and trivial pleasures, man is immersed in 
all kinds of troubles. He can discover his true path only by seeking spiritual illumination. 
Spirituality does not mean performance of ritual worship. It calls for the removal of the animal 
traits in man. Only then sacred feelings will arise in him. That is real spirituality. Regard all 
beings as children of God. Bear no ill-will towards anyone. It is because of hatred and ill-will 
that mankind is plunged in violence and bloodshed. Man's blood is inherently pure, divine and 
unsullied. To misuse that blood in wrong ways is a sign of animal or demonic nature. 


Bhaarath today is in a crisis created by a myriad difficult problems. But not Bhaarath alone, all 
other countries are also facing similar crises. What is the reason? It is the total failure to 
remember the spiritual oneness of mankind. Only the sense of spiritual unity will generate 
universal love. That love alone will bind men together in unity. This love principle should 
emanate from the heart. Only then true unity will emerge. 


Embodiments of Love! Do not be deluded by the belief that life has been given to you for eating 
and drinking and enjoying other physical pleasures. This is not the reason for human, birth, 
which is rare blessing. What is the difference between a human being and the animals? It is 
qualities like kindness, compassion, forbearance and sympathy which differentiate human beings 
from animals. But man tends to forget these inherent qualities out of absorption in selfish, 
mundane desires. Those wearing the glass of selfishness can only see selfishness all around 
them. A defective vision produces an apparent defect in creation. There is nothing wrong with 
srishti (creation). Every defect is related to the defective dhrishti (vision). 


Perform duties but do not claim any rights 


Men must realise that true humanness will be achieved only when the five elements in the 
universe are properly used. The earth is a sacred base of the Supreme. The other four elements 
are super-imposed on it. Without the base, the other elements will be functionless. Hence all 
human beings living on earth should cooperate with each other, engage themselves in socially 
helpful activities and redeem their lives. Every man has duties to perform, but can claim no 
rights. Today people tend to assert their rights without regard to their responsibilities (or duties). 
Duties and rights go together. Today men tend to assert their rights but have no regard for their 
responsibilities. Absolute unconcern for responsibilities has become a kind of epidemic in all 
spheres of life today. When you discharge your responsibilities, your rights will be automatically 
‘ensured. 


In Bhaarath today everybody is clamouring about rights. What is the meaning of "right"? It is 
that to which you are entitled. How do you get it? Can you get the fruit without sowing the seed? 
Without a tree can there be a fruit? But you aspire for the fruit without sowing .the seed or 
rearing the tree? What folly is this? No one has any inherent claim to any right. He has only 
responsibility. Do your duty. Duty is God. Work is worship. 


When you perform your duties, you will be acquiring the title to your rights. Every man should 
discharge his duties. Performance of duty is your yoga. It is your enjoyment. It is your sacrifice. 
Discharge of duty is the basis for everything. 


Have respect for the faiths of others also 


If duties are performed according to one's respective role---as householder, student, renunciant or 
ascetic--the world will not suffer from lack of peace or prosperity. People are not attending to 
their respective functions. They are not carrying out the duties properly. Ignoring their duties, 
they interest themselves in the activities of others. 


This attitude is prevalent in the religious sphere also. Members of one faith consider it supreme 
and deride the faiths of others. No one is qualified to make such a claim. Even as you prize your 
faith, you must realize that others are equally entitled to prize their faiths. You may esteem your 
religion greatly. Adhere' to it accordingly. But do not criticize or despise the religions of other 
people. Unfortunately men have lost this sense of respect for other faiths. If all people recognise 
this truth, there will be no room in the world for conflicts and discord. 


Man strives for peace in many ways. Where is peace to be found? It is not in the external world. 
Peace must be found within. Outside you have only pieces. You must seek to manifest the peace 
within you. There are millions in the world who preach and propagate what is good. But not one 
in a hundred practises the good teachings. The world will pay no heed to those who do not 
practise what they preach. 


It is the liar who is haunted by fear 


Whether others esteem or not, you must be content to act according to your conscience. The 
inner conviction that you are acting righteously is your best witness. There is no greater Dharma 
than adherence to Truth. You need have no fear as long as you adhere to truth. It is the liar who 
is haunted by fear. 


Therefore, go forward to render social service with faith and fortitude. Eschew religious hatred, 
which is the cause of conflict. Respect every religion. 


People today talk about protecting the nation. The nation does not need protection. If you protect 
and foster truth and righteousness the nation will be automatically protected. In the name of 
protecting the country, arms and bombs are piled up which are ruining. the nation. 


At the root of all troubles is human selfishness. Some amount of concern for selfish interests is 
justified. But when anything is carried to excess, it proves calamitous. Man is endowed with the 
discriminating power to control his desires. This power must be used to decide whether any 
action is right or wrong. 


"Be," "do" and "speak" what is good 


All of you are embodiments of the Aathma (Spirit). You are all the manifestations of the Divine. 
The Indwelling Spirit is one and the same in all beings irrespective of their external differences, 
like the current that illumines bulbs of different wattage and colour. Fill your hearts with love. 
Then you can experience real bliss. With a narrow mind and heart, if you indulge in 
magniloquent words, no one will care to listen to you. First of all "Be"--be good yourself. Then 
you "Do"--act likewise. Then "Speak"--tell others about what is good. Only thus you will be 
setting an ideal example. 


Do not entertain bad feelings about anyone. They do you more harm than to others. As the 
saying in a Thelugu poem goes: "One's own anger is one's enemy and one's peace is one's friend 
and kinsfolk. One's happiness is heaven and one's sorrow is hell." Develop sacred arid pure 
feelings. We claim to celebrate the birthdays of people. But the birthday is truly celebrated when 
there is the birth of pure ideas in one. 


You celebrate the birthday of Bhagavaan. But do you follow the teachings? You will experience 
the fruits of celebrating the birthday only when you follow the teachings. Jesus said: “Love 
everyone." Christmas is celebrated, but how far does one practise love? None at all. 


There is love in everyone's heart. Share it at least with ten persons every day. This is seldom 
done. People are more keen on receiving than on giving. They are willing to give away only 
things which they do not relish. There is no sacrifice in this. 


This was the message given by Vyaasa in his eighteen puraanas. "It is meritorious to help others. 
It is sinful to inflict harm on them." 


You should not be concerned with how many have come for Svaami's birthday but how many 
are following Svaami's teachings. If every devotee is able to influence two persons, soon the 
whole world will be reformed. 


Pray for the welfare of all countries 


Embodiments of love! There is only one thing you have to offer to Me today. Pray that people in 
all countries, may the entire humanity, should be happy and at peace. "Lokaas samasthaas- 
sukhino bhavanthu" (Let all the worlds be happy). Then alone there will be real unity. Do not 
wish merely for the peace and prosperity of India alone. Pray for the welfare of all countries. All 
are our brothers, whether they are in Pakistan or America or elsewhere. 


Whether you believe it or not, realise that I am able to attract people from so many countries 
because of my all-embracing love. 


If every person observes three things, he will be one with Svaami. You will experience the 
Divine in you. As the following three are in Me, I can declare firmly about them. They are three 
P's: Purity, Patience and Perseverance. These three are in Me and around Me. Anyone with these 
three qualities will be unafraid wherever he may be. 


The most important quality is purity. Today everything is polluted. Water, air and all the five 
elements are polluted. As a result the mind of man is also polluted. How is purity to be achieved? 
Fill your minds with thoughts of God, dedicate all your actions to God and consider God as the 
inner motivator. Contemplation of God is not a matter for derision. You need have no fear on 
that account. You must have full faith in God, who is the universal sustainer. He is the protector, 
but not the punisher. The punishment you get is the consequence of your own actions. 


Therefore, chanting the name of God, doing bhajans and performing good deeds, engage 
yourselves in service of your fellow-beings. Nourish love in your hearts. Love will drive away 
all bad-thoughts. It will promote the spirit of forgiveness. 


Birthday discourse in the Puurnachandhra Auditorium on 23-11-93. 


When the sun rises, all the buds of lotus in the lake do not open out 
in full bloom. Only those which are full grown can blossom; so the 
rest have to bide their time and grow. 


BABA 


37. Let love prevail 


Whom the Mohammedans adore as Allah, 
The Christians as Jehovah, 

The Vaishnavites as the Lotus-eyed Lord, 
The Shaivites as Sambhu, 

That God, who confers on all 

Long life, health and prosperity, 

Is one only--have this conviction. 

The Lord is all love; 

Love is His Divine form; 

That-Lave is the redeeming Manthra 

For all beings in this world. 

Without experiencing a fragment 

Of that Love how can you experience 
The Divine, Oh man? 


EMBODIMENTS of Divine love! If one object has to combine with another, or one individual has 
to associate with another, love is the basis for the affinity. The entire world is filled with love. 
The world is Love and Love is the world. 


In every human being love is present as an effulgence which shines in his feelings. Love is life 
and life is love. Even as the power to burn is natural for fire, and the power to cool is natural for 
water, love is a natural trait for man. Without it he ceases to be human. 


Love and life are inter-related 


Love is an inborn quality in man. It is his lifebreath. We nourish a sapling with great love. When 
the sapling grows and later becomes a dry plant, we cast it away without any concern. How 
much love did we lavish on the sapling? We cherished it as long as it had life. After it became 
dry and lifeless, we had no love for it. From infancy we bear love for the mother who has borne 
us and reared us. But when she passes away, the dead body is burnt without any attachment. 
What is it that was loved earlier? The living being was loved. Hence life and love are mutually 
inter-related. 


Men today tend to forget the love-life relationship. Love today is mingled with self-interest. In 
the tree of every man's life there is the fruit of love. To enjoy this fruit, the rind that covers it has 
to be removed at the outset. The seeds in the fruit have .also to be removed. The sweet juice in 
the fruit can be enjoyed only after the rind and the seeds have been removed. In the fruit of the 
tree of life, the rind is Ahamkaara (egoism). The seeds in that fruit are the selfish interests of 
man. Only when the ego and selfishness are eliminated, the sweet juice of love can be 
experienced. 


The Upanishaths described this love as "the sweet juice that is amritham (nectarine) and the 
Supreme Brahman." This means that the juice (of love) is nectar itself, is verily the Brahman 
(Divine). It is life itself. It is the Divine Effulgence--Thejas. 


This juice of love is equal to Brahman. It confers immortality on man and fills him with Divine 
bliss. Men today are unable to grasp the meaning of this Love Principle. It is essentially Divine 
in its nature. Hence, "Love is God; live in Love." 


Most people, however, in their fascination for sensuous pleasures and worldly objects, are 
deeming the attachments to these as love. Immersed in selfish pursuits and interests, men seek 
everything for only selfish reasons and have no regard for the transcendental. Everything is 
desired for self-enjoyment and not out of love for the sake of love. We should love for the sake 
of the Divine, to realise the eternal. Love should be for experiencing the effulgence of Jnaana. 


The martyrdom of Jesus 


Love is thus, an amalgam of sweetness, effulgence and wisdom. Compassion is the reflection of 
love. Jesus is the embodiment of compassion. He looked with compassion at the poor and the 
miserable and gave them succour. In those days, people used to treat birds and animals without 
pity in the temple in Jerusalem. Jesus sought to put an end to these cruel practices. 


From those times to the present, those who care for the well-being of all living beings and 
humanity were subjected to many trials and tribulations. Good people are always pursued by 
difficulties and troubles. The messiahs, the prophets, saints and God-men have always suffered 
from troubles and ordeals of various kinds. You should not bother about them. Have faith in 
God. When you live up to the truths you believe in, you will be indifferent to what others think. 


Jesus was unaffected by the persecution to which he was subjected on a charge of treason. 
Moreover, whatever attempts may be made to suppress good people, their goodness cannot be 
extinguished. 


A fine diamond even if it is in a heap of garbage 
will not lose its brilliance or its value. 
A pumpkin, even if it is grown beside a hedge, 
will not lose its sweetness. 
A peahen's egg, even if it is hatched in a crow's nest, 
will not lose its colours. 
Love is an expression of the Divine effulgence 


Likewise, the glory and greatness of good men will suffer no diminution in whatever 
circumstances, or situation they may be placed. Such Divine effulgence is shining in every 
human being. Love is an expression of this effulgence. To manifest this love, men must be 
prepared to bear every kind of suffering. 


Can the sweet juice of the 
sugar be had for 
Making sugar without the 


cane being crushed? 


The human body is like the sugarcane filled with the juice of love. It is only when the body is 
subjected to hardship that the divine, sweet juice of love can flow from it. Without trouble to the 
body, pains to the mind, and control of the feelings, how can you expect to experience the 
Divine? Men today aspire for liberation without suffering from their part. God's love is not to be 
secured so easily. The precious gem of love can be got only in the bazaar of Thyaaga (sacrifice). 
It is valued only in the Kingdom of Love. How can it be got in the market of cheap wares? 


Devotee should first give up selfishness 


Man's devotion these days is suffused with selfishness. Everything he does stems from self- 
interest. The first requisite is the giving up of selfishness. There must be a curb on egoistic 
conceit and possessiveness. The mind must be submerged in pure love. 


You may have heard about the life of St. Paul. In the beginning he was bitterly opposed to Jesus. 
He was ceaselessly criticizing Jesus. One day Jesus appeared in his dream and said: "Saul, are 
you not a human being? Is it proper for you to revile one who has done you no harm, has 
entertained no evil thoughts about you and has not led you to wrong ways? What harm have I 
done to you? Why are you abusing me? This is sheer folly. You are thereby demeaning yourself. 
Beware, beware!" After uttering this warning, Jesus vanished. On waking up in the morning Saul 
(as Paul was known before his transformation) lamented that he had been false to this human 
nature by deriding and condemning fellow beings. He felt that Jesus was doing many good 
deeds. He was one who could not bear the sight of others sufferings. He was showering love on 
everyone. Saul felt that it was a sin to revile such a person. From that date Saul became a devotee 
of Jesus and came to be known as St. Paul. 


In this manner, in the lives of many Avathaars one finds that despite all the love and blessings 
they receive and the benefits they derive from the Avathaars, some devotees turn against the 
Divine when their selfish desires are not fulfilled. 


Three types of traducers of God 


There are three types of traducers of God. In the first category are those who have no belief in 
God and always indulge in abuse of God. Without faith, how can there be any devotion? And 
without devotion, how can there be love? Without love, how can he be termed human? The 
words of such a person are worthless. 


The second category of persons are those who adore God when their desires are fulfilled and 
deride God when their wishes are not satisfied. They imagine that they have a right to receive 
favours from God. Such petty-minded persons revile God. Their desires are sky-high. But their 
deserts are minimal. Their spiritual efforts are insignificant. Nevertheless, they criticise God 
when their insatiable desires are not satisfied. 


The third category of persons are those who turn against God out of jealousy. They cannot bear 
the prosperity or position of others towards whom they think, God is partial. There is a remedy 
for almost every malady, but none at all for the disease of Jealousy. The envious indulge in 
calumny against God. 


It is because of the ubiquitous presence of these three categories of anti-God men that spirituality 
and the divine feeling of love have become rare commodities today. 


There is a Vedhic saying: "The knower of Brahman becomes Brahman himself." You are aware 
of the Godly man, Moses, described in the Bible. He was one who was ceaselessly praying to the 


Lord. He was a fervent lover of God. His intense devotion and love ultimately transformed his 
face and filled it with a divine radiance. 


Likewise, the Gopikas, through their intense devotion to Krishna, became the living images of 
Krishna. Rathnaakara, who was a highwayman in his early years, acquired the radiance of 
Raama by continually chanting the name of Raama. 


Develop the sense of oneness with God 


Whatever the God you worship, adore Him with Thadhaathmabhaava (a sense of oneness). 
Bodies may be two, but the heart is one. This is the feeling with which God should be 
worshipped. Only then you reach the state when you can declare: "You and I are one." 


How this state is to be realised is illustrated by a biblical episode. Once St. John, while walking 
along, saw an angel reading a book. He asked who she was and what she was reading. She 
replied that she was an angel and that she was reading a book dealing with the doctrine of love. 
He asked for the book and the angel gave it to him, but said: "You must eat this book. When you 
are consuming the book, its taste will be bitter. But after you have eaten and digested it, it will 
become very sweet." "Eating the book” means absorbing the contents of the book, practising 
them and experiencing the bliss derived therefrom. 


While reading and digesting "the book" the experience was bitter as declared by the angel. But, 
in due course, there was great transformation in St. John. His speech acquired a unique 
sweetness. His looks were sweet. Everything about him became sweet. What does this mean? It 
signifies the truth that you should completely identity yourself with the Divine love, which you 
seek from God. This love is not a purchasable commodity. 


Today, devotion is treated as an exercise in shareholding, a kind of business partnership. But this 
is not right. The devotees should feel: "Everything is Thine." It is only when there is such a 
feeling of total surrender that the nature of Divine love can be comprehended. 


Activities of "Messengers of Sathya Sai" 


There is nothing more easy in the world than the spiritual path. It has to be followed in the form 
of Seva (loving service). To demonstrate to the world the beauty, the sweetness and the glory of 
selfless and loving service, the association called Messengers of Sathya Sai was formed (from 
among the old students of the Sathya Sai College for Women at Ananthapur). These girls, 
regardless of the families into which they got married and the countries where they had to live, 
pledged themselves to carry on their service activities. What this vow means should be properly 
understood. Men have greater freedom to act as they please. Married women have less freedom. 
They come under the sway of their husbands and in-laws. Despite these constraints, these former 
students have not only carried on their service activities but also interested their husbands in 
them. 


The service activities of the "Messengers of Sathya Sai" are beyond praise. There are boy 
students amongst us. Of what use are they? They enjoy freedom, but are making no good use of 
it. They take no part in service activities. They are self-centred. But the girl students are not like 
that. They are not concerned about publicising themselves. To mention some of their service 
activities: In many small hamlets, these girls are building the roofs for the villagers houses, 
working like men. They go to the foreign countries where their husbands are employed. 


The annual report of the Messengers of Sathya Sai mentions that their members are rendering 
service in different countries like Kuwait, Australia, and New Zealand. Their varied service 
activities are highly commendable. I am confident that very soon their activities will cover the 
entire world and promote the welfare of every country. Whatever work they take up, they carry it 
out with firm resolve. 


For instance, there are numerous primary schools in which men and women teachers work. But 
men teachers do not work with the same zeal and earnestness as women teachers. For one thing, 
women are by nature accustomed to rearing and teaching the young. The record of performance 
of the students is much better in schools taught by women teachers than in schools with male 
teachers. 


Follow the women's example 


For the past sixteen years, these ex-students of the Women's College have been rendering great 
service. For the past one week the old students present in Prashaanthi Nilayam have been eager 
to train themselves for security duties in the Nilayam. Male students have shown no such 
eagerness. It is unbecoming of men students to be indifferent to service activities. It is a pity that 
they have not been impelled to action although they have been listening to the reports of the 
services of the girls year after year. 


There was an officer by name Raammohan Rao. He used to sport an impressive moustache. One 
day when he was going to his office, he passed by a man who was lying on the road, injured in 
an accident. He went on without rendering any help to the injured man, while some women 
rushed to his aid. In the office he reflected over his conduct and felt ashamed that he had failed to 
go to the help of an injured man while some women had gone to help him. Feeling that he had 
behaved in an unmanly way, he removed his moustache. When he went to the officers club the 
next day, the members noticed the change in his face and asked him what accounted for it. He 
confessed that he had failed to act as a true human being and had forfeited the right to call 
himself a man. From that day, he dedicated his life to social service. 


Service should be your watchword 


All those who are in high positions will acquit themselves as true human beings only when they 
render selfless service to their fellow-men. Plunge yourselves in society and take part in. service 
activities. Whenwomen are doing such splendid services, why should men lag behind? If men 
and women together render service, Bhaarath will be a gloriously prosperous nation. Not in 
Bhaarath alone, but in every country men and women should render service to those in need. 
Many overseas devotees here are found eating and strolling about without doing any useful 
work. They should shed their laziness and take part in some worthwhile activity. 


Service should be your watchword. The spirit of sacrifice is essential. To speak about devotion 
without a spirit of sacrifice is meaningless. 


Many of the women carry on their service activities inspite of the troubles which they face from 
their husbands. This shows their spirit of sacrifice. The Messengers of Sathya Sai are doing 
signal service. They need not confine themselves to their own members. They should try to draw 
other women into service activities and strive to improve the living conditions of the poor people 
in rural areas. 


Follow the message of Sai 


If the name of Jesus is glorified all over the world today, it is because of His boundless love. He 
served the lowly and the lost, and in the end, offered his life itself as a sacrifice. How many of 
those, who call themselves devotees of Jesus, are following His teachings? Those who claim to 
worship Raama, how far are they following His example? How many professed devotees of 
Krishna are living up to His teachings? There are many who claim to be Sai devotees. How many 
of them are following the message of Sai? If everyone seeks the answer within himself, he will 
see that it is a zero Anyone who claims to be a Sai devotee should dedicate his life to Sai ideals. 
That is true devotion and real penance. That is the hall-mark of humanness. It will be reflected in 
love, which will find expression in compassion that generates real Aanandha. 


The greatest quality in every man is love. When love is absent, evil qualities like hatred and 
jealousy rear their heads. Make love the breath of your life. 


Christmas Day Discourse in the Puurnachandhra Auditorium on 25-12-1993. 


