1. The Power of Divine Love 


STUDENTS! To see an effulgent light you do not need another lamp. Likewise to know the self- 
luminous Aathmik Knowledge there is no need for any other knowledge. Every human being has 
in him the knowledge of his true form. Owing to his failure to know this stupendous fact, man 
pursues all kinds of worldly knowledge. 


All the diversity you see in creation is a manifestation of the Indivisible One. The cause is the 
same for both differences and oneness. All the changing entities are based upon the One that is 
unchanging. 


Creation has to be viewed as a Cosmic Stage. God is the director and dramatis personae in this 
play. He assigns all the roles of the characters in the play. All creatures in the world are 
manifestations of the Divine. The good and evil in the world are expressions of the Divine 
consciousness. Man should not be misled by these expressions. Behind all the various actions of 
the actors, the Divine director is at work. It should be realised that though names and forms may 
vary, languages and nationalities may be different, the human race is one in its divine essence. 
All are sparks of the Divine. The Lord declared in the Geetha: "All beings in the world of the 
living are aspects of my Eternal Self." 


Manifest God's love 


God is the embodiment of Love. Love is His nature. His love pervades the cosmos. This love is 
present in one and all. Just as God manifests His love in the world, everyone should manifest his 
love. 


Prema (Love) has been described as beyond speech and mind, It is said to be Anirvachaneeyam 
(indescribable). This love cannot be got through scholarship, wealth, or physical powers. God, 
who is the embodiment of love, can be attained only through love, just as the effulgent Sun can 
be seen only through its own light. 


There is nothing more precious in this world than Divine love. God is beyond all attributes. 
Hence His love also is beyond attributes---Gunaatheetha. But, human love, because it is 
governed by Gunas (attributes), results in attachment and aversion. Love should not be based on 
expectations of a reward or return. Love based on such expectations makes it a business deal. 
Love is not an article of commerce. It is not like a loan and getting it back. It is a spontaneous 
offering. Pure love of this kind can emanate only from a pure heart. 


Prema should be like a mariner's compass. Wherever the compass may be placed, the needle will 
point only to the north. Likewise, man's love, in all circumstances, should be directed towards 
God. That alone is true love. It should be unaffected by pleasure or pain. It makes no difference 
between "mine" and "thine." Love has to be acquired only through love and not by any other 
means whatsoever. 


No one can describe the nature of Divine love. It is beyond the reach of poets. The one who is 
immersed in the waters of Divine Love will be unable to speak to anyone. When he is only upto 
neck-deep in the water he may be able to say a few words. 


Those who speak about God in the world do so only from superficial experience, but those who 
are wholly saturated with God's love will find no words to describe their bliss. That is why the 
Vedhas declared that the Divine is beyond the reach of the mind and speech. 


Transcendental love 


Divine love transcends the three qualities of Sathva; Rajas and Thamas. It is beyond the dullness 
of Thamas, the passionate form of Rajas and the coolness of Sathva. God's love is pure, unsullied 
and utterly selfless. Everyone should make an all-out effort to experience this love. 


The ancient sages identified this Love with the Aathma (Supreme Self). The Self and Love are 
not different from each other. The Self is love and love is Self. 


In every human being this love is present. But, not recognising this, man is a prey to greed, 
hatred, pride and envy, Man can get rid of these evil traits only by developing the Love principle 
that is inherent in him. 


Love is present not only in human beings, but also in all creatures, birds or beasts. Nor is that all. 
It is in fact all-pervasive. Love pervades everything in creation. Man's humanness is vitiated 
when he fails to recognise this love. 


Today men worship wealth and power, which are transient and ephemeral. They must fill their 
hearts with love, which is greater than all the wealth of the world. What use is there in imparting 
knowledge to those who have no love in their hearts? 


It is not got by education, 

Nor by knowing the rules of logic, 
Nor by secular studies, 

Nor by professing any religion, 
Nor by Vedhik speculation. 

It is present only 

Ina heart filled with compassion. 


Every man should have a compassionate heart. Without compassion, all wealth or scholarship is 
of no use. 


Acquire Divine Love 


Students! You may seek various positions in life. You may desire to earn wealth. But Divine 
love, which is the source of everything, should be acquired first. Grasp the significance of this 
truth. Everyone should experience and manifest this love. Men today have become playthings in 
the hands of demonic forces like egoistic pride, envy and ostentation. Can they be called human 
at all? 


People talk about Bhakthi, Yoga and Jnaana. What do they mean by these terms? Does Bhakthi 
mean getting involved in bhajans and enjoying the tune and beat of the songs? Does Yoga mean 
sitting in a corner and exercising breath control? Does Jnaana consist in reading some books and 
getting by rote a few shlokas? What is Sanyaasa? Is it wearing the ochre robe? Bhakthi (true 
devotion) means getting rid of the vices of attachment, hatred and envy and manifesting pure 
love. Anyone who loves pomp, who is filled with pride and is consumed by envy cannot be a 
devotee by any test. Devotion will go nowhere near him. The devotee has to overcome hatred, 
envy and attachment and experience the peace and bliss of love. That devotee will then acquire 
the attributes of the Divine. 


Yoga, Jnaana and Sanyaasa 


As regards Yoga, people speak about Hatha Yoga, Kriya Yoga, Transcendental Meditation and 
some new-fangled ideas. All these are not Yoga. "Yoga is control of the vagaries of the mind." 
True yoga is control of the senses. One should treat alike both praise and censure, pleasure and 
pain. This kind of self-restraint is yoga. 


What is Jnaana? "Adhvaitha dharshanam Jnaanam" (To see the One without a second is the 
supreme knowledge). To recognise the Ekaathma-bhaava (the same Aathma dwells in all beings) 
is true knowledge. 


True sanyaasa (renunciation) consists in the transformation of one's qualities and not in a change 
of garb. The mind must change, not the apparel. A true sanyaasi (renunciant) is one who has 
mastery over all his senses and has given up all desires. Sanyaasis today have more desires than 
householders. Why have these desires? For whose sake? Not for the sake of the body, which is a 
perishable leather bag filled with nine holes. He is a sanyaasi who seeks the feet of the Lord, 
giving up all attachments to the body, which is subject to disease and decay. He must treat life 
and death, pleasure and pain alike. 


Students, however, should learn to lead ideal lives even in the mundane world in which they 
have to get on in life. Most of them, boys and girls, are carried away by the attractions of the 
phenomenal world and go after worldly comfort. While utilizing their education for earning a 
decent living, they should share the fruits of their knowledge with others. Education should 
inculcate in them good thoughts, good character, truthfulness, devotion, discipline and dedication 
to duty. 


Jnaana cannot be secured without Bhakthi 


Aadhi Shankara proclaimed the supremacy of the path of knowledge for the realisation of the 
Self. In his "Aanandhalahari" he declared that Aanandha (Bliss) is man's goal and it can be 
secured only by God's grace. He firmly asserted that Brahman alone is real and there is no 
second. Even for such a staunch exponent of Monism, devotion became necessary. Without 
cultivating devotion, Jnaana (Knowledge of the Divine) cannot be secured. 


What is the cause of the erosion of wisdom among the people today? It is the sway of bad 
thoughts and evil impulses over-them. Capping all these bad qualities is egoism. The individual 
human being is such a pitifully petty creature in this vast cosmos that he has no basis at all for 
getting conceited. Egoism is demonic quality. Those who are proud about their wealth or power 
should realise that both these are maladies presaging ruin. 


Learn to give respect and receive respect. This is the first lesson students have to learn. When 
you revere and love others, they will also love and respect you. Practise humility and reverence, 
which are the hallmarks of true scholarship. 


Students! By your conduct you have to demonstrate the basic difference between the Sathya Sai 
Institute and all other universities in the world. The teachers should also set the example in this 
respect. If the teachers and higher authorities go astray, how can the students be expected to 
behave properly? All teachers and administrative officials should act in harmony and unity. 
Without unity and cooperation, they are no better than wandering buffaloes. 


Students! The first and foremost thing you have to observe is respectfulness. This is the essence 
of education. Cultivate reverence and behave without pride and ostentation. Give no room for 


jealousy. Do not feel envious when some one is better than you in scoring marks or in sports. 
Even if you live for only three days, you should lead ideal lives. Better be a swan for a brief 
while than live long like a crow. 


Today is a sacred festival day. It is a day for the celebration of plenty and prosperity. This day of 
Sankraanthi brings with it an abundance of crops and wealth. This Pushya month brings with it a 
cool breeze, a bright sun, golden fields and trees echoing the songs of birds. The earth shines in 
the glory of Nature. 


People admire the beauty of Nature, but are not aware of the beauty in their hearts. Make your 
heart beautiful by adorning it with the sacred love of God. 


Spread the Lord's name 


Students! Members of this august gathering! From today harness the enthusiasm of youth for 
carrying to every street and alley, the glory of the Lord's name! The entire atmosphere is 
surcharged with electro-magnetic waves. Because of the pollution of these waves, the hearts of 
human beings also get polluted. To purify this atmosphere, you have to chant the Lord's name 
and sanctify the radio waves. There is pollution in the air we breathe, the water e drink and the 
food We consume. Our entire life has been polluted. All this has to be purified by suffusing the 
atmosphere with the Divine name. Chant the name with joy in your hearts. 


Discourse in the Puurnachandhra Auditorium on the morning of 14-1-1995. 


Sugar-dolls are valued for the sugar, not the shapes they are given 
by the manufactures. Their sweetness makes men purchase them. 
Elephant, dog, cat, rat, jackal or lion -- it does not matter. That is 
a matter of individual fancy. Each is sweet, that is the essential 
thing. The sweetness draws Maanavas (human beings) towards 
Maadhava; the Pravritthi (deed) towards Nivritthi (dedication); 
the Ananda towards Sath-Chith-Aanandha (Highest Bliss). When 
the appetite for these grows, all low desires and hungers cease. 


BABA 


2. Prema and the triple purity 


EMBODIMENTS of Divine love! He who recognises that the Aathma in him and in all beings is 
one and the same, dwells in the constant presence of God, whether he is a householder or a 
renunciant, whether he is alone or in a crowd. Everyone has to recognise the divinity that is 
inherent in all human beings. 


The sage Naaradha declared: "Prema amrithasya svaruupah" (Love is the embodiment of 
ambrosia). In the mundane world, man considers the four Purushaarthas (the four goals of life) 
as the means to Moksha (Liberation). This is not correct. Dharma (Righteousness), Artha 
(material wealth), Kaama (the satisfaction of desire) and Moksha (Liberation) which are 
considered the four aims of human existence, are not all. There is a fifth aim for mankind which 
transcends even Moksha (Liberation). This is Parama-prema (Supreme love). This Love 
Principle is Divine. 


Love and God are not distinct from each other. God is love and love is God. It is only when the 
truth of this Love Principle is understood that the meaning of human existence can be realised. 
Says a Thelugu poem: 


The Sai Lord is the embodiments of Love, 
Who taught the Love principle, 

Proclaimed the equality of all beings, 

And revealed the preciousness of humanness. 


In a home where three persons live, if they have harmony amongst them and cooperate with each 
other, verily that home is heaven itself, where divine bliss reigns. If, on the contrary, the three 
persons lack harmony and adjustment, dislike each other and behave as enemies, there can be no 
hell worse than that. 


Ancients considered triple unity as a form of yoga 


Heaven and hell are dependent on the conduct of people. The body is a home wherein reside 
three entities called manas (mind), Vaak (speech) and limbs (organs of action). True humanness 
consists in the unity of thought, word and deed. In Vedhaantik parlance, this unity was described 
as Thrikarana Shuddhi (triple purity). True moksha (liberation) consists in giving expression in 
words to the thoughts which arise in the mind and to practise what one says. The ancients 
considered this triple unity as a form of yoga. "Manasyekam, vachasyekam, karmanyekam 
mahaathmaanam" (Those whose mind, words and deeds are in complete accord are high-souled 
beings). “Manas-anyath, vachas-anyath, karmanya-anyath dhuraathmanaam" (The wicked are 
those whose thoughts deviate from their words and actions). 


Hence every man should strive to achieve unity in thought, word and deed. That is the hall-mark 
of humanness. This profound truth is proclaimed by the Vedhaanthik pronouncement that the 
body is a temple in which the eternal Aathma is the Indweller. The Veda is dualistic. Vedhaantha 
is monistic (Adhvaitha). The essence of Vedhaantha is the triune unity of thought, word and 
deed. In this unity, true bliss can be experienced. It will also demonstrate the spiritual basis of 
divinity. 


Vedhaantha is of no avail if precepts are not practised 


There are today countless numbers of scholars who expound the Vedhaantha and they have 
numerous listeners. The outcome of it all is precious little. This is because there is no practice of 
the teachings of Vedhaantha. All study of Vedhaantha is of no avail if the precepts are not 
practised. 


People have to find out what are the easy methods of putting into practice the precepts of 
Vedhaantha. The easiest way is to cultivate harmony in thought, 'word and deed. Here is a 
Thelugu poem: 


Can the world's darkness be dispelled 
by talking about the glory of light? 
Can a diseased man's afflictions be 
relieved by praising panaceas? 
Can a destitute's poverty be relieved by 
listening to the greatness of wealth? 
Can a starving man's hunger be appeased 
by descriptions of delicacies? 
Rather than listening to a ton of precept, it is better to practise an ounce of teaching. 


What we have to practise today is something very easy and very subtle. The spirit of service is 
the royal path to be followed. How is this spirit of service to be cultivated? The Geetha lays 
stress on the word Suhrith (friend). Who is a true friend? Can he be utterly selfless? Will he help 
you without expecting any return? Whether it be one's mother, husband, wife or son, they love 
you for their own selfish reasons. A totally selfless friend cannot be found in the world. It is hard 
to find anyone who renders service totally without self-interest. God alone is totally selfless as 
friend and benefactor. God has been described as Suhrith--a friend who is your alter ego. God 
seeks no reward of any kind There is no trace of self-interest in Him. God alone can be utterly 
selfless and loving, expecting nothing in return. 


Follow the royal road of God's injunctions 


If you ask a friend where he is residing, he will give a certain address. But this address relates 
only to the residence of the body. But the true residence of one is his Aathma (the Self). This 
Aathma is the embodiment of Love. Therefore, you have to dwell in Love and live in Love. You 
must dedicate your life to that love. If you devote your life to the pursuit of impermanent things, 
you will only get ephemeral things. You must seek what is lasting and permanent. What is it? It 
is the Bhagavath-Aajna (injunction of the Lord). When you take to the royal road of following 
God's injunction, you will realise all your desires. 


You must remember, however, that these desires only bind you the more you cherish them. The 
bonds get reduced when desires are reduced. There must be a limit to desires. 


Similarly there must be restraint in developing attachments. There is grief when a person dies in 
a family. Is death the cause of grief? No. It is the attachment to the dead person that is the cause 
of grief. The process of getting rid of attachment has been described in Vedhaanthik parlance as 


vairaagya. Gradually attachments should be eliminated. In the journey of life the less luggage 
you carry the greater the comfort you will experience. 


It may be asked: "How is it possible to reduce attachments and desires in worldly life?" The 
answer is' "Carry on your business or other activities in a spirit of dedication to the Divine." All 
actions should be done with the conviction that they are dedicated to the Lord. This is an easy 
path to follow. Consider all actions as actions performed-by the power of the Divine, whether it 
be seeing or hearing or speaking or doing. Without the power of the Divine, can the eyes see or 
the ears hear? 


Divine potency is the source of all talents 


The primary requisite for man is to realise the divine potency in him that is the source of all the 
faculties and talents in him. This is true whether one is an atheist, a theist or an agnostic. No one 
in the world can get on without this energy. It may be called by different names. Names are not 
important. The energy is one. It is this divine energy which directs mankind on the right path. 
Men should strive to recognise the presence of the Divine even in small things. 


In his speech earlier today Anil Kumar spoke about the Sai Organizations. The Sai organizations 
are carrying on their activities with devotion and dedication. But they do not try to find out what 
should be the ideal to be achieved. "Are you engaged in this work for your own satisfaction or 
for the satisfaction of the Divine?" This is the question they should ask themselves. 


In this context an incident from the Bible may be recalled. Once a devotee went to Jesus and 
asked him: "Oh Lord! What is the power by which one can protect oneself?" Jesus replied’ "Son! 
When you love God, that power itself will’ protect you." 


In the Bhagavath Geetha, Arjuna asked Krishna, "What should one do to earn the love of the 
Lord?" The Lord replied' "You simpleton! You imagine you are loving God. The truth is God is 
seeking a true devotee." 


Crores of people all over the world are in quest of God. But where are they searching for Him? 
In my view, the 'very ideal of a quest for God is mistaken. There is no need for you to search for 
God. God is ‘omnipresent. He is everywhere. Devotees imagine they are searching for God. This 
is not true. It is God who is in search of devotees. "Where is the-devotee to be found who is pure 
in thought, word and deed?" God is searching for such a devotee. 


You need not search for God. God is nearer to you than your mother and father. You yourself are 
divine. How can you go in search of yourself? This is the mistake you commit. When everything 
is permeated by the Divine, who is the searcher of the Divine? It is because the world has lacked 
men who could proclaim this Vedhaanthik truth with authentic experience that it has sunk to 
such degrading levels. 


Best way to love God is to love all, serve all 


It is needless to search for God. Verily you are the Divine. Strive to realise this truth. There is a 
simple and easy way. Have the faith that every human being is an embodiment of the Divine. 
Love everyone. Serve all. The best way to love God is to love all serve all. 


You must love everyone because God is in everyone. Every human being is a manifestation of 
God. On the cosmic stage every man identifies himself with the form and name given to him. 
But he does not realise what is his true form and name. 


Last night you witnessed the film in which Anjalidevi acted the role of Sakkubai. In the film she 
appeared as Sakkubai and not Anjalidevi. But both are one and the same person. God takes on a 
human form and appears as a human being. But when the human being recognises his basic 
divine nature he becomes the Divine. As long as one-thinks he is a mere human, he remains a 
human. But ‘when he considers himself as Divine' with deep conviction, he will be transformed 
into the Divine. 


See the cosmos through the glass of spirituals oneness 


Hence, thoughts and feelings determine what you are. Change your thoughts. If you give up your 
worldly outlook and view the world from the spiritual point of view, the Vishvam (world) and the 
Vishnu (Divine) will become one. Therefore, change your viewpoint. Instead of altering his 
dhrishti (vision) man wants to change Shrishti (creation). No one can change creation. It is one's 
vision that has to be changed. 


If you wish to experience oneness,, you have to see the cosmos through the glass of Ekaathma- 
bhaava (spiritual oneness). Otherwise, the world will appear as a bewildering multiplicity 
because you will be seeing it through the glasses of the three Gunas-Sathva, Rajas and Thamas. 
Put aside these three glasses. Wear the glass of Ekaathma-bhaava, the feeling of unity in Spirit, 
Love is one. "The Supreme is One though, the wise call it by many names. 


The Divine has to proclaim this unity when God comes in human form and lives and moves 
among human beings. The Divine has no likes or dislikes. He has no distinction of "mine" and 
"thine" He is beyond praise or censure. How, then, should the Divine (in human form) conduct 
Himself? Everyone should understand this. 


Svaami and devotees 


Many bemoan the fact that Svaami does not speak to them despite their frequent visits. "Is 
Svaami angry with us?" they ask. These are not mental aberrations. They are due to total 
ignorance. Such questions arise in their minds only when they have not understood Swami's real 
nature. I have no antipathy towards anyone. I do not hate anyone. All are mine. And I belong to 
everybody. But in dealing with devotees, I have to behave like a doctor who prescribes a specific 
diet for each patient. For instance, there is a patient suffering from diabetes. He should not 
consume sweets. If a devotee feels, "I enjoy sweets, why should the Sai Mother prohibit me from 
eating sweets?", the answer is that it is for his own good. If Svaami did not have the patient's 
well-being in view, He would let him suffer by giving him sweets. It is out of love for the 
devotee that the Sai Mother denies sweets to him. Svaami adopts these different regimens in the 
interest of curing the devotees' ailments. 


There are others with a different kind of grievance. For instance, the students often complain that 
Svaami does not talk to them because He is angry with them. I have no anger towards anyone. 
Whether you believe it or not, I do not know what anger means. But, occasionally I appear as if I 
am very angry. This is unavoidable because without such assumed behaviour on my part, the 
students will not heed my words. I tell them to behave in a certain way. Some students heed my 
words and try to act upto them. Some others go against my injunctions. In such a situation, I 
have to ensure respect for my words. Of what use is it to speak to those who attach no value to 
my words? I don't intend to devalue my words. 


Truth is the life of the plighted word. My words bear the imprint of truth. I cannot depart from 
truth. I don't speak to those who attach no value to My words. This should be realised by those 


who complain that Svaami does not talk to them. When people heed My words, I am ready to 
help them in every way and confer happiness on them. I do nothing for my own sake. This is My 
truth. 


"Everything I do is for your sake" 


The Super-Speciality Hospital has been built at the cost of many crores. Was it for my sake? 
Similarly, the University has been established by spending crores of rupees. For whose sake? Is 
it for my sake? This magnificent hall (attached to the mandhir) has been erected to protect 
devotees from heat and rain. Am I sleeping in this hall? Everything I do is for your sake. I am 
surprised that you do not recognise this. Can devotees be so lacking in intelligence? There is no 
trace of selfishness in Me anywhere. I have no fear of any sort. Only the guilty man is racked by 
fear. I have done no wrong to anybody and so I have no fear. But I am subservient to devotees. 


Not realising this truth some people imagine that Svaami is angry or ill-disposed towards them. 
Get rid of such mistaken feelings. Be convinced that whatever Svaami tells you is for your own 
good and act upto it. I gain nothing-by your good behaviour. I don't lose anything by your 
misconduct. Because I love you, I do not want you to suffer from the consequences of your 
misconduct. 


Understand God's love 


Turning to God's love, let me make it clear that 99 percent of devotees do not understand what 
this prema means. This love is construed in a worldly sense. This leads them astray. The 
attachment between husband and wife, mother and child, between friends, between kith and kin, 
all are loosely described as Prema (love), but these attachments are the result of temporary 
relationships and are by their nature transient. Prema is Thrikaala-abaadhyam (Love is that 
which lasts through all the three categories of time---the past, the present and the future). Such 
love can exist only between God and the devotee and cannot apply to any other kind of 
relationship. 


It is not easy for you to comprehend' the true nature of God's love. You are aware only of 
worldly attachments which are subject to ups and downs. What is liable to such changes cannot 
be called love. True love is unchanging. It is Divine. Love is God. Live in love. 


Embark on this path of love. You are liable to feel elated over trivial pleasures or depressed over 
petty losses. God's love is permanent and unvarying. Try to understand that love. How is it to be 
done? By cultivating the feeling that whatever happens to you, whether pleasant or unpleasant, is 
for your own good. When you have that firm conviction, the value of God's love for you goes up. 


Most people feel the boundless joy of God's love as long as they are in the presence of Svaami. 
But this feeling evaporates once they are in the environment of the outside world. You must see 
that the same sacred environment exists wherever you may be, by carrying your devotion 
wherever you go and spread the Divine message to every nook and corner of the country. Chant 
the name of the Lord wherever you are--in the village, in the street, in every home and in your 
speech and songs. This is the way to ensure that your love of God remains unshaken and 
unabated. 


God derives no benefit from this, as He has no desires. He wants nothing. It is only for your own 
good. "Uddhareth Aathmanaa Aathmaanam" (Elevate yourself by your own self-effort). Failing 
to recognise this truth, many people imagine that Sai Baba is holding Akhanda bhajans and 
celebrating various festivals to glorify his name. They are utterly foolish persons. Sai Baba seeks 


nothing from anyone. You improve yourselves. Become better. Experience your bliss. Make 
your lives sublime. Utilize these festivals and devotional activities for this purpose. 


Sathyam, Shivam, Sundharam 


Embodiments of love! As love is verily your form, manifest it in every way. Share it with others. 
The Lord is the Hridayavaasi (Indweller in the Heart). 


Sarvabhootha-dharam Shaantham 
Sarvanaama-dharam Shivam 
Sath-chith-aanandha Roopam Adhvaitham 
Sathyam Shivam Sundharam 


(The sustainer of all beings, Peace incarnate The bearer of all names, Goodness incarnate 
Embodiment of Being-Awareness-Bliss, the One without a second. He is Truth, Goodness and 
Beauty). 


The Greek philosopher Plato--who was the teacher of Aristotle, under whom Alexander 
studied—declared three things as fundamental verities-Truth, Goodness and Beauty. These are 
the same terms as Sathyam, Shivam, Sundharam, used by the Indian sages to describe the Divine. 


Thus in all religions and philosophies through the ages, these three have been declared as the 
forms of the Divine. Love is the form of the Divine. Dharma (Righteousness) is the form of the 
Divine. 


"Mother and motherland are greater than heaven" 


The first impulse that emanated from man was Prema (divine love). All other things came 
thereafter. Every child that is born develops immediately love for the mother. Every child tries to 
recognise at the outset the mother and the father. In the same manner every individual should 
recognise the land of his birth and his Samskrithi (cultural heritage). One's nation and one's 
culture should be revered as one's parents. The nation is one's mother. One's culture is the father. 
This profound truth was proclaimed by Raama when he declared: "The mother and the 
Motherland are greater than Heaven itself." Love the mother. Love your country's culture. These 
are the two primary duties of every man. They should be the main aims of life. 


When people follow this path of truth and righteousness, love will sprout naturally in their 
hearts. All knowledge and scholarship are of no avail if there is no practice of virtue. Practise at 
least one of the teachings and experience joy. 


Embodiments of love! Devotees from East and West Godhaavari, Guntur and Krishna districts 
rejoiced in the celebration of what they described as the Golden Jubilee of the Sai Movement. 
There is no need to seek a reason for experiencing joy. "Sarvadha sarvakaaleshu sarvathra 
Harichinthanam (Always, at all times and in all places contemplate on Hari). Make every 
moment a holy day. Invest every word with the power of a manthra (sacred formula). Sanctify 
the ground you tread on. Make this the mission of your life. Without wasting a single moment, 
use all the time you can find to spread the message of the Lord's name to every nook and corner 
of India. 


Desires can be reduced by chanting God's name 


Today we are witnessing corruption, violence, wickedness and malpractices everywhere. The 
basic reason for all these is selfishness. Insatiable desires are at the root of these evils. By 
chanting the Lords' name, desires can be reduced, while legitimate wishes get fulfilled. 


Sakkubai prayed and yearned to go to Pandharpur for dharshan of Paanduranga. She endured all 
kinds of troubles and indignities and earned the Lord's grace. How can you get God's grace 
without undergoing trials? You know what severe processes gold goes through from the crucible 
onwards before an ornament is made. There can be no happiness without pain. When you desire 
the welfare of someone, you must. be prepared to let him face the ordeals which are necessary 
before he can experience what is good for him. Pleasure and pain go together in this world. In the 
Geetha the Lord says He is both the Kshethra (the body) and the Kshethrajna (the Indwelling 
Knower). 


What people have to learn today is to give up attachments to the things of the world and seek the 
love of God. When one cultivates the love of God, renouncing worldly things becomes as simple 
as leaving hold of a hand-kerchief. Clinging to property is difficult. Giving it up is easy when 
people have understood the meaning of God's love. 


Let people, wherever they may be, in villages or towns, cultivate faith in God, develop love and 
share it with one and all. Then they will experience ineffable bliss. Liberation will not come 
though meditation or penance. Love is the only means. When you render service with love, it 
will become meditation, penance and all else. Love is the fifth Purushaartha, the supreme goal 
of life. Love is also the panacea for all the ills that afflict society today. Hate is the cause of all 
ills. Hence hatred should be banished, as declared by the Geetha. 


Don't give room for any evil feelings in your heart, which is the seat of God. Dedicate your 
minds to God. In due course, you will merge in-the Divine and become one with God. 


Discourse in the Puurnachandhra Auditorium on the evening of 14-1-1995. 


This is the proper plan of study: Reading, Reflection and Regular 
Application in life. Study is Work. Inquiry into the value and 
applicability of what is studied is Worship. 


The experience of the validity and value of the practice is Wisdom. 


BABA 


3. Noble mothers breed noble sons 


EMBODIMENTS of love! This entire cosmos is under the control of God. God is subject to 
Truth. Truth is governed by the noblest persons. These noble beings are embodiments of the 
Divine. 


Students! Today you must all become messengers of peace and security to the world. To prepare 
yourselves for this role you have to cultivate the spirit of sacrifice. Only the individual who 
cherishes sacrifice and renounces pleasures can be qualified for a life of sacrifice. It is only when 
the distinction between this renunciation (of pleasures) and acceptance (of a life of sacrifice) is 
rightly understood can one experience the joy of sacrifice. 


Even if the soil is fertile, if the seed is of poor quality, it cannot grow into a good tree. On the 
other hand, if the seed is good but the soil is unfertile, a strong tree cannot grow. If children are 
to become culturally refined young persons, the parents should have the refinement of culture. 
When the parents observe exemplary conduct based on culture, the children will also imbibe 
these practices. As Dr. Sushila Nayyar observed (in her speech earlier), students have to cultivate 
simple living and high thinking. Students must learn to lead simple lives. At the same time their 
ideals must be of the highest order. 


There are many examples of people who have led simple lives with high ideals. 


Puthlibai and Gaandhi 


Gaandhiji's mother, Puthlibai, was a lady who believed in the two principles of truth and right 
conduct. She adhered to the practice of taking her morning breakfast only after hearing the first 
call of the cuckoo. One morning, the cuckoo's call was missing for a long time and Puthlibai did 
not take her breakfast. Seeing this, the young Gaandhi went to the backyard, cooed like cuckoo 
and came and told his mother that she could now take her breakfast. Puthlibai, who could easily 
guess the trick her son was playing, felt very sad about his behaviour. She thought: "What sin 
have I committed that such a son should be born to me? There is no use blaming you for what is 
the result of my own sin. How sinful am I that I gave birth to an untruthful son." Unable to bear 
her grief, she slapped the boy on the cheek and went inside. 


That very moment Gaandhi took a vow "I must never again utter an untruth in my life. What life 
is it that causes grief to a mother? In a country in which everyone is enjoined to revere the 
mother and father as God, I have caused grief to my mother by an act of deception." From that 
day he resolved only to speak the truth and never indulge in falsehood. 


Mothers of those days were women of great piety and noble character. They practised virtue and 
set an example to the children. Only from wombs of such noble women were born sons of high 
character. 


The mother of Aadhi Shankara, Aryaamba, was a high-souled woman. Hence, Sankara could 
achieve greatness and world fame. Vivekaanandha was another illustrious figure Adhering to the 
instructions of his mother, he led an exemplary life and achieved name and fame. Their lives 
shine in the pages of history as examples for mankind. 


As is the seed, so is the tree. Similarly some are born with noble character and some are born 
differently. These differences are the result of their careers in previous lives. 


Chaithanya's yearning for the love of the Lord 


Once Chaithanya went to Puuri and prayed to Lord Jagannaath- "Oh Lord of the universe! Lord 
of Life! Master of my body! Lord of Creation! I am not concerned with surrender and salvation. I 
am incapable of doing Yoga or Dhyaana. Nor am | interested in mundane pleasures. I only desire 
one thing. Give me the all-consuming love for you. With that love I can accomplish everything. 
Without your love, of what use are all the pleasures of the world, all the talents and powers one 
can command? Of what avail is scholarship or intellectual brilliance? I must earn the love of the 
Lord. Confer that love on me, Oh Lord!" 


By revering their parents and following their noble examples, many great men achieved glory 
and fame in the past. If today we do not have high-minded youth, it is the parents that are 
responsible. In this context, let me relate the story of Eeshvar Chandhra Vidhyaasaagar, the great 
scholar of Calcutta, who was inspired by his mother to educate himself for a career of dedicated 
service to the people. His mother, told Eeshvar Chandhra: "True education must lead you to God. 
Academic education must help you to serve society and promote the welfare of mankind. You 
must be an example to other men and lead an ideal life." Despite their poverty, the son followed 
the mother's advice and by his own diligence got a degree. In due course, he got a job, pursued 
higher studies and attained a position of eminence. Having accumulated some money he 
approached his mother and asked her whether she wanted anything. She said: "I have no desires. 
I only want you to earn a name as a man of good character, dedicated to the service of the 
nation." 


The three wishes of Vidhyaasaagar's mother 


The son pressed her again after some time to indicate what she wanted by way of jewels or 
clothes. She told him: "I am now past the age for wearing jewels or flaunting gaudy dresses. 
However, I desire three ornaments about which I shall tell you later on." 


After a period, having saved some more money, Eeshvar Chandhra asked his mother’ "What are 
your three desires?" "The first one," she said, "is a primary school for the children of our small 
and backward village. The second one is a small village hospital for the local population. My 
third desire is that you should not sell your knowledge, nor feel proud about it. Cultivate humility 
and consider yourself the servant of all. Service is the pathway to leadership. These are the three 
ornaments I seek." 


Carrying out his mother's wishes, he established a primary school in the village, a hospital for the 
villagers and dedicated his entire life to the service of his fellowmen. He became famous as 
Eeshvar Chandhra Vidhyaasaagar, known for his knowledge and spirit of service. He became 
well known as a speaker who attracted large audiences of men and women. His talks were 
ennobling and inspiring, summoning the people to a life of sacrifice and service’ 


A young officer learns a lesson 


Once, a senior officer was keen to listen to Vidhyaasaagar's speech and set out for the place of 
the meeting by train with a suitcase. On alighting at the station, he called for a porter to carry his 
suitcase. As no one appeared, an old man who had got down from the same train offered to carry 
the suitcase. From the simplicity of the old man's dress, the officer took him for a poor villager 
and allowed him to carry the suitcase upto the place where he was to stay. After depositing the 
suitcase, when the old man was about to leave, the officer offered him a rupee for his labour. The 
old man declined the money and said that what he had done was in a spirit of service and not to 


earn money. After thanking him the old man (who was none other than Eeshvar Chandhra) told 
the young officer before leaving: "Your practice does no credit to your education. After so much 
education you are not able to attend to your own needs. You have made yourself unfit. Humility 
is the ornament for education. Education without humility is no education at all. Self-conceit is 
also not an index of good education. Arrogance and attachment are bad qualities, which you 
must get rid of." 


Later in the day large crowds were assembling at the place of meeting. All were eagerly waiting 
to welcome Vidhyaasaagar. As Eeshvar Chandhra got up on the stage, he was profusely 
garlanded. The young officer was in the audience. He saw the speaker on the stage and wondered 
whether he could be Vidhyaasaagar: "Is he the same man who carried my suitcase in the 
morning?" He felt ashamed of himself. "What a shame that I should have treated with disrespect 
such a venerable person out of my pride and arrogance!" The officer felt that he had learnt a 
good lesson that humility is the true hall-mark of real education. 


Eeshvar Chandhra Vidhyaasaagar was in the habit of examining his faults, if any, and trying to 
correct them. But students today entertain bad thoughts or do wrong things and justify their 
behaviour by the specious argument that "to err is human." They should realise that because they 
are human they should observe right conduct. They should not take to bad ways. Bad conduct is 
utterly unbecoming of one who calls himself human. The natural qualities of a human being are 
good thoughts and good conduct. Students should strive to live in this manner. 


Parents are responsible for children going astray 


The world has witnessed any number of great personalities who have led ideal lives. Today 
mothers who ‘brought up such noble beings are becoming rare. Parents often tend to encourage 
the improper behaviour of their children rather than correct them. Parents today are primarily 
responsible for their children going astray. 


Here is another story of a mother and son who came as refugees from Burma. The son starved 
himself to feed his mother from the food he was getting by begging. One day when a house 
owner offered to give him food as he was starving, the boy said he would not eat the food there, 
but must carry it home. He fell down in front of the house and the owner heard the feeble words 
coming from the boy's lips: "First mother, then myself." With those words, he breathed his last. 


Such examples of filial and maternal affection are becoming rare these days because of the 
trends in modern education. Maternal love has vanished. Filial duty is absent. What a testimony 
to the tragic results of modern education! There is no reverence for elders, no recognition of 
obligations to parents. Selfishness has become the bedrock of life. The nation is a prey to all 
kinds of ills because of this all-pervading selfishness. 


Education should make students service-oriented 


There was a time in the past when men were prepared to sacrifice their all for the sake of the 
people and the welfare of the nation. Today this spirit is absent. Selfishness is rampant. The 
educational system is responsible for this situation. Education should make students service- 
minded, not job-seekers. Parents have also a duty in this regard. They must reform their children 
by setting the example themselves. 


You must be prepared to make any sacrifice for the sake of the nation. Welcome sacrifice, banish 
pleasure-seeking. Discover the joy to be derived from sacrifice. 


When Bhaaratheeyas got their independence, Nehru was the prime Minister and Vallabhai Patel 
was the Home Minister. Dr. Sushila Nayyar was then the Health Minister. It was at that time she 
came to see me in Delhi. Later in 1962, she came to Puttaparthi together with Vinoba Bhave. 
Since then she has been associated with 'Svaami. Vallabhai used to tell Sushila Nayyar: 
"Sushilaben! You lead a simple life. As a minister you should appear more impressive." Patel 
used to tease her in this manner. 


Vallabhai's daughter used to live with him. She was an exemplary daughter. She used to spin the 
yarn from which the clothes were made for her father and she used to make a sari for herself out 
of the old dhothis of her father. The national leaders of those days were ideal leaders. They 
fought for the freedom of the country. In those days, it used to be said that the white rulers were 
oppressing the black natives. Alas! Today the black natives are oppressing the black natives. In 
those days there were men who were prepared to sacrifice their all for the nation. Today we have 
men who are prepared to sacrifice the nation for their self-interest. What kind of leadership is 
this? Whither have the ideals fled? What we need is devotion to God, which will fill us with the 
spirit of sacrifice. Only then can real humanness prevail. Sacrifice is the key to immortality. 
Today people seek nectar in intoxicating drinks. Is this a mark of culture? No. Sense-control 
comes first. Life is a challenge. Meet it. 


Students should become crusaders for peace 


Students should become crusaders for peace in a country riddled with conflict and disorder. 
Sanctify your education by a life of dedicated service. I told the girl students yesterday that Duty 
and Discipline should be like two body-guards for Devotion. 


All of you should set an example to the nation in leading a life marked by Devotion, Duty and 
Discipline. I bless you all that you should become worthy servants of the nation. 


Dedicated services of Sushila Nayyar 


I have seen Sushila Nayyar on several occasions. Recently she came to Brindhaavan and stayed 
there for two days. After the passing of Gaandhiji, she has been working in Gaandhigraam with 
dedication. She has faced many trials and tribulations. Whenever she comes to Svaami she 
experiences peace and joy. She is working hard to promote the activities in Gaandhigraam. 
Svaami's grace has been available to her in plenty in this mission. She need not worry on this 
account. She is far advanced in age (96). Despite the infirmities of age, she is actively engaged in 
social service. What ails our young people that they are not attracted to social service? The only 
service they are rendering is to feed themselves. But the body is given for the pursuit of Dharma 
(Righteousness). if it is not used for this purpose, why have it at all? Don't bother to fatten your 
body. Rather, you should wear it away in the service of others. It is .through such service that 
you should redeem your lives. 


Develop devotion to God through meditation and contemplation. Take a pledge to render service 
to your fellowmen. 


Discourse in the Puurnachandhra Auditorium on 15-2-1.995. 


4. Idol worship and God Omnipresence 


One kind word pleases everybody. 

Why, then, should you be miserly in soft speech? 
By pleasing words all beings are happy. 
Therefore speak lovingly always 

Why be chary in the use of kind words? 


EMBODIMENTS of Love! Pleasing speech confers immense joy on man. There is no scarcity of 
pleasant words. Hence everyone should speak sweetly to all. 


"There is an atomic particle subtler than the atom. 
There is something vaster than 

The vastest you can imagine. 

The atom is in the immense and 

The immense is in the atom. 

The Aathma is in the atom as the Spirit" 

says a Thelugu Poem. 


The entire phenomenal universe is a manifestation of the atom. The water you drink, the air you 
breathe, and the sounds you hear are all composed of atoms. The five basic elements (space, air, 
water, fire and earth) are all made up of atoms and pervade the universe. The Cosmos is the 
embodiment of the five elements. For this reason, the ancients regarded the universe as a 
manifestation of God. 


Long before men started exploring the secrets of the atom and discovering the nature of atomic 
energy, even before scientists began to understand the nature of spirituality, Bhaaratheeyas 
worshipped the Bhuumi (Earth.) as divine. Because the five elements were present in the Earth, 
they adored the Earth as Bhuudhevi, the Earth Goddess. 


Moreover, they worshipped water as Ganga. Dhevi, recognizing the divine element in water. The 
Fire God comes next. The fourth is Vaayudeva (the Lord of Wind). The fifth is Shabdha 
Brahman, the Divine as primal sound. Thus, all the five elements were considered manifestations 
of the Divine and worshipped as such by the Bhaaratheeyas, Outsiders who did not understand 
the profound significance of the worship of the elements, treated them with levity. 


The worship of forms or idols 


Every atom has a form. There is no object in the universe without a form. The form is Vigraha 
(an expression of the Divine Idol). Members of other faiths considered idol worship as irrational. 
They ridiculed idol worship as a form of superstition, but they made no attempt to explain the 
worship of the formless. 


Every person begins to learn about all objects only in relation to their forms. People could not 
conceive of God as omnipresent, who is in every object and in every individual. Some were able 
to conceive that the atom is present in every, object and everywhere. But it was only in the 
seventeenth century that atomic physics came into existence. But long before this, the child 


Prahlaadha realised the omnipresence of the Divine. He told his father: "Do not have any doubts 
that the Divine is present here and not there. He is omnipresent. You can find Him wherever you 
seek Him." 


What Prahlaadha declared millennia ago, the scientists of today are discovering, namely, that the 
energy that is present in the all-pervading atom is divine. 


I point my finger at the mike and tell you: "This is a mike." After you have seen the mike, you 
don't need the finger to point it out. I point to a flower and say: "This is a flower." After you have 
seen the flower, there is no need for the finger to point it. Likewise, idols were used to point out 
God. Until God-realisation comes, idols are essential. After God-realisation there is no need for 
idols. 


Why worship idols? 


If a girl before her marriage is asked to describe her future husband, how can she do it? She can 
describe the husband only after the marriage. Likewise, after worshipping an idol and gaining 
experience of divinity by such worship, one would be able to describe one's experience of God. 
Before worshipping God and gaining spiritual experience, how can anyone say anything about 
the nature of Divine? Hence, it is necessary to develop faith in idol worship. It should be realised 
that every object is a manifestation of God. Every atom is divine. 


Respect for the National Flag 


Some people ask whether it is not foolish to worship an inanimate inconscient figure as God. 
This question is born of ignorance. Today ninety crores of Bhaaratheeyas hoist the National Flag 
and revere it. Before the Flag could attain this status, many sacrificed their all for the freedom of 
the country. Many suffered long terms of imprisonment. They went through all this suffering so 
that they could have their own flag in a free country. On August 15th and January 26th, the 
National Flag is hoisted all over the country and revered as the symbol of national freedom. In 
the same manner people in other countries revere their respective national flags. Moreover, 
people respect even their party flags. Is this flag animate? Has it any vitality or power in it? 
When you enquire like this you discover that it is the faith in the flag that makes it adorable. 


Likewise, if the question is asked whether a stone idol that is worshipped has any life or 
consciousness in it, they will find the answer from the example of the honour done to the 
national flag. 


How does a square yard of cotton cloth made into a flag acquire its value? The value is derived 
from the fact that the flag is a symbol of the victory achieved in the freedom struggle. That 
victory has no form. The flag demonstrates the achievement of that victory. Without the flag how 
do you demonstrate the victory in the freedom struggle? 


Take another example. There is a 100-rupee note. It is lifeless. But you take good care of it 
because it represents wealth. All people seek wealth. Money as such has no qualities like 
goodness. But the possessor of money has qualities. Money is a symbol of power. 


The fragrance emanating from a flower has no form, but the flower has a form. 


Take love, for instance. It has no form. But the mother who exhibits love for her child has a 
form. If there is no mother, how can there be love? 


Every form deserves to be worshipped 


The idols that are worshipped are the answers to those who go about asking, "Where is God?" 
The truth is, God is present in every atom. Every atom represents the power of the Divine. Every 
atom deserves to be worshipped. All objects in Creation have to be respected. Men have to 
cultivate this feeling of reverence for all things. 


But, believing that the physical body is permanent and is all in all, men are wasting their lives in 
the pursuit of the ephemeral and the transient. There can be no action without the body. Without 
action there can be no fruits, Hence the body is at the base of everything. The body is a Vigraha 
(embodied form). The mother is a form. The preceptor is a form. All are forms. The term 
Vigraha also means an idol that is an object of worship. But these Vigrahas have a certain value 
It is through them that we can realise the Divine. It is impossible to conceive in this world any 
kind of Aaraadhana (worship) without a form. Worship of the formless is misconceived. It is 
these misguided persons who preach against idol worship. 


In every religion there is a distinct form for worship. For example: Prakrithi (Nature). Nature has 
the power of attraction. It contains all the five elements. It is from Nature that we get our food. 
Nature is the source of all minerals. Nature is the sustainer of man in ordinary life. That being the 
case, what is wrong in adoring Nature? Should we not be grateful to that which provides so 
many things for our needs? That gratitude is a form of worship. 


Every man is composed of the five elements. Man cannot exist without these elements. Is there 
no obligation to express one's gratitude to them? 


Nature has the power of attraction. This is called magnetism. Nature has immense magnetic 
power. Every object is affected by this magnetic power. The object also gets magnetized in the 
process and acquires magnetic power. 


The power of idols 


Today scientists are trying to understand this power of attraction in Nature. Take, for instance, a 
temple. Thousands of people go to the temple for worship. The magnetic power in the earth 
extends to the idol in the sanctum. The thoughts of the worshippers are also attracted by the idol. 
Thereby the power of attraction in the idol gets intensified. The rituals performed for the idol 
also enhance its power of attraction. This process can be noticed if a couple of nails are kept near 
a magnet. After two days it will be found that the nails also have been magnetised. In the same 
manner when worshippers go to a temple the power goes forth from thousands of worshippers, 
the power or a action in the idol gets immensely intensified. The idol surcharged with this power 
is able to energize the worshippers. 


Thus, in the world there is no object without this power. Atomic energy is present everywhere. It 
is only when the true character of this atomic power is understood that the power of the Divine 
can also be understood. 


"Shankara" is made up of the two words, ‘Sham' and ‘kara.’ What does 'Sham' mean? 'Sham' is 
that which is all-pervading like air. The air is filled with bliss. Shankara is one who offers this 
bliss to all. Nithyaanandha (everlasting bliss), Brahmaanandha (Supreme Bliss) and every kind 
of bliss is conferred by Shankara. 


"Eeshvara" is the embodiment of wealth 


There is the term "Eeshvara." It refers to one who is the embodiment of Aishvarya (every form of 
wealth and prosperity). Aishvarya is not confined to material wealth alone. It includes also the 
wealth of health, of intelligence, of physical prowess. Aishvarya represents this omnibus 
opulence, including Aanandha (bliss). Eeshvara is the one who confers every kind of opulence. 


What is the form of this Aanandha? Experience alone is the form of this bliss. This bliss can be 
experienced only by God-realisation and not by any other means. Bliss is all-pervading, but it not 
visible. For that reason, its existence cannot be denied. 


Eeshvarathva (Divinity) is all-pervading. By losing faith in the Divine, turning into unbelievers, 
moving away from bliss, men are becoming a prey to worry. This is totally wrong. A life without 
faith is like water poured on a sieve. Bliss must be secured through faith. 


The Divine is omnipresent. All of you are forms of the Divine. All of you are endowed with 
electromagnetic energy, atomic power, heat and other forms of energy. The magnetic energy is 
the most important power in man. From this magnetic energy comes electrical energy. The 
strength of the electrical energy is related to the strength of the magnetic energy. When the 
electrical and the magnetic energies come together, the divine power operates. This divine power 
does not come from outside. It is within human beings. Our very form is divine. That is why I 
address you all as "Embodiments of the Divine Aathma." 


By failing to recognise this truth, people are going in search of God here and there. God is 
everywhere. Make every effort 'to recognise this fundamental truth. 


Meaning of "the search for truth" 


People talk about Sathya-anveshana (the search for truth). What is this search? Truth is 
everywhere. Consider this example. Your eyes see the mother, the child, the wife, the cook, and 
the daughter-in-law. The eyes are the same but they see different persons with different 
emotions. The search for truth means seeing everything in its own true, specific nature. All the 
persons may be feminine and the eyes that see them are one and the same. But to find out the 
truth one has to determine how he should view each person in relation to that person's state. 


Consider, again, the role of the tongue. The same tongue may indulge in falsehood or stand for 
truth. The same tongue may revile at others or praise them. The tongue's role in the quest for 
truth is to determine when a lie may be uttered or the truth should be spoken, when blame or 
praise is justified. 


Truth resides in you. It is the appropriate application to specific objects which determines what is 
true. 


Hence, if you want to discover the Divine who is omnipresent there must be a change in outlook 
within you. When you realise your own inherent divinity, you will be able to recognise the 
divinity in others. 


Significance of idol worship 


Idol worship should not be regarded as a meaningless exercise. It is a good practice because on 
the basis of the idol the higher consciousness is attained. In a home, there are pictures of 
grandparents and great-grandparents. The present generation has not seen them. But they offer 
garlands to the pictures and revere the ancestors. Is there life in the pictures? Do they exhibit any 


love? Do the pictures by themselves reveal any relationship? Not at all. But the pictures are 
revered out of the feeling that they represent one's ancestors. If such a loving feeling did not 
exist, the pictures will not be kept in the house. Likewise it is the attachment for an object that 
inspires respect and reverence. This is termed devotion. This devotion should be shown towards 
all objects because the Divine is in everything, in every atom. It may be difficult to cultivate such 
devotion. But once its rationale is properly understood, the practice of devotion will become 
easy. 


There have been controversies and doubts about this in the past. For instance, a school of 
philosophers known as Chaarvaakas used to deride idol worship. But later on, they also 
recognized its value. They realised that everything in the world has a form, from the atom 
onwards, and that everything with a form was Vigraham (an idol) fit for worship. What is the 
form of water? Here in this tumbler is some water and its form is derived from the tumbler. 
Likewise air acquires the form of the balloon in which it is confined. Similarly when the body is 
filled with Divine energy, the Divine acquires the human form. The all-pervading Divine thus 
acquires the form in which it manifests itself. Perform your worship to the Divine with 
awareness of the truth that the Divine is omnipresent and is therefore in the idol that is 
worshipped. And then you are bound to have a vision of the Divine. 


The truth about the omnipresence of the Divine was evident to the Gopikas who sang in praise of 
Krishna: 


O Krishna! How can anyone know your mystery? 
You are subtler than the atom and 

vaster than the vastest thing in the world! 
You are present in myriads of beings in this 

vast universe in innumerable forms. 
How can we ever know you? 


"You are a thief among thieves, a good man among the good. You manifest the qualities of the 
object in which you dwell. You are everything." 


Infinite forms of the Lord 


Those who have studied the Vibhuuthi Yoga in the Bhagavath Geetha will know the infinity of 
forms which the Lord assumes. All forms are His. If one has faith that the lord is present in the 
atom, one will have a vision of the Lord even in the atom. But if you make a distinction between 
different objects, treat some as pure and others as impure, you will not get that vision. Till the 
realisation that everything is permeated by God comes to one, he must worship an idol as a 
sacred symbol. A sculptor creates an idol out of a rock. Because of the form given to it, it is 
installed in a temple and worshipped. In fashioning the idol, the sculptor chisels away many 
chips of stone. The chips may proclaim verily their kinship with the idol worshipped in the 
temple. They may say: "You and we are one. The only difference is, you have a form and we 
have none." 


Thus, the Divine exists both in the form and in the "formless". It is because this concept of the 
Universe is not understood that faith has declined. 


Faith is at the root of spirituality. If you believe that God exists, He exists. If you have no belief, 
so far as you are concerned God does not exist. 


When you believe in God, you develop faith in the divinity of all things. Faith is the basis of 
worship. Worship leads to oneness with the Divine. The sense of separateness will persist as long 
as there is no God realisation. Separateness ends with Realisation. 


Science and Vedhaantha say 'the same in substance 


Scientists are tending to realise the basic unity of the energy that fills the universe. Vedhaantha 
describes that Unity as Brahman (the Supreme all-pervading Absolute Consciousness). The 
terms used are different, but in substance they are saying the same thing; namely that the One 
subsumes the many. 


With regard to divinity, there is no meaning in making a distinction between the Divine with 
form and the formless divinity. How can you conceive of the Formless Divine? You cannot 
avoid idol worship until you have experience of the Divine within you. Raamakrishna 
Paramahamsa once told a disciple--who asked why he (the disciple) was not able to see God-- 
whether he yearned for God with the same intensity with which he sought many worldly things. 
If he did so, he would certainly have a vision of God. When a similar question was put to 
Buddha, he said that without indulging in speculation about God if one practised truth, 
righteousness and non-violence he would have the highest experience. 


The ways of Svaami 


Many people who have some questions regarding Svaami do not realise the ways of the Divine. 
They look at all things from the worldly point of view. They should look at things from the 
Divine point of view. Change the angle of your vision. When you practise seeing the world from 
the point of view of the omnipresence of the Divine, you will get transformed. You will 
experience the power of the Divine in everything in creation. You cannot hide anything from 
God. Many imagine that Svaami does not see what they are doing. They do not realise that 
Svaami has a myriad eyes. Even your eyes are divine. But you are not aware of your true nature. 
When you have faith in yourself, you will have faith in God. Realise that there is nothing beyond 
the power of God. Love God with that supreme faith. Then you will be drawn towards God. It 
needs purity. A magnet cannot attract a piece of iron covered with rust. Similarly God will not 
draw to Himself an impure person. Hence, change your feelings and thoughts and develop the 
conviction that God is everything. God will not give you up when you have this conviction. 


Today is Shivaraathri, the Night of Auspiciousness. This is the occasion for cherishing 
auspicious thoughts and praying for auspicious action and conduct in life. You must get rid of 
narrow and petty feelings. 


Men today have lost the spirit of sacrifice. Three things are essential for every man love of one's 
country, sacrifice and following the godly path of spirituality. One is a true human being only 
when he has these three qualities. To know is the function of the mind. To act is the duty of the 
body. To remain as the Eternal Witness is the function of the Aathma. Mind, body and Aathma 
together constitute humanness. The Divine is present in all three. 


God has provided everything for man's good in the world. But there is one condition that has to 
be observed. The results of your actions will be according to their nature, whether they are good 
or bad. Men today want to reap the fruits of good deeds without performing good deeds. This is 
impossible. Nor can they escape the consequences of their evil actions. God is only a witness. 


At least from now on, develop good thoughts, do good actions and redeem your lives. You have 
to start with the Karma Maarga (the path of Action), and end with Jnaana Maarga (the path of 
knowledge). In between there is the Upaasana Maarga (the path of Worship). This is the path 
you have to follow today. For this you have to get the conviction that God is omnipresent. When 
you have that conviction, you will not indulge in falsehood or practise deception, you will not 
abuse others or cause harm to them, you will acquire all virtues. This is the purpose of observing 
Shivaraathri as a Sacred Night. The night vigil should be dedicated entirely to contemplation of 
God. 


Develop the firm conviction that God is within you and that you are Divine. Love is God and 
God is Love. Live in love and make your entire life a saga of love. 


Discourse in the Puurnachandhra Auditorium on 27-2-1995, Shivaraathri Day. 


5. God: The trinity and the cosmos 


EMBODIMENTS of love! The tongue is the cause of prosperity or poverty. The tongue is 
responsible for promoting friendship and kinship, for attachment and bondage, and for death and 
liberation. 


It is essential to keep the tongue under control. The manner in which the tongue is employed 
determines one's fame of ignominy. The tongue determines your friendships and relationships. 


The entire creation is based on three processes: Shrishti (creation), Sthithi (sustenance) and 
Layam (dissolution). The cosmos is kept going by these three Karmas (processes). Should there 
not be a director for these processes? You cannot have in this world a Karma (an action) without 
a Kartha (a doer). The doer and the deed go together. 


Who is the doer? What is the action? What is the fruit of the action? It is only when these three 
are properly understood can the secret of creation be recognized. 


Three Divine agencies 


It is easy to criticize the Lord's /ee/as, but it is difficult to understand their inner meaning. Our 
life should be devoted to understanding the ways of the Lord. 


In this understanding, the first aspect to be recognized is Shrishti (creation of the cosmos). What 
is involved in this process should be understood. For instance, if a giant bridge has to be 
constructed, a large number of engineers and other personnel are required. Besides a chief 
manager, there will have to be engineers and men working under him. It is only their combined 
effort that can build a bridge. 


In the same manner, for the creation, protection and mergence of the cosmos, three principal 
agencies are required. The principal authority responsible for creation is known as Brahma. He is 
in charge of all that is related to creation. Next comes protection. What has been created has to 
be fostered and protected. The authority responsible for this function is called Vishnu. After 
growth inevitably there comes the stage of dissolution. There is an authority responsible for 
laying down the rules for dissolution and enforcing those regulations. This authority is called 
Eeshvara. Thus there are three authorities who share functionally the responsibility for creation, 
protection and dissolution. There must be someone who presides over these three functionaries, 
like the Prime Minister in a Cabinet. Brahma, Vishnu and Eeshvara are presiding deities for three 
different functions. There is a supreme authority presiding over these three. This supreme 
authority was called by Bhaaratheeyas as Bhagavaan. Members of different faiths have given 
different names to this authority. The term is most widely used in this context today is God. 
Bhagavaan refers to the One who governs all the three functions of creation, protection and 
dissolution. 


"G-O-D" combines the three aspects 


In the word GOD, you have three letters: G,O,D. "G" refers to Generation (or creation). "O" 
refers to Organization (that is, keeping creation going). "D" stands for Destruction. GOD 
combines the three aspects of generation, organization and destruction. When people refer to 
God, they regard Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva as each a God. God is the one who wields authority 
over all the three. This Divine entity pervades the entire universe in the form of atoms. "Subtle as 
the atom, vast as the vastest in creation, the Aathma pervades everything as atom" says a 
Thelugu poem. 


Hence, the Divine is called Aathma. This Aathma pervades everything and is present everywhere. 
This all-pervading Aathma is the Eternal Witness. This role may be illustrated by a simple 
example’ There is light here. There are some who are reading under it, some who are sleeping, 
some who are talking and some others who are moving about. The light has no connection with 
all these different activities. The light is only a witness. Likewise, the Sun is shining. Using the 
sunlight different people are carrying on different activities. The sun is totally unaffected by 
either the good or bad actions that are being done by different persons. Each is accountable for 
his actions. But the sun shines as a witness to all that is happening. Without the sun none of these 
actions is possible. The sun is thus the agency that enables the actions to be done but he is not the 
dispenser of the fruits of those actions. He is only a witness. The doers have to reap-the 
consequences of their actions. Brahma, Vishnu and Eeshvara are responsible for enabling the 
actions to be done, for furthering their fruition and for determining how-the fruits should be 
enjoyed. These three deities have to be propitiated for favours in these respects. That is what has 
been done on Shivaraathri night. 


Nine forms of propitiating the deities 


How are they to be propitiated? The methods are indicated in the nine forms of devotion: 
Shravanam (hearing), Keerthanam (singing), Vishnusmaranam (remembering the name), 
Vandhanam (prostration), Archanam (worship of images), Paadhasevanam (worship of the feet), 
Dhaasyam (service), Sneham (friendship), Aathmanivedhanam (total surrender). 


Today we have to acquire the favours of these deities. With their friendship we can face any 
troubles just as, if we have friendship of a person in power, we can overcome troubles in life. 
These deities will help to alleviate the consequences of our actions if they are properly 
propitiated. For this purpose, the chanting of the Divine name is essential. Equally meditation 
and penance are necessary. All forms of worship are designed to please the deities. These deities 
lay down regulations for observances by the world in respect of their specific functions. These 
regulations are like the traffic rules and guideposts and the road signs that indicate to people 
using the roads how they should behave. 


For instance, there is Brahma. As Creator he lays down the laws relating to actions and how the 
consequences of these actions affect people in their lives from birth to death. In addition, he also 
effects changes in the administration of these rules. On the basis of this function, the Brahma- 
principle is operative everywhere. The very term 'Brahma' means 'pervading.' The pervasiveness 
of the Brahma-principle is cosmic. 


Vishnu also means that which is all-pervading. The Vishnu-principle permeates everything. 
Wherever the creation principle of Brahma is present, there the sustaining principle of Vishnu is 
also present. 


Where there is protection there is also punishment. This means where Vishnu is present, 
Eeshvara is also present. 


Omnipresence of the absolute 


Where is the Supreme Divinity? It is omnipresent. But not recognizing this truth, people pray to 
God in various ways. These prayers are not to God. They are prayers addressed to the guardian 
deities of the Lord. These guardian deities examine the merits of each case and make their 
recommendations to God. 


Hence, God is a permanent Witness. He has no attributes. He has no specific form. He can 
assume any form. The attributeless Divine has attributes also. A pot is made from clay. The clay 
is formless, but the pot with form is made from it. There is no pot in the clay, but there is clay in 
the pot. Likewise, the Divine is everywhere. The Divine is in forms and is formless. He is with 
and without attributes. 


How do men relate to God? There is Chittha in man (the heart). There is a recording deity known 
as Chithraguptha. The good and bad actions done by everyone are duly registered in the heart 
and taken into reckoning by Chithraguptha. The results of these actions are given a concrete 
form and the fruits are made available to each according to his deserts. The Divine cannot offer 
what is not there. He will not take away what is one's due. He lets the respective deities carry out 
their functions according to the rules. Hence He is called the 'Embodiment of Dharma.' The Lord 
will not interfere in the functions of the different deities. He lets Brahma, Vishnu and Eeshvara 
carry out their respective functions according to the cosmic laws. As He remains a Witness, He is 
described as the 'Embodiment of Dharma and Truth." 


Today everyone interferes with every other's function. This causes the breakdown of the natural 
order. This is described as the reign of unrighteousness and untruth. This is the difference 
between the reign of Dharma by the Divine and reign of Adharma by the mundane rulers. 


The Divine is verily the form of Dharma (Righteousness). Hence Raama is described as 
"Vigrahavaan Dharmah" (The embodiment of Righteousness). Even if you are unable to 
worship the form of the Divine as Righteousness and Truth, adhere to Righteousness and follow 
Truth. "Sathyam vadha, Dharmam chara" (Speak the truth, observe, righteousness)---these are 
the Vedhik injunctions. 


Surrender to God 


The cosmos is governed by the three principal deities. I am letting you into a secret. So far as 
Creation is concerned, propitiate Brahma and establish links with the deity. As regards 
protection, establish links with Vishnu (by propitiating Him). With regard to destruction, 
establish association with Eeshvara (Shiva). However if your heart is totally pure, you can 
establish direct connection with God. You need not approach the lesser deities. For this, there is 
a way. That is the way of total surrender. Through surrender you can establish a direct link with 
God, heart to heart. 


All the bhajans and chantings that are done now are related to the lesser deities. The Divine 
mystery is incredibly marvellous. It is not easy for ordinary mortals to comprehend these 
mysteries. People ask questions from time to time about Svaami's actions. "Why is He causing 
this trouble? Why is He acting in this manner?" 


The answer may be got from a puraanic story. 
The Bhasmaasura story 


Once Eeshvara gave a boon to Bhasmaasura as desired by him, namely that whatever he touched 
should be reduced to ashes. Immediately on getting the boon he lost his sense of gratitude to 
Eeshvara. He wanted to place his hand on Eeshvara himself! Eeshvara could not protect himself. 
He went to Vishnu, who has the duty of being a protector. Even as protector Vishnu had to 
observe the laws of Dharma. He could not punish Bhasmaasura straightaway. He staged a 
drama. He assumed the form of a most beautiful damsel, Mohini. On seeing her, Bhasmaasura's 
passion was aroused. He ran after Mohini. Mohini told him, "You perform all that I do, I shall 


marry you." Bhasmaasura readily agreed. He had no sense of discrimination or of gratitude. 
Mohini started dancing and Bhasmaasura kept pace with her. In the course of the dance, Mohini 
placed her hand on her head. When Bhasmaasura did the same, he was reduced to ashes. His 
hand was his undoing. This episode shows that even in discharging the duty of protection, the 
divine has to observe the code of Dharma. 


It should be recognized that the ways of God are governed by Shaasanam (cosmic laws). Even 
the Divine cannot act against these laws. 


God cannot act against the cosmic code 


Men today violate the code of moral behaviour. But the divine cannot act against His own moral 
code. So, on different occasions, God waits for the appropriate time to enforce the code. On that 
account, you cannot say God is powerless or incompetent. God is omnipotent, but that does not 
mean He can act arbitrarily. He acts according to the cosmic code. 


God is not like a lecturer who teaches a lesson and leaves the classroom. God is like a physical 
director who teaches by his own example. That is why I say: "My life is my message." God 
teaches by demonstration. 


Today some people carry on propaganda to cast aspersions on the actions of the Divine by mis- 
representation and misinterpretation. They declare: "God punishes you, God persecutes you." 
This is totally misconceived. It is not God's business to punish you or harass you. The 
punishment and the persecution are consequences of your actions. God is the giver of the fruits 
of your actions. He is like a postman who delivers letters in different homes. In one house the 
letter brings grief. In another the letter causes joy. Is the postman responsible for joy in one home 
or the grief in another? It is the message contained in the letters that is responsible for the 
different reactions. 


In the same manner, the Lord is an impartial witness. He, merely hands over the fruits of each 
one's actions according to their deserts. In case the consequence is unpleasant God may interfere 
to get the pain reduced by proper propitiation. That authority He has. The three presiding deities 
over creation, protection and dissolution are the trinity--Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva. But there is 
a fourth entity--Shironaayakam (the Overlord), who is above these three. He is God. He can 
overrule the Trinity. How? By mitigating the magnitude of the consequences of Karma. He can 
counteract any kind of situation. That is the Divine prerogative of God. He can create anything, 
protect anything. He creates and brings about its dissolution. 


Therefore, God should be regarded as having control over Generation, Organization and 
Destruction. To realise God, you have to surrender yourself completely. When the surrender is 
total, a direct link with God is established. 


Without such surrender propitiating the lesser deities is a waste of time. 
Bad associations cause doubts 


When one surrenders, according to the circumstances, the devotee becomes subject to some 
doubts and mental agitations. For instance, in the Raamaayana, when Raama and Lakshmana 
were going in search of Seetha, suddenly Lakshmana felt tired and told Raama that he was fed up 
with the search for Seetha and would like to go back to Ayodhya to have a more comfortable 
time. Raama smiled and said: "Let us proceed. I shall explain everything later." How did 
Lakshmana, who previously had declared that Raama was everything to him and that he would 


not live without Raama even for a moment, suddenly develop this attitude? How did this concern 
for bodily comfort arise? 


After they had walked some distance, they sat under a tree. That moment Lakshmana felt the 
pangs of repentance. He realised his mistake, clasped Raama's feet and said' "Brother! Forgive 
me for what I had said. I cannot understand how this bad thought came to my mind. What is the 
reason?" Raama then replied' "Lakshmana! The region through which we passed recently was 
the haunt of Shuurpanakha. Shuurpanakha used to rest under the tree there. That place was 
surcharged with all her evil qualities. Those vibrations aroused in you the bad thoughts. The 
moment you came out of the place, your inherent good nature asserted itself." 


The lesson of this incident is that people will have to be careful about their association with 
certain places or persons. Eschew bad company. Be away from places where evil qualities are 
rampant. The vibrations from a place affect persons who frequent them. 


Divine vibrations in Prashaanthi Nilayam 


Here you have Divine vibration. Elsewhere you have demonic vibrations. Recognise the 
difference between these two kinds of vibrations. Realise that association with good people 
ultimately leads to God-realisation. You must understand that God's grace is related to your good 
actions. When your conduct is good, God's grace comes direct to you. 


People ask, "Where is God?" But, even without knowing it, a so-called unbeliever believes in 
God. 


Once, Prime Minister Nehru visited Madurai in South India. He was not interested in spiritual 
matters. God had no meaning for him. His agnosticism was a product of the environment in 
which he grew up. The local leaders took him to Meenakshi temple, whether, he was inclined to 
visit the temple or not. During the visit, the leaders who were with Nehru praised the ornaments 
worn by the Goddess and told him that the diamonds and gems in the jewels on the idol were 
worth crores of rupees. After listening to them, Nehru remarked "Why is it that these valuable 
gemstones are placed on a valueless idol?" After that he was returning from the sanctum. He did 
not notice the door and he hit against it and stumbled. At that moment, he cried out: "Oh! my 
God!" This shows each one has his own God and refers to Him as "my God." 


Thus, even without being conscious of it, all have some faith in God. The reason is that God is in 
everyone. That divinity manifests itself without one's knowledge. Faith in God is natural to man. 
Doubts about God are artificial exercises of the mind. 


Spirituality calls for the removal of the animal qualities in man and developing his divine 
qualities. This is the duty of all spiritual aspirants. Qualities like slander, back-biting and 
speaking ill of others are sub-human qualities. You must learn to respect the divine in everyone, 
while carrying on your duties. 


Total surrender is essential for Divine realisation 


The path of direct realisation of the Divine consists in total surrender to the Divine, as 
exemplified by Lakshmana in his surrender 'to Raama. He told Raama that after his surrender he 
had nothing that he could call his own and he existed only to carry out Raama's will in every 
matter. 


Thyaagaraaja, who once for a brief while entertained doubts about Raama's capacity to relieve 
him of his troubles, later extolled the limitless power of Raama, which enabled Hanumaan to 


leap across the ocean and which accounted for Lakshmana's total surrender to Raama. (Svaami 
sang the keerthana of Thyagaraja in praise of Raama's prowess, which evoked the adoration of 
Lakshmana, Bharatha and others). 


Likewise, how can anyone determine "Sai-shakthi?" Here are people from Argentina and 
Australia. Are they dull-witted? Are they not intelligent and affluent people? What is the 
meaning of their coming to Svaami? If Svaami did not have the power why would they come? 
This one fact is enough to show how they recognise the truth about Svaami. 


To recognise divinity there is no need to master the scriptures, or study the Upanishaths. A single 
visible experience is enough. 


The nature of divinity cannot be described or defined. It is beyond description. What is needed is 
development of faith in the Divine, through weal and woe. In the pursuit of the Divine, 
perseverance is essential. The quest should not be given up in any circumstances. Either God 
should bless you or you should forget yourself in thinking of Him. People today lack such 
determination and perseverance. Part-time devotion can only receive part-time grace. 


Adore God with firm determination. The right time for starting on this quest is when you are 
young as students. Remain unflinching in your faith. 


You did bhajans all thorough the night. But that is not enough. Contemplation of God should be 
kept up always at all places. Whatever work you do, dedicate it to God. Divinise every word and 
action. 


Discourse in the Puurnachandhra Auditorium on the morning of 28-2-1995. 


6. Uphold the ideals of Sai Institute 


The one whose heart is compassionate 

Who is adorned by the Jewel of truth in speech, 
Whose body is dedicated to the well-being of others 
What can Kali do to him? 


EMBODIMENTS of Divine Love! For every man, the body, the tongue and the heart are the 
elements which constitute humanness. This is the purport of the Sanskrith shloka. 


A sacred and pure heart, speech wedded to truth, and a body dedicated to the service of others, 
with these three attributes a man can have no trouble from Kali (presiding deity of the present 
aeon). Purity of the heart, truthfulness in speech and a service devoted body constitute what is 
called Thrikarana shuddhi (the triple purity of body, speech and heart). 


Sai seeks from you good qualities, 
Friendliness towards mankind, 

The spirit of sacrifice, 

Eschewing of selfishness and 

Rendering service to society. 

This is the offering Sai desires from you. 
And this is verily the wealth you 

should offer to Sai. (Thelugu Poem). 


This is the wealth Sai expects. Good qualities, friendship towards all, selfless service to society 
are what Sai seeks from you. 


Students! Teachers! Educationists! In this world of moving and non-moving objects, man is 
carrying on his life with two desires. One is Preyas (material prosperity). Although there are all 
kinds of objects in the world, man seeks first of all things which will please his senses. Deriving 
pleasure from time to time through sense-organs is described as Preyas. This Preyas is not 
enduring. It is like a mirage. Sensuous pleasures are momentary and leave trial of pain behind, 
However, most people seek only such fleeting and unreal pleasures. From the learned to the 
illiterate, all seek only these sensuous pleasures. Indulgence in sensual pleasures leads to bad 
practices and bad conduct. 


"Constantly entertaining bad thoughts, 
playing a game of blind man's buff, 
Strutting about with a perishable body, 
ds soon as one's accumulations 

From past lives are exhausted, 

giving up this make-believe existence, 


The poor player meets with his death, 


carrying with him the consequences 
Of his good and bad deeds," says a Thelugu poem. 
Is this the life one should lead? Can this be the purpose of life? 


This verily is not the life a true man should lead. One would manifest his full personality. How is 
this personality to be developed? The first requisite is elimination of the ego. Only when the ego 
is destroyed, does a man's personality blossom forth. 


Shreyas and Preyas 


Man today seeks primarily sensual desires. Secondarily, he desires Shreyas. Shreyas means 
overcoming the demands of the senses and achieving that spiritual bliss which is represented by 
the term Sath-Chith-Aanandha (Being-Awareness-Bliss). All actions aimed at Aathmik 
(Spiritual) bliss are related to Shreyas. 


The one who seeks Preyas (sensual pleasures) is concerned with the body, while the one 
concerned with the Aathma seeks Shreyas (spiritual well-being). 


Today ninety nine percent of the population are involved in sensual desires and not in spiritual 
bliss. Education today is mainly concerned with sensory pursuits. All occupations are related to 
the achievement of sensual desires All enjoyments are related to the senses. Even the acquisition 
of wealth is for enjoying trivial sensual pleasures. The involvement with Preyas thus is 
connected with pleasures of the body, the mind and the senses. There is doubtless need for some 
concern about physical comforts. "Even the body is essential for the realisation of Dharma," says 
the scripture. The demands of the body have to be satisfied. Society has to be served. Family 
responsibilities have to be discharged. The body is the basis for all these. But this should not be 
the ultimate goal of life. The former relates to the external phenomenal world and is concerned 
with worldly desires. Together with this, there should be the yearning for a higher Shreyas 
(spiritual life). 


The pursuit of Preyas (worldly desires) is negative, The quest for Shreyas is positive. Without 
association with the positive, Preyas is of no use, however much there may be worldly goods. It 
is only when one yearns for Shreyas (spiritual bliss) that even Preyas leads to fulfilment. 


Worldly knowledge is not to be ignored or neglected. It is undoubtedly necessary. Secular 
knowledge is for the enjoyment of this world. Brahma Vidhya is for the enjoyment of other 
worldly bliss. While acquiring secular knowledge, be keen about realising spiritual truth. 


Conflict between sensual desire and spiritual yearning 


Good qualities are the key to experiencing spiritual bliss. Love towards all one's fellow-beings 
and service to society are essential. These three contribute to the sublimation of human existence. 


There is a conflict between sensual desires and spiritual yearning in human beings. The senses 
are so powerful that they are able to delude by their attractions even profound scholars. In 
spiritual parlance this power is described as Viruddhashakthi (negative force). In science this is 
called magnetic force. 


The magnetic power (or the power of attraction) is present in all objects in the world. All the 
thoughts in a man's mind have this magnetic power. From magnetic energy is derived electrical 
energy. Electrical energy is the source for the power of light and for atomic power. Atomic 
energy is present in thoughts and in speech. Thus, magnetic energy is the basis for all forms of 


energy. It is the energy that accounts for speech, for singing and all other activities. The power of 
this energy was recognized from ancient times. India is the nation that recognized the divine 
source of this energy, experienced its power’ and propagated the truth about it to the whole 
world. You must feel elated that 'you have taken birth in such a glorious land. You must feel 
proud that you are a son of Bhaarath. 


The glory of Bhaarath 


For this land of Bhaarath, the great Himaalayas are the frontiers. The Himaalayas convey the 
message of peace and security for every man. The Himaalayas proclaim the message of purity 
and irremovable firmness. 


The land of Bhaarath is watered by the life-giving rivers Ganga, Yamuna and Sarasvathi. These 
are the arteries of the nation. 


And then, you have the Bhagavath Geetha, the Upanishaths and Brahma Suuthras. These three 
sacred texts teach the philosophy of work, worship and wisdom. The Raamaayana and the 
Mahaabhaaratha teach how to sublimate human life. In the Raamaayana, Raama is an ideal hero. 
The Raamaayana teaches that every individual should lead an ideal life. 


It is said about the Mahaabhaaratha that what is not in it cannot be found elsewhere. Bhaarath is 
made up of the two words 'Bhaa' and 'Rathi.' 'Bhaa' means effulgence, illumination, 
enlightenment. 'Rathi' means taking pleasure. Bhaaratheeyas are a people who delight in 
illumination and enlightenment. The concept of Bhaarath is thus full of significance. 


Bhaaratheeyas, who are the inheritors of a great heritage, are today leading meaningless lives, 
lacking peace of mind, as they have become slaves of the senses. 


Every student should understand what is his duty even now, because life is fleeting and one's 
days are numbered. 


Students! Do not get involved in metaphysical riddles as to whether the world is real or only 
Brahman is real. Try to realise the truth about yourself. Ask yourself the question: "Am I real or 
not?" The answer comes' "I am real." How long are you real? As long as life lasts. What is 
Reality or Truth? The answer is' That which remains unchanged through the three categories of 
time, past, present and future is truth. The world is constantly changing. If that is the case, how 
can you say that the world is not unreal? You are part of the world. The world contains you. 


we and "mine" 


There are two words. 'l' and 'Mine'. 'l' is associated with the concept of Ekathvam (oneness). 
"Mine' is social concept. 'l' represents the individual. Who is this individual? It is not connected 
with the body. 'Mine' is a collective concept. You describe many things as 'mine’. But 'I' stands 
alone. Being associated with the One, it stands for the Aathma. Ekaathma--the Aathma is one. 
"Mine' is associated with the things of the world. 


Where does the 'I' (Nenu in Thelugu and Aham in Sanskrith) exist? Wherefrom did the Aham 
originate? Vedhic scholars and spiritually realised persons declared that the source of Aham is 
Hridhaya. What is the meaning of Hridhaya? In the worldly sense it refers to the physical heart 
in the body. But this is not what the term Hridhaya signifies. Hridhaya and 'T' are one and the 
same. The Shrutis gave the name Hridhaya to 'l'. Where is this Hridhaya? It is assumed that it is 
in the body. Where is the 'I' presumed to exist in the body? 'T' is not part of the body. You say, 
"This is my body." 'My' is separate from the body. 'My' therefore, is not a part of the body. It 


follows that 'l' is not part of the body. If you understand the nature of 'T', you will understand the 
whole world. 'T' is in all beings. Everyone uses the 'T' to identify himself or herself. The 'T' is the 
omnipresent indwelling entity. When the Hridhaya is identified with the 'T' it is equally all- 
pervading. 


Mind merely follows Hridhaya like a shadow 


Man today has a narrow conception of the 'I' and Hridhaya because he misconceives the 
relationship between the Upaadhi (container) and what is contained (the indwelling Aathma). 
How is this misconception to be removed? At the outset, there should be an enquiry into the 
nature of Hridhaya. All you students are here (in this hall). If Hridhaya referred to the physical 
heart, your Hridhaya should be here. But when you think about your parents, in one moment 
your thoughts turn to Hyderabad. Another moment, you think about Madras. What is it that goes 
to Hyderabad or Madras? What is that experiences these feelings? You may think it is the mind. 
The mind is Jada (inert). When you understand the mind properly, you will realise it is .not the 
mind that is involved, it is the Hridhaya that is at work, and the mind merely follows it like a 
shadow. There can be a shadow only when there is a real object. The mind is only the shadow of 
'I'. Wherever the 'I' goes, the mind follows. When the 'T' is still, the mind will not move. 
Understanding this truth is real education for students. This is what is involved in Sathya 
anveshana (quest for truth). 


The quest for truth should embrace all things. For instance, when you see a flower, you should 
try to know its name, how it came into existence, etc. 


The heart and the senses 


You hear some good news which delights you. You also hear some sad news, as well as some 
harsh abusive words You hear words of praise and blame. All the words were heard by the ears. 
But when happy news was heard the heart felt elated. When sad news was heard the heart shrunk 
in sorrow. The heart got enraged when the ears heard harsh words about you. You were filled 
with joy when you heard words of praise. What is responsible for these varied responses, though 
all the words were heard by the same ears? The ears are inconscient by themselves and incapable 
of any reactions. The responses of joy or sorrow are related to the contents of the messages 
conveyed by the ears. Thus, the senses are by themselves Jada (inconscient). How can the 
operations of these senses be deemed as Sathya (Truth or Reality)? How can the experiences 
resulting from these negative senses be considered as Truth? When the senses are unrealisable, 
the reactions produced by them are equally unreliable. 


It is enquiring along these lines that man can overcome sorrow. 


The basic cause for the occurrence of feelings like hatred, jealousy and anger is the body 
constituted by the five elements. As long as the body remains, it will be subject to these types of 
feelings. For instance, all experiences derived through the senses and the mind occur during the 
waking state. How long do they last? When you go to sleep none of these experiences is present. 
Even the mind is absent, as it were. There is no consciousness even of breathing. In the dream 
state you are not aware of the life process. But there is a kind of perception in that state. Is that 
perception by the physical eyes? You are lying in bed with closed eyes. Which are the eyes that 
perceive in that state? What is the body that moves about in that state? What is it that receives 
impressions from outside or experiences grief? It is clear that the experiences in that state are 
different from the experiences in the waking state. The experiences in the dream state are real as 


long as the dream lasts. The experiences in the waking state are real in that state. There are no 
dreams in the waking state and there are no perceptions of the waking state in the dream state. 
But you are present in both the states. 


In both the states the "7" is one. The experiences in both the waking and dream states are of the 
same "J", only the states are different. Hence, the Reality or truth is that which remains in all the 
states. The "J" was present in the dream state. It is now present in the waking state. This 
continuity in the past and the present characterizes the Aathma. It is wrong to identify the "I" 
with the body. 


"I" is subtle and incomparable 


Over the ages, by identifying the "I" with the body, its true nature has been grossly underrated 
because of ignorance, perversion and false attachments. The truth is this "J" is subtle and 
incomparable. It is beyond change. This is the characteristic of divinity. Men have to recognise 
their inherent divinity. 


In the conflict between the Prego maarga (materialistic path) and the Shreyo maarga (spiritual 
path), people are deluded into following the former. They are ready to sacrifice their lives for 
sensory pleasures. Should they not dedicate their lives for higher truth? 


Be exemplars of Shreyo Maarga 


The power of Shreyas (spirituality) can confer boundless bliss. Hence you should pursue Shreyas 
rather than Preyas. Those who are after sensuous pleasures do not readily listen to the words of 
those who advise them to give up their evil ways. On the contrary, they try to drag others down 
to their level. 


The one who pursues the spiritual path not only benefits himself but promotes the well-being of 
others. He is like the incense-stick which consumes itself in the process of spreading its 
fragrance while burning. 


Hence, our students should be exemplars of the Shreyo Maarga. Learning for Shreyas or a 
spiritual upliftment, is true education. Students should avoid imitating the silly practices of 
persons who sport a long hair or go about in "bell bottoms" and "drainage pipes." Students 
should use their discriminating power in deciding how they should act. They should try to 
spiritualize their will power. 


They should realise the infinite powers latent in man. It is these powers which have enabled men 
to invent the most wonderful kinds of machinery. Men are, therefore, more valuable than the 
most precious things in the world. It is man who imparts value to things by the changes he makes 
in them, as in the case of diamonds or a work of art. 


In the spiritual field, man is enjoined at the very outset to know himself. He should not be a slave 
of the senses. Nor should he follow others like sheep. "Be a ship and not sheep." A ship serves to 
carry others and cross the Ocean. 


Consider the miraculous manner in which various organs in the body, the heart, the lungs, the 
stomach, the eyes and the tongue, function. Can this marvellous human machine be made by any 
human being? Students should realise how the divine functions in the body; making the organs 
carry out their different functions. What the scientists have discovered is an infinitesimally small 
part of what exists in God's creation. 


Realise that time lost is lost for ever 


Students should realise that time lost is lost forever. Hence time should not be wasted. Moreover, 
you should realise the power which time wields over men. For instance, it was the impending 
bad time in store for him and his family which led a lover of righteousness like Yudhishthira to 
engage in a game of dice in which he lost everything. Seetha similarly was a victim of the 
misconceived desire for the elusive golden deer. When disaster is impending, the intellect gets 
clouded. 


The lesson from such episodes is clear. Avoid wrong actions and eluding desires. Don't harbour 
evil thoughts. 


Consider the body as a vessel, wisdom as a rope 'and use the vessel to draw the nectar of divinity 
from the well of spirituality. Not otherwise can immortality be attained. 


Students! After the end of the academic year, you will return to your homes and spend your. 
vacation well with your parents and brothers and sisters. This is good. But you must be always 
on your guard during these two months. Some of your old friends may try to influence you. Don't 
succumb to their pressures. Try to live upto what you have learnt here. When the Asuras and 
Dhevas churned the Ocean of Milk, first came poison. They did not give up the churning till they 
got the Amrith (nectar). Regard your heart as the Ocean of Milk and the intellect as the Mandhara 
Mountain. Using your yearnings as the churning ropes, carry on the churning by reciting the 
Lord's name. Do not mind if the first thing to come out is poison. Go on churning till you get the 
nectar of divine bliss. 


When you study the Geetha, you will note that it begins with Vishaadha Yoga, the Yoga of 
sorrow. But ultimately, Arjuna experiences the Vishvaruupa, the Cosmic Form of the Lord. 
Utilize your holidays in the best manner possible. Lead exemplary lives so that you may justify 
your studies in this Institute. Unfortunately many students misuse their great opportunities. 
Experiencing the Divine is more valuable than all the wealth of the world, as Saint Thyaagaraaja 
pointed out. Try to render whatever social service you can selflessly and with dedication. You 
are bound to get God's grace. Yearn for God's "grace" and not the worldly "grass." 


Dedicated service of all Vice-Chancellors 


Now about our Institute. Since its inception we have had four Vice-Chancellors. All of them 
have served the Institute without any desires in a spirit of dedication. 


The first Vice-Chancellor was Prof. Gokak. After his first term, when he was due to retire, the 
University Grants Commission allowed him to continue for another term to build up the infant 
University. This extension was given as a special case. After two more years he was given 
another special extension on the same grounds. As long as he remained he served the Institute 
honorarily without any remuneration. 


Then came Prof. Saraf. He was a member of the U.G.C. Board. He had held important positions 
in the Government. He also served the Institute with dedication, deeming Svaami's grace as the 
highest reward. 


The third Vice-Chancellor was Prof. Sampath. He had been Director of the Indian Institute of 
Technology at Kanpur and was Deputy Director of the Madras Institute of Technology. He is an 
authority on Computers. In my view he is a computer himself. He also served the Institute 
honorarily. If Vice-Chancellors were to be paid on U.G.C. scales, they would have to be paid 


Rs.15,000 or so per month. None of the Vice-Chancellors received any salary and they served 
the Institute in a spirit of selfless service. Because of Government regulations they had to retire 
at the end of their term. 


Then came Dr. Hanumanthappa. He used to look after the Commerce Department when the 
Sathya Sai College was started in Brindhaavan. At that time he was an M.Com degree holder. 
Later he did his Ph.D and was appointed Vice-Chancellor of the Bangalore University. He served 
there for many years and was eager to serve Svaami's University. He completed two years as 
Vice-Chancellor on March 4th. He also served the Institute in an honorary capacity expecting no 
remuneration. 


In this way, our University from its inception has benefited from the dedicated services of Vice- 
Chancellors who had no self-interest. Although they served honorarily, our Trust felt that it has 
an obligation towards them. The Trust has established a tradition of honouring the Vice- 
Chancellors in an appropriate manner. 


Uniqueness of Sai Institute 


This University has been fostered and developed by a succession of Vice-Chancellors in 
different ways. Our University does not collect fees of any kind from the students. You are aware 
about the agitation of the students in Delhi and Madras against the raising of fees. The colleges 
had to be closed on account of the agitation. The present scenario in the educational field is like 
this' the teachers agitate for higher emoluments; the students demand a reduction in college fees. 
How is it possible to meet both the demands? There has to be a balancing of the teachers' claims 
and the demands of the students. 


In our University we have got over this problem by taking no fees from the students. Elsewhere 
heavy donations are demanded even for admission to the K.G. Class. Here everyone is admitted 
free, without regard to creed or nationality. No fees of any kind are collected from the students. 
The Trust is managing the Institutions with due regard to these factors. 


Unlike students in other Institutions, our students are extremely well behaved and there, is no 
danger of any kind of indiscipline. Students who are so well looked after here should conduct 
themselves well when they go out into the world' so that they bring a good name to the Institute. 
They will be guilty of treachery to the Divine if they appear to behave well when they are here 
and misbehave when they are outside. Apart from betrayal of God and their teachers, they will be 
guilty of betraying their own selves if they do so. Do not be guilty of this self-destructive crime. 
Instead, you must proceed from self-confidence to Self-realisation. Svaami's only desire is that 
students should be taught on proper lines so that they may lead ideal lives. 


Dr. Hanumanthappa honoured 


Our Vice-Chancellor has completed two years of service. He has contributed to various 
developments in. the Institute. We (in the Trust) have a duty to honour him. (Svaami then 
fastened Gold Wristlets around the wrists of Dr. Hanumanthappa as the audience cheered). 


Students! It is a reward for all the good you had done in many previous lives that you have been 
able to get an opportunity like this. I adjure you not to waste this opportunity (as unfortunately 
many have done before). You may act as you like, lead the kind of life you want, but you should 
not go against what you have learnt here. Those who live upto the ideals of the Institute are near 
and dear to us wherever they may be. Those who betray the ideals of the Institute are as good as 
dead. 'Do not lead unworthy lives like street dogs. Be grateful to your Alma Mater. I do not seek 


anything from you. But you have to cherish the sense of gratitude for what you have received 
here. I bless you all. 


Discourse in the Institute Auditorium at Prashaanthi Nilayam on 5-3-1995. 


Love is God; God is Love. 
Live in Love; This is the way to God. 
BABA 


7. Think God, Love God 


EMBODIMENTS of Divine love! "Maanam hithvaa priyo bhavathi" (The man without egoistic 
pride is liked by everyone). "Krodham hithvaa na sochathi" (The man without hatred is free 
from grief). "Kaamam hithvaa aarthona bhavathi" (One who has given up desire is free from 
worries). "Lobham hithvaa sukhee bhavathi' (Overcoming greed a man becomes happy). 


When you rid the mind of impurities, humanness turns divine. The world is confronted today 
with many problems. On the one side there is fear of war. On another side, there is fear of 
famine. On a third front there is the lust for power. On the fourth side, selfishness is rampant. 
There is discord between man and man, between one caste and another. What is the reason for 
this? Society is riddled today with conflicts because morality has been banished and humanness 
has been forgotten. 


Desires are dreadfully dangerous 


No man filled with greed, fear and anger can achieve anything in this world. Greed comes first. 
Excessive desires degrade man. You cannot give up desires entirely. But there should be a limit 
to them. When they exceed the limits a man goes astray. Desires are dreadfully dangerous. To- 
day's enemy may become tomorrow's friend and vice versa. But desires are perpetual enemies. 
They haunt man ceaselessly. The Geetha declares desire as the Nithyasha-thru (eternal enemy) of 
man. Hence desire has to be kept under control. 


Becoming a prey to peacelessness, man seeks the Divine by various means. But why is he unable 
to realise his desire? What is the cause of his sorrow? Is it due to unfulfilled desire or the failure 
of his efforts? Is he miserable because he has not got various possessions, or failed to win a 
lottery? Lamenting over such trifles, man today is forgetting his divinity. 


These are not real troubles at all. The real cause of sorrow is attachment to the body, identifying 
one's self with the body. All sorrow arises from the feelings of "7" and "Mine". It is essential’ at 
the outset to reduce dheha-abhimaanam (attachment to the body). 


Desires are a source of pleasure for man, but they are also the cause of his grief. The mind has to 
be brought under control. Even thousands of men cannot hold back a fast-moving train. But the 
train comes to a stop the moment the brake is applied. The same applies to the vagaries of the 
mind. When the mind is controlled, all sorrows will cease. 


The Divine Aathma, which dwells in the heart of every human being, is not recognized by man 
because it is covered by the clouds of desire. The splendour of the sun is revealed when a wind 
drives away the clouds that hide the sun. Likewise, when the wind of love blows away the clouds 
of desire in the heart, the ego ("I"-ness) and possessiveness (sense of "mine") are driven out and 
the effulgence of the Aathma within is revealed in all its glory. Man has to restrain the feelings of 
Ahamkaara and Mamakaara ("I" and "Mine"). 


Uncontrolled desire can bring down anyone, even the deities presiding over human destiny. 
However intelligent, scholarly or powerful a man may be, he may succumb to desires. Hence 
everyone has to be vigilant in controlling desires. 


Attachment brings sorrow 


Even a man of great prowess like Arjuna became subject to the feeling of attachment--"my 
relatives," "my teachers," etc. He was a prisoner of the feeling of "mine." Sva, Svajana, my 


people, my kinsmen--this sense of attachment made him throw away his Gaandeeva (bow) on 
the battlefield, overcome by grief. This kind of attachment may plunge anyone in feeble-minded 
grief at any place, at any time and in any situation. Hence it is essential to keep all attachments 
under control. 


Prema (Love) should be shown not only towards God but towards all beings in creation. Love is 
a powerful force. No other power excels it. Misunderstanding the nature of love, men are falling 
a prey to suffering. This is 'the result of misguided expressions of what is considered love. 


Men today worship God for the fulfillment of desires relating to this world and the other. This is 
not true love. People pretend to love their kith and kin and friends out of purely selfish 
considerations. This is only attachment and not love. Only that can be described as love which 
offers itself without any expectation of recompense. In the Geetha, Bhagavaan has been 
described Suhrith (a true friend). Without expecting any return, accompanying you like a 
shadow, God fulfills your desires. Even a mother in loving her son, may have expectations that 
he would take care of her in her old age. God has no such expectations. Suhrith defines the 
utterly selfless love of the Lord. 


The nature of Divine love is not rightly understood by most people. For instance, even a great 
woman like Dhraupadhi did not understand the ways of the Lord. Once, during their exile, while 
she and Yudhishthira were strolling in the Himaalayas. Dhraupadhi asked Yudhishthira with 
tears streaming from her eyes, "Dear Lord, you have taken such good care of your subjects, you 
fed the starving and relieved the needy, you always adhered to Dharma. Why should you be 
subject to this present suffering? You are the very embodiment of Righteousness. We are leading 
the life of a destitute here. Why should this happen to you? Have we forfeited God's grace? Is 
there anything wanting in our devotion?" 


Dharmaja's advice to Dhraupadhi 


Smilingly, Dharmaja replied, "Dhraupadhi! Look at the Himaalaya mountains. How beautiful are 
the peaks! I am filled with joy looking at those mountains. They do not serve me in any way, but 
still they fill me with joy. The beauty of Nature gives me joy. Beauty is bliss. That bliss is 
nectarine. There is no joy equal to the enjoyment of the beautiful. When you look at a flower, 
you derive ineffable joy, though the flower renders you no service. Nature is the vesture of God. 
When you behold Nature, you experience bliss. I love Nature for the joy it gives. I derive joy 
from seeing it and for no other benefit. Likewise, God should be loved in a selfless spirit. I love 
Krishna regardless of what difficulties I have to suffer, because that is the way I love him. I have 
no interest in the transient pleasures and possessions of the world. True bliss transcends the 
fleeting pleasures experienced by this perishable body. Dhraupadhi! Do not seek these pleasures 
relating to the body. Seek the Divine feet of the Lord, which will confer enduring bliss. Do not 
grieve over petty difficulties. Concern yourself with the means to experience God. All other 
things are valueless." 


The bliss from experiencing the Divine has been extolled by the Vedhic seers and sages from 
ancient times. It is holy, eternal, ineffable and infinite. It is the bliss of oneness with God. 


The Yugas and the Divine 


To enable mankind to realise this infinite bliss, the Lord makes His descent from age to age. The 
Kritha Yuga began in the month of Vaishakha. The 7hretha Yuga began in the month of Magha. 
Dhvaapara Yuga began in the month of Maargashira. In the Geetha, Krishna declared that 


among the months He is Maargashira. Kali Yuga started in the Chaithra, month. This is 
according to the lunar calendar. 


What is the meaning of Yuga? Yuga means divinity. The divinity of the Yuga is derived from the 
Divine. Thus the Yuga originates from the Divine and merges in the Divine. 


Yugakrith is one of-the names of the Lord. It means that the Lord is the creator of the Yugas 
(aeons). Yugaadhi refers to the commencement of the particular Yuga. The Lord is also the 
sustainer 'of the Yuga. He is the very embodiment of Time. That is why He is the master of Time 
and hence He is worshipped as Samvathsara. "Samvathsaraaya namah" (Salutations to the Lord 
of the year). 


The Yugaadhi day; which is associated with such sacred significance is being observed as merely 
the beginning of a new year. The day should be regarded as Divine in origin. 


Naamasmarana is the best panacea for Kali Yuga 


The Kali Yuga is considered a dreadful aeon and the presiding deity, the Kali Purusha, is viewed 
with fear as the source of difficulties and trials. This is not so. Naamasmarana is a mitigating 
factor at all times. For the Kali Age, there is no greater panacea for all troubles than chanting the 
name of Hari. This truth is forgotten by people today. Instead of Hari's name, they dote over Siri, 
the Goddess of wealth. The worshippers of wealth far exceed the worshippers of Hari. People 
should remember that if God is the source of all things, He alone should be remembered at all 
times. 


The year that commences today is named Yuva. Yuva means those in their youthful age. It 
implies that it is a transitional stage between childhood and old People are worried about what is 
in prospect for the world in this new year. Those who make all kinds of dire predictions for the 
year are not doing any good. The new year Yuva, according to astrology, commences in Shani 
(Saturn). But Guru (Jupiter) is well disposed. He is the ruler for this year. When the ruler is 
good, why worry about the ministers? He presides over all the other planets. Hence, there is no 
room for any fear. The world will no doubt experience some troubles, ups and downs. Such 
things have happened in previous Yugas also, as in Kritha Yuga, Thretha Yuga and Dhvaapara 
Yuga. Were there not wars in Dhvaapara Yuga? There is no need to attach special significance to 
the Kali age. There were wicked men even in Kritha Yuga and there are good men in the Kali 
age. It is not the Yuga that matters. It is the heart that is important. If people's hearts are pure, 
what does it matter what the Yuga is? People must strive to purify their hearts. The heart is called 
Hridhaya. Hridhaya signifies a compassionate heart. People must transform their stony hearts to 
compassionate hearts. 


Portents for the year 'Yuva' 


The year Yuva will experience a mixture of good and bad events. There will be some serious 
mishaps. There will be grave disorders. There will be many political crises. Hence each one 
should concentrate on protecting oneself by purity of heart and mind. Your preceptor or your 
deity or your scripture will not serve to take you to your goal. You have to make the journey 
yourself. Others can serve as guide-posts but they cannot take you to your destination. 


Each one, therefore, has to chalk out his own path to reach the goal, "Strive to safeguard your 
Aathma." If you adhere to righteousness you can face any ordeal. Strive to earn God's Grace. 


Young people must be very much on their guard this year. They must control the vagaries of 
their minds and not give way to anger and envy. Anger and envy are pernicious diseases. Envy 
has grown to alarming proportions. It is less curable than cancer. 


Men often ask: "Who is God and who is Yama (the Lord of Death)?" The answer was given by 
Purandharadhaasa in one of his compositions. "Who is Raama for you and who is Yama? For the 
unbelieving Raavana, Raama became Yama. For the believing Vibheeshana, Raama was God. 
For Shurasena who had no belief, Krishna was Yama. To Akruura, who was a believer, Krishna 
appeared as God. To the believing Prahlaadha, Naaraayana was the saviour. To the unbelieving 
Hiranyakashipu, Prahlaadha's father, Naaraayana became the destroyer. Raama and Yama are not 
distinct from each other. According to one's beliefs, Raama becomes Yama and Yama becomes 
Raama. One's feelings make all the differences in the role of God as protector or slayer. There is 
a Thelugu poem' 


To those who say "Yes", He is 'Yes,' 
To those who say, 'No', He is 'No’. 
'Yes' or 'No' comes from others' mouths, but 
He always remains 'Yes, Yes, Yes.' (S.S.S--Shri Sathya Sai). 
For God there is no 'Yes' or 'No' These are echoes of your own feelings. 


Therefore, whatever the year and whatever the difficulties you confront, develop compassion in 
your heart. Develop your meditation on God. With faith in God you can achieve anything. 


Ingratitude is the worst sin 


Many strange things are likely to happen in this new year. Ingratitude is rampant. Not only are 
people forgetting all the good that is done to them, but they are doing harm to those who have 
helped them. History provides a bitter example of such ingratitude. You are aware of Ghori 
Mohammed who invaded India several times and plundered the country. At last in one encounter 
with Raana Prithviraaj, he was defeated and captured by Prithviraaj. Prithviraaj pardoned him 
and let him off. Later on, by nefarious methods Ghori caught Prithviraaj. Then he decided to put 
an end to Prithviraaj's life. At that time, the Divine intervened, in answer to Prithviraaj's prayers, 
and an arrow released by Prithviraaj went straight to Ghori's neck and severed his head. Thus the 
evil-doer was punished by the Lord. 


The lesson is clear. Don't harbour ill-will towards anybody. Don't do any harm to others. Get rid 
of doubts and develop faith in God. People today are filled with doubts of every kind. 


By truthful speech, by generous hands, by listening to what is ennobling, people must overcome 
the untoward happenings of this Kali age. It is by these means that human life can be redeemed. 


The purpose of life is to experience unity in diversity 


What is the purpose of life? It is not eating or sleeping. It is to lead an ideal life. Every human 
being has to accomplish certain aims in life which are in tune with humanness. You have to 
realise that the Lord is the Indweller in all beings and experience unity in diversity. The entire 
creation is present within the human body. This is the mystery of creation. The human body is a 
marvellous creation. Every organ in the body discharges its specific function and nothing else. 
Only the Divine can create such a wonderful organism. The Aathma is the Master within the 


body. Never betray the Master. Be grateful to God for endowing, you with such a marvellous 
body. 


India was the teacher for the whole world from ancient times in the spiritual field. It gave to the 
world the glorious universal message. "Let the peoples of all the worlds be happy." 


Indians today have forgotten this ancient message and have not recognized their own inherent 
divinity. The ancient sages knew what power there was in the human being because of the 
presence of the Divine within. They radiated effulgence as a result of their Yogic power. All of it 
comes from God. The power of the Divine is infinite and indescribable. 


People should pray for the blessings of Divine grace. They need not worry about the prospects in 
the new year. With God's grace they can overcome any situation. People speak about the 
affliction caused by the nine planets. In fact, people are plagued by only two planets-- 
Ahamkaara and Mamakaara (egoism and possessiveness). To free themselves from these two all 
that men require is divine grace. 


Young people should participate this year in sacred activities. Try to solve social problems. 
Cultivate unity. Give up pride and ostentation. Develop the courage to face any situation, the 
courage that is based on faith in God. Strive for the welfare of all people in all countries. 
Humanity is one irrespective of race, creed or colour. Dedicate this year to the development of a 
universal outlook. 


All bodies belong to the Divine Mother 


This is the lesson Raamakrishna Paramahamsa taught towards the end of his life when he was 
suffering from cancer. He could not take any food. At that time, Svaami Vivekaanandha came to 
the Master and asked him why he should not pray to the divine Mother to enable him to take 
food. Raamakrishna Paramahamsa replied: "I did ask the Mother and she gave me her answer, 
when I am taking my food through so many mouths, does it matter if I don't eat through your 
mouth'?" Raamakrishna felt ashamed on getting that answer. The lesson he learnt was that all 
bodies belong to the Divine Mother. 


In the Geetha, Krishna says that the divine as Vaishvaanara enters all bodies and helps to digest 
every type of food. Only the Divine can perform this kind of function. Whatever the kind of food 
you eat, it is digested, converted into blood and circulated to every part of the body. Only the 
power of the Divine can do this. Develop faith in this truth. Very soon you will experience the 
bliss of God-realisation. The experience will come only if you act in the appropriate manner. 
But, failing to act, people blame God for their troubles. God is utterly blameless. Only your 
lapses are reflected in your actions. There are no flaws in God and no one is competent to blame 
God. 


God-realisation is not a time-bound process. Some one went to Ramana Maharishi and asked 
him how long he should sit in meditation. The Maharishi said that he should meditate "till he is 
not aware that he is meditating at all." Similarly the love of God should become a spontaneous 
act. With such love, one can face any situation in life with confidence derived from the 
consciousness that the Divine is within. 


Duty of youth 


Do not worry about the predictions made for this year in the almanacs. If you put your faith in 
God, you can overcome all troubles. Youth in particular should cultivate this faith. It is a pity 


that Indian Youth today are lacking in love of the Motherland. Becoming bookworms is not 
education. It is more important to put into practice at least a fraction of what you have learnt. 


Think God. Love God. Realise that there is no truer friend than God. Merge your love in His 
love. 


Discourse in the Puurnachandhra Auditorium on 1-4-1995, Yugaadhi Day. 


Love.. Love...Love First...Love, as long as life lasts. For myself, I 
can say. I shower more blessing on those who decry or defame me 
than on those who worship and adore me! For, those who spread 
falsehoods about me derive joy therefrom; I am happy that I am 
the cause for their exultation and joy. You too must accept this line 
of argument and be very happy when someone derives joy by 
defaming you. Do not respond by defaming that person; then the 
chain of hatred will bind both down. Life will become a tragedy. 


BABA 


8. Install Raama Raajya in your hearts 


What can Kali do to the one 

Whose heart is filled with compassion, 

For whose speech truth is the ornament, 

And whose body is dedicated to serving others? 


EMBODIMENTS of Divine Love! A tranquil mind, a truth-filled speech, and a body dedicated to 
service one who has these three qualities is described as the embodiment of Thriputhi (the triple 
purity). Such a one is the noblest of human beings. 


Tulasidas was the great one who proclaimed that human life is redeemed when every talent and 
every moment are utilized by humanity for realising the Divine. To God all objects in the 
universe are alike because they are manifestations of the Divine. The scriptures declared about 
this Divine manifestation "Sarvam khalu idham Brahma" (All this verily is Brahman). Hence, 
whoever worships the Supreme Lord should also worship Prakrithi (Nature or the Phenomenal 
universe). He should love Nature and adore Nature. Nature is not different from Paramaathma 
(Supreme Self). Nature is the effect and God is the cause. Nature is the expression of this 
relationship between Cause and Effect. 


Goodness is a synonym for God. Hence, it is only by contemplating on the qualities of God that 
human existence finds fulfillment. The body of a human being who does not think in this way is 
merely a lump of clay. 


God's words, actions, thoughts are always pure, selfless and infinitely precious. The truth of this 
is illustrated by an episode from the Raamaayana. 


Dramatic acts of God to prove His omnipresence 


Once, while proceeding to Mithila, Raama sat on a stone in the sage Gautama's ashram. That 
very moment, a woman emerged from the stone. However, Raama did not feel proud that by a 
mere touch of his feet, the stone had turned into a woman. On the contrary he felt sad that his 
feet had touched the wife of a great sage and thereby he had committed a wrong, This shows that 
God dwells in the minds of sages. 


God indulges in dramatic acts like these to demonstrate His omnipresence in the universe and. to 
teach the world the greatness of Nature. 


Another episode reveals another aspect of the Divine. 


For all the mighty deeds done by Hanumaan and great help rendered by him, Raama asked him: 
"Hanumaan! What reward can I give you? Apart from expressing my gratitude to you I cannot 
give you any fitting recompense. The only way I can show my gratitude to you is that whenever 
you think of me at any time in your life, I shall appear before you." Raama was showing his 
gratitude to Hanumaan in this manner. 


This indicates that the primary duty of man is to be grateful all his life to the person who has 
done him a good turn. 


Man has to realise his divinity and look at all Nature from the Divine point of view. Instead, man 
looks at everything only from the mundane point of view. The body is indeed perishable. But it 


is also the means for realising the imperishable Truth. This means, all speech should be about the 
Divine. All actions should be godly. Every thought should be about God. 


That is the appeal which Thyaagaraaja made to his mind: "Oh mind, think always about Shri 
Raama." (Bhagavaan sang in His own mellifluous voice Thyaagaraaja's song in which he said: 
"Oh Kaushalya, what penance did you perform to enjoy the privilege of calling Shri Raama 
affectionately as a mother and showering your kisses on the divinely beautiful child Raama. 
What penance did Dhasharatha perform to call Shri Raama to come to him?") Thus Thyaagaraaja 
was chanting Raama's name all the time and singing his glories. This is an example to the world. 


Raama the ideal exemplar of righteousness 


Raama is the supreme exemplar of how people should conduct themselves in the world, how a 
country should be governed, how the integrity and morality of human beings should be 
protected. High-minded actions, ideal' qualities and sacred thoughts are basic foundations of 
character. Raama is the very embodiment of these three attributes. This means that every human 
being should cultivate sacred thought, right actions and good qualities. Raama demonstrated by 
his words, thoughts and actions how such a life can be lived. Raama acted upto the ancient 
injunction: "Speak the truth. Practise Righteousness." Eschewing harsh words, Raama pleased 
everyone by his sweet speech. He countered harsh speech by others with his composure, 
patience, sweetness and smile. He never pried into affairs of others, never took notice of their 
faults, never indulged in ridicule, and never caused any pain to others by the way he spoke to 
them. It is essential for everyone to follow the example set by Raama and cultivate his many 
noble qualities and do righteous actions. People should entertain sacred thoughts. 


One should never go back on the plighted word 


Man is an image of the Divine. The Lord has declared in the Geetha: "My Spirit is the indwelling 
Spirit in all beings." God is the indweller in all human beings. Today, in the pursuit of power, 
men are prepared to commit any kind of crime and to inflict any kind of harm on people to 
achieve their ends. Raama, on the contrary, gave up the kingdom and, to honour the pledge given 
by his father, chose to face the ordeals of life in the forest as an exile. He demonstrated to the 
world that one should never go back on his plighted word. Raama gave up the throne and became 
a denizen of the forest. In life, it is not difficulties and calamities that are important. The supreme 
importance of Truth was that Raama wanted to hold forth to the world. One should never go 
back on one's pledge even at the cost of one's life. 


Today, however, men go back on their words from moment to moment. They indulge in 
falsehood at every step. Promises are forgotten. How can the Raama-principle flourish in such a 
human environment? The Raama-principle is remote from such an atmosphere. 


God will be in proximity only to those persons whose thoughts, ideals and deeds are in accord 
with Raama's. Raama was a man of his word, but man is the very reverse. It may be asked- "In 
this situation how is it possible to say that in human beings there is divinity?" Not at all. In such 
human beings there is either animality or demonic nature. Whatever saadhanas (spiritual 
practices) one may perform or however much one may recite the Lord's name, God will not 
judge one by these criteria. What is the transformation in one's heart? If there is no 
transformation of the heart, of what avail are spiritual saadhanas? 


Indwelling divinity within the shrine of the body 


Man is not a mere creature of flesh and blood. He is the embodiment of the Aathma. It is only 
when man recognises this truth that true spirituality will be evident to him. Concentrating all the 
time on the physical body as the only reality, time is wasted on external observances. The body 
should be regarded as a temple of God. To consider it otherwise is a sign of foolishness. Only he 
is a true human being who recognizes the indwelling divinity within the shrine of his body. The 
scriptures have declared: "In the temple of the human body dwells the individual Self which is 
the eternal Self." 


In this context, it may be noted that even scholars and intelligent persons tend to get confused 
over this matter. People who go to endless trouble to acquire positions, power or reputation do 
not care to devote even a small fraction of that effort to earn God's grace. The lesson taught by 
the story of Raama is different. Thulasidhas said: "Raama! I am helpless, poor and crippled." 
Why did he say he was a Angaheena (cripple)? He had hands and legs, head and everything else. 
Nevertheless he declared that he was a cripple. What is the inner meaning of this? "What is the 
use of having hands when I am unable to serve you, oh Raama! What is the use of having eyes, 
when I am unable to see you? So, I am verily blind." Thulasidhas declared that limbs that are not 
used in the service of the Lord are as good as lost. 


Purandharadhaasa also sang in the same manner. "Alas, even when they are endowed with eyes, 
they do not see your glorious form! Even when they have ears, they do not listen to the songs in 
the praise of the Lord." 


Men use their eyes to look at the attractions of the world and not the charm of God. As long as 
man is fascinated by Prakrithi (the phenomenal world), he cannot comprehend the Divine. Even 
the most eminent persons are subject to this weakness. This is the mark of the powerful influence 
of the Kali age. 


The way to God 


Men, however, should strive to get rid of the attachment to the body by persistent efforts. The 
yearning for God should be nourished. Qualities such as backbiting, spreading scandal and 
searching for the faults in others are not human but demonic. People should cultivate good 
thoughts, good words, good hearts and good conduct. This is the way to God. That man is 
redeemed who follows this path. 


History is full of examples of men who used force and fraud to come to power. There are 
examples from the communist countries. In Muslim countries also there are examples of persons 
who did not disdain to imprison or kill their kith and kin to seize power. But Bhaarath has 
generally been free from such deeds. This is the result of Raama's glorious example. 


The glory of Raama's sandals 


Once, while moving about in the forest, Raama and Lakshmana sat under a tree. At that time, 
they heard the neighing of horses and the cries of elephants at a distance. Raama asked 
Lakshmana to find out how horses and elephants happened to appear in the forest. Lakshmana 
climbed a tree and noticed Bharatha coming with a huge army. Immediately he exclaimed 
"Brother! Get ready for battle. Take up your bow and arrows." Raama smiled at Lakshmana and 
said, "Why are you so excited? Do not be hasty. Calm yourself. What has happened?" 
Lakshmana replied, "Bharatha is coming with an army to kill us." Raama said' "Lakshmana! 
What a serious mistake you are making! It is impossible for any action of the Ikshvaaku clan to 


think of such a preposterous idea even in dream. Because we two were not present in Ayodhya 
when Bharatha and Shatrughna returned to the capital, they are now coming to see us." Raama 
sought to pacify Lakshmana. 


Lakshmana replied: "What is this forbearance and sympathy on your part? If they merely wanted 
to see us, will they come with a huge army? No. they are coming only to slay us." 


Raama said' "Lakshmana! You are too much dominated by Raajasik tendencies. You seem to be 
attached to kingship. Why worry? Bharatha is coming. I shall ask him to crown you as king. You 
may go with him." 


Even as Raama was speaking thus, Bharatha came rushing towards Raama, fell at his feet crying: 
"Raama! Raama! Raama!" and said: "I am not competent to rule over Ayodhya. To reign over 
the kingdom Raamachandhra alone is worthy as' the eldest son of Dhasharatha. You alone are fit 
to role over the kingdom properly and establish Raama Raajya. Please return to Ayodhya." Thus 
pleaded Bharatha. 


As Bharatha was entreating in this manner, Raama looked smilingly at Lakshmana. "Compare 
your feelings with the expressions of Bharatha," he said. 


Sage Vashishtha also joined in the appeal to Raama to return to Ayodhya. But Raama did not 
yield to Bharata's entreaties and, acting according to Vashishtha's directions, offered his sandals 
to Bharatha and asked Bharatha to perform the coronation for the Paadhukas (divine sandals). 


You must recognise the inner significance of this episode. People generally regard the sandals as 
objects to be despised. But Raama taught a different lesson about them. Raama treated the 
kingdom and the sandals on par. "I don't want a crown. Enthrone my sandals." 


Acting on Raama's injunctions, Bharatha performed the coronation of Raama's sandals and spent 
his time peacefully, contemplating on Raama. 


Raama's teaches lessons to Bharatha 


Raama taught Bharatha how government should be carried on. "Have as your ministers only 
persons of character and virtue, who are tranquil in mind and devoted to truth. Don't have as 
ministers anyone lacking in these four qualities. Moreover, they should possess self-confidence, 
practise righteous conduct, and be capable of giving proper advice. These are essential 
prerequisites for wise administrators. Give no place for selfish persons. There should be no room 
in the government for persons animated by self-interest. Nor is that all. Don't allow anyone given 
to vices like gambling and drink to wield authority. Entertain only those who command the 
esteem of the people and who are respected and loved by the people. You must have daily 
conferences with three or four such ministers. Your talks should be in private and no outsider 
should know anything about them. It is only when such secrecy is observed that the nation will 
prosper. You will then be able to ensure peace and prosperity to the nation. Moreover, you must 
send out as envoys to other countries ambassadors who are totally loyal to the king and not time- 
servers who practise duplicity. Only such men can convey to the king truthful information." 


Raama did not stop with that. I request the women devotees not to take it amiss. Raama told 
Bharatha that he should not permit women to take part in affairs of state. Women have their 
estimable role in household affairs, but they should be kept out of state politics. "Don't employ 
women as ministers. The reason is: a nation's honour is based upon its women. It is only when 


women maintain their respect and honour that the nation will be respected. It is not proper for 
women to cheapen themselves by roaming in public places." 


How to establish Raama Raajya? 


Such were the sacred precepts of good administration which Raama taught to Bharatha. How 
does the situation in the country today compare with Raama's conception of an ideal 
government? The state of things today is 100 percent contrary to the ideas and ideals of Raama. 
How, then, can Raama Raajya be established here? 


If we desire to establish Raama Raajya, there should be harmony in thought, word and deed. 
This applied not only to Bhaarath but to the entire world. All countries should have governments 
which conform to this principle of triple purity. Only then, the people also will reflect the 
character of the rulers. 


Today, the people reflect the vices of the rulers. If a minister prefers one bottle, the man in the 
street asks for two (drinks). How can such citizens establish Raama Raajya? They can do so only 
if there is a complete transformation in their mental attitudes. Despite all the teachings they have 
listened to, their minds remain in the same state. Without a mental change, they are not entitled 
even to utter the name Raama. What, then, is the meaning of talking about Raama Raajya? It 
will be only Raama Raajya in name, but in reality it will only be Raavana Raajya. 


Declining trend in respect for parents 


If you really value Raama's ideals, you should practise them. You may say that the high ideals of 
Raama are beyond your competence. But there is one thing which you can do: Raama carried out 
the words of his father 


Pithruvaakya paripaalana. How many today respect the words of the parent? If the father asks 
the son, "Son, where are you going?" The son replies: "Shut up and keep quiet in your place." 
Few have any respect for the words of the father. There is no need to speak about respect for the 
mother. Such unworthy sons are ruining the world. Mothers are shedding tears over the 
behaviour of such sons. 


This state of things should change. The sacredness of parents should be restored. Young people 
should cultivate pure thoughts and lead unselfish lives. Children who disregard their parents will 
be treated likewise by their children in due course. Partly the parents are to blame for the way 
they pamper the children. The children of today are worse than even Raavana's children, who 
obeyed him to some extent. 


People who acquire knowledge or wealth are making no use of it to help others. They are 
following a dog-in-the-manger policy. This is not the way to follow Raama's example. 


True meaning of devotion lies in practice 


Today people celebrate Raama's birthday as a festival, but do not practise Raama's ideals. 
Enshrine Raama's ideals in your heart. Without it, there is no meaning in celebrating Raama's 
birthday. You must follow the example of a noble and ideal person. This is the meaning of 
devotion. 


People talk about devotion. Does mere participation in bhajans constitute devotion? No. It is all 
a stunt. True devotion calls for the practice of at least one of the teachings that you learn. By 
following at least one good lesson, a man should lead an ideal existence. 


Remember that the lessons taught to Bharatha by Raama are ideal lessons. After instructing 
Bharatha regarding the principles of good government, Raama told Bharatha: "You must revere 
the parents, the preceptors and all elders. If any person misbehaves within your kingdom, do not 
punish him. Banish him. That will be punishment enough." 


Here I wish to explain what is meant by punishment. There is no need to beat or abuse the 
earring person. Stop talking to him. What is the use of talking to a person who is going astray? I 
do not want to waste my words on such a person. | attach great value to my words. They may not 
know it, but I know their value. None of my words has any selfish motive. Everything is for the 
welfare of all. If one has no such broad outlook and is only concerned about his personal 
interests, what is the use in talking to such a person? As long as one remains self-centered, he 
cannot understand the Divine. 


The reign of Dharma is Raama Raajya 


At the outset, understand what is Raama Raajya. It is the reign of morality, of truth and virtues. 
Raama Raajya means that which engenders happiness (Raamayathi). There should be no ill-will 
towards anybody. No one should be harmed. That is Raama Raajya. When such feelings arise 
among the people. Raama Raajya will come into existence of its own accord. 


It is with such feelings that Thulasidhas extolled Raama. His Raamaayana is suffused with his 
deep devotional experience. He exclaimed: "Raama! I have no abilities of any kind. I have 
practised no system of yoga. I have not developed any method of meditation. I have no 
possessions of any kind. I have only one thing and that is my love. I love you for love's sake." 


Spiritual practices of various kinds, including japa, yoga and the like, will not lead you to God- 
realisation. I do not suggest that you should discontinue these exercises. The devotional activities 
are better than many other useless pastimes. But, if you want to get near to God and to 
experience God, you have to transform the heart. As you sow, so shall you reap. Sow the seeds 
of love and reap the fruit of love. Sow the seed of immortality and reap the fruit of immortality. 
Today you want sweet fruit, but you sow poisonous seeds. This is thoughtless action. 


Some people say that they are too weak to scale spiritual heights. But you have the strength to 
commit sins and do wrong actions. The strength required for good or bad actions is the same. In 
fact, it is more difficult to commit sin than to be good and meritorious. To utter an untruth is 
difficult. To speak the truth is easy. Speaking the truth calls for no effort. But to declare what is 
not true as true calls for considerable ingenuity. Uttering an untruth is therefore more difficult. 
Equally, cheating is more arduous than being honest. 


Many devotees tell Svaami that they are caught up in the coils of Samsaara (family and worldly 
life) and are unable to break away from it. But what is the truth? Is it you who are clinging to 
Samsaara or is it Samsaara that is holding you in its grip? Has Samsaara any hands to hold you? 
You have hands and you are holding on to worldly life. Samsaara is not holding you. It is a 
paradox for you to say that Samsaara is holding you in its grip when the truth is otherwise. 


It is excessive attachment that is the cause of man's troubles. Do everything as an act of offering 
to the Divine. Without faith in God man ceases to be human. 


Diversion of mind in religious gatherings 


Devotees who attend bhajans turn their looks this side and that side without concentrating on the 
bhajans. Tf they are not interested in the bhajans why should they come at all? 


Once Raamakrishna Paramahamsa slapped Rani Rasmani at a gathering of scholars and 
worshippers. All people were astonished at Raamakrishna's action. Raani Raasmani felt 
humiliated. Raamakrishna explained that he found Raani Raasmani thinking about her court 
affairs while sitting in the religious gathering. This was highly improper and hence he slapped 
her. It was equally improper for devotees to sit in bhajans and divert their thoughts to worldly 
matters. Sitting in good company, how can one entertain bad thoughts? People speak about 
Sathsang. What is Sathsang? It is not mere assemblage of ten devotees. ‘Sath' refers to that 
which exists in all the three categories of time--past, present and future. The term applies to the 
Divine. Sathsang, therefore, means association with the Divine. 


God is pleased only with inner feeling 


Each word has profound and sacred meaning. But common people do not relish such 
interpretations. They enjoy what is trivial and pleasing to the ears. I do not want to please people 
in this way. The truth has to be taught. Some day or other people will understand it. Worldly 
sayings may please people for the moment, but they are of no value spiritually. God is pleased 
with the inner feeling and not the external show. But most people are interested only in the 
external and do not bother about the inner feeling. If you break the branch of a tree and plant it in 
the sand, will it grow into a tree? It must be planted in soil where it can strike roots. Similarly, 
the feeling must arise in the heart and get deeply rooted in it. Then the fruits will appear in the 
external world. Therefore, cultivate the feeling inside and enjoy the fruit outside. 


Such wise teachings were taught to the people in the reign of Bharatha and Raama. When we 
speak of establishing Raama Raajya, let not Bhaaratheeyas imagine that it is relevant only to 
Bhaarath. The whole world needs the advent of Raama Raajya. What this means is that the rulers 
should have three qualities. They are: Sathpravarthana (righteous conduct), Sadhaalochana 
(good counsel), Sadhguna (good qualities). There should be a combination of all the three. 
Today good counsel is a rarity. As for good qualities, the less said the better High-souled 
persons, who represent harmony in thought, word and deed, should fill the seats of power. There 
should be no place for the wicked who think one thing, speak another thing and act in a different 
way. 

Devotees should till their minds with sacred thoughts. At least from now on, banish all bad 


thoughts, Turn your minds towards God. At least install Raama Raajya in your hearts. When this 
happens, the world will experience Raama Raajva. 


Fill your minds with the ideals of Shri Raama and try to put them into practice as much as 
possible. This will cost you nothing. You do not have to perform any asanas or go to the forest 
for practice. Staying in your homes, attending to your duties, purify your hearts. 


Discourse in Sai Ramesh Mandap, Brindhaavan, on 9-4-1995, Shri Raama Navami Day. 


A loveless heart is a dry desert. Love is the foundation of life. The 
air that is inhaled and exhaled has to be loved in order that it may 
replenish and revive. 


BABA 


God, man and the Cosmos 


Trees yield fruits for the benefit of others, 
Rivers carry water for the use of others, 
Cows give milk for the good of others 

The human body is given for serving others. 
(Sanskrith shloka) 


FOR the benefit of others, trees yield fruits. Likewise, for the benefit of others in the world, 
rivers carry water. Cows, without consuming their milk, take the trouble to produce milk for the 
benefit of others. Man also, without considering his own personal interests, should use his body 
for the benefit of others. 


"Shareeram Aadhyam Khalu Dharma Saadhanam" (The body is the primary requisite for the 
achievement of Dharma). The body has to discharge a variety of functions for the sake of the 
family, the society and the nation. 


"Aham Eva Akshaya Kaalah" (1 am the indestructible Time), says the Lord in the Geetha. This 
Time is not a momentary phenomenon. It is the embodiment of eternal and infinite Time. The 
sages called' this Time as Vathsarah. This name signifies the presence of the Divine as the Time- 
Spirit in all human beings. Moreover, God is the basis for all that happens, either through 
instrumentality or by direct intervention. He is the basis for what is permanent and .what is 
temporary, for birth and death, for joy and sorrow. For this reason the Divine Time-Spirit has 
been called Hethu (the Cause). Hethu means that God is the primal cause of everything. He is 
also the eternal witness. He is Pramaanasvaruupa (validating authority) for everything. Hence 
He is described as omnipresent, having His feet, etc., everywhere. Time is the basis for 
everything. 


Samvathsara (year) is also called Vikshara. All objects in the world are subject to the process of 
creation, growth and decay. But the name Kaala-Svaruupa was given to the Divine, who is not 
subject to birth, growth or decay. This changeless Divine is called Vikshara. Since the year is 
associated with Vikshara, God is Samvathsara Svaruupa (the embodiment of Time and its 
periods). 


Sathya and Dharma in Bhaaratheeya culture 


For the proper utilization of Time, which is Divine, the Vedhik texts laid down basic injunctions 
for mankind. Among these, foremost are "Sathvam Vadha: Dharmam Chara" (Speak the Truth. 
Follow Righteousness). This aphorism has a pre-eminent position in Bhaaratheeya culture. 
Likewise, we have the injunctions' "Esteem the father as God: Revere the mother as Divine." The 
Vedhas proclaimed these aphorisms to be followed by the whole world. 


Sathya is the basic goal of human life. Bhaaratheeya culture has revealed how this goal is to be 
reached. Bhaaratheeyas today have forgotten this culture. From immemorial times, 
Bhaaratheeyas were engaged in the quest for Truth. Everything is encompassed by Truth. 


The quest for Truth is linked with the pursuit of Jnaana (spiritual wisdom). For the acquisition of 
wisdom, purity of Buddhi (intellect) is essential. If the intellect is not pure, the senses are likely 


to go haywire. Purity of the intellect is in fact, essential for every purpose. Saadhanas performed 
without purity of the heart will be utterly useless, like food cooked in unclean vessels. 


The glory of spiritual bliss 


Bhaaratheeya culture and the Vedhik texts have proclaimed the glory of Aanandha (spiritual 
bliss). The Aathmik principle can be understood only in relation to this concept of Bliss. What is 
the Aathma? Who has seen it? What is the proof for its existence? To answer these questions, 
here is an illustration. Today is Friday, the 14th April. Who told you these particulars about 
today? The day did not announce this when it began. You derive this information from a 
calendar or an almanac. In the same manner the proofs for great spiritual truths are provided in 
the declarations of the Vedhas. It is only Aathmathathvam (spiritual principle) that reveals the 
oneness of the universe. The entire cosmos has emanated from the Aathma. 


The human being is called Nara in Sanskrith. Nara means Aathma (the Self). Nara is. made up 
of two syllables. ‘Na’ and 'Ra.' Ra (rah) means that which is perishable. Na-Ra means that which 
is not perishable. This means that Nara (man) is subject to change in bodily form, but is 
essentially immortal. He is full of bliss. 


But today people are oblivious to this true nature of man. Human values are also forgotten. 
People are behaving either like animals or like demons. It is only when people recognise their 
real human nature and pursue spiritual values, they will realise their sacred divinity. 


For all these, devotion is fundamental. Does devotion mean meditation, japa, or observing 
various austerities? Na Anything done with expectation of reward gets tarnished by the desire for 
fruits and cannot be deemed real devotion. Devotion has been defined as desireless love for the 
Lord. Any prayer to God for fulfilment of a desire cannot be called devotion. God should be 
loved for His own sake. Love should be fostered for its own sake. 


True devotion is a combination of selfless service and love. This is illustrated by an episode from 
the Mahaabhaaratha. 


Dharmaja's love for Krishna 


Dharmaja, the eldest of the Paandava brothers, ceaselessly adored Krishna. While living in the 
forest or when he was in Dhuryodhana's court witnessing the dishonouring of Dhraupadhi, or 
when Abhimanyu was killed in battle, or when the infant Upapaandavas were killed (by 
Ashvathaama)--in all these situations Dharmaja used to love Krishna with perfect calmness. He 
used to feel' "Krishna! These joys and sorrows are twins that always go together. Hence there is 
no need to get elated or depressed. I cannot swerve from my allegiance to your divinity. My love 
for you is for your own sake and not for the sake of the world. My love is the bond that links you 
and me. It is like a bridge that connects the OmniSelf and the individual Self." 


Such sacred and divine love is being abused today and consequently the results are bad. 


You hail this year as new, but it is not new at all. Nor is Maanava (man) a new arrival on earth. 
Maa-nava means that which is not (Maa) new (Nava). When man himself is not new, how can 
the year be new? Time is divided into night and day, weeks and years on the basis of the 
revolutions of the earth and the moon in relation to the sun. In truth, man should regard every 
moment as new, every day as new. Man is governed by these changes, but God is unaffected, 
God is changeless. 


It is only when such sacred truths are understood properly that real devotion will arise in people's 
hearts. 


Fill your hearts with love 


For the growth of crops water is essential. But the crops cannot go upto the sky in search of 
water. For the sake of the crops, the clouds come down and provide water for them. When you 
pray to God for His own sake, He will take care of everything. Flowers do not invite the bees, 
but the bees go to them in quest of honey. When we develop the nectar of love in our hearts, God 
will come to us, like the bee, to drink the nectar. If, on the other hand, you have a plastic flower, 
no bee will come near it. Likewise only when we fill our hearts with the nectar of love will the 
Divine enter it. 


Today there is perpetual discord between man and man, community and community, village and 
village, caste and caste. What is the reason? The absence of unity and feeling of common bond. 
This accounts for the divisions among people. People should realise that it is the one Divine Self 
that resides in all beings. 


I often tell the students that the one truth proclaimed by all the 18 puraanas (epics) is: 
"Paropakaarah Punyaaya; Paapaaya parapeedanam" (It is meritorious to help others; it is 
sinful to harm other's). The term paropakaara should be properly understood. It is not merely 
rendering help to others in one form of other. The term para-upa-kaara means: Bringing (Kaara) 
to the proximity (Upa) of God (Para). Purely mundane forms of help cannot be described as 
paropakaara. They are gross, external and worldly. True paropakaara consists in bringing your 
life close to the divine. That is punya (merit). Punya does not mean going on pilgrimage or 
giving gifts. Punya means taking your life close to God. This calls for Ekaathmabhaava (the 
recognition of the Divine in all beings). Para-peedanam means failing to see the Divine in all 
beings. That is Paapa (sinful). 


Growth of selfishness 


Man has progressed a great deal in the physical and scientific fields. But with regard to morality 
and spirituality man has declined considerably. The reason is the deep-rooted growth of 
selfishness over the centuries. The entire human life is permeated with selfishness. This 
selfishness should be brought under restraint. Only then human life can be meaningful. Man 
should look at the world from the Divine point of view. Life is full of ups and downs. All these 
are transient. Man should use what is temporary (the body) as the base for realising what is 
eternal, the Aathma. These are inter-related. 


People should endeavour to understand the Aathmik principle. What is the Aathma? Where is it? 
These questions were raised by a king. Where is God? Where does He cast His looks? What does 
He do? Few in his court could answer these questions. He then summoned a sage and asked him: 
"Where is God?" He replied, "Like butter in milk, He is everywhere." "Where does God cast His 
eyes?" asked the king. "In which direction does this lamp shed its light?" asked the sage in 
return. "It sheds its light in all directions," answered the king. The sage observed- "Likewise, 
God is effulgent and sees everything everywhere. There is no particular direction for God's 
vision. He is all-seeing and omnipresent." 


The king then asked: "What work does God do?" The sage said: “To answer this question I have 
to assume the role of the preceptor and you should accept the role of the disciple. Are you 
prepared for this?” The King said "Yes." the sage said: "In that case, you better come down from 


the throne and sit down, while I sit on the throne." When the king sat down the sage remarked: 
"This is what God does. He brings down the mighty and elevates the humble, He can make the 
poor rich and the rich poor. He can do anything. He is all-powerful, all-knowing, and all- 
pervading." These are true characteristics of God. He is all-pervading like butter in milk. He is 
all-seeing like the light of a lamp which sends out its rays all around. God is also all-powerful. 
He can do anything. 


Faith is essential for everyone 


Everyone should have this faith in the Divine. Faith is essential for anyone, whether, he is a 
theist or an atheist. People may judge things as good or bad according to their own predilections. 
But for God all things are the same. In this world nothing will appear bad if one views it from the 
Divine point of view. Seen from the worldly point of view, there will be differences of good and 
bad. 


To experience the Divine, one has to perform good deeds. The Divine is present in every being 
as Chaithanya (consciousness). This consciousness is also described as Sath-Chith-Aanandha 
(Being-Awareness-Bliss). Sath means Truth, that which is true and unchanging in all the 
categories of Time---past, present and future. Truth can be cognised only by truth. Chith means 
total awareness. To have total awareness you have to have a total vision. You must have 
complete love to get that vision. To see an object in its totality, and not partially, is total 
awareness. It is only when there is total awareness of Truth, you can experience the Aanandha 
(Bliss Divine). Aanandha is that which is unchanging. To experience Aanandha you have to fill 
yourself with bliss. How is this to be achieved? Where is Aanandha? Is it in this phenomenal 
world? You imagine that if you get a certain object you will be happy. But after getting it, how 
long does the happiness last? 


The source of enduring bliss is within you 


A student thinks that he will be happy if he passes his examination. After passing the 
examination, he wants to continue his studies. After completing his studies, he is again unhappy 
because he has no job. After getting a job, he is anxious for a promotion. And so on, at every 
stage happiness is only momentary, but desires are endless. Bliss cannot be found in worldly 
objects. The source of enduring bliss is within you. There is no meaning in searching for it 
elsewhere. Turn your external vision inwards. Close your eyes and try to see within. In this 
process, bliss will emerge from within you. 


Some teachers declare: "Give up the world and take hold of God." Do these teachers follow what 
they preach? No. They are very much in the world and still preach in this manner. It is not 
possible to give up the world. The world also is a manifestation of God. Unfortunately, people 
go on looking at this Divine manifestation but do not see it as such. All that you see is a form of 
the Divine. Do not see it as different from God. 


Sun presides over the intellect and moon over the mind 


In this world, you have to give due recognition to the physical and the phenomenal. From the 
worldly point of view today is the beginning of a new year in Tamil Nadu. This relates to the 
sidereal year. The lunar new year began on April Ist. The lunar and sidereal years are not 
opposed to each other. The moon is not a self-luminous planet. He shines as a result of the sun's 
light. When sunlight does not fall on the moon, there is darkness on the moon's surface. The 
moon is the presiding deity for the mind and the sun is the Lord of the eyes. The Vedhas have 


declared that "The moon came from the mind of the Cosmic Person and the sun from his eyes." 
The sun and the moon are not separate. The same light comes from both. This truth has to be 
recognized. 


The sages have declared that the sun presides over the Buddhi (intellect) and the moon over the 
manas (mind). If you succumb to the mind you will be deluded by Maaya (worldly illusions). 
Follow the Buddhi and you will become a Buddha (The Enlightened One). Buddhi (intellect) is 
in close proximity to the Aathma (Self). Hence the effulgence of the Aathma falls directly on the 
Buddhi. The mind receives the light indirectly from the Buddhi. It is Jada (inconscient). It is 
enveloped in the darkness of ignorance. Man today is inclined to follow the mind rather than the 
intellect. Hence he is caught up in ignorance, because the mind has no luminosity of its own. It is 
only when the light from the intellect illumines the mind that man can-make a safe journey. 
"Buddhi-graahyam atheendhrivam" (The intellect has been described as capable of going beyond 
the reach of the senses). Hence man should be guided by the intellect. Below the intellect is the 
mind. Below the mind are the senses. Below the senses is the body. 


Consider the relationship between the body and God. The hands, the eyes, the ears, the mouth 
and the nose are organs in the body; all these are limbs of the body. The body is a limb of 
Society. Society is a limb of humanity. Humanity is a limb of Prakrithi (Nature). Nature is a 
limb of the Divine. This is the integral relationship between the human body and God. Dehi (the 
indweller in the body) and God are one. The body is a moving temple. Without the indwelling 
spirit, the body is only a corpse fit to be burnt or buried. 


Man has to be sustained by faith in the power of God. Without that faith Kama, despite all his 
prowess, died ingloriously. Arjuna was victorious because of faith in Krishna. Man should 
recognise the divinity within him and should be guided by the Divine charioteer 


Develop love for God. That love will take you to God. Observe three maxims in life: Love of 
God, fear of sin and morality in society. Then, in all situations, God will stand by you. 


Every moment is auspicious if you dedicate your actions to God. If your mind is pure, other 
things do not matter. 


Discourse in the Sai Ramesh Mandapam on 14-4-1995, Thamil New Year Day. 


10. Fill your hearts with love of God 


HUMAN life is extremely precious. There are five sheaths in the human body. Annamaya, 
Praanamaya, Manomaya, Vijnaanamaya and Aanandhamaya Koshas. Of these five sheaths (the 
food, the vital, the mental, the integral awareness and bliss sheaths), man has in a large measure 
the Vijnaanamaya Kosha (integral awareness) This Vijnaana (Awareness) is not present in other 
beings. For this reason man is regarded as supreme among all living beings. He has qualities and 
capacities not present in other creatures. Hence human birth is considered exceptional. 
Moreover, man alone has the capacity to recognise the past, the present and future and to take 
note of .changes occurring over time. 


There is one common quality present in all living beings: Moha (attachment). This quality is 
present equally in human beings. But man alone has the competence to overcome this Moha and 
attain Moksha (liberation). The Maaya (illusion) which envelops man drives him to take to 
wrong courses. Maaya has three qualities. Satwa, Rajas and Thamas (purity, passion and inertia). 
Through these qualities man tends to forget his divinity and humanness and behave like an 
animal. The three qualities of Maaya and the three forms of Moha combine to make man a 
demon. The three forms of Moha are: desire for wealth, attachment to the wife and attachment to 
children. These three make man a slave to Moha The man who conquers these three desires can 
transcend Moha. When Moha declines, Moksha becomes attainable. Liberation is the elimination 
of Moha (attachment). Everyone should strive to bring under control these three desires. 


Population and spirituality 


In earlier times, the world's population was around 100 crores (one billion). At that time the 
number of persons engaged in spiritual pursuits or in the quest for liberation was sizable. Today 
the world's population has grown, the seekers of liberation have dwindled. With the growth of 
population, spirituality should also grow alongside. 


Man has two essential organs: Head and heart. Pravritthi (interest in the external) arises from the 
head (the mind), while Nivritthi (interest in the internal) arises from the heart. What we are 
witnessing is an excessive growth of thoughts arising in the head. This means that involvement 
with the external world is growing from minute to minute. But internal feelings are not 
developing with steadiness and purity. 


Aeons change. The world is changing. But man's heart is not getting transformed. Man is 
growing, but his heart is not expanding. It is only when the heart widens that humanness will 
find fulfilment. 


Why is the heart of man not broadening at the present time? The reason is the secular education 
that is prevalent today. This educational system is diverting man's attention towards the external 
world. The student concentrates his attention on worldly and technical knowledge. He devotes no 
attention to knowledge of spiritual and ethical importance. 


True devotion, should be firm and unwavering 


All pose as devotees. All appear to be spiritual aspirants. But when you enquire into their 
actions, you find they are shallow and pretentious. The proverb says: "When troubles come, 
think of Venkataramana (God)." Similarly these so-called devotees think of God when they have 
troubles, but forget Him when the troubles are over. True devotion should be firm and 
unwavering, unselfish and free from any expectation of reward. Devotional activities should be 


unaffected by any kind of troubles and tribulations, by censure or praise. That alone is Bhakthi 
(devotion). It is when a man develops such devotion that he would be able to experience the 
Divine. Students today are completely lost in studies which are worldly- and ephemeral. Spiritual 
knowledge is ridiculed. Spirituality is treated as a kind of hysteria. 


Once an ochre-robed person, was going in a bazaar. School boys and college students followed 
him, talking flippantly about him. He took no notice of them. He was proceeding from one 
village to another. The students indulged in all kinds of abusive language with a view to 
provoking the mendicant. But the mendicant walked on and sat under a tree on the outskirts of 
the village. 


The students went on railing at him and exhausted all their stock of abuse. As they were silent 
the mendicant asked them, "Children, have you any more words to be used against me? Come 
out with them even now, as I have to go to the next village." One insolent youth among them 
asked: "What will happen when you go to the next village?" The mendicant replied' "Child, I will 
do nothing. Praise or blame attaches only to this body and not to my Self. But, there are in the 
next village a large number of people who have high regard for me. If you indulge in your abuses 
of me there, the villagers will trash you. To save you from this experience I am informing you in 
advance." On hearing this, the students had a change of heart. They felt: "In spite of all the 
abuses we levelled at him, this noble being was totally unaffected, did not lose his temper and 
taught us the right behaviour." They prostrated at the feet of the mendicant and craved for his 
Kshama (forgiveness). 


To forgive is Divine 


Forgiveness is a quality that every man should possess. That forgiveness is Truth itself, it is 
Righteousness, it is the Vedha. It is the supreme virtue in this world. Hence, all people should 
develop the quality of forgiveness. People should remain unaffected by what others may say. A 
true man is one who overcomes the ups and downs of life with fortitude. One should not recoil 
before reverses of fortune. One should bravely face them and overcome them. 


Whoever aspires to win the grace of God should cultivate at the outset the quality of Kshama. It 
is a divine quality. Man is permeated from head to foot by the six mortal vices' lust, anger greed, 
attachment, pride and envy. His heart is the source of qualities like sympathy, compassion, non 
violence and peace. The very term, Hridhaya, means the place--Hridh--which has Dhaya 
(Compassion). People get agitated over trifles. They should not dissipate their energies in this 
manner. There are innumerable talents latent in man, of which he is unaware. 


Win God's grace through love 


Naaradha wanted to teach Sathyabhaama the supreme greatness of some human qualities of 
which she was not aware. He brought about a situation in which Krishna was to be weighed in a 
balance and reacquired by Sathyabhaama by offerings in the other balance. All her jewels and 
wealth could not tilt the balance in her favour. Ultimately she prayed to Rukmini to come to her 
rescue. Rukmini came, prayed to Krishna, saying that "if it is true that God submits himself to a 
devotee who offers with love a leaf, a flower, a fruit or some water, let my thulasi leaf turn the 
scales against Krishna." 


The esoteric meaning of this prayer is that the body should be considered as a leaf, the heart as a 
flower, virtue as fruit and the tears of joy flowing from the devotee's eyes as the water offered to 
the Divine in a spirit of complete surrender. Tears should be shed only for God and not for 


anyone else. Whatever one's grief one should not shed tears. Tears may flow out of joy or 
enthusiasm or ecstasy, but not from a feeling of sorrow. 


Naaradha enacted the entire scene to demonstrate to Sathyabhama what glorious qualities 
Rukmini possessed and the greatness of her devotion. He told Sathyabhaama: "The Lord will not 
succumb to wealth. He will yield only to goodness. Rukmini is a supremely good woman. 
Follow her example." In this manner Naaradha humbled Sathyabhaama's pride. 


Man is endowed with limitless, latent abilities, which will manifest themselves at the appropriate 
moment. Every devotee has these unseen and unknown abilities. Man contains within himself all 
the powers and all the substances that exist anywhere in the cosmos. All objects in the world, 
including gold and diamonds, derive their value from man. Man is more valuable than all the 
things of the world. Unfortunately, today5 the human being, who is inherently divine, is 
devalued and degraded. Human values are born with man. They are not got from outside. Man in 
his ignorance is not aware of these values. When man sheds his ignorance, he will experience his 
divine nature. 


Image of God can be seen in the mirror of Nature 


People want to see God. How can they do it? Are they able to see themselves? They need a 
mirror to see themselves. Nature is the mirror in which the image of God can be seen. A mirror 
needs a mercury coating to be able to reflect an object. To see God in Nature, the mirror has to 
be coated with the mercury of love. Prema (Love) is vital for everything. Today, in the place of 
love we have hatred and aversion instead of compassion. 


What is the inner significance of describing God as Hridhayavaasi (Indweller in the heart)? He 
resides in the form of Dhaya (compassion) in the heart. If there is no compassion it is no heart at 
all. I advise, the students to avoid excessive speech and not to give way to anger. 


Everyone should realise that God is with him, beside him and around him all the time. 
Mukundan (who had addressed the gathering earlier) said that "If you take ten steps towards 
Bhagavaan, he takes hundred steps towards you." But whither should you take these ten steps? 
No one seems to think about that. If you take ten steps towards evil, falsehood, injustice and 
wickedness, will I take hundred steps in that direction? No. Your steps should be in the direction 
of what is good. What is good? The steps should lead upwards spiritually. So, if you ascend ten 
steps, I shall help you to climb a hundred steps. You should move in the right direction, not the 
wrong one. To the extent you yearn and pine for God, God will pine for you a thousandfold. You 
can have no conception of Thaapam (God's pining). Your pining is Thamas, God's pining is 
thapas (penance). The difference between the two should be understood. 


Kuchela and Krishna 


God offers you in return manifold what you offer to Him. This is what Kuchela told his wife. He 
went to Krishna to ask for many material gifts. But on seeing the Divine face of Krishna, he 
forgot all his desires. On his return to his native village he found that big mansions had sprung 
up at the spot of his old dwelling. Kuchela's wife came out, finely dressed and wearing many 
ornaments, and greeted her husband with the remark: "Lord, see what wonderful things Shri 
Krishna has given to you?" Kuchela looked at everything and said: "I did not ask Bhagavaan for 
anything. I did not speak to him about our domestic situation. Is it necessary for me to say 
anything to the omnipresent, all knowing Lord?" Kuchela then described in detail to his wife 
how Krishna had received him in His palace and how He hugged Kuchela to His bosom and 


showered His love on him. "How can I describe His loving kindness? Is there anyone like him 
who can confer all prosperity on one after receiving fistful of parched rice? He is Love incarnate 
and Love is He." (Svaami recited a Thelugu poem). 


Today the devotee behaves differently towards God. He goes with a mountain of desires to the 
temple and offers a small coconut. This is not what you should offer to God. What you should 
offer is a pure, unsullied heart. If you offer little, God gives you much in return. This means that 
some kind of offering should be made to God. 


Dhraupadhi offered a grain of rice to Krishna with devotion and Krishna, in return, appeased the 
hunger of thousands of Dhurvaasa's disciples. God needs nothing for Himself. Whatever you 
offer is for your own sake. 


What God seeks is a heart filled with love 


Today, Kerala celebrates the beginning of the new year. Keralites prepare a variety .of dishes 
(aviyal, poriyal, etc.) to be offered to God as prasaadham. The offering is only placed in the 
shrine. But it is all consumed by them later. If God were to consume the offering, it is unlikely 
that any Naivdhyam (offering) would be made at all. What you have to offer to God is your 
heart. What God seeks is a heart filled with love. There is nothing greater in the world than such 
a heart. 


We are celebrating the advent of the new year. But what we should celebrate is the coming of 
every new moment. A year is made up of seconds, minutes, hours, days and months. Why wait 
for a whole year? Greet every new second as a .new moment for celebration. Contemplate on 
God: every moment as your life-breath. To make God approach you, you have to engage 
yourself in the service of others, in conferring joy on them, and in activities which will please 
God. Subject all that you do to the test of divine pleasure. 


Although the new year is celebrated by Andhras, Tamils, and Keralites on different dates, the 
year is only one. How often have these festivals been celebrated? What has been achieved 
thereby? Nothing! How far have people earned God's grace? How are they enjoying it? Without 
seeking answers to these questions, people cannot have God-realisation, however long they may 
be with Bhagavaan. The Gopikas prayed for proximity to Krishna in whatever form He 
manifested Himself--as a flower, or a tree or a mountain or the sky. They were totally innocent 
of spiritual exercises of any kind. They dedicated all their actions to Krishna. Developing such 
love in your hearts, You should sow the seeds of love in the hearts of people who are bereft of 
love today. Water the hearts with love, grow the plants of love and enjoy the harvest of love. 


Discourse in the Sai Ramesh Mandap, Brindhaavan on 1.5-4-1995. 


Joy is your birth-right; Shaanthi is your inmost nature. The Lord is 
your Self and support. Do not discard it; do not be led away from 
the path of faith by stories invented by malice and circulated by 
spite. 


BABA 


11. Nearness to God 


Vedhaaham etham Purusham Mahaantham 
Aadithyavarnam thamsah parasthaath 
(Purusha Shuktham). 


IN ANCIENT days the sages, who were doing Thapas and finally had a vision of the Reality, 
declared that they had realised-the Divine, whose effulgence was that of the sun, beyond the 
darkness of ignorance. They also taught that God is the embodiment of Truth and had to be 
experienced as such. They declared that one who does not see this truth is akin to an animal. That 
is why there is the saying that one who is revelling in untruth is only .an animal. 


Truth issues from Prema. In this world there is nothing greater than prema. The more you love, 
the more blissful you become. Divinity is the embodiment of love. Love shines as the eternal 
truth in every one's heart. However, it will be dormant in the heart of the selfish. Prema shines 
only in the heart of the person who is selfless. Love cannot co-exist with ego and pomp. Love is 
the royal path that can take you to the highest state of the Divine. 


This love has to be experienced and shared with all. When love is directed towards the 
ephemeral world it is Anuraaga (attachment). When it is directed towards God it is true love. 
Worldly experiences confer only temporary happiness. Love towards the Paramaathma (the 
Supreme Self), who is eternal and changeless, will confer eternal bliss. Every individual should 
know the difference between Prema and Anuraaga. Many people profess that they love God. 
But, in reality; not even one in a million loves God in the true sense of the term. They may love 
God for securing some selfish material benefits. This is not true devotion at all. 


True devotion is unpolluted by selfish motives 


What is devotion? It is not merely offering several types of worship or going on pilgrimage. 
Unalloyed and true love for love's sake alone constitutes devotion. True devotion is the love 
flowing from a pure heart unpolluted by selfish motives. Love is the intimate bond of 
relationship between the devotee and the Lord. There are nine types of devotion. But they are not 
equal to Prema (Pure Love). 


All the 18 yogas mentioned in the Bhagavath Geetha, such as Jnaana Yoga, Karma Yoga, 
Vibhuuthi Yoga etc., are contained in Bhakthi yoga. There is nothing beyond this. Do you want to 
realise God? Do you want to tread the spiritual path and redeem your life? Then, it is enough if 
you pursue the Prema Marga (path of pure love). 


There is no power greater than Prema (love) in this world because it is selfless and pure. Though 
several yogas are available for practice, each and every yoga contains an element of selfishness. 
But prema, is free from selfishness. It is only because of the absence of such selfless love that 
chaos, conflicts and confusion are prevalent in the world. One who is interested in the welfare of 
humanity should practise this principle of true love. The life of an individual bereft of love is a 
sheer waste. 


Sages spent their time in the forests amidst wild animals. They lived amicably side by side with 
them. The animals did not harm these sages. What is the reason? The sages had no weapons at 
all. They had the sole weapon of love. With this weapon they were able to tame the wild animals. 
But, in these days, while calling themselves human beings, men are behaving worse than 


animals. The reason is rank selfishness. Whatever they think, say or do, selfishness is the basic 
motive. The result is they are not able to enjoy peace. 


From truth to peace 


How is peace to be got? When you plant the seed of Truth in the heart and make faith take deep 
root, with the rain of chanting God's name, peace blossoms, yielding the fruit of Liberation. 
Therefore, every human being should sow the seed of Truth in his heart. The deeper the root of 
faith goes down, the stronger will be the tree of life. You must provide water for the flourishing 
growth' of the tree by means of Bhajana and Dhaiva Chinthana (singing the glory of God). Only 
then the flower of Shaanthi (peace) will bloom and from this the fruit of liberation will be 
attained. 


Human life has four stages. It can be described as a four-storeyed mansion. Any structure can be 
safe and sound only when the foundation is strong. Brahmacharya (Celibacy) is the foundation 
for the structure of life. The first floor is the stage of Grihastha (householder leading a married 
life). The second floor is Vaanaprastha (preparatory to renunciation) and the third floor is 
Sanyaasa (Renunciation). 


This year is called Yuva (Youth). Youth should develop strongly the foundation of celibacy so 
that when they reach the other stages they can be ideal persons. They should develop Prema 
towards God. This is the only way to build their strength. 


People think that the world is separate from them. The entire universe is in the heart of each 
individual. "Vishvam Vishnusvaruupam." The universe is but a manifestation of the Divine, 
which is within the heart of every individual. Vishnu is the cause and the universe is the effect. 


All the three worlds are within everyone 


There are three states of consciousness in man--the waking state, the dream state and the deep 
sleep state. All the three states are in every individual. The three governing powers in these states 
are Vishva, Thaijasa and Prajna respectively. The Gaayathri manthra “Om Bhur Bhuvas Suvah" 
is related to thee three. We think that Bhuuloka is the world that we live in, Bhuvarloka is svarga 
and Suvarloka is beyond that. This is not correct. All the three worlds are in our heart only. The 
outside world we see is the material world formed of inert matter. You may ask how this can be 
called inert when there is a lot of movement. The world that you see is Bhu and the power that 
causes the movement is: Bhuvah or Praana shakthi (Life-force) which can be termed as 
Vibration. It is the force of vibration that activates all the limbs of the body. When air is pumped 
into a tyre we see this force in play which causes the tyre to bloat. Praana (Life-force) is 
Bhuvah. Because of the Prajnaana, which is inside, the Life-force is able to cause vibration and 
activate the limbs. The source of prajna is Suvaha (Radiation). When you analyse in this manner, 
it will be seen that Bhur-Bhuvas-Suvah represents the forces of Radiation, Vibration and 
Materialsation. 


It is the existence of these potencies in man that makes human birth very precious. But its value 
is now being mined by people getting immersed in fleeting sensual pleasures. Humanness is 
entirely forgotten. It cannot be acquired by learning from a teacher or studying text books. It is 
born with the human being. It is there in everyone. People are not able to understand this truth 
today. 


Reason for codification of Vedhas by Vyaasa 


The Vedhas are infinite and human life is limited. How to master the infinite within the short 
span of one's life? Keeping this problem in view, Sage Vyaasa codified the Vedhas into four 
major divisions and named them Rig, Yajur, Saama and Atharva Vedhas. Rig Vedha is Manthra- 
Svaruupa (consisting of Mantras). The Yajur Vedha is a compilation of rituals and the Sama 
Vedha is a compilation of riks set to music. In order to maintain the health of the individual and 
ensure the protection of the country, the Atharva Vedha was compiled. Sage Vyaasa, who 
codified these four Vedhas and wrote 18 puraanas, finally gave one stanza as the essence of all 
the puraanas, namely, "It is meritorious to render help to others. It is sinful to cause harm to 
them," "Paropakaarah punyaaya, paapaaya parapeedanam." The inner meaning of the 
declaration by Vyaasa should be understood by everyone. Para means Brahma, Upa means 
nearness and Kara means go. So this term Paropakaara means travel towards the Aathma and go 
nearer the Paramaathma. Chanting the name of God or doing other forms of worship will not 
help you to go near God, though they are good deeds. It is only by selfless service you can get 
nearer to God. This is real Punya. 


"Paapaaya Parapeedanam." According to worldly interpretation, this means that it is a sin to 
hurt others. But there is an inner meaning for this. Para means Aathma. Peedanam means 
‘hurting.’ The same principle of Aathma is in everyone. You should not hurt the Aathma. What is 
meant by this is that you should realise the oneness of the Aathma in all. If you do not realise this 
and act contrary to the principle, it is ‘hurting.’ 


When there is Prema there is no grief 


You are considering the bodies which are different in form as different from you. To do so is sin. 
You must only see the Aathma in all. There are many bulbs of different shapes and sizes here in 
this hall. But the electric current that makes them shine is only one. The Aathmathathva, the 
principle of Aathma, is the one current that activates all the bodies which are like bulbs of 
different hues and shapes. "To see diversity is sin" says Vyaasa. He taught the .world to see the 
One in the many. You should follow this principle and develop Prema, the principle of love., 
towards all. When there is Prema there is no grief. 


You need not waste time in trying to study all the sacred texts, as they are innumerable and your 
life-span is very short. All that is needed is to cultivate the Premathathva (Love principle). There 
is no greater power than this in the world. It is the supreme among all virtues. 


Real love is beyond the three categories of time past, present and future. Love towards God, the 
permanent changeless entity, alone is fit to be called Prema. 


The meaning of Gaayathri Manthra 


In the Gaayathri Manthra, the unity of body, mind and soul is depicted in the first line as "Bhur- 
Bhuvah-Suvaha." The next line "Bhargo Dhevasya Dheemahi" means' "Throw away the 
darkness." "Dheeyo yonah Pracho-dhayaath" means: "Let the effulgence of the Divine dispel the 
darkness of ignorance." Gaayathri is pervading everywhere. It consists of three deities, 
Gaayathri, Saavithri and Sarasvathi. Of these, the first one is master of the senses. The second is 
the teacher of truth and the third is the master of speech. Hence it is Trinity of the senses, the 
mind and speech. Gaayathri is hailed as Chandhasaam maathah (the Mother of all Vedhas). 
Gaayathri has five faces and is the embodiment of all deities--Sarva dhevathaa Svaruupam. 


Sthothra (description of the glory), Dhyaana (meditation) and Praarthana (prayer) are all con- 
tained in the Gaayathri Manthra. When does a prayer become meaningful? It is only when you 
stabilise your mind and turn it towards God. The basis for this is to meditate, pray and 
experience. It is essential to achieve harmony in thought, word and deed. Gaayathri is teaching 
this great lesson. 


Significance of Upanayanam 


Every small word or phrase in a manthra has immense inner meaning. It cannot be dismissed as 
superstition. Modern education has ruined our ancient Bhaaratheeya culture. You should know 
the meaning of the manthras. People want the fruits of meritorious deeds but they indulge in 
sinful action. How can you get good results when your action is faulty or sinful? Youth today 
must pledge themselves to speak the truth, develop love and have unshakable faith in God. They 
will then be able to establish peace in the world. This is the significance of Yagnopaveetham (the 
sacred thread ceremony). Upanayanam is a Samskaara (sacrament) that makes a boy fit for 
pursuing the highest wisdom. There is no difference between one child and another at the time of 
birth. All are born out of the mother's womb only. This is the first stage of life (sudra). The 
second stage is getting the upadhesha of Gaayathri at the time of Upanayanam, when the boy 
becomes a Dhvija (twice-born). He is then purified. 


The third stage is Vipra, when one has mastered the study of the Vedhas. The fourth stage is 
Braahmana when he actually realises the Brahman through the knowledge of the Self. One 
becomes a Braahmana not by birth but only when one realises the Supreme Brahman. One 
becomes a Braahmana by action and not by birth. 


Prahlaadha said that a father can be proud of his son not at the time of the son's birth but only 
when the son attains fame as a good man. It is only then that his birthday can be celebrated. 
Those of you who have had this sacred teaching of Gaayathri today are very lucky. On this very 
auspicious day; you have all taken a second birth. You must forget the past. The present is very 
important. From today onwards you must develop love of God and get a good name. Though 
God is the Creator of all beings, you must understand that while God created mud and water, it is 
the potter that is responsible for creating a pot by mixing the mud and water, similarly God has 
created chaithanya (consciousness) and jada (matter). Your father and mother have together 
given you your body and brought you up. It is, therefore, your duty to make your parents happy. 
If you don't please them, or if you ignore them, you cannot be happy. You must develop love for 
your parents, study well, imbibe the sacred culture of Bhaarath and lead noble lives as ideal sons 
of your parents. 


Gaayathri will protect your body, make your intellect shine and improve your power of speech. 
That is why Gaayathri is considered to be very important for this second stage of your life, which 
you are entering today. How should you live? You should live in accordance with the 
Upanishathic prayer! "Sahanaa Vavathu Sahanou Bhunakthu Sahaveeryam Karavaavahai" (Let 
us grow together, live together and develop love together). From such living, you get divinity. 
Unity leads to purity and purity to divinity. Where there is no unity, you get enmity and hatred. 


All mothers are Goddesses 


Today is Eswaramma day, the day of the Maathru Dhevatha (Mother Goddess). All mothers are 
goddesses. That is why in Bhaarath, people follow the maxim: Esteem the mother, the father, the 
teacher and the guests as God. Once when Seetha was teaching how to worship God, Raama 


intervened and said: "Oh simple-minded one! Who is greater in the world than the mother and 
the father? They know our difficulties and needs. They are able to understand our feelings. They 
are able to fulfill all our wants. Having such known entities who take interest in your welfare, 
why should you go after unknown entities?" At all times, the parents are there looking after you, 
You have to worship them. The mother can be compared to the earth and the father to the seed. 
Unless the seed is sown in the earth the plant will not sprout. You cannot ignore the father and 
mother who are responsible for your birth and growth. Even if you become the Prime Minister 
you must remember you owe your birth in the world to your mother. You must develop humility 
and discrimination as a mark of education. You should not discard love of God at any time. If 
you forget God, you are not human but demonic. Money, beauty and youth will not last long. 


Nowadays, people are not getting rid of attachment and arrogance even in old age. I composed a 
drama when I was young under the title, “Cheppinatlu Chesthaaraa?" (Do you do as you say?) 
Now I have to ask: "Cheppinatlu Chesinaara?" (Have you done as I told you?"). If you go on 
concentrating on your family alone till death, what is it you derive finally? None of these people 
will come with you on your final journey. It is the love of God that will come with you even after 
death. Develop love and sanctify your life with that Prema principle. Chant the Gaayathri 
morning, noon and evening. You do so many things. Why don't you chant this Gaayathri? I bless 
all of you that you may sanctify your life in this way, making it useful and meaningful. 


Discourse in Sai Ramesh Hall, Brindhaavan on 6-5-1995, 


12. Restoration of Moral Values 


Knowledge enhances man's status; 
it is a Hidden Treasure. 
Knowledge confers Joy, Fame and Happiness; 
it is the teacher of teachers, 
It is one's kinsman in travels abroad; 
it is a third Eye for Man. 
Even kings adore Knowledge’ and not Wealth; 
without Knowledge one is an animal. 
(Sanskrith Shloka) 


STUDENTS! Teachers and lovers of education! In this work-a-day world, knowledge is the 
adornment for man. It is hidden wealth. It is the basis of fame,' happiness and comforts. It is a 
teacher for teachers. It serves as a relation when one goes abroad. It is like a third eye for a man. 
Such sacred knowledge qualifies the person for honour at the courts of kings. It is more precious 
than riches. A man without such sacred knowledge is verily like an animal. 


Embodiments of love! Just as when a child is born, he is able to recognise his mother, likewise 
every student should recognise his motherland and its history and culture. The Motherland is the 
land of his birth. The nation's culture is like one's father. Without understanding the country's 
culture one cannot understand the true state of the nation. 


Bhaarath's culture is unexcelled. Bhaaratheeyas were known for their adherence to Truth and 
Dharma. Justice was their life breath. 


Bhaarath's culture represents the eternal verities which are unaffected by the ravages of time or 
the vicissitudes of history. Students should realise that if they cherish Truth and Righteousness, 
the nation will get automatically protected. Success seeks Truth and Righteousness and not 
wealth or possessions. 


Decline in human values 


Students acquire human values, in addition to their scholastic, intellectual and other attainments. 
It is the decline in human values that accounts for the degradation of human-beings in the 
country today. 


Technology has made great strides in modern times. The advances in other fields need no 
mention. The revolutionary advances in technology have brought about many changes in 
national life. The most important change is the decay of morals. All spiritual and ethical values 
have been undermined. Moral standards have collapsed. 


Hence, students today should be more concerned about good qualities than about knowledge. 
Society can progress only through men of virtue. Every student should have the welfare of 
society in view and have service as the ideal. 


What is education? It is not mere acquaintance with books. Can mere ability to read and write be 
regarded as education or even the acquisition of degrees? True education is associated with the 


ideal goals of life. Today all ideals have been perverted. "Qualities like compassion and 
goodness have been replaced by unrighteous conduct. The ancient teachings have been given up. 
Education has gone astray," says a Kannada poem. 


India gave the message of peace to the world in ancient times because of its spiritual leadership. 
Then, as well as now, the Bhaaratheeya message has been "Let all the people everywhere be 


happy." 
Who are to blame for failure of educational system? 


Who are responsible for the failure of the educational system? The parents at home, the teachers 
in schools and colleges, the leaders of society have failed to set the right examples and hence the 
students have gone astray. The parents at home tell the children one thing and act differently 
themselves. Teachers likewise teach one thing and act differently themselves. Leaders also 
preach one thing and practise another. Students are intelligently observing these double 
standards. They are induced to take to wrong courses by this divorce between words and deeds. 
Obviously, the elders are setting a bad example. The parents are not anxious to see that their 
children develop good qualities and lead ideal lives. Their affection for children is natural but it 
should not be, as in the case of Dhritharaashtra, such as to encourage the children in evil ways. It 
is only if children are corrected and punished for their misconduct that they will learn to behave 
properly in society. 


Every student today wants to lead a comfortable life. But they have no idea what comfort really 
means. They argue that comfort consists in eating, drinking and leading a free and easy life. But 
spending one's time in this manner is unworthy of a human being. The preciousness of human 
life has to be realised. To lead an animal existence is unbecoming for any student or anyone else. 
The first need is self-restraint and control of the senses. Only then can true bliss be secured. This 
alone will confer true freedom. 


Freedom emanates from Spirit 


Freedom does not mean living as you please. Sva-Thanthra (True freedom) emanates from the 
Spirit. The goal of self-realisation can be attained only through selfcontrol. Knowledge of the 
Self, control of the senses and Self-realisation constitute true freedom. 


Bhaaratheeyas got freedom (from foreign rule) but have not achieved national unity. Unity is 
essential for achieving anything, as has been declared in the Vedhik saying' "Let us live together, 
strive together, impart to others what we have learnt and lead a life of harmony and unity." 


India has never lacked, from ancient times, people of knowledge, ability, heroism and courage. 
But, because of absence of unity among them the country became a prey to foreign conquerors. 
Students should therefore learn the lesson of unity. The Nation's progress and good name are 
dependent on the behaviour of the students. Hence, their conduct should be exemplary. Today's 
students are the future leaders of the country. From now on, you should develop good qualities 
and cherish ideals of service to the nation. Become heroes in action and plunge into society for 
service, with self-confidence. 


Today, people talk about egalitarianism, a new social order and so on. There is no need for a new 
social system. We need only boys and girls of high character. Only they can save the country and 
not those who indulge in subversive activities. Humanity is one. If you strive to serve the country 
unitedly, Bhaarath will make enviable progress. If all the ninety crores of people in Bhaarath act 
as one, Bhaarath will stand forth as an ideal nation. 


The ancient virtues 


There are many things about Bhaarath's achievements in the past which you should know. What 
did humanness mean in the ancient times? 


Forbearance was esteemed as 

the highest quality. 
Adherence to truth was 

the strictest form of penance. 
Maternal love was deemed 

the sweetest feeling. 
Charity was esteemed greater 

than life itself. 
(Thelugu poem). 


All these have been forgotten, alas, under the regime of our rulers today. Bhaaratheeyas are 
unaware of their own past greatness and strength. 


What glory was there in the past! What spirit of sacrifice! What sense of justice! What devotion 
to Dharma! All this is forgotten today. Why? Because of limitless selfishness. Only when 
selfishness and hatred are given up can we enjoy peace. Humanness calls for harmony in 
thought, word and deed. Today this harmony is totally lacking. 


Pursue studies with welfare of society in view 


The educational process should aim at developing character and not merely intellectual abilities. 
Of what use is it to get a Doctorate without character? Education should have a practical bias 
which will make the student useful for himself and society. Students! Pursue your studies with 
the welfare of society in view. Develop love towards the Motherland, realising that the mother 
and the Motherland are greater than heaven itself. You owe so much to Bhaarath. Do your duty 
to Bhaarath. 


Bhaaratha-Maatha (Mother Bhaarath) is greatly concerned about the state of her children. You 
must be good and become ideal students. You must win fame for the country. You must share in 
the prosperity of the nation with all others. To whatever country you may belong, cherish 'love 
for your country. "All are one. Be alike to everyone." Don't give room for differences of race, 
creed or nation. There is only one race, the race of humanity. There is only one caste, the caste of 
spirituality. There is only one language, the language of the heart. There is only one God, the 
Supreme Divinity, that is present in all beings and permeates the entire cosmos. The Divine is 
present in every atom. Everything in the world is composed of energy and matter. Einstein called 
it "Supreme Power." Bhaaratheeyas described it as Dhivya-Shakthi (Divine Energy). 


In every human being this divine energy is present. It is this which makes man live and survive. 


Students! There are many here who have come to study science. Scientists have invented many 
new kinds of machinery and instruments. But the scientists have not recognized that there is one 
machine which exceeds all other machines put together. The scientists have produced satellites 
which go round the earth and spacecraft that can land on the moon. They are harnessing solar 


energy. They have made atom bombs and hydrogen bombs. There is one machine that is more 
powerful than all these. That is the human body. Man is the maker of all these machines. The 
marvellous powers of the human body are not fully recognized by any one. You should examine 
your own potentialities. It is man's potent power that has created all the wonderful machines. All 
the powers in the world are within you. The outside world is a reflection of your inner being. 
Students should recognise this truth. Various scientists are being praised. But all powers are 
within you, electrical power, magnetic power, the power of light and fire and radiation. Every 
human being is a computer. Every individual is mini-generator. Every person is a lamp and a 
radio station. 


Tension and temper destroy humanness 


Our ancients knew the secret of enjoying peace. Today even a tiny tot suffers from "tension." 
Where there is tension there is temper. Tension and temper are jointly destroying humanness. 
How can peace be found? Peace has to be found within each of us. You are the embodiment of 
peace and truth, You are the embodiment of love. Instead of realising the truth about themselves 
students are engaged in studying various subjects, thereby missing the main object of education. 
Just as the most complicated and expensive machine cannot work without electric power, the 
human machine cannot work without divine energy. 


Students! You have a powerful machine in your body. Activate it with Divine energy. You have 
all the power you need within yourself. Being unaware of it, you misuse it You should not waste 
time, which once lost cannot be recalled. Utilise all your learning for the service of society. 
Experience the life Divine, by putting into practice a fraction of what you learn from the Geetha. 
Practise any one of the human values. Prema is the basis for all -the values. Action with love is 
right conduct. Speak with love and it becomes-truth. Thinking with love results in peace. 
Understanding with love leads to non-violence. For everything love is primary. Where there is 
love there is no place for hatred. 


Cultivate humility and discipline 


Make right use of the period of youth. Banish conceit. Respect your parents and elders. Cultivate 
humility and discipline. A boy is judged by his behaviour and a man by his manners. A devotee 
is judged by his discipline. In these summer classes you must try to understand how to realise 
Divinity, how to lead a spiritual life in the work-a-day world, and how to render service in the 
best way possible and how to lead an ideal life. 


The poet Eliot defined culture as "a way of life." But Bhaaratheeya Culture has far wider 
connotations. Life itself is culture. What is done from moment to moment is an expression of 
culture. Having been 'born in this sacred land of Bhaarath you should learn to behave in such a 
way that you please Bhaarathmaatha. Mother Bhaarath is deeply distressed not only over the 
conduct of students but all others in this nation. No section of the people is behaving properly. 
Even in the field of spirituality, the Motherland has cause for grief. The garb is changed, but not 
the qualities. Treat the Motherland as the mother and our culture as the father. Students today 
have no patriotism. Students must be prepared to give even their lives to protect the integrity and 
honour of the motherland. 


We are unaware of the significance of being Hindus. What does Hindu mean? 
H for Humanity 
I for Individuality 


N for Nationality 
D for Divinity 
U for Unity 


It is when all the five qualities are present, we have a real Hindu. Of these humanity is most 
important. 


Students! Make best use of the next ten days and try to practise what you learn. You have 
listened today to the addresses of the Chief Minister and the Education Minister of Karnaataka. 
You must try to imbibe the ideals they have set forth before you and live upto them. The Chief 
Minister has been deeply concerned about the state of the nation and of Karnaataka for many 
years. Even now he is keen to do some lasting good to the country. Well-meaning persons are 
always confronted with obstacles. Those troubles only serve to ennoble them, just as a diamond 
gets added value from more cuts. 


Students should face all the challenges of life and serve the country well. 


Discourse at the Inauguration of the Summer Course in Indian Culture and Spirituality in the 
Brindhaavan Campus Auditorium on 20-5-1995. 


13. Experience the Divine 


STUDENTS! To illumine a lighted lamp, you don't need another lamp. Likewise, it is foolish to 
try to illumine the effulgent Aathma by the light of any other knowledge. It is a sign of ignorance 
to embark on a search for the Aathma principle which is all-pervading, effulgent and unchanging. 
No individual tries to search himself in the world outside. Similarly, is it not sheer ignorance to 
search for the Aathma when he himself is the Aathma? 


Bhaarath has been propagating this sacred truth over many aeons. Bhaarath is the birth-place of 
spiritual enquiry, generosity and righteousness. It was the home of peace and non-violence. 
Nowhere else in the world can be seen that interest in the pursuit of Truth which Bhaarath had. 
The seven great sages were born in Bhaarath. It is the land which gave birth to the Aadhikavi 
aalmeeki and the great codifier of the Vedhas, the sage Vyaasa. It is the sacred land where Lord. 
Krishna delivered His message. It is the sacred land where Raama established Raama Raajya. It 
is the most sacred land of the Buddha. From ancient times, Bhaarath has never been bereft of 
people revelling in righteousness and charity and dedicated to the contemplation of God. 


Like food for body; God is vital for mind 


In the contemplation of God there can be no difference of caste or creed, no distinctions based on 
age or language. It is open to everyone. Like food for the body; God is vital for the mind. In the 
practice of devotion there may be some ludicrous exercises. But even in such exercises, there is a 
spiritual under-current. 


For instance, a student may pray to God for passing in his examination. A litigant may pray for 
success in his dispute. Why go so far? Some people pray even for securing a seat in a bus! In this 
manner Bhaaratheeyas have looked to God for help in trivial and serious matters. This may be 
regarded as a form of craziness or a kind of religious delusion, or even foolishness. Whatever 
people may say, each one is entitled to his madness. Each has a right to his beliefs, his faith and 
his appetite. No one has the authority to deny their right. Their beliefs are their business. 


However, beliefs may require some basis. The discovery of a bridegroom does not decide the 
marriage of a bride. Finding some money will not ensure the launching of a business. Other 
accessories are needed for the purpose. By merely learning the alphabet, one cannot start writing 
letters. Letter-writing calls for knowledge of words and sentences. Likewise, knowledge of 
worldly matters will not enable the understanding of God. Spiritual knowledge is also necessary. 
The acquisition of spiritual knowledge calls for enquiry into truth. 


To start with, every man has to understand the nature of the universe. He should also understand 
the life principle. Only those who understand the nature of living beings in the Universe can 
know the secret of the Divine. 


Science and spirituality 


From ancient times, wise sages and scientists have been investigating the secrets of the Universe. 
Galileo discovered some facts about the movement of planets. The earth is going round the sun 
at the rate of 18000 miles per second. It completes the round in 365 days. Who is responsible for 
the earth's motion? Why is it rotating? On what basis is it revolving? We find that night and day 
are caused by the earth revolving on its axis. The earth's motion round the sun is the cause of 
seasons, which enable man to raise food, etc. Whatever the Divine does, whether it is something 
small or great, it is for the good of mankind. There is a power at work about which we are 


ignorant. This was described as the Ajnaatha Shakthi (the unknown power). The ancients called 
it Dhivya Shakthi (power of God). 


Another scientist, exploring the secrets of Nature, came to the conclusion that understanding the 
powers of Nature means understanding God. The great scientist, Einstein, discovered the 
convertibility of matter and energy and declared that energy is convertible into various forms but 
cannot be created or destroyed. 


Students who perform experiments in the laboratory should bear in mind an important truth. 
They know that water is made up of hydrogen and oxygen. But who created hydrogen and 
oxygen without which there can be no water? Likewise nothing can exist without a basis. 
Science is concerned with substances that are liable to change. Spirituality is concerned with the 
basic unchanging entity. 


The term spirituality is bandied about in various ways. We talk about culture and spirituality. 
Culture was defined as "a way of life." In Sanskrith parlance, it is called Samskrithi or the 
refinement of behaviour. It was declared that for this refinement of behaviour spirituality is the 
means. 


What is spirituality? People regard various rituals and forms of worship as spirituality. 
Spirituality is concerned with the spirit of love. Science is engaged in "split of love." The 
splitting process in science results in changes. The "Spirit of love" in spirituality is permanent 
and unchanging. Hence, culture grows out of the spirit of love. There can be no culture without 
love. Spirituality implies a power that is associated with love. 


Einstein felt that the unchanging power that underlies energy may be described as divine. But he 
could not go any further. 


Discovering God 


However, many spiritual seekers undertook various exercises to discover God. At one time, some 
aspirants approached Buddha and asked him whether he had any awareness of God. On this 
issue, Buddha remained silent. Later on he told his disciple' "Son, there is no meaning in having 
controversies over the unknown. Don't go into such questions. Divinity is not perceptible. It is 
beyond human comprehension, not within the reach of the mind or speech. However, the 
Divinity that I know has three forms: Truth, Righteousness and Non-violence. I consider these 
three as the embodiments of Brahma, Vishnu and Maheshvara. First of all, follow the truth and 
act according to Dharma. Lead a life of non-violence. This is true spiritual saadhana." 


Truth is God. The Vedhas declared' "Speak the truth; follow Righteousness." There is no greater 
divinity than these two. Where truth reigns, there Divinity is present. Where Righteousness is 
prevalent, there the Divine exists as Dharma. 


One who adheres to Dharma is embodiment of God 


It was because Raama stood by the plighted word, pursued Dharma renouncing the Kingdom 
and choosing to live in the forest, that Vashishta hailed him as .the very embodiment of Dharma. 
To honour the promise given by the father, the son was prepared to undergo such an ordeal. He 
sacrificed everything for truth. He ceaselessly practised Dharma. He was regarded as God 
incarnate. Any one who adheres to Dharma, whoever he may be, is verily the embodiment of 
God. 


In our own times, some people approached Raamakrishna Paramahamsa and put him the 
question' "Svaami! Have you seen God?" "Oh yes, I have seen Him." They then asked: "In what 
form did you see Him?" "I saw Him just as you are seeing me," declared Raamakrishna 
Paramahamsa. "How is that possible?" they asked. "This is possible. You do not have that 
intense yearning needed to see God. You take endless trouble to acquire possessions. You shed 
tears over petty matters, you weep night and day for the sake of riches. Have you shed a single 
tear for God?" There is a poem of Jayadheva in which he declared that if a fraction of the trouble 
which people take for the sake of the family and wealth, were to be devoted to God, they would 
have no fear of death). Raamakrishna Paramahamsa told them: 'You are totally absorbed in 
worldly desires. How can you experience God?" 


The apparent and the invisible 


Atheists, the Chaarvaakas and the scientists want to have direct perceptible proof for the 
existence of God. They ask: "How are we to believe in something which is not visible to the eye, 
and cannot be grasped by the hand?" 


Scientists who demand such proofs should be considered extremely foolish. For instance, you 
see an individual. His height is 5 feet 6 inches. You can measure it. His weight is 63 Kgs. as 
shown by the weighing machine. His complexion is fair. He has a bald head. All these are 
evident to the eye. Is this the truth about him? Yes, so far as the external measurements and 
appearances are concerned. But the man has qualities which are not apparent and beyond 
measurement. He has kindness, determination, spirit of sacrifice, compassion, all of which are 
not visible to the eye and. cannot be measured. You cannot notice them even if he is dissected. 
On this account can it be said that he does not have them? It is these qualities which make him a 
useful being. It is the invisible qualities which lend meaning to the visible features. It follows 
that what is not apparent provides the proof for what is apparent. 


You fool! Realise that 
What is not apparent is 
That which makes you suffer 
The consequences of past actions. 
To consider apparent as the only reality is foolish 


To deny what is not perceptible by the senses as nonexistent is foolish. Equally, to consider the 
apparent as the only reality is foolish. For example, you see a tree full of branches. The scientist 
sees it and says that is the truth. But the spiritual Jnaani looks at the roots, without which the tree 
cannot exist. The one who looks at the branches will not see the roots, the one who looks for the 
roots will not bother about the branches. The question arises: Which are more important, roots or 
branches? If the roots are there, the tree will remain even if the branches are cut. But if the roots 
are gone, the tree will not survive. It is the unseen roots which enable us to see the branches. 
Likewise, there is an invisible Divine power which underlies all that is seen in the phenomenal 
Universe. It is because of that power that we are able to perceive the universe. 


Here are some more examples- You have the fragrance of a flower. Fragrance has no form but 
you enjoy it. Can its existence be denied because it is not visible or can be touched or tasted? 
Likewise, love has no form, but the mother who shows love has a form. Fragrance has no form 
but the flower which exudes it has a form. Similarly, Aanandha (bliss) has no form, but there is a 


form for the Divinity that confers bliss. What is that form? It is a form beyond comprehension by 
the senses. It may be associated with anything. 


Yet another example. Air has no form. What is the form of water? Water is visible. Air has no 
form but you can experience its presence. When does air acquire a form? When a football or a 
balloon, is filled with air, it acquires their form. Water assumes the form of the container. 
Likewise, whatever the form in which the devotee worships the Divine, God appears in that 
form. What is the reason for this? The feelings of the devotees endow the form for the Divine. 
This is called Bhaavaruupam (the form caused by the feeling). Dhyaana (Meditation) is the 
means by which the form is experienced. Whatever the feeling about the form which the devotee 
cherishes, God assumes that form for him. The Lord appears in the form that you envisage. 
Divinity cannot be defined in this way or that. That is why it is said that God has a myriad feet, a 
myriad eyes, a myriad heads and He encompasses everything in the cosmos. He is omnipresent. 


No one is entitled to ridicule worship of Nature 


Everything in the universe, from sub-atomic particles to the biggest star, has a form: It was this 
fact that impelled the ancients to worship the Bhu-maatha (earth as a Mother). Some scientists 
ridiculed this adoration as a superstitious worship of mud and stone. They asked what is the 
meaning of worshipping mud and stone? The answer is: "That mud is the source of our food. 
The air (over the earth) is enabling us to breathe and live. The sun is enabling the crops to grow. 
Hence, no one is entitled to ridicule the worship of Nature. It is proper to worship those who help 
us. What help are the five basic elements rendering to mankind? Without these elements, there 
will be no world’ at all. What, then, is the loss in adoring them?" 


Some others ask: "Apart from the five elements, you are worshipping stones. How can these 
stones be treated as God?" The answer is' "You crazy one! Everything is an embodiment of God. 
Why should not they be worshipped?" "They have no qualities. They have no consciousness. 
Why do you worship something which is inert and inconscient?" Inanswer to this, mention may 
be made of an appropriate example. On August 15th the National Flag is hoisted and it is 
honoured in various ways. Why is the flag respected? It is a piece of cloth, made up of threads. It 
has no virtues. It is inconscient. It sways if there is wind. Otherwise it is still. Why is respect 
shown to such an object? Because it is regarded as a symbol of the freedom that we gained after 
a struggle. Divinity has to be regarded in the same manner. You have to place your faith in some 
symbol. In every country, its national flag is honoured. If a flag can be honoured though it has no 
consciousness, what is wrong in worshipping a stone idol if it has no consciousness? The Divine 
consciousness is universal. 


Devotee's devotional feelings are imprinted in idols 


In our daily life, there is an object of general worship. It is wealth. People offer worship to 
Lakshmi, the Goddess of Wealth and prosperity, in elaborate rituals. People even consider a 
hundred rupee note as sacred and press it on their eyes before placing it in the pocket. What is 
this hundred rupee note? It is made from some pulp. What virtue or merit is there in it? Both 
theists and atheists value the note for its value as currency. 


People worship the photo of the father or the grandfather after they have passed away. The 
reason is that the picture is a reminder of one's ancestor. Similarly, the worshipper of a stone idol 
is entitled to say: "Doubtless, it is a stone. But the stone bears the image of the God I worship." 
The devotee's devotional feelings are imprinted on the idol. 


If one goes about enquiring in this manner, he will realise that God is present in everything. No 
one is qualified to criticize another's beliefs and practices. You may keep out of them if you like. 
But you have no right to interfere in other's beliefs. 


The quest for truth 


Although there have been a variety of beliefs, the ancients laid stress on what they called the 
quest for truth. What is the rationale of this quest? The reason is that Truth is one. Here is an 
example. With the same eyes a man sees his mother, his wife, his sister, his child, aunt and 
several others. The eyes that see are one and the same. But the perspective from which the 
mother, the sister and all the others are to be seen calls for anveshna (enquiry into the truth about 
what is seen). The mother has to be viewed as a mother, that is, with filial feelings. This is the 
search for truth. You cannot treat all alike. You can see them with an equal eye, but the feelings 
will vary. 


Likewise, we have the five senses, each has its own functional role. Enquiry into truth calls for 
an understanding of what is true and false. A distinction has to be made between an apparent fact 
and the real truth. 


For instance, seeing a flat piece of ground one may say the earth is fiat. In a limited sense this is 
a fact. But when the nature of the earth is explored, it is proved to be a globe. Moreover, 
apparent facts are liable to change. A man who is seen wearing certain clothes, today; may be 
seen in a different dress tomorrow. Facts relate to momentary appearances. Truth relates to the 
unchanging reality. It is changeless in all the three categories of time--past, present and future. 
That is Divinity. What pertains to the individual is subject to change. But what is opposed to 
both the permanent and the changing is false. 


Brahmam is only one without a second 


In spirituality, you have insight into such truths. This has been termed "the secret of truth." Why 
should there be any secrecy about truth? There is a secret within this secret. That is why the 
Vedhas declared: "The Truth is one, it is described variously by the wise." The Vedhaantha 
declared: "Ekameva adhvitheeyam" (Brahmam is only one, without a second). Why did they not 
stop with saying that Brahmam is only one? Why should they go on to say that there is no 
second? It is to emphasise the oneness of Brahman that the second statement is added. By stating 
that "God is only One and not two," all room for doubt is eliminated. In this manner the 
scriptures reveal profound truths. 


The scientists also conducted numerous experiments and came to the conclusion that there is a 
unique power, without calling it God. People can call it by any name. But the substance cannot 
be altered. There is water in this tumbler. That water is given different names in different 
languages. The names vary but the water remains the same. Likewise, different people adore the 
Divine under different names and forms. But one thing is common to all of them. God exists. 
There is only one God. He may be worshipped in different names and forms. 


Without God there is no universe. It is essential to enquire into the nature of God to strengthen 
one's faith. For instance, when you examine a piece of cloth you find that it is made up. of 
threads, which are made out of cotton. Cotton is the basis. Threads and cloth are changes in 
form. 


Purity and truth 


A child believes whatever the mother says because of faith in her words. The faith may be 
ascribed to innocence. But in that innocence there is Amaayakathvam (the transcending of 
ignorance). Jesus used to say: "How happy would I be if only I could be a child for some time in 
a day!" In that childlike innocence there is freedom from all the lies and deceits of the world. 
That is purity of mind. In that purity dwells truth. Today we are discarding that purity and 
leading a polluted life. 


Students! Don't get involved in controversies about Divinity. Recognise that there must be a 
basis for everything. Nothing can exist without it. What the scientists have found so far is an 
infinitesimal part of the totality of knowledge. They are making much of it. But he who knows 
everything remains calm and quiet. The argumentative man knows little. 


If you mean to be a true scientist, you must first learn to control the senses and develop love. 
There is nothing greater than love. Develop Love. It has to emanate from the heart. It expresses 
itself as kindness and compassion. Today people behave without compassion. 


God has been described as the Hridhayavaasi (Indweller in the heart). It has been said that a 
heart filled with compassion is a shrine of the Divine. When you develop that compassion, you 
will have the vision of God. 


The Divine is omnipresent. He is inside, outside and everywhere. God is in the air you breathe 
and the words you utter. The Divine is in sound as Shabdha Brahman. The radio waves are all- 
pervading. They represent Dhivya Shakthi (power of the Divine). It is the same power that 
manifests itself as magnetism, electricity and atomic energy. You have to realise the limitless 
Divine powers latent in the cosmos. 


The Bhaagavatha extols the indescribable and marvellous powers of the Divine. The stories of 
the Lord confer bliss and immortality. 


Need for discrimination 


Students! You are not being respected for your education, nor for your personality. You are 
being respected for your conduct. When a man's behaviour is good, he is respected without any 
enquiry. Did not Raama confer His grace on Shabari and Jataayu without their asking Him? But 
Raama did not respond to the entreaties of Dhasharatha. Even the sages in the forests who were 
earnestly praying to him were not recognized by Raama. The Divine alone knows when and 
whom to bless, for what reason and where and in what form. You have to seek the Divine's grace 
in the right form, at the proper time and place. This calls for discrimination regarding time and 
circumstances. This is mostly absent today. This discrimination is called "Constant Integrated 
Awareness." It is described as "Prajnaanam Brahma," the humanness that is the Divine Itself. 


The four great pronouncements in the Vedhas are: "Prajnaanam Brahma," "Ayam Aathma 
Brahma," "Aham Brahmaasmi" and "Thath Thvam Asi." They proclaim the oneness of the 
Aathma and the Omni-Self. I once asked a student: "Who are you?" When a question is asked the 
reply must be well considered and must be related to one's practice, reflecting one's deep 
conviction. Remembering what Svaami used to say, the student replied- "I am you and you are 
me." I thought this boy had gone very far! "Is it so?” I asked. "Yes!" he said. 


"In that case, you go to that shed and give dharshan to the devotees and come back," I said. Who 
will see him? If you say: "I am Svaami and Svaami is J,” will anyone look upon you as Svaami? 


If that feeling is fully and genuinely within you, you will appear so to others. But if you only 
mouth the words but don't live up to them, it is no use. Practise and realise the truth. 


Supremacy of Bhaagavatham 


Today the Vice-Chancellor requested Me to speak to the students about the Bhaagavatham 
during the summer course. A knowledge of the Bhaagavatham is essential for the boys because it 
expounds the childhood deeds of Krishna. By understanding the Bhaagavatham well, you will 
become baagavuthaam (better human beings). All the fruits of saadhana are contained in the 
Bhaagavatham. Ba=Bhakthi, Ga=Jnaana, Va=Vairaagya, Tha=Thathvam, Mu=Mukthi 
(devotion, spiritual wisdom, detachment, philosophy and liberation). Bhaagavatham is the 
quintessence of all the Shaasthras, it is the goal of all paths. I have decided to give in the next ten 
days all the essential stories in the Bhaagavatham in a manner appealing to the young. It is not 
enough to listen to these stories. You must put into practice the lessons they convey. Therefore, 
eat and digest the Bhaagavatham, purify your hearts and serve society. 


Discourse on the afternoon of 20-5-1995 in the Kunwar Ba Auditorium, Brindhaavan. 


14. Immortal devotees of the Lord 


THE inextricable relationship between the devotees and the Lord, a relationship maintained by 
unassailable and unflinching faith on the one side and a continuous and loving care for the 
devotee on the other, was the central theme of the series of discourses given by Bhagavaan 
during the ten-day Summer Course to students held in Brindhaavan from May 20th to May 30th. 
Bhagavaan took up for each discourse one episode from the Bhaagavatham to bring out 
illuminating lessons about the nature of devotion and significant role of the Divine in coming to 
the rescue of the devotee. 


Produced here are stories narrated by Bhagavaan from 21-5-1995 to 29-5-1995. 


The Krishna Avathaar 
(From the first discourse on 21-5-1995) 


There are four qualifications needed by anyone to understand the underlying significance of the 
Bhaagavatham, which describes devotion as a bridge between the Divine and the devotees. They 
are: 


1. Flee from evil company. 

2. Seek the company of the pious. 

3. Indulge always in meritorious deeds. 

4. Discriminate between the eternal and the transient. 


Shuura, a king of the Yaadhava dynasty, had two sons, Ugrasena and Dhevaka. The former had a 
son, Kamsa, and the latter had only one daughter, Dhevaki. Kamsa had great affection for 
Dhevaki and considered her as his own sister and celebrated her marriage to Vasudheva with 
great enthusiasm. When he was driving the chariot of the newly-wed couple to take them to the 
bridegroom's place, an ethereal voice declared that the eighth child of Dhevaki would kill him. 
Kamsa, on hearing this voice, immediately unsheathed his sword and decided to kill Dhevaki on 
the spot to prevent the predicted catastrophe. Then at once Vasudheva gave Kamsa his assurance, 
that he would hand over all Dhevaki's newborn babies to Kamsa and appealed to him to spare 
Dhevaki. Kamsa relented and allowed them' to go. The pious Vasudheva kept his word and 
handed over each child as it was born to Kamsa. On learning from Naaradha that the threat to his 
life might come from any one of Dhevaki's children, Kamsa killed six of them. 


The Magadha Emperor, Jaraasandha, gave his daughters in marriage to Kamsa, who harboured 
increasing hatred against the Yaadhavas, from whom he apprehended the threat to his life, and 
also because, according to Naaradha's words to Kamsa, the gods were to incarnate as Yaadhavas 
with the advent of Krishna. 


God made His master-plan to punish the wicked and help the pious and pure devotees. 
Vasudheva's other wife, Rohini, was staying at Nanda's house away from Kamsa's tyranny. The 
Lord by His Maaya Shakthi (deluding power) transferred Dhevaki's seventh child to Rohini's 
womb. He was Balaraama (who was always with Krishna after he grew up). He was also called 
Sankarshana (transferred from one womb to another). 


The Lord incarnated as Krishna, the eighth child of Dhevaki, and both Dhevaki and Vasudheva 
had a vision of the effulgent form of the Lord, who directed Vasudheva to take the new-born 


child to Repalle (Gokulam), a village on the other bank of the Yamuna. According to the Divine 
Plan all the warders were fast asleep and the doors and gates of the prison, in which Kamsa has 
confined Vasudheva and Dhevaki, opened of their own accord, and the river in flood gave way, 
while Aadhisesha protected the child from the torrential rains as he was being carried in a basket 
by Vasudheva. No power can stand against the Divine Will. The child was exchanged with that 
born to Yashodha, without anyone knowing about it, due to Yogamaya. 


The child brought by Vasudheva to his cell started to cry and immediately the warders woke up 
and informed Kamsa, who rushed to the prison. He seized the baby and lifted it up to kill it but 
the Baby escaped from his clutches, went up in the air, and announced that the slayer of Kamsa 
had taken birth and was alive somewhere else. Enraged by this, Kamsa started killing all new- 
born babies. He sent his demons to Repalle also, but Krishna, even as a tiny babe, destroyed all 
of them. 


Yashodha had vaathsalya (maternal love) for Krishna at the physical level, while the Gopikas of 
Gokulam had real devotion which was symbolically demonstrated by Krishna, who used to go 
after their butter rather than receive that offered by his mother Yashodha. Butter here signifies 
the spiritual heart of the devotee, which Krishna shared as the Divine. Krishna demonstrated to 
the innocent devotees of Repalle, His Divine Power in several ways. 


Ambarisha's devotion 
(From the discourse on 22-5-1995) 


Ambareesha's father was Naabhaaga, who was rewarded by Lord Shiva for his attitude of 
detachment to worldly things. 


Ambareesha was pious and devout and adhered firmly to the truth. He performed a Yajna (ritual 
sacrifice) with such great devotional fervour that Lord Naaraayana was pleased and blessed him 
with Sudharshana, which means good vision, and which manifested as a wheel of prosperity, 
peace and security to his kingdom. On sage Vashishtha's advice, Ambareesha performed another 
Yajna called the Dhvaadhasi Vratha. An important rite to be observed in this vratha was that the 
king must start a fast on the day prior to Dhvaadhasi (the twelfth day after new moon) and break 
it at the start of Dhvaadhasi and feed all the people. As the moment of breaking the fast was 
drawing near, the mighty sage Dhuurvaasa arrived and was received with all honours by 
Ambareesha. Dhuurvaasa agreed to the king's request to be his honoured guest, and asked the 
king to wait till he finished his bath in the river and returned. As the auspicious moment 
approached when the king had to break his fast to fulfill the vow of the Yajna, Dhuurvaasa did 
not turn up. On the advice of the sage Vashishtha, the king broke his fast by taking a thulasi leaf 
with water, and waited for the arrival of sage Dhuurvaasa to offer him food. 


Dhuurvaasa, who was well known for his short temper, felt that Ambareesha had violated the 
respect due to a guest by breaking his fast before the guest had taken his meal, and in his rage 
created a demon to kill Ambareesha. Lord Naaraayana's Sudharshana (discus) intervened, 
destroyed the demon, and started chasing Dhuurvaasa himself. Dhuurvaasa went to-Brahma and 
Shiva for protection. Both pleaded their inability to save him. He went to Lord Naaraayana 
himself, who said that He could do nothing as He was bound by the blemishless devotion of 
Ambareesha and suggested to the sage to seek the pardon of the king. Dhuurvaasa 'went to 
Ambareesha, who prayed to Lord Vishnu to recall the Sudharshana and save Dhuurvaasa. 


The lesson of this episode is that God regards Himself as a servant of His true devotee. Students 
need to learn the lesson that it is not enough if they do good work, but should do so with humility 
and devotion. Ambareesha was the embodiment of humility. 


The saga of Dhruva 
(From the discourse on 23-5-1995) 


Dhruva was a young lad of five years, who did penance with single minded devotion and 
determination and was blessed with the vision of Lord Naaraayana. 


Uthaanapaadha, the elder of the two sons of Manu, who gave to mankind the Dharma Shaasthra 
(the Code of Righteousness), had two wives, Suruchi and Suneethi. Uthama was the son of 
Suruchi, the younger queen while Dhruva was born to Suneethi. 


Once both of the boys were playing in the garden. Spotting their doting father sitting on the 
throne, they rushed forward to sit on the king's lap. While Uthama sat on his father's lap, the five- 
year old Dhruva was prevented by Suruchi, who said that only her sons had the right to sit on the 
king's lap. Dhruva went to his mother Suneethi and sat weeping. When he started criticizing his 
step-mother for her action, his mother silenced him and said, "Desist from criticizing anyone. If 
you criticize others the defects pointed out by you will come to you. Accept everything as 
something good." 


So saying she advised Dhruva to go to the forest and do penance to secure the Grace of Lord 
Naaraayana, who was the only hope for the helpless. Dhruva obeyed his mother implicitly and 
proceeded to the forest without any fear and with full faith in his mother's words that God was 
the only refuge for the forlorn. Having noticed this wonderful determination of the young boy 
who was ready to brave the perils of the forest with firm determination, sage Naaradha appeared 
before him and tried to dissuade him from undertaking a severe penance to earn the Lord's 
Grace. But Dhruva refused to go back and expressed his confidence that he would surely succeed 
in winning the Lord's Grace with his mother's blessings and his unshakable faith. This is the ideal 
that today's students should learn. Naaradha was pleased with the young Dhruva's firm faith and 
initiated him in the chanting of the twelve-lettered manthra, "Om Namo Bhagavathe 
Vaasudhevaaya." 


Dhruva did intense penance, giving up food and drink, and was reduced to a skeleton. He 
transcended his Annamaya Kosha (food sheath). He was saturated with the Lord's name, which 
he chanted with each breath ceaselessly. His Manomaya Kosha (mind sheath) was also dedicated 
to the Lord, driving away all other thoughts. His entire being was filled with bliss in the 
contemplation of the Lord. This is another ideal taught by Dhruva to students that meditation 
must be with total concentration on the Divine Form. 


Lord Naaraayana appeared before Dhruva, whose radiance went on intensifying as the Lord was 
approaching him. Looking at the majestic form of the Cosmic Lord, Dhruva burst into ecstatic 
praise. He exclaimed, "O Lord! Till now you were in me and you have come out to grace me. 
Are you going to leave me?" 


Lord Vishnu, who was astonished at the amazing wisdom of such a young child, patted him on 
his cheek and asked him to say what boon he wanted. Dhruva said, "Oh Lord, after having your 
Dharshan (audience) and getting your Grace, I don't want anything else." The Lord replied, 


"Dhruva, you undertook this penance with one thought, namely, to sit on your father's lap, but 
now you speak differently. Your words and action are contrary to your thought. You must go 
back to your father with my blessings. He will receive you with full affection. You must rule the 
kingdom and then come to Me." The Lord also assured Dhruva that after ruling the kingdom for 
a long time he would occupy a most exalted position in the firmament as a star around whom the 
constellation of the Seven Rishis (sages) and other galaxies would revolve. 


Dhruva, on his return to the kingdom, was received with ceremonial honours by his penitent and 
joyous father. Dhruva consoled his father by reminding him that all are forms of Naaraayana. 
Uthaanapaada entrusted the kingdom to the six-year old Dhruva, saying that a boy who could get 
the Divine vision and grace at that tender age, could rule the kingdom. He retired to Skanda 
Aashrama, (hermitage) seeking realisation of the Divine. 


Dhruva ruled for a long time very wisely and well, maintaining justice and peace. When his 
sojourn in the world came to an end, a celestial chariot came to take him to God's Abode. He told 
the charioteer that God was everywhere and so the question of taking him to God's place did not 
arise. So saying, he sat down closing his eyes in meditation and merged in the Divine. 


The infinite power of Bhakthi (true devotion to the Lord) must be understood by all. It contains 
all the six qualities, namely, Bhukthi (food), Rakthi (charm), Yukthi (knowledge of how to love 
all), Anurakthi (great attraction), Virakthi (cessation of desires)and Mukthi (Liberation). When 
from the word Bhagavaan (the Lord), the root word, 'Bhag’, (relating to the Divine) is taken and 
combined with ‘kthi’, which is common in all the six qualities, it becomes Bhakthi. 


The story of Dhruva must teach the students the value of determination and devotion to God. 


The example of Jadabharatha 
(From the discourse on 24-5-1995) 


Priyavratha was the son of Svayambhuva Manu and brother of Uthaanapaadha. Having realised 
the futility of mundane comforts, which are transient, he renounced his kingdom at the early age 
of 19 years and left for the forest in pursuit of realisation of the Aathma. He had strong belief in 
the truth that the human body is given only for realising and experiencing the bliss of Aathma. 
The students of those days sacrificed all comforts to pursue their studies, unlike those of the 
present day who hanker after materialistic pleasures. Priyavratha developed the steadfastness and 
mental tranquillity and purity of heart. Emperor Manu, his father, was worried and tried to wean 
him back to the kingdom. He declined, stating that without realising his own nature and reality 
he could not satisfy the people. Manu sought the advice of the sage Naaradha, who prevailed 
upon Priyavratha to agree to rule the Kingdom as a command from God. 


After a few years, Priyavratha again felt that association with people and worldly objects 
constituted obstacles to spiritual saadhana. So he renounced the kingdom and returned to the 
forest. King Rishabha took over the reigns of the kingdom and ruled with a sense of detachment, 
while pursuing his spiritual saadhana for the realisation of Truth. 


Bharatha, the son of Rishabha, was a righteous prince. He would not embark on any work 
without praying to God and seeking Divine Grace. Our country: Bhaarath is named after this 
king Bharatha. Even though he was not attracted by worldly pleasures, he had a special 
attachment for a. deer, which he was bringing up with great affection. At the moment of his 


death he was thinking of this deer and was born as a deer and later on had a human birth. 
Students should be careful to remember the Divine name and form always, so that even at the 
time of death one will have the Divine name on the lips and merge with the Divine. 


In his new birth, Bharatha was immersed in Aathmik consciousness from the very beginning and 
was totally oblivious to his physical existence. In this state he was caught by a band of brigands 
to be offered as a human sacrifice for their deity Kaali. He was totally unaffected by what was 
being done to him. Just as the brigands were about to cut off his head, Goddess Kaali Herself 
appeared and rescued him and bade him continue on his righteous path. 


Just then the king Sindhu Saveera (Rahugana) was going that way in a palanquin accompanied 
by some of his attendants. The servants carrying the palanquin were tired and asked Bharatha to 
help them in carrying it for sometime to relieve their strain. Bharatha took this also as a divine 
dispensation and assisted in carrying the palanquin. As he was very compassionate by nature, he 
was careful not to trample on any insects on the ground and swayed continuously and walked 
slowly while carrying the palanquin. The king became angry at the slow and swaying movement 
of the palanquin and asked his servants why they were going slow. He peeped out of the 
palanquin and found that Bharatha was the cause for the slow movement and rebuked him for 
walking like a corpse. Bharatha replied calmly: "It is not me alone. All of us are corpse. It is only 
the power of the Divine that is making us function." .The King was on his way to meet Kapila, 
the great sage, to have Aathmik Knowledge. He was astounded at the wise reply of Bharatha. He 
got down and sat there listening to Bharatha's exposition about the Aathma. 


Because Bharatha had obtained the knowledge by his own experience, he was able to influence 
several kings and scholars with his expositions. Some of his teachings were' 


e One should have sense control by which alone one could avert the danger of attachment 
to the physical. 


e To have no attachment for mundane comforts. 


e To reduce desires for worldly objects. Man must not try to propitiate God for achieving 
paltry worldly desires. 


e One cannot escape the consequences of one's action despite intense meditation, 
pilgrimages or rituals. 


e As is the heart so is one's experience. 
e Everyone should, on his own, forge a path to get over his destiny. 


Manu and the kings in his lineage were examples of enlightened beings described in the 
Bhaagavatham. 


Students should learn to serve society selflessly without expecting any' return. They should 
combine spiritual saadhana with academic studies. 


Thrishanku and Vishvaamithra 
(From the discourse on 25-5-1995) 


Thrishanku, of the Lunar dynasty; was a noble, pious king, but developed an irrational desire to 
go to heaven in his human body. His preceptor, Bhrahmarishi Vashishtha told him that his desire 
was like seeing to pack an unsuspicious dead body and taking it to heaven. Thrishanku was 
adamant, but Vashishtha refused to help him in his unholy desire. The king approached the 
learned sons of Vashishtha, who had immense spiritual powers. They refused to help one who 
had defied the advice of his own preceptor, their father. Finally the king approached sage 
Kaushika, who harboured an ill-feeling towards Vashishtha because of an earlier encounter with 
him. Kaushika agreed to take up the case of Thrishanku as a challenge. He performed a Yajna for 
the purpose of sending Thrishanku bodily straight to heaven. At the conclusion of the Yajna, the 
gods did not come down to accept the offering. Enraged by this, Kaushika concentrated all the 
powers acquired by' him by his penance on his Brahmadhanda (flagstaff) to transport Thrishanku 
to heaven. But Indhra, the Lord of the celestial ones, blocked his path and Thrishanku came 
hurtling down. towards the earth. On seeing this, Kaushika stopped him in the middle of the 
firmament and proceeded to create a parallel heaven, with all its paraphernalia. Even today, it is 
known as Thrishanku Svarga (In western astronomy, this is known as the constellation Southern 
Cross, consisting of four stars). 


Consequences of breach of promise 


King Thrishanku had a son by name Harishchandhra (not Emperor Harishchandhra who 
sacrificed everything for truth). This Harishchandhra had no sons and prayed to Lord Varuna 
(the Rain God) for a son, with the promise that he would sacrifice his son later to the same God. 
He got a son, Raahul. As he became attached to the son, he did not keep his promise and was 
afflicted by a strange disease. 


Raahul, being afraid of the consequences of his father's failure to keep his promise, fled to the 
forest. He got the idea that his father's illness could be cured if someone else was offered to 
Varuna in his place. Seeing a Brahmana couple with three children, he asked them to offer one of 
the sons for sacrifice in return for a large herd of cows and other wealth. The Brahmana was 
attached to the eldest son and would not part with him. His wife was attached to the youngest son 
and would not let him go. So it was the middle son who was offered and preferred to die as an 
offering to God, rather than live without the love of father and mother. Raahul was taking this 
boy with him when on the way they passed through Kaushika's Aashram. The Brahmana boy, 
Shunassepha, sought refuge with the sage. Pledging to protect him, Kaushika asked one of his 
sons to go with Raahul, saying that the human body has to be offered in service to others. His 
sons ridiculed the idea and declined to comply with Kaushika's proposal. Thereupon the sage 
taught Shunassepha a manthra to propitiate Lord Varuna. The boy chanted the manthra and Lord 
Varuna appeared before him and chided Harishchandhra for agreeing to offer his son to Varuna 
and then going back on his word and offering some one else in his place. He said because of his 
breaking the promise, he would be consumed by the disease afflicting him. 


Students should learn from this the lesson that they must not develop excessive attachment to 
anything and should always keep their plighted word. 


Sage Kaushika himself was a victim of an unbecoming desire (when he was an emperor) to 
possess the wish-fulfilling cow of sage Vashishtha. Foiled in his attempt, he embarked on severe 
penances to acquire the title of Brahmarishi on a par with Vashishtha. He forfeited the fruits of 
his penances several times before he could earn ultimately the title of Brahmarishi from 
Vashishtha himself. 


The all conquering faith of Prahlaadha 
(From discourse on 25-5-1995) 


This is the story of Prahlaadha, who remained utterly unshaken in his faith in Lord Naaraayana 
despite the ordeals to which he was subjected by his father, Hiranyakashipu, who hated 
Naaraayana as the slayer of his brother. 


Hiranyaaksha, the younger brother of Hiranyakashipu, was killed by Vishnu in his incarnation as 
Varaaha (Boar). In order to acquire invincible power, Hiranyakashipu left for Mount Mandhara 
to perform a rigorous penance. While he was away doing penance, his wife, Leelavathi, was 
taken by sage Naaradha to his Aashram to protect her and the child she was carrying, from the 
onslaught of dhevas. He imparted to her the knowledge of the exploits of Naaraayana. Though 
she did not pay much attention to the teachings of Naaradha, the child in the womb absorbed 
them and started meditating on the Mahaa manthra, "Om Namo Narayanaaya" while still in the 
womb. 


Brahma was pleased with the penance of Hiranyakashipu and granted him the boon that he 
would not meet with his death either during day or night, either on earth or sky; either from man 
or beast or from the gods. With this boon, he became lord of the universe and decreed that he 
alone should be worshipped. 


When Prahlaadha was five years old, he was entrusted to the care of two teachers, Chanda and 
Amarka, both sons of the sage Kripaachaarya, with strict instructions to impart all demonic traits 
to the child and banish Vishnu's name from his mind. The teachers taught him about 
Artha(wealth), and Kama (desire) but abstained from teaching about the other two goals of 
human life, Dharma (Righteousness) and Moksha (Liberation). But in spite of their best efforts, 
the teachers could not create a single negative thought in Prahlaadha's mind. He persisted in his 
own belief that Lord Naaraayana was the Supreme Master of the world to be worshipped by nine 
modes of devotion, beginning with listening to the glories of the Lord and culminating in total 
surrender of the self. 


Hiranyakashipu tried all means of gentle persuasion to coax Prahlaadha to accept him as the 
supreme master and forget Naaraayana. Prahlaadha told his father that though he had mastered 
the entire external world he could not master his senses. Enraged at this son's unshakable 
devotion to his arch-enemy, Hiranyakashipu decided to put an end to Prahlaadha by all possible 
means. Prahlaadha was totally devoid of body consciousness and was always in a state of bliss 
chanting the name of Hari. He survived all tortures inflicted on him and came out unscathed. In 
utter exasperation, Hiranyakashipu finally asked Prahlaadha: "Who is this God that protects you? 
Where is he?" Prahlaadha, who had realised the omnipresence of God, told his father that God 
was everywhere in the cosmos, from the tiniest microcosm to the mighty macrocosm. He added! 
"One who is a slave to his senses cannot see Him. As long as you have ego and attachment you 
cannot see Hari, though He is within and outside every being." Hiranyakashipu then asked 
Prahlaadha: "Is He in this pillar?" When Prahlaadha said, "Yes, He is," Hiranyakashipu smote 
the pillar with his mace. The pillar split into two and there emerged from it the Lord in the 
dreadful form of Narasimha (half-lion and half-man). He seized the demon by the throat, placed 
him on his lap and tore his entrails with his nails. 


Though everyone trembled at the sight of the awe-inspiring form of Narasimha. Prahlaadha stood 
beside the Lord cheerfully, in adoration. When he was asked by the Lord if he had no fear, 


Prahlaadha replied, "To me You are only the embodiment of Love. I believe in your Divine form 
of Love and not this physical form." Lord Narasimha then commanded Prahlaadha to take over 
the reigns of the kingdom, transform the demons into virtuous beings and then come back to His 
divine Abode. Prahlaadha requested the Lord to pardon his father and take him to heaven. The 
Lord granted the boon. Prahlaadha ruled over the world for a long time with justice and 
righteousness. 


Students must imbibe at least one quality of the great devotee, Prahlaadha, and practise it in daily 
life. You should always remember God and chant His name and have his Form in mind in any 
situation. 


Krishna and the gopalas 
(From the discourse on 26-5-1995) 


Balaraama and Krishna were in the habit of taking the other cowherd boys with their cows for 
grazing in the forest near Gokulam. Once the Gopaalas engaged in merry making, in dancing and 
singing, quite unconcerned about the time, while the cows were out grazing. Suddenly they 
found that the cows had disappeared and they went in different directions to search for them. 
They found the cows grazing at a distant place and saw a fire blazing all around. The cowherd 
boys could not approach the cows. They cried in desperation, "Krishna, Krishna." When Krishna 
called the cows by their names, they responded, running towards him, crying "Amma." The cows 
could always recognise Krishna's voice and understand his call. The cowherd lads were terribly 
shaken by the sight of the advancing fire. Balaraama and Krishna told them: "Why fear when we 
are here?" Krishna asked them to close their eyes and not to open them until he gave the order. 
They always implicitly obeyed the command of Krishna, in whom they had full faith. 


When Krishna asked them to open their eyes they did so, and found themselves in the same place 
where they had been dancing, and it was cool all round. The fire had disappeared. Immediately 
they fell at the feet of Krishna and hailed him as the Supreme Lord. 


When such miracles were performed they used to hail Him as God, but after some time they 
would revert to their old habit of calling him their friend. Even now people consider the 
Avathaar (divine advent) as God only when miracles happen, but at other times they consider 
Him an ordinary being. 


Krishna wanted to teach the Gopaalas about the Aathma. It was the rainy season, and dark clouds 
were hovering over the sky. There was lightning followed by thunder. Krishna said that the dark 
clouds represent the Thaamasik (ignorance) quality in man, thunder the Raajasik (passionate) 
quality and lightning the Saathvik (enlightening). Because of Thamo-guna you are not able to see 
the vast sky which is the Divine. Just as lightning shines in a dark cloud, Jnaana (wisdom) 
shines beyond the cloud of ignorance. 


A lesson for pandithhs 


On another occasion, Krishna gave the Gopaalas a sublime experience. The cowherd boys had 
taken the cows to the forest to graze. When they felt hungry, they asked Krishna and Balaraama 
to give them food. Krishna said, "When you have the all powerful Being with you, why do you 
worry about food? There is a Yajna being performed by some pandiths nearby. All of you may 


go and tell them that you are hungry. They will feed you." Accordingly they went to the place 
and asked for food. The pandiths told them that they could serve food only after the Purnaahuthi 
(completion of the sacrificial ritual). The lads returned disappointed and informed Krishna about 
it. Krishna asked them to go to the wives of the pandiths who were cooking the food, and not to 
the pandiths who could not recognise the nature of Divinity. Krishna asked them to go behind 
the yajnashaala (hall of ritual) and ask the women to serve food. They went there and informed 
the ladies that they were Krishna's friends. While the pandiths could not recognise the greatness 
of Balaraama and Krishna, the ladies asked them with great devotion as to where Balaraama and 
Krishna were. When told that they were nearby; the ladies took all the food in their vessels to the 
place where Krishna was. They forgot body-consciousness and were in ecstasy at the sight of 
Krishna. They made all the cowherds sit and served the food. The pandiths came in search of 
their women and found them serving food to Balaraama, Krishna and their friends. The pandiths 
later realised that the God to whom they had been making their offerings at the Yajna was 
Himself there in the form of Krishna. Krishna showed the form of Naaraayana to the pandiths, 
who prostrated before Him. What was the use of doing yajnas without realising the God who 
was in human form available close by? 


Nothing in the world is yours and you are just a trustee for the wealth which belongs to the 
Divine. Developing the feeling of "mine" and "thine" people get attached to the unreal and the 
transient and forget the eternal. 


Devotion of the Gopikas 


The Gopikas were examples of true devotion. Krishna was five years old when He did the 
Rasakreeda (sporting with the Gopikas). There is nothing sensuous in this; it is the sacred 
Aathma-thathva which the Gopikas experienced, that is oneness with the Divine. They enjoyed 
the music of Krishna's flute as Naadha-brahman (the Cosmic Absolute in the form of sound). 
Krishna gave them the essence of the music of the Vedhas in his music and talked to them in the 
language they could understand. 


The Gopikas had only the name of Krishna on their lips and the form of Krishna in their hearts. 
When Uddhava was sent by Krishna to teach them the shaasthras (spiritual texts) they said they 
had only one mind and that was given to Krishna and that they had no room in their mind for 
anything else. Uddhava read out the letter to them which Krishna had sent. The letter said' "I am 
always with you and around you. I am the Indweller of your hearts. Uddhava will pass on the 
message. Practise it." The Gopikas had no patience to learn any lesson from Uddhava. Finally 
they said they wanted one message to be sent to Krishna and that was' "Let Krishna come and 
make the flower of our hearts blossom." Uddhava went to Krishna and extolled the pure 
unalloyed devotion of the Gopikas. 


You should understand the real devotion of the Gopikas. You should have full faith in and 
single-minded devotion to God. 


Akruura's vision of the Lord 
(From the discourse on 28-5-1995) 


Everyone in the world loves objects or persons or even God, for his or her own selfish purpose. 
No one loves God for God's sake. Man exists in three states 


waking, dream, and deep sleep. In the waking state all his senses and mind are at work, while in 
the dream state only the mind is active, and in deep sleep everything merges in the Self and one 
enjoys bliss. Man should make efforts to experience the reality beyond all the three states. 


Naaradha told Krishna in advance about the impending visit of Akruura and mentioned that 
Akruura would perceive Him as Naaraayana and Balaraama as Aadhisesha. Akruura arrived 
shortly afterwards with an invitation to Krishna and Balaraama to attend the Dhanur-Yajna to be 
performed by Kamsa. Akruura was very devoted to Balaraama and Krishna and so he informed 
them that Kamsa's invitation was only a part of his nefarious scheme to lure them to Mathura and 
kill them. 


The Gopikas and Gopaalas tried their best to prevent Akruura from taking Krishna and 
Balaraama in his chariot. They were not worried about 'any harm that might be caused by the 
evil-minded Kamsa. Their fear was that Krishna might not return from Mathura. Krishna told 
them, "We must go to Mathura to fulfill our mission. You are not the body. The Indweller in the 
heart is directing the whole show. That is the Aathma. You are in Me. I am in you. Understand 
this truth and you will know everything." 


After thus pacifying the Gopis and Gopikas, Krishna and Balaraama left in the chariot driven by 
Akruura. In the evening Akruura alighted near a river to perform his ablutions. While having a 
dip in the river he had the vision of Lord Vishnu reclining on Aadhisesha, the hydra-headed 
Divine Serpent. On hurrying back he saw Krishna and Balaraama sitting in the chariot 
unperturbed. Krishna asked Akruura what he had seen to make his face so radiant. Akruura was 
thrilled at the experience and praised them. He requested them both to stay at his house, but 
Krishna politely declined, promising to visit him after finishing his mission in Mathura. 


The next day, while they were walking along the road, they spotted the royal washerman and 
asked him for some royal clothes. The washerman rudely replied that the royal clothes could not 
even be touched by low-born cowherds. Infuriated at this, Krishna struck the dhobi, who fell 
down. They took some of the royal clothes, and went on their way. 


Later they met an old hunch-backed lady, Kubja, who was providing scents and perfumes for 
Kamsa. She had a beautiful face but an ugly body, bent over in three ways. Seeing the two 
brothers, she was overjoyed and gave away all the perfumes to them. Though God never asks 
anything from anyone, if someone offers something He returns it a hundredfold. Krishna planted 
His foot or her feet, caught hold of her chin and lifted it up. Lo and behold! Her crooked back 
was gone! She shed tears of gratitude to Krishna for restoring her beautiful shape and prayed to 
Him to visit her house to accept her prayerful offerings. Krishna promised to do so after finishing 
His mission. 


Parents freed 


Kamsa heard of these exploits of the young lads and tried to send an elephant in rut, to kill them, 
but it was the elephant that was killed. Next Kamsa had two of his best wrestlers challenge them 
in combat. The wrestlers met with their end and realised that the Divine had come in the form of 
Krishna and Balaraama. Then Kamsa ordered his troops to close in on them. But Krishna, in a 
trice, jumped on the platform where Kamsa was seated and rained severe blows on him till he 
dropped dead. 


After the death of Kamsa, Krishna and Balaraama went to the prison where Dhevaki and 
Vasudheva were confined, and freed them. Krishna reinstated Kamsa's father on the throne. 


Later Krishna went to Akruura's house. Akruura referred to the inexplicable ways of the Lord in 
His various incarnations and said that he was greatly blessed by Krishna's visit to his house. He 
hugged Krishna, who was well aware of Akruura's boundless devotion. 


Students should develop devotion to God, such as this. Whatever you do must be done as an 
offering to God; that in itself will be a penance to win the grace of God. 


Creation of Dhvaaraka city by Lord Krishna 
(From the discourse on 29-5-1995) 


People are generally hankering after academic education and worldly attainments, but forget the 
Super Power, who is the Basis for all knowledge and the entire cosmos. 


After Kamsa was killed, Nandha and Yashodha made arrangements for the education of Krishna 
and Balaraama in the traditional manner, by sending them to a Gurukul. In those days, even 
princes had to go to the aashram of a guru to study, and no distinction was made between the 
rich and the poor or high and low among students. Even though Krishna and Balaraama had 
exhibited superhuman powers in vanquishing Kamsa and other demons, they had to learn the 
regular lessons in Brahma Vidhya from sage Sandheepani, in his aashram in the forest. 


They had to go to the forest and gather firewood for the Guru's household. All the students had 
to share the work in the aashram among themselves equally without any distinction. At the end 
of the educational course the students used to give Gurudhakshina (offering to the preceptor). 
Krishna and Balaraama asked their preceptor what he would like them to give. The teacher, who 
was quite aware of the Divine powers of Krishna, told Him that since He was the incarnation of 
the Supreme, He could do anything, and so he would like to have his son, who had died some 
time earlier, restored to life, as his wife was very much attached to the son and was in great grief 
after his death. Krishna and Balaraama chanted some manthras and brought the Guru's son back 
to life. The Guru was immensely pleased and expressed his gratitude to Krishna and Balaraama. 


After they returned to their kingdom from the forest, Jaraasandha, the ruler of Magadha, who had 
given both his daughters in marriage to Kamsa, and bore a grudge against Krishna, invaded the 
Yaadhava kingdom and caused considerable destruction. Krishna's strategy was to weaken 
Jaraasandha after each encounter and finally destroy him. The followers of Jaraasandha 
harboured hatred towards Balaraama and Krishna and were harassing the Yaadhavas during 
yajnas. Krishna wanted to settle his people in a secure place. He had an island city constructed 
by Vishvakarma, the architect of the gods. That city was Dhvaaraka, a city of unmatched 
splendour and beauty. The Yaadhavas began to lead happy lives in the new place. 


Here, students must understand the difference between the Yaadhavas and the Gopikas. The 
Yaadhavas considered Krishna as their relative, and were proudly proclaiming Krishna as their 
own kinsman. Because of their pride, they finally perished in mutual strife after Krishna's exit 
from the world. In contrast, the Gopikas considered themselves as Krishna's worshippers, and 
were humble and devoted to the Divine. 


I conclude the series of discourses on the Bhaagavatham with a stirring appeal to students to 
learn the following lessons: 


e Students should learn humility and obedience and serve society. 


If you have God's Grace, you can progress fearlessly in the world. 
For this, faith in oneself or self-confidence is the foundation. 


You should cultivate Ekaathma-bhaava or oneness of the Aathma dwelling in all beings, 
as taught by Prahlaadha's example. 


Students should have determination, like Dhruva, to follow the righteous godly path. 
You should follow the discipline necessary to maintain the balance in life. 
Everything should be within limits, and excessive desires should be curbed. 


Following examples of great devotees as a guide, you should strive as exemplary 
individuals leading ideal lives. 


I want each one of you to grow into a strong, steady and straight 
person. Your eyes should not seek evil sights; your ears should not 
seek evil tales; your tongue should not seek evil speech; your 
bands should not seek evil acts; your minds should not seek evil 
thoughts. Be pure and be full of Love. Help those who are in a 
worse condition and serve those who need your help. 


BABA 


15. The quest for Aathma Jnaana 


THE universe is full of energy or power. The Divine power is all pervasive. Just as sugar is 
present in sweets, the divine is present in everything. That is why God is called the Rasa 
(essence) of everything in the Universe. Though the Divine is in everything and everywhere it is 
not easily cognisable. The seed sprouts and grows into a tree. The child grows into an adult. This 
is evidence of Divinity, which is the life force stimulating the growth. 


You enjoy the sight of the mighty mountains, the big rivers, the vast ocean and the dense forests. 
Who is the creator of all these beautiful manifestations in Nature? God is the basis for all these. 
Though it is not possible for most people to realise the existence of God as the eternal truth, yet a 
few have acquired this highest wisdom, the wisdom of the Aathma. Having experienced the 
Divine they have given to the world the bliss that they have enjoyed. 


Physical knowledge does not help you to march towards the goal of realisation, though it may 
make you a scholar. The Rishis did penance by way of spiritual saadhana to realise the Divinity 
within. 


There are certain qualities which are necessary to acquire Aathmik knowledge. One should 
adhere to truth, right conduct and have a spirit of selfless service. He should have the attitude of 
caring only for the welfare of humanity and strive to make them happy by serving them. The 
purpose of education is only to breed such good qualities. 


Education should foster human values 


Students should acquire spiritual knowledge along with secular knowledge. They should delight 
in the well-being of all creatures--"Sarvabhootha hithe rathah." They should also cultivate total 
awareness. Paripuurna Jnaanam (total knowledge) is essential to acquire the qualities of good 
conduct, unity and purity which leads to Divinity. Education should foster human values such as 
Truth and right conduct. 


Buddha taught that truth, right conduct and non-violence constituted the most sacred qualities. 
You consider Ahimsa as merely not hurting others. This is not the whole truth. Speaking too 
much, working too much, harping on the mistakes of others are all acts of himsa (violence) and 
should be avoided. These result in the wasting of energy, which causes harm to oneself. You 
must observe restraints in eating, talking, sleeping, working, and all actions in daily life. Human 
beings make attempts to know God. They are confused about the meaning of the words used in 
spiritual parlance, like Jeeva and Dheva, Aathma and Paramaathma (Divine Self and Supreme 
Self). Vedhaantha has explained these terms, but still they are not fully clear to many people. 
Unless you have the right attitude you cannot understand the Divine. God has been described as 
smaller than the smallest atom and bigger than the biggest thing in the Universe. Anu is Atom 
and signifies the Aathma. Anu is also Brahman (the Supreme Absolute). This Aathma is 
in every being, however tiny it might be. 


Divinity is the same in all 


For example, one may take water from the river Godhaavari in a small tumbler or a big vessel. 
Whatever the size of the container, the water is the same in taste and quality. If you understand 
this principle you can easily understand the truth that the minute atom and the mighty Universe 
contain the same Brahman. The divinity is the same in all. God is everywhere. 


Once a disciple asked a sage about this. The sage asked him to get a cup of water and some 
sugar. He asked the disciple to mix the sugar with the water. Then he could not see the sugar, 
which was dissolved in the water, nor could he feel the sugar with his hand. But he was sure he 
had himself put it in the water. In order to know the truth of its existence in water, he was asked 
to taste a little of that water when he could experience the sweetness of sugar. It was pervading 
in the entire quantity of water. 


In the cosmic context, the Aathma is the sugar which is present in every being. Just as sugar 
cannot be seen or felt while in water, you are not able to see or feel the Aathma. Sugar has-no 
form in the water. So also the Aathma or Paramaathma cannot be seen, but has to be 
experienced. This is cosmic consciousness and is infinite. It is in the form of consciousness in 
human beings. 


In the Geetha, Krishna says "Beejam maam Sarvaboothaa-naam" (I am the seed in all beings). 
The seed is Anu and the tree is Mahath. The Anu is contained in the tree and the tree is in the 
seed too. Divinity as the seed is there invisible under the earth and is also pervading externally in 
the tree, branches, leaves, flowers, etc. 


When you are asked: "Who are you?", you may first give your name. then your profession and 
address, etc. All these descriptions pertain only to the body and physical features. They are 
subject to change. You may change your name, profession and nationality. But the Aathmik 
principle in everyone is changeless and eternal. Things pertaining to the world are like rivers 
while the Divine is like the ocean. The moment rivers merge in the ocean they lose the names 
and forms. 


If you worship the mother you worship God 


You have to acquire Aathma Jnaana (knowledge of the Spirit) along with worldly knowledge. 
People refer to Brahma, Vishnu, Maheshvara. No one has seen their real forms. Brahma is the 
creator. The essence of creation is in everyone. The physical bodies of your parents have this 
essence and they are both the cause of your birth. They bring you up and protect you. This is 
their aspect of protection. If you worship the mother, you worship God. The child has to be given 
education and brought up properly. This is done by your father and so he is 'Vishnu' the 
sustainer. Maheshvara is a giver of boons. He grants boons easily as He did to Bhasmaasura, 
who immediately sought to use his power against Maheshvara himself. Power has to be used 
with discrimination. By respecting the teacher who imparts this discriminatory knowledge you 
respect Maheshvara. That is why the Vedhas declare "Treat the mother as God, the father as God 
and the Preceptor as God." This is the basis of Bhaaratheeya culture. 


A true son should seek the truth. He should not leave this pursuit for selfish reasons. That is why 
"Sathyvam vadha; Dharmam chara" (Speak the Truth; follow Righteousness) has been the sheet- 
anchor of Indian culture You should not sacrifice the truth for the sake of name and fame. You 
should have unshakable faith in the Divine. 


One should know the basis for whole creation 


Scientific knowledge is subject to continual change, while spiritual knowledge is changeless and 
will help you to realise the Eternal Truth. Today man does everything out of selfish motive to 
satisfy self-interest. The scriptures declare. "Dharma muulam Idham Jagath" (The whole cosmos 
is rooted in righteousness). This is the Truth. The planets, the sun, the moon and the stars are all 
moving in a set pattern according to their Dharma. You must understand this harmony and unity. 


In the world today there are more than 550 crores of people. Not one is identical with another. 
Who is the author of all this complex but orderly creation? It is difficult to comprehend the 
Creator. Scientists have explored a small part of creation. But they have made no attempt to 
understand the Creator. One should know the Muulaadhaara (the basis) for the whole of 
creation. 


Students should not waste time or energy in wrong pursuits. They should cultivate Sath sanga 
not in the worldly sense. Sath is a part of Sath-Chith-Aanandha, the attribute of the Divine. You 
must always internally be in the company of God, who is the embodiment of Bliss. Sath is Truth. 
Chith is Awareness and Aanandha is Bliss. The significance of this can be understood by a small 
example. Sweetness is the essence of God. We sing in the bhajan "Madhuraadhipathe 
Madhuram Madhuram" (Oh Lord of Mathura You are Sweet). Sugar is sweet. God is like Sugar. 
Sath 'may be compared to sugar. Chith can be compared to water, because it is everywhere. It is 
necessary for the sustenance of life whether one is a prince or a pauper. If you mix sugar and 
water you get syrup. Likewise the syrup of Aanandha comes out of the combination of Sath and 
Chith. 


Students! Always think of the Lord. Don't give room for selfishness. Engage yourself in service 
to humanity with a sense of sacrifice. This is the lesson you should learn from the ten-day course 
that you have attended now. 


You must understand that matter combined with energy is God. Make use of the things in the 
world with the awareness that it is all God's creation and you should be grateful to the Divine for 
everything. Have everything within limits, including your desire for comforts. Even the five 
elements should be used within limits. Otherwise they will spell danger. 


Students! Work for the peace and prosperity of society without selfish motives. You have to put 
these things into practice and shine as ideal students. 


Discourse in the Institute Auditorium at Brindhaavan on 30-5-1995. 


16. Health, diet and Divinity 


Not by penance, nor by baths in sacred waters, 
Nor by studying of Scriptures, nor by Japa 
Can the Ocean of worldly existence. 

The cycle of birth and death--be crossed. 

It can be done only by service to good people. 
(Sanskrith Shloka) 


MAN seeks to cross the ocean of Samsaara by penance, pilgrimages to sacred shrines, scriptural 
studies and exercises in meditation. But all these are of no avail without service to good people. 
All these spiritual exercise are comprehended by seva (service). 


For the achievement of the four Purushaarthas (main goals of life)--Dharma, Artha, Kaama, and 
Moksha (Righteousness, wealth, desire and Liberation), health is essential. Without good health a 
man cannot accomplish even the most trivial thing. Hence, health is wealth. However, because of 
the influence of the present Kali (evil). Age, man is a prey to all kinds of ailments and has no 
peace of mind despite the possession of every conceivable kind of wealth and comforts. There is 
no dearth of doctors. In spite of the availability of so many amenities, why is man afflicted with 
disease? Indeed, more than physical ailments, mental diseases are growing limitlessly. Mental 
sickness caused by tension and worry gives us so many bodily ailments. 


Man today is afflicted with discontent. As one set of desires are satisfied, other desires go on 
cropping up. If desires are reduced, contentment will grow. 


Moreover, because of the perversions of the Kali Age, the five basic elements--ether, air, fire, 
water and earth--are polluted. The water we drink is impure. The air we breathe is polluted. The 
food we consume is polluted. As a consequence the mind gets polluted. 


Understand the relationship between matter and mind 


Today man has to understand the true relationship between matter and mind. When one is asked 
about the mind, he says, "Don't mind." When he is asked about matter, he answers' "It doesn't 
matter." By this sort of casualness, man is failing to understand mind and matter. 


Only when man understands the nature of the mind can he recognise the true nature of 
humanness. What is the mind? It is not something negative. It is positive. It represents the power 
of the Aathma, the power of Sankalpa (Will). It can travel any amount of distance in space. It is 
capable of exploring the powers of the atom. The mind is capable of recognizing the truth that is 
valid for the three categories of Time--the past, the present and the future. The mind is therefore 
very essential in man's daily life. It is the source of all strength. Man today is indifferent to the 
importance and the powers of the mind. 


Search for happiness within yourself 


Man is seeking happiness from birth to death. The search starts with education. But education 
does not confer happiness. He desires a job, but that does not make him happy. He then seeks 
marriage as the means to happiness. Happiness eludes him because the wife claims equal rights. 
Then he declares' "My life is a total darkness." What is the reason for this feeling? It is the ego 


that is the cause. As a man grows, his egoism also grows. One after another, desires go on 
increasing. Their fulfilment does not bring him the happiness he seeks. 


Where is this Aanandha (bliss) to be found? It does not exist in material objects. It is not to be 
found in physical pleasures. The truth is man is the embodiment of bliss. He is searching for it 
outside himself. This is the mark of ignorance. When he is the embodiment of bliss, how can he 
secure bliss outside himself? 


Today, inspite of all his wealth, man is unhappy. He is perpetually racked by lack of peace. 
Devotees come here from all parts of the world. Each of them asks: "I want peace." Here are 
three words: "I", "want", "peace". "I" is ego. "Want" is desire. Remove the ego and desire, you 
will have peace. Ego and desire have enveloped peace. When the covering is removed, peace 
will manifest itself. 


Man can lead a blissful life only when he enjoys health. Wealth can offer comforts but not peace. 
Wealth can provide a multi-storyed mansion but not sound sleep. Wealth can provide bodily 
comforts, but physical comforts do not produce bliss. Air-conditioners and Dunlopillo mattresses 
may give comfort to the body. But when there is no peace of mind, of what use are these 
comforts? The body is like a water bubble, the mind is like a monkey; don't follow the body or 
the mind, follow the conscience. 


Man today is not following the conscience. He is sticking to the body and mind which are 
useless. He must enquire into the problem, "Who am I?" He will discover that the body; the 
senses and the mind are all the instruments and he is their master. The master has today become 
a Slave of his body and mind, which should be his servants. You are-the Soul. Make it the basis 
for all your actions. 


Realise the human values first 


Today man is forgetting his essential humanness. The first requisite is for man to realise human 
values: Truth, Righteousness, Peace and Love. For a bulb to burn, you need a connecting wire, a 
switch and electric current. For man, that current is Truth or God. It is energy. This divine energy 
has to flow through the wire of Dharma (Righteousness) reach the bulb of Shaanthi (Peace) and 
produce the light of! Prema (Love). Love is God. Live in Love. Love is everything.. Without 
love, life is a living death' for man. 


Love expresses itself in many forms in relation to different persons, but is essentially one. Today 
love is tainted by selfishness, whether in relation to the mother, the spouse or the children or 
others. Man's selfishness is polluting the entire society. Attachment to others is natural. But there 
should be a limit to it. When this limit is exceeded, it becomes a disease. This is true in every 
case. Because of man's excessive desires, he is prone to diseases of every kind. 


The most common source of illness among people today is tension. What is the cause of tension? 
It is indulgence in excesses of various kinds. Men must learn to moderate the hectic pace of 
living. Hurry causes worry and worry causes disease. "Hurry, worry and curry (fatty food)" are 
the causes of heart diseases. Therefore the first requirement is control of food and head (the 
mind). When you control these two, there will be no room for illness. 


Importance of the eye 


Today the new operation theatre has been inaugurated in our hospital. Doctors know that in the 
eye there are billions of cells which react to light rays. If any of these cells are affected, the 


vision is affected. For man the eye is the most important organ for comprehending the Universe. 
Hence the eye has to be regarded as a sacred instrument. You cannot change creation, but by 
changing your vision you can get the proper view of creation. 


Here is an illustration. Once there was a king, who developed an acute stomach trouble. All the 
medicines administered by doctors were of no avail. He then approached a great yogi, who told 
him that for his stomach ailment he had to treat the sight. He should see nothing but green 
everywhere. The yogi left and the king ordered that all places in his kingdom should be painted 
green. Sometime later, the yogi returned and found that people were engaged in splashing green 
paint everywhere. When asked for the reason, they told him that they were carrying out the 
King's orders. The yogi went to the king and told him that to see everything green, all that was 
needed for him was to wear green glasses. It was absurd to attempt to paint everything green. 


Similarly if we change our vision, we will experience peace. When people view the world with 
the vision of love, they will have peace. All diseases will be cured. Most diseases have their 
origin in the mind. Everything has a psychological basis. When a person feels that something is 
wrong with him, he develops an illness. A healthy mind is needed for a healthy body. But it is 
not enough to be physically healthy. Man needs Dhaiva-anugraham (God's grace) also. To 
acquire God's grace you have to cultivate the love of God. Love has become today a kind of 
show. Genuine love should emanate from the heart. Start the day with love, spend the day with 
love, end the day with love, that is the way to God. If you develop love, disease will not come 
near you. 


Realise the value of health 


I am 70 years now. I can see even an ant that is far away. It is not due to divine power. It is 
physical power. What is the reason? Diet control. My weight has remained the same for over 
sixty years---108 lbs only. Proper balance must be maintained throughout life. There must be 
balance in respect of knowledge and several other things. Students pollute their knowledge by 
seeing bad things, listening to bad things and by bad thoughts. Their minds are perverted by 
addiction to films. They should learn to lead pure lives. Only then will they experience bliss and 
health. 


Embodiments of the Divine! Realise the value of health. Self-restraint is essential to maintain 
health. Regulate your habits and develop good manners, which are the mark of a true man. 
Similarly the good devotee is one who does his duty. Duty is God. Everyone has to develop 
the manners required in daily life. The manners should be such that they confer self satisfaction. 
You should conduct yourself properly not for the sake of others but for your own sake. When 
there is self-satisfaction there will be self-realisation. For all these you must have self- 
confidence. Most people today have no confidence in themselves and are perpetually racked by 
doubts. In Jesus's time there was one 'Doubting Thomas.' But today all are 'Doubting Thomases.' 
Everyone is doubting every other. 


For every man two things are essential: Arogya (good health) and Aanandha (Happiness). Health 
for the body and bliss for the spirit. With these two wings you can soar to any height. You need 
both the things, for which you must secure God's grace. To get God's grace, you have to engage 
yourself in sacred action. Bear in mind the three P's--Purity, Patience and Perseverance. With 
these three you are bound to acquire good health and bliss. 


Bhagavaan's example 


You may believe it or not. But the truth is that these three are responsible for my Aarogya 
(health) and Aanandha (bliss). I am always happy. I would like to run but there is no place where 
I can do so. I can lift anybody at this age. This strength is present potentially in everyone. But it 
is being wasted. If the energy in everyone is properly conserved he can do anything. 


The Hospital here began in a small way with a single room. Over the years it was expanded. Dr. 
Rajeshwari, mother of Srinivas, (former Warden of Brindhaavan Hostel) worked hard to develop 
the hospital. She devoted all her earnings to the expansion of the hospital. She worked 
ceaselessly day and night. Ultimately she passed away in the hospital itself. The hospital was her 
home. 


Thereafter, Dr. Savithri has been carrying on the work. Savithri has been working tirelessly. She 
attends to everything herself. By her work for patients she is becoming a patient herself. She 
must take care of her health. Only when the doctor is healthy, the patients can be well cared for. 
As is the doctor so is the patient. Hence Savitri must take care of her own health. This is all the 
more necessary because the hospital is growing day by day. Srinivas is rendering every help for 
the hospital. There are others who are also serving the hospital in various ways. 


Free medical aid 


The Whitefield hospital which began in a single room, has now grown into a big complex. The 
doctors have to meet the growing demands on their services, The numbers of patients coming to 
the hospital are growing all the time. All services are totally free. Not a paisa is collected from 
the patients. Such free medical treatment is not given anywhere in the world. This applies to the 
Super Speciality Hospital in Prashaanthigram. Elsewhere hospitals have become big business. In 
fact, in every sphere commercialization is rampant. Education is a business, music is a business, 
health is a business. The whole world has become a market place. Welfare services should be 
free for all. There are numerous people who cannot afford the costs of medical treatment. 
Doctors should render free service to such persons. My words should not be misunderstood. 
Even in the earning of incomes there should be a limit. Many doctors lack determination. They 
join a hospital on a good salary. But after a month or so, when another hospital offers a higher 
salary they go over to the new hospital. How long are you likely to stay in the other hospital? 
When you go like this, you forfeit the confidence of hospital managements. Even workers 
behave in this way. They shift from place to place. The right thing is to stick to a job for three or 
four years. Then your work will secure automatic recognition. 


Doctors should inspire confidence in patients 


Doctors are obsessed with salaries. They should be more concerned about patients. When they 
concentrate on their patients, they will develop into excellent doctors. Inspire confidence in the 
patients. Then any medicine you give will work wonders. The patients will hail such a doctor as 
a "good doctor." A "good doctor" in due course becomes a "God doctor." "Vaidhyo Naaraayano 
harih," it is said. The doctor is Divinity itself. Doctors should render service in this spirit. 
Service is God. 


Very good work is being done in our hospital as well as elsewhere. Bhaarath would not be what 
it is without good people. Without meritorious people can the world experience light? There are 
good and bad people in the world. All should become good and develop into Godly men. The 


same Aathma is present in everyone. Doctors should look after the patients with the same care 
they would show to their kith and kin. Then all would experience equal happiness. 


Discourse at the Sri Sathya Sai Hospital, Whitefield on 3-6-1995. 


17. Significance of worship at the Lord’s Feet 


GOD is immanent in the entire cosmos like oil in sesame seed and butter in milk. Just as the 
seeds have to be crushed to get the oil and the milk has to be curdled and churned for getting 
butter, saadhana has to be done to realise God. Nine forms of devotion have been indicated in 
the Bhaagavatham. If one follows any of these paths, he can experience the Divine. 


Prior to the commencement of this meeting, the Jyothi (sacred lamp) was lit by Svaami. No other 
thing signifies divinity as this sacred effulgent flame. It always goes upward. It can be kept 
anywhere. Everywhere it is lit it dispels darkness. Since ancient times the people of Bhaarath 
have been observing the sacred custom of lighting a lamp at the commencement of any 
auspicious ceremony. They have been worshipping the jyothi as it dispels darkness and is a 
symbol of the effulgence of wisdom. Such a sacred custom, which is immemorial part of Indian 
culture, is ignored today. People indulge in practices which are contrary to such traditions. If you 
understand the significance of this custom and the spirit behind the lighting of the lamp, you can 
understand Divinity. 


In order to light the jyothi you need four things - a container, oil, wick and a match-stick (fire) to 
light it. For dispelling the darkness outside, you need these four. Similarly for dispelling the 
darkness within you, you need the Jyothi of Wisdom. Raavana was a highly learned person, who 
had mastered all the Vedhas and Vedhaangas (ancient sacred texts). In spite of such erudition his 
heart was in pitch darkness (plunged in lust). This brought about his downfall. His son, Indhrajit, 
was also very powerful and was noted for his valour and his capacity to wield missiles charged 
with the power of Manthras. But these were of no avail against the power of the Divine. 
Likewise, Hiranyakashipu, who had mastery over the elements, was a victim of his ego. 


Inner purity is the greatest wealth 


Only by the light of the Divine lamp inside can you blossom as a worthwhile person. Inner purity 
is the greatest wealth that one can acquire. The inner purity is the wick in the container of the 
heart. Devotion is the oil and Divine Grace is the fire with which the lamp of wisdom can be lit. 
The prime requisite for achieving Divine Grace is to have harmony in thought, word and deed. 
The Lord has inscrutable ways when He wishes to protect His devotees. An incident in the 
Mahaabhaaratha can be described to prove this, in which Krishna made Dhraupadhi fall at the 
feet of Bheeshma and secure his blessings for saving the Paandavas from the pledge Bheeshma 
had taken to kill the Paandavas or die in battle the next day. Bheeshma lost the fight stricken by 
Arjuna's arrows. 


One cannot apprehend the ways of Divinity. It is only by unsullied devotion and adherence to 
Truth that one can realise God, who is embodiment of Love and Truth. If you follow truth you 
can sanctify your life. 


To earn the grace of the Divine, the easy way is surrendering at the Feet of the Lord. The feet, 
which were washed by Brahma, the creator, the feet which were worshipped by Bharatha 
through Raama's sandals, which ruled the kingdom of Ayodhya for 14 years, should be your 
object of worship. 


Real significance of the feet 


There is so much power in the feet of the Lord which you cannot understand. The feet form the 
basis for not only the physical frame of the body; but also for spiritual and ethical purposes. The 


significance of each limb of the body is explained in Vedhaantha. The five senses of the body. 
represent the five elements (sound is ether, touch is air, vision is fire, taste is water and smell is 
earth). In the Purusha Shuktha the body of the Divine is described in detail. The four varnas in 
society are represented by four parts of the Cosmic Person Brahmanas, Kshathriyas, Vaishyas 
and Shuudhras (the working class). It is the feet that support the entire body, comprising the 
other three classes. So the feet are an important part of the body. The real significance of the feet 
is not properly understood by all. The Vedhas proclaim the unity of all classes of people by 
describing them as limb of one body. The Vedhas declare that "“Ekaathma Sarvabhuutha 
antharaathma" (same Aathma is present in all beings). 


The Vedhas proclaim the importance of the feet. Even in ordinary life we advise a person who 
has harmed another to fall at the latter's feet and beg his pardon to escape legal action. There is a 
close link between the different parts of the body. When one walks on the road if the eye sees a 
thorn, the legs avoid trading on it. When the foot is injured, the eye sheds tears. There is such 
close co-ordination in the physical body. Similarly in the body of the Divine, the Brahmanas, 
Kshathriyas, Vaishyas and Shuudhras form an integral part. If a Shuudhra is in trouble, the 
Brahmana should be concerned. When such feelings develop in the world, there will be peace 
and harmony in society. Everyone should realise this and foster unity. 


Do all saadhanas with purity of heart 


Embodiments of love! The Prema thathva (Love Principle) is within you. What you are 
practising now as love is not real love. It is only affection out of Anuraaga (attachment to the 
body). Real love is unchanging. The feeling of love to the Divine is real devotion 'emanating 
from the heart. 


You are doing a lot of saadhana. You should do this with purity of heart. The greatest saadhana 
will be chanting the Name of the Lord and doing service to one’s fellow beings, who are the 
embodiments of the same Aathma that is in you. Whatever you do, do it as an offering to the 
Divine. What is the use of sending thousands of rupees and carrying the Paadhukas (divine 
sandals) if you do not understand their inner significance and have purity of heart? The external 
objects serve as symbols for beginners, just as a child learns words with the help of pictures. 
After understanding the significance, you must concentrate on Divinity without external aids 
such as these Paadhukas. 


Worship the Paadhukas thinking all the while of the Lord's Form. Develop Love of God and 
share it with all. 


Discourse on the evening of 8-7-1995 at Sai Kulwanth Mandap, Prashaanthi Mandhir. 


We are flowers of the same creepers. Our minds are the flowers 
that grow on the creeper of the heart. The flowers may be different 
but the creeper is the same. We are the children of the same race! 
We all belong to the race of humanity but not to the race of birds 
and beasts. Since we belong to the illustrious race of humanity, we 
must conduct ourselves in a sublime manner; we are waves, born 
in the ocean of Sathchithaanandha. Since we are born of the same 


race, we should radiate the oneness of humanity without 
harbouring hatred against any one. 


BABA 


18. Manifest Divine Qualities 


Why should one be born at all on earth 

If he will not lift his hands in prayer to Siva, 

Chant the name of Hari with his tongue, 

And is not filled with compassion and love for Truth? 
He is a curse for the mother who bore him. 


This is a poem by Pothana. It was blossoming from the flowers of his heart. It is the essence of 
the three yogas (Karma, Jnaana and Bhakthi). It signifies the Karma-thraya (the three-fold 
action) in thought, word and deed. It shows the royal path to Liberation. 


"Chethulaaranga Shivuni Puujinchadeni" (If one will not worship Shiva with his hands) refers to 
the Karma-maarga, the path of action. This is the first among the three yogas expounded in the 
Upanishaths. This is the first chapter in the Bhagavath Geetha. 


"Noru novvanga hari Keerthi nuduvadeni" (If one will not chant the glories of Hari with his 
tongue) refers to the second step. This is the Bhakthi yoga preached in the Vedhas and the 
Upanishaths. This is the Bhakthi yoga extolled in the Geetha. 


"Dayayu Sathyamu thaa thanuvedeni" (If he does not cherish compassion and Truth) refers to the 
primary duty of man to cherish in thought, word and deed, truth and compassion. 


Only he is a true man who has all three qualities. The Upanishaths define man as one who has 
full faith. Today, people instead of adhering to this sacred path, are ruining their precious human 
life by taking to wrong ways. 


True ornaments of man 


"Truth is the ornament for the neck." "Charity is the ornament for the hand." "Listening to sacred 
scriptures is the ornament for the ears." What other ornaments does a man need if he had these 
three? So says a Sanskrith saying. 


The ornaments which people wear today are a source of fear. But if the ornaments of truth, 
charity, and listening to sacred discourses are worn, there is no cause for fear. This is called 
Abhaya (fearlessness). The most important element in man's existence is sankalpa (firm 
thought). As are the 'thoughts, so is the speech. As is the speech so are the actions. The harmony 
of these three will lead to the experience of Divinity. Words come out of the heart. They should 
be filled with compassion. The heart is the abode of compassion. It is the source of' love. Hence 
whatever emanates from the heart should be filled with love. That love should express itself in 
speech. The flow of love in speech should find concrete expression in action. 


The heart is the seat of the Paramaathma (Supreme Self). The Ganga that flows from it is the 
river of Truth. Actions are the harvest that is reaped from the field watered by Truth. Hence, it is 
said that the high-souled beings are marked by harmony in thought, word and deed. 
Unfortunately, today people think in one way, speak in another way and act differently. As a 
result, humanness has been degraded today. To raise it to its proper level, the triune unity of 
thought, word and deed is essential. This is the penance for our times. This is the means to 
realise peace. This is the truth. This is everything. 


Manifest Divine qualities 


The cosmos was born out of Truth and merges in Truth. This is the Truth that is a manifestation. 
God is Truth. The human form is an expression of the Divine. Having emanated from the Divine, 
man should manifest his Divine origin by manifesting his inherent divine qualities. But, man is 
behaving in a demonic manner. 


Man has to rise above the animal nature. He has to express his divine potencies. For this, man 
has to acquire Aathmik knowledge (Knowledge of the Divine Self). Aathma is the all-pervading 
Universal Consciousness. It is immanent in everyone. Only as along as this consciousness is 
present in the human body it is called Shivam. Once the consciousness leaves the body it 
becomes Shavam (a corpse). 


To experience the Divine within you all you have to do is to dedicate all your actions to the 
Divine. No other spiritual exercise is necessary. This does not mean you should give up other 
forms of worship like japa. The basic equipment is that whatever spiritual exercise is done it 
should be performed whole-heartedly, with full concentration. 


For instance, we have Likhitha Japa. (Bundles of notebooks in which devotees had written the 
name of the Lord thousands of times had earlier been placed at the Lotus Feet of Bhagavaan). 
Today people write the names without thinking aloud the name of the Lord in their minds and 
uttering the names with their mouths. As you start writing the Name, you must first reflect on the 
Name in the mind and utter the Name by the mouth, and then write the name with your hand, 
This is Likhitha japa, the penance of writing the Lord's name. Some people, to complete the 
writing of the name a crore of times, resort to devices like using carbon paper to multiply the 
number of names written or cyclostyling what they have written once. This cannot be described 
as Likhitha Japa. The name should get inscribed in the heart. It then becomes a kind of negative 
from which any number of prints can be taken. 


Dedicate all deeds to God 


Whatever you do, deem it as God's work. This can be applied to every ordinary act in daily life, 
whether it is sweeping the floor, or preparing chappathis or cutting vegetables. Everyone of these 
acts can be turned into a spiritual exercise by the spirit in which you do it. To perform every act 
as an offering to the Divine is true devotion. 


India and the world are today suffering from disorder and violence because people have lost 
Aathma-Vishvaasa (faith in the Self). They are fostering attachment to the body and ignoring the 
Spirit. Man should not follow the senses which are wayward, the body which is perishable, or the 
mind which is fickle. He must follow the conscience, which tells him what is right or wrong. 


From ancient times, Bhaaratheeyas have adhered to the four goals of human life: Dharma, Artha, 
Kaama and Moksha (Righteousness, wealth, desire and Liberation). But all the goals were linked 
to Dharma (Righteousness). Wealth should be acquired by righteous means. Desires should be 
related to what is righteousness. When wealth and desires are associated with Dharma, Moksha 
(Liberation) is easily attained. 


"Go back to your source" 


Many devotees come to Svaami and pray to Svaami to show them the way. What is it that is to 
be shown to them? I tell them, "You crazy ones! There is no need for any new path for you. You 
go back by the way you came. You came from the Aathma. You go back to the Aathma." 


Here you have come from your respective places. You may spend a few hours or a few days here 
You will then return to your homes. You go on pilgrimages. But whatever places you may visit 
ultimately you return to your Svasthaanam (native place). The true Svasthaanam is the Abode of 
the Spirit---Sva + Sthaanam. People who are not aware of the spiritual basis of life take to wrong 
courses. 


Embodiments of love! Undergoing many hardships, you have come here out of your devotion and 
faith to experience the bliss of staying here in spite of many inconveniences. You 'must carry 
with you the same blissful feelings when you go back to your homes. Today each of you is 
experiencing separately. But when you go back, by recalling this experience you feel the 
presence of all the others in your hearts. 


Install the Divine in your hearts and carry on your duties with devotion and dedication. 
Remember the ultimate message of Vyaasa that the whole purpose of life is to render help to 
others and avoid the sin of doing harm to others. 


Righteousness dwells in your heart 


Shri Narayana Rao (who had spoken earlier) urged that Righteousness should grow in the world. 
Where is this Righteousness? It is in your conduct, your thoughts, words and deeds. 
Righteousness dwells in your heart. When the impulses arising from the heart are expressed in 
words, that is Sathya. To put into action your words is Dharma. For all these Love is primary. 
Love in action is Righteousness. Love in speech is Truth. Love in thought is Peace. Love in 
understanding is Non-violence. 


When you realise that God is in everyone, you will practise non-violence. God is one, though He 
may be worshipped in different forms and under different names. You may call him Raama or 
Krishna, Allah or Jesus, Hari or Saayee. Any Name can be uttered by any one. 


Embodiments of love! If you want to transform the world, to promote all-round prosperity in the 
country, to make the prayer that "all people should be happy" become a reality, develop faith in 
the Self. Never forget God. Without God there is no universe. Let the non-believers have their 
way. But they have no right to question the beliefs of others. To ask for physical proofs of the 
existence of experience like bliss or love or for subtle things like the fragrance of a flower is 
impracticable. To deny the reality of love on the ground that it has no recognizable form is 
meaningless. Love may have no form. But the mother who exhibits love has a form. 


All beings are manifestations of the Cosmic Divine. The forms are different but the spirit that 
animates them all is One, like the current that illumines bulbs of different colours and wattage. 
Cultivate this feeling of oneness and do not be critical of any faith or religion. Dedicate your 
lives to the service of your fellow-beings. Thereby you will be redeeming your lives. 


Discourse in Prashaanthi Mandhir on the morning of 9-7-1995. 


Take up the Name of God, any of the innumerable ones, any that 
appeals to you most and the form appropriate to that Name and 
start repeating it. From now on, that is the Royal road to ensure 
joy and peace, that will train you in the feeling of brotherhood and 
remove enmity towards fellowmen. 


BABA 


19. Acquire friendship of God 


Destroying pride man becomes endearing; 
Destroying anger man gets rid of sorrow; 
Destroying desire man acquires peace; 
Destroying greed man achieves happiness. 


EMBODIMENTS of Love! As long as man is filled with arrogance, he cannot win any kind of 
respect from others. Egoism brings about a man's ruin. Only when a man gets rid of pride the 
people respect and love him. The first requisite for securing the esteem and love of the people is 
to root out Ahamkaara (self-conceit). 


The second is Krodham (anger). A man consumed by anger can never be free from misery. 
Anger catries with it a blazing fire Anger is also described as Krodhaagni, (the fire of anger). As 
long as one is consumed by the fire, he cannot have happiness. To get freedom from misery, man 
has to get rid of anger. Anger is also the cause of depravity in man. It ruins him in various ways. 
It alienates him from his kith and kin. 


For the decline in human qualities today, pride and anger are primarily responsible. The third 
enemy of man pervades his entire being. It is insatiable desire. Man's entire life is filled with 
desires which are endless and ever mounting. Man can achieve peace of mind only by the 
conquest of Kaama (desire). 


The fourth enemy is greed or miserliness. When man overcomes greed, he can secure happiness. 
A greedy man cannot enjoy bodily; mental or spiritual happiness. The miser is like the dog in the 
manger. He neither enjoys his wealth, nor does he allow others to enjoy it. The world despises a 
miser. 


Only when man gets rid of these four undesirable qualities can he experience peace and 
happiness. These four vices have no place in a true human being. 


Human heart should be filled with compassion 


Man is the very embodiment of the Divine. This Divine Will is termed Prakrithi (the cosmos). In 
every human being the Divine Will is present. Man has taken birth to give expression to the Will 
of the Divine. The human heart should be an ocean of milk filled with compassion. The heart, in 
the core of which there should be this milk of compassion, is today filled with the four evil 
qualities. 


The ancient sages had a vision of the Supreme Lord Vishnu reclining on the Ksheerasaagara 
(Ocean of Milk) and adored Him in that form. And this was how Saint Thyaagaraaja described 
the Lord in his famous song beginning with the words: "Ksheera-saagara shayana!" (Oh Lord 
reclining on the Ocean of Milk). (Svaami sang some lines from the song). 


What is this Ocean of Milk? Is it anywhere on earth? On this mundane world with its material 
concerns, you cannot perceive this Ocean of Milk. Nevertheless, it exists. Where? In every 
human heart. In this heart Lord Sriman Naaraayana is resting. This is the reason why the Lord is 
described as Hridhayavaasi (the Dweller in the Heart). Every human heart is a shrine of God, In 
the Ocean of Milk in such a heart, no room should be given for crocodiles and whales in the form 
of evil qualities to dwell. Unfortunately, because of the influence of the Kali Age, the Ocean of 


Milk in the human heart has been turned into a Kshaarasaagaram (Ocean of brine)-in which 
attachment and hatred dwell as crocodiles and whales. The salt in this Ocean is of man's making. 


Today cities like Madras and Bombay are close to the sea. But can they make use of its water? 
No. Because it is saline. 


Deities and demons in daily life 


The ancient sages used to pray: "Oh gods, we welcome you. Oh Raakshasas (demons), depart 
from us." Who are these gods? These deities are' good thoughts, good feelings, good behaviour. 
The sages prayed that such celestial beings should enter their minds. The demons whom they 
wanted to get rid of are evil thoughts, bad feelings and bad actions. This is an example for every 
one to follow in daily life. 


In daily life, we consume good things and eschew bad things. We consume good food and 
defecate what is not wholesome. This is a basic principle. You must give up the bad to provide 
room for the intake of what is good. This is the lesson from everyone's daily experience. 


Unfortunately today men give up what is wholesome and take what is harmful. That is, they are 
taking in the bad and giving up the good. It is this which accounts for the prevalence of disorder 
and misery in the world today. Hence, the first need is to cultivate good qualities. Bad thoughts 
and bad habits have to be cast away. Not recognizing this truth, man makes himself a prey to 
misery and discontent. Can you say that this misery and worry were caused by Providence? Not 
at all. You own bad thoughts and actions are the cause of your misery. As you sow, so shall you- 
reap. The seed determines the fruit. When man cherishes bad thoughts, 'bad results haunt him. 
When he has good thoughts, the results are also good. 


Do not blame God for your grief 


'Those who do not recognise this fact, go about blaming God. They lament: "Oh God! Why are 
you inflicting these miseries on me? Why are you denying, me peace of mind?" God is the 
Eternal Witness. He is the dispenser of the fruits of actions. He gives you according to your 
deserts. He is in no way responsible for your grief’ or happiness. (Svaami sang a ballad which 
pointed out that a man sows a poisonous seed, while desiring sweet fruits. Unable to eat the 
poisonous fruit he blames God). This is the product of ignorance. It is opposed to the sacredness 
of human life. 


Man's first duty is to practise good conduct. Such good conduct can ensue only from the 
contemplation of God. People must nourish sacred thoughts about the Divine in their hearts. This 
is not something which can be got from someone or somewhere outside you. It is within you. 
The Divine is present within you. 


Those who experience this Presence within them can experience a joy that is indescribable, 
wherever they may be. It is not enough if you are here. You must realise the sweetness of your 
presence here. A frog that is close to a lotus is totally unaware of its nectarine honey. But a bee 
comes from afar and drinks the honey. 


People should realise that time is fleeting and one's life span is melting away every moment like 
a block of ice. Man is nearing his end even before he realises his primary duty. What is that 
duty? It is to discover the purpose of life. Man seeks wealth, comforts, position and happiness. 
How are these to be got? Moving away from God's grace, man seeks all these kinds of worldly 
happiness. Of what avail are these transient physical pleasures? Thyaagaraaja sought to know 


wherein lay real happiness. Is it in wealth or is it in the service of Lord Raama? If one is blessed 
with God's grace, what more does he need? 


Practise sacred impulses to experience the bliss within 


Hence, seek God's grace at the outset. Does real happiness lie in enjoying creature comforts? No. 
True happiness consists in manifesting all the potentialities in man. When you put into practice 
all the sacred thoughts that emanate from your mind you will realise true happiness. Most people 
do not practise the sacred impulses that arise in them with the result that they do not experience 
the bliss within them. 


Embodiments of Love! The most important thing you have to recognise is that your heart is a 
Ksheerasaagaram (Ocean of Milk). But because of the invasion of bad thoughts and feelings, 
your humanness is vitiated. Humanness consists in harmony of thought, word and deed. 


Your freedom is subject to the norms of society 


Today devotees have come here from all parts of the world. Whatever your dress, your 
education, your habits, each of you has to realise one supreme fact. You are a member of society 
and as such you have to respect the social norms. You cannot behave as you please. All your 
actions have to be in accordance with the obligations to society. Your freedom is subject to the 
norms of society. 


Society does not mean a large group of persons. Relationship with any other person is governed 
by social obligations which limit your freedom. Your right to wield the stick in your hand in a 
public place is limited by the right of others to use the public places. Your freedom is subject to 
your duty towards other fellow-beings. 


Moreover, Svathanthram (freedom) has to be construed in the correct way. Svathanthram 
consists of the two terms: Sva and thanthram. Sva means the Spirit. Svathanthram means acting 
according to the dictates of the Spirit. The Spirit will never cause harm to others. It is the Eternal 
Witness present in everyone and desires the welfare of one and all. Hence Svathanthra or real 
freedom is related to the Divine Will. 


Duty is related to one's obligations to society. Freedom is related to expressing the Will of the 
Divine. The Prakrithi (phenomenal world) is a projection of the Divine. Hence, it should be 
regarded as holy. Duty means recognizing the sacredness of one's obligations to Prakrithi. Each 
one must recognise that he (or she) is an image of the Divine and conduct himself on that basis. 
He alone is a real man who lives his life in this way. 


Deeming the physical body alone as real, man goes after worldly objects and ultimately ends up 
in misery. Man must take to the spiritual path. This means that one should recognise the entire 
cosmos as an image, of the Divine. Once one has this conviction, evil can never approach him. 
He experiences bliss at all times and everywhere. He desires that all should be happy. 


Unfortunately, most people today do not cultivate such a. broad feeling. They are immersed in 
concerns about themselves and their family, They should transcend these narrow feelings and 
have regard for society as a whole. They should deem service to society as service to God. 


The illness and the remedy 


The overseas devotees who have come here are affluent people. Why have they come here? They 
are like patients who go to a hospital for their ailments. All of them suffer from some kind of 


illness or other, mental or physical. All are victims of some kind of mental illness. They have all. 
come for the medicine of peace, joy, and happiness. Wherefrom is this peace to be got? It 
cannot be got from outside. It is within oneself. The disease has arisen within because of bad 
qualities. Every person’s physical, mental and spiritual health is mined by bad qualities, bad 
thoughts and bad feelings. Hence, cultivate good thoughts, good feelings and good attitudes 
Expel every bad thought as it arises in the mind. 


You cannot relish food that is not tasty. Should you not to impart sweet taste to your life which 
spans several decades? How to impart that taste? By constant contemplation on God. Life is 
made tasty by good thoughts and good actions. All those who wish to pursue the spiritual path 
must begin with getting rid of bad thoughts and bad practices and start transforming their lives. 


People ask: "How are we to cultivate a broad attitude?" The answer is: "Get rid of the artificial 
barriers you have raised between yourself and others." These barriers create narrow and limited 
loyalties and prevent you from enjoying an all-embracing bliss. Enlarge your horizon. Expand! 
your vision. This is the true, spiritual exercise for you. 


Devotion of overseas artists 


During the past three days, devotees from many countries have presented a blissful programme 
of the kind which cannot be seen anywhere else in the world. They would not have come on the 
invitation of any government. Even if they had come, you would not have experienced the kind 
of bliss you have enjoyed here. This is an example of the relationship between an object and its 
image. It is because of the bliss within the artists, they could generate that bliss in the audience. 
They have come from their respective countries filled with devotion and in their singing and 
dance they completely forgot themselves. This kind of performance would not be possible by 
artists who expect rewards. The devotees did not come merely with art, but they came with their 
hearts. Their "art" is filled with "heart." 


Some of them were oblivious to their bodies in the performances. They were forgetful of their 
native countries--whether Russia, or America, or' Germany, or Africa. This is real Samaadhi (the 
state of spiritual ecstasy). Samaadhi is not falling into a trance or some state of unconsciousness. 
These may be caused by hysteria or antic of the imagination. 


Samaadhi means equal-mindedness, forgetting the body consciousness and being immersed in 
Aanandha (bliss). These devotees demonstrated this Samaadhi and shared their bliss with 
thousands of others. Not only did they experience this bliss themselves, but they shared it with 
all. Can there be a greater thapas (penance) than this? What greater Saadhana do you need? 
"Udahareth Aathmanaa-Aathmaanam," says the Upanishath--Raise yourself and share that 
experience with others. 


Adherence to tradition by overseas artists 


Those artists have been strictly adhering to the artistic traditions of their respective countries. In 
the Japanese dance yesterday, the priest (an old man) appeared to be shivering. He has all the 
strength, but when approaching the shrine and nearing the Emperor he displays extreme humility 
and reverence. They practise such supreme humility. Economically and technologically Japan is 
a highly advanced country. But see what humility and discipline they display! 


Look at the Russians. Among Russians, there is a tendency to "rush." But what complete self- 
forgetfulness was displayed by the lady while she sang and danced? What ecstasy in her heart 
made her experience such joy? She was completely lost in her song and dance. 


No one can tell what kind of experience one can have in a certain place at a certain time and in a 
certain situation. Altogether, what transformation has taken place in all those who came for the 
Global Festival! They came for the first time. But the transformation that has taken place in them 
cannot be seen in many who have been coming here for years and years. Many of you have 
listened to countless discourses and have read a lot of books. But, what is the change in you? 
None at all. You have remained where you are. If we examine further, many seem to have gone 
back rather than going forward. Hence, devotees should strive to put into practice at least a 
fraction of what they have seen and heard. 


The lives of these overseas devotees appear exemplary. Though they have learnt little, the joy 
they derive from it is great. This is what is great about them. There are many here who know a 
great deal, but who practise very little of it. 


Every devotee must aspire for friendship towards God 


Of what use is all the reading of scriptures and epics? Very little of it is put into practice. The 
overseas devotees know only a few things. An American artist declared’ "Baba is my great 
friend." This means that he had developed this friendly attitude even before coming here. How 
did he accomplish? Friendship towards the Lord is one of the nine forms of devotion. Starting 
with listening to the glory of the Lord, friendship forms the penultimate stage before Aathma- 
nivedhanam (utter self-surrender to the Lord). Every devotee must aspire to reach the stage of 
sneham (friendship). What kind of friendship is it? It is not something new. It is an old 
friendship. Only such friendship can bring about familiarity and intimacy with the Lord. You 
maintain formal relations with a friend, But, because God is an ancient friend, the devotee can 
experience an unrestrained intimacy. When you recognise this truth, you can behave with natural 
ease and freedom towards God. You are free to confess your lapses to such a friend. You have to 
receive His counsel. You can then get your heart purified. Offering your sullied heart to the Lord 
is like presenting a soiled currency note to the Reserve Bank for getting a new one. A note which 
is not acceptable to others will be accepted by the Reserve Bank. Only God can accept it and 
replace it with a new one. Therefore, offer all your bad qualities to God and receive from Him all 
good qualities. Don't pass on your bad qualities to others. 


You have to offer yourself to God 


What is that you have to offer to God? Not a leaf, a flower, a fruit or holy water. You have to 
offer yourself to God. Then you become one with the Divine. That is what God desires from you. 
Instead of realising this sublime truth people seek to offer their hair to Sri Venkateshvara to 
secure petty favours. What is it that Lord Venkateshvara lacks? Does the Lord need your 
overgrown hair? What is it the Lord needs? On the top of the head you have dark hair. That 
represents the Thamo-guna--the quality of lethargy and ignorance. Those who go to Thirupathi 
should offer to God their Thamoguna and acquire the Sathva-guna. Realise that there is nothing 
of ours that you can offer to God. All you enjoy is from Him. Develop this conviction. Treat 
whatever good or bad that happens to you as coming from God. What you deem as bad may be 
like a bitter medicine prescribed by a doctor for your good. Consider all that happens, good or ill, 
pleasure or pain, is for our good. Only then you will be able to nourish your good qualities. 


Embodiments of love! Wherever you may be, in whatever condition, consider your hearts as an 
Ocean of Milk, the abode of God. God is omnipresent. When you lead your life with this faith, 
there is nothing greater than this. The overseas devotees who were here during the past three 


days have converted their hearts into the Ocean of Milk and invited the Lord to recline on it. The 
other devotees should learn from them. 


The world will come to Sai 


Do not consider Sai Baba as a mere figure five feet three inches tall. His Presence will be felt all 
over the world. Wait and see. In a few days the entire world will come here. Therefore, at least 
from now on make the best use of the opportunity that has come to you and strive to redeem your 
lives. Because of proximity, you have tended to take me for granted. Yashodha was similarly 
misled about the true nature of Krishna and could not understand why He preferred the butter 
kept by the Gopikas to the butter offered by her. Krishna could be bound only by the rope of 
devotion. Yashodha had material affection but not the intense devotion of the Gopikas. The sense 
of dualism should go and there should be total identification with the Divine. 


On this holy occasion devotees from many countries have delighted every one here by their 
presentation of the artistic culture of their respective countries. Wherever you may go do not give 
up your traditional culture. Devotees from outside who come here adhere to their culture. But 
Bhaaratheeyas going abroad forget their ancient culture. What is worse, they even forget their 
mother tongue. After years spent in Bhaarath, within a short spell of stay in the United States 
they get addicted to the American language. When I ask in Thelugu young people who return 
after a short-stay in the U.S. what they are doing there, they say: "I don't know Thelugu," What is 
it that you have learnt? If you have forgotten your mother tongue, are you likely to remember 
your mother? 


Nations are many but the earth is one 


Raama declared: "The mother and the Motherland are greater than Heaven itself." Therefore, 
wherever you may go, do not forget your ancient traditions. This is relevant to people of all 
countries. At the same time, unity should be cultivated. "Nations are many, the earth is one. 
Beings are many, but breath is one." This truth has to be recognized. All the resources of Nature 
like air are available to all irrespective of nationality or creed or race. This is the unity in 
diversity that has to be realised, Out of unity comes purity. All should seek to live as brothers 
and sisters. No one should criticise any nation, faith or culture. When you cultivate this broad 
outlook, your culture will be respected by others. It is this spirit of unity that the world needs 
today. 


If Bhaaratheeyas forget their culture they will be guilty of spiritual betrayal. See how the Chinese 
(from Malaysia) performed their unique dances. The young lads had such intense dedication to 
their culture. Indians going abroad tend to decry their traditional culture as superstition. Once 
Prof. Max Mueller, attempting to get the meaning of Vedhik passage from an Indian I.C.S. 
trainee who gave his name as Chathurvedhi, found that he was totally ignorant of the Vedhas and 
had no respect for them. Prof. Max Mueller was sad that one born in India, with the name 
Chathurvedhi, should have so little regard for the Vedhas. 


Bhaaratheeyas should realise what great respect is being shown by foreigners to our culture and 
spiritual heritage. The nation is going down morally and spiritually. The first need is to cultivate 
self-respect. Everyone should uphold the name and fame of Bhaarath. For this, they should have 
respect for the Vedhas and try to acquire the same knowledge of the Vedhas. To say the least, 
they should at least regard God as the indweller of the heart. 


Embodiments of love! Cherish the heart as the temple of God and try to keep it pure and 
unsullied. Chant the name of the Lord to drive away all evil thoughts and impulses. 


Discourse in Sai Kulwant Bhavan, Prashaanthi Nilayam on 11-7-1995,. 


The greatest instrument by which success can be ensured for all 
your efforts is Bhakthi. That will give health, wealth and prosperity 
too, for it will eliminate hatred and faction and give more power to 
your elbow when you plough the land. 


BABA 


20. The Divine dispeller of darkness 


The human body, constituted by the five elements 
is the combined product of the five elements. 
These five elements are derived from the Divine. 
But man to-day is not aware of the 
truth about these elements. 
Man can accomplish many things in this world: 
he can be a great scholar, a great warrior, 
A ruler of rulers, a great astronomer 
or an astronaut on the moon, 
But can he control his senses and 
make his mind tranquil and steady? 
Neither charity, nor yajna, 
nor thapas, nor wisdom, 
Nor the practice of ancient Dharma, 
nor adherence to truth or any discipline 
Will be of any avail without self-control. 


EMBODIMENTS of the Divine Aathma! Water is getting scarcer every day. What is the reason? 
because of the decline of morality among men water is getting scarce in the world. For human 
life morality is the life breath. Morality makes humanness blossom. Because morals have been 
lost, water is getting scarce. 


Today people are propagating Vedhaantha (philosophy) in various ways. This propaganda is 
exciting the minds of the people. It is perturbing the hearts of people. Life is filled with doubts. 
Man today does not require a siddhaantham (ideology). He needs sense-control. Without control 
of the senses, a man cannot become spiritual. This was proclaimed by saint Thyaagaraaja in his 
song wherein he said that without peace of the Spirit there can be no happiness for any one, 
whether he is a Vedhaanthik scholar or an aspirant. Only through self-control can a man 
experience peace. But man is engaged in a futile search for something he does not know. The 
world is full of such aimless seekers. They are forgetting the Eternal reality in the concern for 
transient worldly objects. 


Lead lives inspired by sheelam and thyaaga 


Man today is dominated by selfishness. Insatiable desire fills his whole being. The numbers of 
such persons are growing without limit. How can they achieve anything great in life? Their daily 
round of activities consists of reading newspapers, watching video programmes and listening to 
the radio. Every moment their attachment to castes, creed and parochial interests is growing. 


Men today must learn to lead lives inspired by sheelam arid thyaaga (morality and sacrifice). 
Human relationships today are governed by friendship or enmity. The cause for either feeling is 
the mind. Hatred is bred by each one's thoughts. This may be seen from the hatred of Raavana 
towards Raama, of Shishupaala and Dhanthavakra towards Krishna and of Kauravas towards 
Dharmaja, who was an "Ajaathashathru," incapable of hating anybody. There is no need to 
worry about the enmity of others towards you. You develop your friendly attitude towards all. 
Ignore the abuses of others, because they serve only to diminish your sins and transfer them to 
the reviler. When a man praises another, the merits of the latter accrue to the former. Deem the 
critic as your friend, not the one who flatters you. 


Accountability for actions 


One's actions determine one's future. Actions are of three kinds, Thoughts are one kind. Giving 
expression to them is another. Acting according to one's words is the third. The mind is 
responsible for thoughts, the tongue for speech and the hands for actions. The combination of 
thought, word and deed represents the human state. These three account for man's pleasures and 
pain. Recognizing this, one should understand that he is accountable for his actions. No one can 
escape from the consequences of his deeds. But anything can be achieved through God's grace. 
Hence man should strive to win God's grace. 


The results of one's actions are realised over different periods of time. In some cases, the results 
are immediate, as, for instance, when one slips and sustains a fall. In some cases, the results 
occur after a few minutes or hours. For example, the food you take in the morning is digested 
after two hours. When you sow a seed in the ground, it takes some months or years to grow into 
a tree and yield fruits. Some fools imagine that they can get away with bad deeds because the 
consequences are not immediate. But the consequences are bound to occur some time or other. 


Three types of Karmas 


There are three types of actions: Sukarma, Vikarma and Akarma. Sukarma relates to good actions 
which produce good results. Vikarma relates to bad actions which have bad consequences. 
Akarma relates to the fruits of actions in previous lives. The suffering of good people like Seetha, 
Harishchandhra and Nala and Dhamayanthi have no basis in their actions during their lives, but 
are the results of previous karma. People who may have done no actions of any kind in their 
present lives may still suffer from the consequences of their actions in previous lives. 


The effects of past deeds can be mitigated by earning God's grace. The means of securing Divine 
grace is to cultivate qualities like truth, righteousness, love, compassion and forbearance. With 
these qualities life becomes a beautiful garden and a joy forever. For the man filled with bad 
thoughts and actions, life is like the dark and filthy Vaitharini river (called Styx in Greek 
mythology). Each one has to judge for himself the nature of his life. Each one is a witness unto 
himself. A bad man may pass off for a good man from his external appearances but he knows 
within himself his real nature. 


God is beyond all praise or criticism. He is Sath-Chith-Aanandha (Being-Awareness-Bliss). He 
blesses even the one who derides Him. When Kamsa, who ceaselessly hated Krishna, died at the 
Lord's hands, his blood flowed towards the feet of Krishna. Likewise, Shishupaala, who used the 
vilest abusive epithets against Krishna, was slain by Krishna, but his spirit merged in the Lord 
because he remembered the Lord always out of his hatred. (Svaami recited poems from the 
Bhaagavatham to illustrate the language in which Shishupaala reviled Krishna). 


Fools who indulge in flippant remarks about Sri Krishna know nothing about the inscrutable 
ways of the Lord. Everyone has to face the consequences of his actions, though he may not know 
how, when or where these consequences may occur Man can reverse the consequences of bad 
actions by performing good deeds and invoking God's help. 


The guru is in the heart 


Today is Gurupuurnima. The real significance of Gurupuurnima does not consist in worshipping 
the guru (preceptor) with some offerings, but getting rid of the darkness of ignorance. Puurnima 
refers to the full moon, but the full moon symbolises the mind filled with delight. There is close 
association between the mind and the moon. Gurupuurnima signifies the elimination of all dark- 
ness and evil from the mind. The true Guru is in our heart. Purify the heart to let the Divine 
dwell in it. 


Do not forget God. What you should forget is the mundane world. God is omnipresent in all 
forms, everywhere, as declared in the Purusha Shuktha. It is foolish to search for God, who is 
within you and outside you. When Raamakrishna Paramahamsa was asked whether he had seen 
God and could show Him to them, he replied- "I have seen God. But how can you see God if you 
don't pine for him in the same manner in which you pine for your wife and children and wealth? 
Pray to Him, yearn for Him and be prepared to sacrifice everything for Him. Then you will 
experience the vision of God." 


God cannot be perceived by the spiritually blind, just as a blind man cannot understand what is 
meant by the whiteness of milk. God is infinite bliss. He is formless, but He can assume any 
form He wills. How can anyone attempt to describe the nature of God? 


Contemplate on God with a pure heart. There is no greater spiritual exercise. But, as long as men 
are attached to worldly objects they can make no progress in the spiritual field. Once Radha and 
other Gopikas wanted to go down in a boat from Mathura to Brindhaavan. They rowed the boat 
all through the night, but found to their astonishment that the boat had remained where it had 
been. They then discovered that they had not untied the rope which kept the boat bound to a post 
on the bank. 


Develop detachment and spirit of sacrifice 


The first need is to develop the spirit of sacrifice and get rid of attachment and possessiveness. 
Then, the yearning for God grows. All are entitled to receive God's grace according to their 
merits. It is like drawing upon a bank according to what you have deposited with it. There are 
three ways of getting money from a bank. One is drawing on your deposit. In spiritual terms, this 
means realising the fruits of your past actions. The second means is raising a loan on the security 
of your assets. This corresponds to the grace you get by your current good deeds. The third 
means to get money from a bank is to have a good surety to the loan you wish to raise from the 
bank. Spiritually, this corresponds to securing God's grace through the medium of a guru 
(preceptor). Who is the guru? He is the Divine dispeller of the darkness within you. The Divine 
Trinity (Brahma, Vishnu and Maheshvara) have been described as gurus. This implies that the 
Divine should be regarded as the supreme preceptor, who can destroy the darkness of ignorance. 


Install God in your heart 


Forgetting this basic truth, people run after men wearing the ochre robe who profess to impart a 
manthra and stretch their palm for money. This is not what is meant by Guru. Install God in your 


heart. The vibrations that emanate from the heart will elevate you spiritually and confer divine 
wisdom. This wisdom has been defined as Prajnaana (Constant Integrated Awareness). To 
acquire such wisdom you have to keep your mind pure as a mirror, using shraddha (earnestness) 
as a Cloth, dipping it in the water of Prema (Love) and wiping the dust on the mirror (in the form 
of bad qualities). This wisdom cannot be acquired from books. It has to be got through self- 
examination and self-correction. 


Gurupuurnima is an occasion for cleansing the mind to make it absolutely pure. It is not enough 
to praise God. You have to love Him. You have to become love itself so that you can love the 
entire Universe. I address all of you as "Embodiments of love." When you become embodiments 
of love, you can love all. 


Discourse on 12-7-1995, in the Sai Kulwant Mandap of Prashaanthi Mandir. 


21. Dedicate all actions to God 


There is no greater penance 
than contentment for securing happiness. 
There is no worse disease 
than insatiable desire. 
There is no greater virtue 
than compassion. 
Peace is the highest spiritual discipline. 


EMBODIMENTS of love! There is no greater penance than shaantham (tranquillity or peace). 
Peace is the foremost prize for man. Peace confers beauty on sages. Peace is the fascinating 
charm of the Divine. "Without such peace there can be no happiness," declared Thyaagaraaja 
(the composer-saint of south India). 


There is no greater santhosham (happiness) than being contented. Man seeks happiness in 
various forms. But there is no happiness equal to shaanthi (peace). Thyaagaraaja sang in the 
same strain, declaring that without peace there can be no happiness. There is no greater 
happiness than that derived from santhrupthi (contentment). What greater heaven is there than 
contentment? 


"There is no worse disease than desire." Contemporary man is afflicted by endless desires. These 
desires are the cause of innumerable diseases, There must be a limit to desires. Today desires 
grow limitlessly. Consequently, diseases also increase limitlessly. Owing to endless desires, man 
is affected mentally and this gives rise to many bodily ailments. Hence everyone should try as far 
as possible to keep a check on desires. 


Compassion-filled heart is the temple of the Divine 


"Na dharmo dhayaa samah" (There is no virtue equal to compassion). What is dharma? 
Compassion is the highest dharma. A heart filled with compassion is the temple of the Divine. 
Every man should have a compassion-filled heart. 


There is a lesson every man should learn. There is the potency of a manthra (a sacred 
declaration) in every word. Every plant has medicinal properties. Every human ‘being is 
precious. A true individual is one who knows and lives upto this truth. 


People today do not recognise the value of being human and the preciousness of time. 
You spend the whole day in hectic activity. 
Do you call this living? 
You eat three times a day. 
Does this constitute living? 
Do you think that living consists 
In sleeping comfortably? 


Do you regard indulgence in 

Gossip as the aim of life? 

Did God give you life for these purposes? 
Knowing what is merit and what is sin, 
You are indifferent to them. 

Is this the way you spend your life-time? 
At least from now on, 


Learn to lead a truly human life. 


The Divine energy 


The cosmos is a creation of the Divine. It is surcharged with energy. This energy is not localised 
at a particular point in space or in time. Though this energy is all-pervading, man is not able to 
recognise its divine nature. As he cannot recognise it, he presumes that it does not exist. 
Electrical energy is present all the time (in the electrical installations). But its presence is 
recognized only when a bulb is switched on. Likewise, though God is omnipresent. His divine 
effulgence will shine only in those who adore Him with a pure heart. 


Man today is unable to understand what is life, what is its goal, what is one's duty and what 
should be one's aim. Time is moving fast like a whirlwind. Man's allotted span of life is melting 
every moment like a block of ice. Man's life ends even before he is aware of his duty. What is his 
duty? Every individual has some aspirations, some ideals to be realised and some sacred paths to 
be trodden. He makes no effort to pursue these aims. What is the goal and purpose of one's life, 
what is its secret? Man hardly puts these questions to himself. He is content to devote himself to 
sensuous pleasures. This is not what he should do; it is not the aim of life. 


Every individual should manifest a divine ideal in his life. This ideal should absorb his entire life 
and activities. Alas! man today does not follow this sacred path. 


Everything is based on man's thoughts, which find expression in external forms--a reflection of 
his inner being. This can be illustrated by a simple example. When one wants to build a house, 
he plans in advance how the different rooms should be located. These ideals are later 
incorporated in blue prints. The thoughts come first and then they are given concrete forms. 
Similarly when you want to write a letter, you first think of what you should write and then 
commence to write. 


Thoughts lead to action. There can be no action without sankalpas (firm thoughts). Hence, it is 
essential to entertain sacred thoughts. Everyone should realise that all the sorrows and miseries 
of modern man are due to his bad thoughts. Every man thinks that someone else is responsible 
for his troubles. This is not so. You alone are responsible for the good and evil that befalls you. 
You blame others because of your weakness. 


Valmeeki's transformation 


The Kenopanishath has proclaimed this truth beautifully. "Brahmavith Brahmaiva Bhavathi" 
(The knower of the Divine becomes Divine himself). Whatever you aspire for, whatever your 
yearning, that you become yourself. When Valmeeki wished to write the Raamaayana, he first 
meditated on all the qualities of Raama and then alone he could commence his epic. Because of 


the constant repetition of the name of Raama and continuous meditation on the Raama Principle, 
he shone with the effulgence of Raama. It is one of the miracles of Raama that the highwayman 
Rathnaakara could become the author of a great epic. 


When you meditate on the effulgence of anyone, a part of that effulgence enters into you. Such 
was the case with Prahlaadha. By constant chanting of the name of the lord, devoting all his 
thoughts to Naaraayana, he was filled with the power of the Divine and experienced ineffable 
bliss. He could face with utter equanimity all the ordeals which he was subjected to by the 
minions of his father. (Svaami sang a poem from the Bhaagavatham in which Pothana describes 
how Prahlaadha chanted only the names of the Lord while the raakshasas were tormenting him). 
Prahlaadha had no sense of fear. The effulgence of Vishnu shone in his face. 


Man is a spark of the Divine 


Man today should reflect on his true nature. The Lord declares in the Geetha- "The individual on 
earth is a fragment of my Eternal Self." The import of this declaration is' "Oh foolish man! Don't 
think you are only a composite of the five elements. You are an Amsa (fragment) of Myself." 


A branch is a part of a tree. A child is a part of the mother. The branch cannot survive without 
the tree. The child cannot survive without the mother. Man is fragment of Maadhava (the 
Supreme Self). Hence man cannot exist without Maadhava. But, it may be asked, "Is not man 
surviving today? How is he doing that?" But what kind of life is he leading? Is he living as a 
human being? No. He is living as an animal. If he were aware that he is a spark of the Divine, 
why is he a prey to suffering? Does God have any worries or troubles? None at all. "He is in 
eternal bliss, the bestower of all happiness, the embodiment of all wisdom," says a Sanskrith 
sloka. If you are a fragment of that Divine, why should you be a prey to all this suffering? When 
you enquire in this manner you will realise that you are not behaving like a spark of the Divine. 
You must take a pledge from today to lead a godly life. 


Consider also how this has been treated in other religions. In the Bible, God is described as 
omnipotent and all encompassing. Moses was always meditating on God and dedicated his entire 
life to God. Because of this, Moses acquired the effulgence of the Divine. Jesus Christ declared 
repeatedly: "I and You are one." 


A very great scientist, Charles Darwin, was so much devoted to his teacher, Henslow, that he 
became the very image of his preceptor. Such feelings should arise in the hearts of every one. 
Today, people's feelings vary from moment to moment. The result is men lead mindless lives. 
Having taken birth as a human being, having realised that one is a spark of the Divine, one 
should lead a godly life. 


Quest for perfection 


There was a great (Italian) violin manufacturer by name Anthony (Stradivarius). He used to take 
a whole year to produce a single violin, perfect in every aspect. Once a friend asked him' 
"Anthony, if you take one year to make a single violin, how can you make a living?" Anthony 
replied' "Brother! God is the embodiment of perfection. In harmony with His perfection I must 
make a perfect violin. If I do not make a perfect violin, I shall be a traitor to God. God 'is 
fullness, total perfection. If you want to please God, your thoughts, words and actions must be 
entirely pure." That is perfect, and this must also be perfect. It is in this spirit that some of the 
great figures in the western world worshipped and served God. 


God is all perfection. Hence, in worshipping Him, the feeling should be total. God should not be 
worshipped in halves and fractions. The devotee should achieve total involvement with the 
Divine. Quantitatively there would be a difference between God, who is the ocean of love, and 
the devotee whose love is a drop in that ocean. But the quality of love is the same. 


The gopikas' devotion 


Whatever you do to please God must be in harmony with the perfection of the Divine. Your 
words should be absolute truth Your actions should be totally God-Oriented. All thoughts should 
be divinised. It should be realised that God is the Indweller in all beings. Because man has failed 
to realise this truth he leads a double life and is a prey to troubles and worries. Only by leading a 
godly life can man redeem himself. 


The Gopikas (cowherd women) are perfect examples of total and pure devotion. They were 
totally absorbed in Krishna. They ignored the message brought to them by Uddhava. They told 
Uddhava that they were so totally immersed in the adoration of Krishna that they had no time or 
inclination to do anything else. They had totally identified themselves with Krishna. 


Krishna was a six-year-old boy when he was sporting with the Gopikas. Even Bhaaratheeyas 
have wrong notions about Krishna's sports with the cowherdesses. His sports were those of a 
young child with his brothers and sisters. By his sports Krishna moved the hearts of the Gopikas. 
The Gopikas saw the image of Krishna in every creeper, every flower and ever plant. When' 
Krishna was away from Gokulam, the Gopikas went to Brindavan and appealed to every creeper 
and flower to let them know where Krishna, who had stolen their hearts, was hiding himself. 
(Svaami sang the song of the Gopikas describing Krishna and appealing to the creepers to let 
them know that He was not hiding amongst them). The Gopikas had only one image before 
them, that of Krishna. They had only one vision, that of Krishna. 


The nature of true love between the devotee and God cannot be understood by the unbelievers, 
the atheists. Only the loving devotee can experience the effulgence of the Divine. The man 
without love is lost in dialectical controversies, with the result that bitterness develops over 
arguments. 


The human life is precious 


The incarnation of Krishna proclaimed the doctrine of divine love, as manifested by the Gopikas. 
Man today is like an earthen pot filled with nectar. His body may be made of clay, but his spirit 
is eternal. The Divine has to be experienced through the body. Hence, human birth should not be 
treated as something trivial. Human life is worth living, it should be cherished as something 
precious. 


But such a precious gift is being treated as dirt today. It is essential to realise the value of human 
existence. What is .the goal of human life? It is to go back to the source from which we came. 
Our duty is to return to our primordial, original home. 


All of you who are here have come from different parts of India and the world. After your stay 
here, you have to go back to your native places. Likewise human beings have come to the planet 
earth as pilgrims. They have to return to their original home. You have come from the Aathma. 
You have to go back to the Aathma. You have come from the Brahman (Supreme Self). You 
have to merge in the Brahman. You have incarnated as a spark of Brahman. You have to become 
the Brahman. In between there may be many impediments. You should ignore them. Have 
unshakable faith. That is true devotion. 


Love is God's gift 


Devotion does not consist merely in different forms of worship. It is dedicated offering of 
yourself to the Lord with unsullied love. You have come from the Divine with love. You have to 
base your life on that love. That love is a gift of the Divine. You must treat it as Divine property 
and not as your personal possession. As long as you entertain the sense of personal property, you 
can never understand the Aathmik principle. 


The feeling of 'I' and 'mine' is the root cause of all man's troubles. Attachment and 
possessiveness cannot be totally eschewed. But there should be limits for them. Insatiable desires 
are the cause of the growth of peacelessness. The Gopikas and Gopalas lived a life of 
contentment. They had only one desire: the yearning for God. 


People are often affected by the deluding power of Maaya. Even the Gopikas once doubted 
whether a little boy like Krishna would be able to lift the Govardhana mountain to give shelter to 
the denizens of Repalle from a heavy downpour. Devotees should not give' way to doubts. Faith 
in God should be firm till 'your last breath. 


The triple purity 


Embodiments of love! You celebrate what are regarded as the birthdays of God coming as an 
avathaar. What is the secret of these birthday celebrations? Every Avathaar comes to uphold or 
testify to a certain ideal or purpose. Avathaars come for establishing Dharma in the world (as 
declared in the Geetha). What is Dharma? There are various Dharmas (Codes of conduct) 
relating to celibates, house holders, renunciants and others. These Dharmas are related to one's 
stage in life. True Dharma is that which sustains one--"Dhaarayathi Ithi Dharmah "Man is 
sustained by three factors: the body, the mind, and the tongue. The hands represent the body, 
thoughts represent the mind and speech represents the tongue. The acting in unison of the body, 
the mind and the tongue is Dharma. Thoughts, words and actions should be in harmony. That is 
the mark of a true human being. This basic truth is valid without regard to place, nationality, 
language or religion. It is applicable to people everywhere, at all times. Those who observe this 
triple purity are the redeemed. They are the salt of the earth. They are the upholders of 
righteousness. To such adherents of Dharma, God is a constant companion, keeping close to 
them at all times and places. Today, people have to cherish and uphold this Dharma. Instead, 
they are deluded by attachment to the body to sacrifice purity in thought, word and deed. 


To illustrate how attachment to bodily relations affects one's judgment, I would relate the 
episodes in the Mahaabhaaratha which preceded the Kurukshetra battle and the conduct of 
Arjuna on the battle field. Arjuna had vigorously opposed Krishna's attempts to hold peace 
parleys with the Kauravas as a futile exercise. But when he saw his preceptors, cousins, and 
other kinsmen ranged against him on the battlefield, he was despondent and did not wish to fight. 
It was then that Krishna taught him that the Spirit is immortal and bodies are perishable and one 
should not give way to bodily attachments in the performance of one's duty. The body has to be 
taken care of, but not excessively. It should be dedicated to the service of God. 


The delusion of separateness 


One may claim to surrender all his wealth, kith and kin and power and position to God. But this 
is not real surrender. One must realise: "I am in You, You are in me." God is one. The sense of 
separation between God and the individual should go. 


Even Yashodha, though she had experienced numerous examples of Krishna's divinity, could not 
realise the oneness of Godhead, because of attachment to the body (owing to the delusion caused 
by Maaya). She complained about the worry caused to her by Krishna, who refused to eat the 
butter given by the mother, but went out stealing butter from the Gopikas' houses. She tied 
Krishna to a tree to prevent him from going round houses. Episodes such as these are intended to 
teach lessons to devotees about the ways of God. The Divine is in every individual, but one's 
realisation depends on one's own efforts. The Divine shines according to the degree of one's 
spiritual awareness. To manifest the full effulgence of the Divine, one has to adhere to the path 
of Love. Only through Love can the Supreme Divine be attained - God cannot be got by hatred, 
anger or jealousy. It is because these three evil qualities are present in people that you see in their 
faces the marks of misery. On the contrary look at the faces of Dhruva, Prahlaadha and 
Naaradha. You see extreme brilliance on their faces because they are filled with the love of God. 
There should be no mark of sadness on the face of one who has faith in God. This was the case 
with Valmeeki. His face was full of radiance---a radiance derived from Raama, who is the 
embodiment of Love. 


All of you should strive to promote your effulgence and bliss by seeking oneness with the 
Divine. This is the primary duty of man. 


(Bhagavaan sang two songs in which He bemoaned the plight of human beings who were more 
concerned about their food than about God and who mastered all the texts but did not sincerely 
worship God). This was the message which Aadhi Shankaraachaarya wished to convey in his 
famous hymn, Bhaja. Govindham. Every one should realise the transitoriness of life and turn his 
thoughts towards God early enough in life. The challenges of life should be faced with fortitude 
and firm faith in God. That is the Supreme quality of humanness. Its grandeur and power should 
not be belittled. Faith in God should never be given up, whatever one's scholarship, position or 
power. That is the summum-bonum of life. 


Universal message of the Geetha 


Today people have forgotten the eternal verities and are immersed in selfishness. The true 
meaning of Svaartha is dedication to the Self and not petty selfishness. 


This is the Supreme message of the Bhagavath Geetha. It is not a message intended for one 
individual or one nation. It is meant for all mankind. It is the word of God the Eternal Wisdom, 
the Cosmic Director, Playwright and Actor, all rolled into one. The unbreakable bond between 
the One and the Many should be properly understood. 


Divinise every act 


Whatever you do, remember the omnipresence of the Divine. Do every act to please God, out of 
love and not out of compulsion. Divinise every act. The Lord declares in the Geetha: "Having 
been born in this transient and unhappy world, worship Me." 


Krishna called upon Arjuna to stand up and face the battle, reminding him of what was in store 
for the evil-minded Kauravas. He adjured Arjuna to have full faith in Him and do his duty. Then 
Arjuna declared' "Karishye vachanam thava" (I shall do as you bid me). 


Then Krishna declared' "You have now become my true devotee." And He exhorted Arjuna to 
rise and fight the battle which would end in the complete destruction of the Kauravas and the 
wicked quartet, Dhuryodhana, Dhusshaasana, Karna and Shakuni. 


The great teaching of the Geetha is: "Put your trust in God, carry on your duties, be helpful to 
everyone and sanctify your lives." Dedicate all actions to God. That is the way to experience 
oneness with God. God is in you. You are in God. This oneness is the basic truth. Chant the 
name of the Lord and render social service in a spirit of selflessness and devotion to God. 


Discourse in the Sai Kulwant Mandap on Gokulaashtami day, 18-8-1995. 


22. Unique potency of Gayathri 


EMBODIMENTS of love! Man today spends his life fully preoccupied with worldly concerns. 
Owing to attachment to the body; he forgets his true nature, is immersed in the affairs of the 
body as permanent and. makes bodily comforts his goal in life. These are the things which every 
individual experiences in daily life. If anybody accosts a person and asks him, "Who are you?", 
out of his identification with the body he gives his name in reply. In answer to further questions 
he introduces himself as a doctor, a farmer, or student, or the like. When the enquiry goes 
further, he identifies himself with his nationality as an American, an Indian, a Pakistani or so on. 
When you examine these answers deeply, you will find that none of them gives the truth. 


He got his name from his parents. It did not belong to him at birth. His identification with one or 
other of his professions is not true because he is not the profession. 


What, then, is the truth about him? "I am the Aathma. That is my true Self." That is the truth. 
But people identify themselves with their names, professions and nationality and do not base 
their lives on the Aathma. No driver of a car identifies with the car. Likewise the body is a car 
and the Aathma is the driver. Forgetting one's true role as a driver, one is identifying one's self 
with the body, which is only a vehicle. 


This truth is emphatically brought out by the Gaayathri manthra. "Dheha_ budhyaath 
Dhaasoham" (From the standpoint of the body, I am your instrument, your servant). 
"Jeevabudhyaath Thvadhamshah" (In the context of the Jeeva, the individual soul, I am a spark 
of the Divine Thou). “Aathmabudhyaath Thvameva-aham" (In terms of the Aathma I am 
yourself). When one views one's self from the Aathmik standpoint, one is identical with the 
Divine. "Iam you and you are me." 


Our life is a three-storeyed mansion 


Every man has thus three aspects. Our life itself is a three-storeyed mansion. The Brahmacharya 
(celibate) stage is the foundation of this mansion. After that, the stage of Grihastha 
(householder) is the first floor. Then you have the Vaanaprastha (retirement from the life of a 
householder) stage as the second floor. Finally, there is the stage of the Sanyaasa (renunciant), 
consisting-the third floor. Thus, Brahmacharya is the foundation for the other three stages of life. 
The safety and security of the other three floors depend on the strength of the foundation, vis, 
Brahmacharya. Hence, Brahmacharya is the basic foundation. 


But, unfortunately this vital fact has been forgotten by people. They feel happy on seeing the 
super-structure. But the whole edifice may collapse at any time if the foundation is weak. When 
you feel happy at the sight of a tree and its flowers and fruits, you must be concerned about its 
roots. The unseen foundation is the basis for the visible mansion. The invisible roots are the basis 
for the visible tree. Likewise, the invisible Praana (Life-Breath or Force) is the basis for the 
visible body. Praana has no form, while the body has a form. There is, however, the Aathmik 
principle which confers all the potencies for the Praana (Life Force). It is because of the power 
imparted by the Aathma that the Life Force is able to activate the body. The body inherently is 
inert. It is made up of different kinds of material substances. 


Three potencies in man 


In the Gaayathri Manthra the first line is: "Om Bhur bhuvas suvah." This manthra is assumed to 
refer to three worlds, the earth, the middle world and Heaven--Svarga, the land of the gods. Bhu 


refers to the body. It is made up of Pancha Bhuthas (five great, elements). These five elements 
constitute Prakrithi (Nature). There is an intimate relationship between the body and Nature. The 
same five elements that are in the nature are also in the body. Bhuvah is the Praana Shakthi (Life 
Force) that animates the body. Even if the Life Force exists, without Jnaana (Awareness) the 
body will be of no use. It is on this account that the Vedhas declared: "Prajnaanam Brahma" 
(Constant Integrated Awareness is Brahman). It is by the presence of Prajnaana that the Life 
Force is able to animate the body. The body represents inert matter. The Life Force operates in 
the body as a vibration. This Vibration derives its power from Prajnaana, which finds expression 
in radiation. 


Therefore, the body, the Life Force and the Prajnaana are all within man. The entire cosmos is 
present in miniature within man. It is because of these three constituents that we are able to see 
the cosmos and experience many other things. Every potency is within us. The external is a 
reflection of the inner being. 


It follows from this that true maanavathvam (humanness) is Dhaivathvam (Divinity) itself. 
Hence, the Vedhas declared that the divine appears in human form. Every human being is 
inherently Divine, but owing to his attachment to the body he' considers himself a mere man. 


How did this human body get animated by the Life Force? Whence has this Life Force come? It 
is from the Aathma-Shakthi (the power of the Self). Making use of this power of the Sell the Life 
Force carries out all activities. 


Triple aspects of Gaayathri 


Who is Gaayathri? Gaayathri is not a goddess. "Gaayathri Chandhasaam maathaa" (Gaayathri is 
the mother of the Vedhas) "Gaayantham thraayathe ithi Gaayathri" (Gaayathri is that which 
redeems the chanter of the manthra). Gaayathri is present wherever the manthra is chanted. 


Gaayathri, however, has three names' Gaayathri, Saavithri, Sarasvathi. These three are present in 
everyone. Gaayathri represents the senses. It is the master of the senses. Saavithri is the master of 
Praana (Life Force). Many Bhaaratheeyas are familiar with the story of Saavithri who brought 
back to life her dead husband, Sathyavaan. Saavithri signifies truth. Sarasvathi is the presiding 
deity of Vaak (Speech). The three represent Thrikarana Shuddhi (purity in thought, word and 
deed). Although Gaayathri has three names, all the three are in each of us as the senses 
(Gaayathri), the power of speech (Sarasvathi) and the Life Force (Saavithri). 


Gaayathri is said to have five faces and hence is called Panchamukhi. Is there anybody in the 
world with five faces? No. In the Raamaayana, Raavana is said to have ten heads. If really he 
had ten heads how would he be able to lie in his bed or move about? This is not the inner 
meaning of this description. He is said to be ten-headed because he was the master of the four 
Vedhas and the six Shaasthras. 


Likewise, Gaayathri is described as five-faced. The five faces are as follows. Om (the Pranava) 
is the first face. The Pranava Principle represents the Ashta-Aishvarya (eight different forms of 
wealth). The second face is: "Bhur Bhuvas Suvah." The third is: "Thath-Savithur-varenyam." 
The fourth is' "Bhargo Dhevasya dheemahi." The fifth face is: “Dheyo yo hah prachodayaath." 
When the Gaayathri manthra is understood in this way, it will be realised that all the five aspects 
of Gaayathri are within each of us. 


Power of Gaayathri Manthra 


The Gaayathri manthra has all the three elements which figure in the adoration of God 
description, meditation and prayer. The first nine words of the manthra - "Om-Bhur-Bhuvas- 
Suvah-Thath-Savithur-_ Varenyam-Bhargo-Dhevasya"--represent the attributes of the Divine. 
Dheemahi pertains to dhyaana (meditation). “Dheyo yo hah Prachodayaath" is the prayer to the 
Lord. The manthra is thus a prayer to God to confer all powers and talents. 


"Sarva roga nivaarini Gaayathri" (Gaayathri is the reliever of all diseases). "Sarva dhukha 
parivaarini Gaayathri" (Gaayathri wards off all misery). "Sarva vaancha phalashri Gaayathri" 
(Gaayathri is the fulfiller of all desires). Gaayathri is the bestower of all that is beneficial. If the 
manthra is chanted, various kinds of powers will emerge in one. 


Hence the Gaayathri manthra should not be treated casually. In our respiration process the sound 
of Gaayathri is embedded. That sound is a reminder of our true form. In the breathing process, 
there is inhalation and exhalation. In the Yoga-Shaasthra, inhalation is termed Puurakam and the 
exhalation is called Rechakam. Holding the breath is called Kumbhakam. When air is inhaled, 
the sound that is produced" is ‘So-o-o.' When it is exhaled, the sound is 'Ham-m-m.' 'So-ham, So- 
ham.' (Bhagavaan demonstrated how this happens while breathing in and out). ‘So’ is "that." 
'‘Ham' is "I". "Tam that," "I am Divine." Every breath proclaims this. The Vedhas declared the 
same thing in the pronouncements: "Thath thvam Asi" (That thou art), 


"Aham Brahmaasmi" (1 am Brahman), "Ayam Aathma Brahma" (This Self is Brhman). 
Gaayathri is the indweller in the heart 


Don't imagine God is somewhere remote from you. He is within you. You are God. People want 
to see God. “Sathyam Jnaanam Anantham Brahma," say the scriptures. Truth. is God. Wisdom is 
God. Both these are present everywhere. They transcend the categories of time and place. Truth 
is that which is valid at all times--past, present and future. That truth is Gaayathri .... 


Gaayathri is thus the indweller in the’ Hridhaya (heart). Hri-dhaya contains the word Dhaya 
meaning compassion. There is compassion in every heart. But to what extent is it shown in real 
life? Very little. All the while only anger, jealousy, pride and hatred are displayed. These evil 
qualities are not natural to man. They are opposed to human nature. 


It has been declared that one who bases himself entirely on the mind is a demon. One who bases 
himself on the body is an animal. One who follows the Aathma (the Self) is divinely endowed. 
One who relies on the body, the mind and the Aathma is a human being. Humanness is the 
combination of the body; mind and Aathma. Man should strive to ascend to the divine and not 
descend to the demonic or animal nature. 


How to remove insecurity and secure security 


From today onwards parents should teach their children stories with morals. You all know in 
what a chaotic condition the world is today. Disorder and violence are rampant everywhere. 
Peace and security are not to be found anywhere. Where is peace to be found? It is within us. 
Security is also within us. How is insecurity to be removed and security secured? It is by giving 
up desires. In the language of the ancient Bhaaratheeyas this was termed Vairaagya (giving up 
attachment). This does not mean giving up home and family and retiring into the forest. It is 
reduction of wants. As a householder limit your desires to the needs of the family. As a student, 


stick to your studies. As a professional, adhere to the duties of your profession. Do not indulge in 
excesses of any kind. 


In the practice of the Gaayathri manthra, one should realise that everything is within one and 
thereby develop confidence in the Self. Man today is racked by numerous troubles because he 
has no confidence in the Sell The aspirant on the spiritual path is bound to face the troubles 
caused by the six enemies, lust, anger, greed, infatuation, pride and envy. He has to overcome 
them. 


Students! On an auspicious occasion like this, you should consider how you can lead an ideal 
life. Through faith in God, you have to sanctify the body. Without the body, you cannot 
experience the mind and the intellect. To achieve your ideals, the body is the instrument. It 
should be kept in proper condition. While the body is an instrument, the user of the instrument is 
the Self. All senses function because of the Aathma. The Aathma is the Witness to everything. It 
is also known as Conscious Self. It derives its sanction from the Divine. It is a fragment of the 
Divine. Every human being is a spark of the Divine, as declared in the Geetha. The human being 
is essentially Divine, but tends to forget his Divine origin. 


The Gaayathri manthra is enough to protect the person who chants it, because Gaayathri 
embodies all the Divine potencies. It is an essential requisite for the young because it ensures a 
bright and auspicious future for them. The young students are the citizens and leaders of 
tomorrow. Hence, they should develop pure and noble thoughts. The parents also should foster 
such a development. 


The meaning of Upanayanam 


The Upanayanam ceremony is just over. The Gaayathri manthra has been imparted to you. You 
are wearing the sacred thread with three strands tied in one knot. The three strands represent 
Brahma, Vishnu and Maheshvara. They also represent the .past, the present and future. 
Upanayanam means being near to God. Nearness to God will enable you to get rid of your bad 
qualities and acquire virtues. 


Students! The Vedhas have emphasized three duties. Esteem the mother as God, the father as 
God and the preceptor as God. Bear this injunction in mind. Gratitude to your parents is your 
foremost duty. This is the lesson taught by Shri Raama. 


Love your parents and remember God. When you please your parents and make them happy, 
your entire life will be filled with happiness. 


Chant the Gaayathri as often as possible. If you chant it while you take a bath, your bath gets 
sanctified. Likewise chant it before taking your food. The food becomes an offering to the 
Divine. Develop heartfelt devotion to God. 


Discourse in the Sai Kulwant Mandap, Prashaanthi Mandhir, on 23-8-1995. 


A man with Bhakthi will do every act as worship of God and so the 
act will be done better and more efficiently, without maligning or 
insincerity. It will also win the grace of the Lord, and so, a 


Bhaktha will be able to raise more crops and enjoy greater health 
and mental happiness. 


BABA 


23. The significance of Vinaayaka worship 


With your elephant's trunk 

And single tusk, and benign looks, 

With the tingling of your anklets, 

And your prodigious belly, 

Looking like a dwarf, 

But capable of bestowing all knowledge, 
Oh Son of Paarvathi! 

Hail! Lord of the Ganas. 


BHARATHEEYAS' festivals are pregnant with spiritual significance. Unfortunately 
Bhaaratheeyas today give importance only to external rituals and observance, ignoring their 
inner meaning and eternal values. 


"Paarvathi thanaya Ganaadhipa!" (Oh son of Paarvathi! Lord of the ganas). In these terms the 
Vedhas extolled Ganapathi. Who is this Paarvathi? Who is her son? What is the relationship 
between mother and son? Few Bhaaratheeyas care to enquire into these questions. The Vedhas 
proclaimed' "Oh Ganaadhipa!" Who are these ganas? Are they celestial hosts or Asuras 
(demonic beings)? They are celestial beings. Where are they? Are they wandering in the external 
world or are they present subtly in human beings? He (Vighneshvara) is called Ganaadhipathi 
because he is the Supreme Lord of the ganas. The ganas are the embodiments of the 
Jnaanedhrivas (organs of perception) and of Karmendhriyas (organs of action). The mind is the 
master of these ten senses. The presiding deity of the mind is called Indra as he is the Lord of the 
Indhriyas (the senses). The master over the mind is the Buddhi (intellect). 


The meaning of "Ganapathi" 


What does the name 'Ganapathi' signify? 'Ga' means Buddhi (or intellect), 'Va' means Vijnaana 
(wisdom). As Vighneshvara is the Lord of the intellect and Wisdom, He is called Ganapathi. 


It follows from this that what are called ganas are parts of the human body. The vyakthi 
(individual) is a part of shrishti (creation). Hence, Divinity, of which the cosmos is a projection, 
is immanent in the human being. "Vigatho naayakah Vinaayakah" (Vinaayaka has no master 
over him). This means that Vinaayaka is a totally autonomous and independent deity. He has no 
lord above him. In the world, any individual or authority has someone superior above him. But 
Vinaayaka has no overlord. 


The worship of Vinaayaka has been in existence from times immemorial in Bhaarath. The Rig 
Vedha, the Naarayanopanishath and the Thaitheertya Upanishath have passages referring to 
Vinaayaka. It is embedded also in a Gaayathri manthra. 


Thathpurushaaya Vidmahe 
Vakrathundaaya dheemahi 
Thanno Danthi Prachodayaath 


This manthra indicates that Vinaayaka's divinity is glorified in this Gaayathri manthra. Hence, 
Ganapathi signifies an all-pervading divine potency. 


In everyday parlance, Ganapathi is described as the son of Paarvathi. Paarvathi represents 
Prakrithi (Nature). Man is a child of Nature. Hence every human being is a Vinaayaka. He is a 
spark of the Divine Shiva-Shakthi, the union of the Lord and Nature. Everything in the world has 
emanated from Prakrithi (Nature). All things are aspects of Nature. It is to reveal this sacred 
truth that holy festivals are observed. 


Elephant head and Muushika 


How does it happen that Vinaayaka has the head of an elephant and has a mouse as his vehicle? 
The mouse is called Muushika in Sanskrith. It is a sign of night, which signifies darkness. The 
mouse is a symbol of darkness. Because Vinaayaka has control over darkness, He is described as 
the rider on a Muushika. He is the one who dispels darkness and sheds light on the world. 


The Muushika (mouse) is also a symbol of the sense of smell. The mouse moves about following 
the direction of the vaasana (smell). Vinaayaka is the one who has mastery over vaasanas, that 
is, desires and ignorance (represented by Muushika). 


What is meant by describing the Muushika (mouse) as 'the vehicle of Vinaayaka? It means that 
Vinaayaka rides on the Muushika, representing vaasanas (desires) and ignorance (darkness). 
Vinaayaka is one who drives away all sorrows, difficulties and miseries. He is the enemy of all 
obstacles. He will not allow any obstacles to come in the way. He is the destroyer of obstacles. 
He confers happiness and peace (on his devotees). He is the master of all these powers--Buddhi 
and Siddhi. What is this Siddhi (fulfillment)? When there is purity of mind you achieve peace 
which is Siddhi. Vinaayaka is thus the Lord of Buddhi and Siddhi (the Intellect and Self- 
Realisation). Hence, every human being should acquire control over the mind. 


Nature of food offered to Vinaayaka 


Every festival is celebrated by various culinary preparations. For Vinaayaka Chathurthi, these 
preparations are of a special kind. The edible offerings to Vinaayaka are totally free from oily 
substances. Vinaayaka is offered only items cooked through steam. What is the reason? 
According to the science of Ayurvedha (the ancient Indian system of medicine), food cooked 
through steam is easily digested. 


Moreover, the Vinaayaka festival, which is celebrated in the month of Bhaadhrapadha, falls in a 
month when sesame and jaggery come to the market after the harvest. The sesame seeds are 
powdered and mixed with rice flour and jaggery and cooked in balls which are offered as 
Naivedhyam to Vinaayaka. Jaggery is a cure for several ailments relating to phlegm and bile. The 
sesame seeds have the power to cleanse 'the lungs and improve the vision. These balls of sesame 
and jaggery are thus noted for their medicinal properties for curing both external and internal 
ailments. 


The ancient Bhaaratheeyas never indulged in meaningless practices. Every festival has an inner 
spiritual significance. Every word they spoke, every step they moved, every food they consumed 
had spiritual significance. 


The Lord of learning 


Vinaayaka is the Lord of all Vidhya (learning). Does learning mean bookish scholarship? No. 
Everything pertaining to the cosmos is included in the term Vidhya (learning). Walking, talking, 
laughing, sitting, eating, strolling, thinking every kind of activity is related to learning. 
Vinaayaka is the master of every kind of learning. 


Today learning is identified with 'acquisition of information. But apart from knowledge of the 
physical world, we have many other kinds of knowledge relating to chemistry; the fine arts and 
other skills. 


Vinaayaka is the master of every kind of knowledge. Learning is related to Buddhi (intellect). It 
is not mere scholarship. Familiarity with books is not knowledge. One's entire life is a 
continuous process, of learning. Any process of enquiry is related to learning. But basically our 
enquiry should be concerned with finding out what is transient and what is permanent. This is 
true knowledge. 


Hence, today students worship Vinaayaka with zeal. Vinaayaka is not the one who merely comes 
to the aid of those who read their books. He helps everyone at every step in life's journey. He is 
readily accessible. He is pleased with an offering of flowers of no value ("Jilledy" flowers). It is 
said that any one who eats these flowers will become insane. Such flowers are 'offered to Vinaa- 
yaka. Vinaayaka is also worshipped with an offering of' green grass. 


What is the inner meaning of these kinds of offerings? It means that earlier Vinaayaka used to 
be worshipped even by animals. His face is that of an elephant. His vehicle is a mouse. These are 
symbols from the animal kingdom. They indicate that Vinaayaka is worshipped even by birds 
and beasts. Vinaayaka is thus worshipped by all beings and is Lord over all beings. He does not 
belong to one country or one nation or one period of time. He is related to all places and all 
times. 


Puraanik stories to testify Vinaayaka's greatness 


There are scriptural texts which testify to all this. But some of them are quite fanciful. For 
instance, in one puraanik story, it is stated that once Shiva and His consort Paarvathi were 
playing a game of dice. For any game there has to be an umpire, who has to declare who is the 
winner. Shiva and Paarvathi agreed to have Nandhi (the divine bull) as the umpire. Nandhi is a 
favourite of Shiva, as he is Shiva's vehicle. Although Shiva lost the game, Nandhi declared Him 
the winner. It is stated that Paarvathi was indignant over Nandhi's partiality for Shiva and cursed 
him that he should die from an incurable disease. Thereupon Nandhi fell at the feet of Paarvathi 
and pleaded for forgiveness. "Mother! forgive me. Should I not show at least this amount of 
gratitude to one who is my master? Is it not humiliating for me to declare that my master has lost 
the game? To uphold his honour I no doubt uttered a lie. But am I to be punished with such 
severity for so small an offence?" Nandhi prayed for forgiveness in this manner. Paarvathi 
forgave Nandhi and taught him the means to atone for his lapse. She told him, "The 
Chathurdhasi day in the month of Bhadhra-padha is the day when my son's birthday is 
celebrated. On that day you have to offer to my son what pleases you most (green grass)." This 
means that one atones for one's sins when One offers to the Lord what is most pleasing and 
enjoyable to him. For Nandhi the most enjoyable and relishing food is green grass. As directed 
by Paarvathi Nandhi worshipped Ganapathi by offering green grass. Nandhi was then relieved of 
his dreaded disease. His health improved and by the grace of Paarvathi he was redeemed. 


This incident is the basis for the practice recommended for pilgrims to Gaya, Benares and other 
places that they should give up something they love most as an offering to the Divine. This 
means that they should give up something which they like most and not something which they do 
not like. Whether it be a fruit or a vegetable, what you should choose to give up as an offering to 
God is what you like most. This means that you give up consuming thereafter that vegetable or 
fruit. This practice has been prevailing from ancient times among pilgrims to Benares, Prayaag 
or other sacred places for a holy bath in the Ganga or Yamuna. 


Offer to God what you like most 


Today many people go to Prayaag (Allahabad). What is the real meaning of Praayag or Kaashi? 
The scripture declares: "The Indweller is the Eternal Self." The body is the temple in the center 
of which the Ganga of Jnaana (Wisdom) is flowing. In this Ganga of wisdom the two rivers of 
Bhakthi and Sraddha (Devotion and Earnestness), represented by Yamuna and Sarasvathi-- 
merge and the point of conjunction of the three is known as Prayaag. Hence, the Divine should 
be offered what is most pleasing to one. 


Unfortunately today this ancient traditional practice has been reduced to a fashionable formality. 
Pilgrims going to Prayaag are asked by the paandas (priests) to give up what is most pleasing to 
them. Some of the pilgrims ponder over what they can easily give up and mention the names of 
these vegetables and fruits. They give up the bitter gourd or something else which they don't like. 
This is not proper. People should offer to give up what they relish most as the best offering to the 
Lord. But when they offer something which they don't like, the Lord seated in the heart declares: 
"Be it so!" As you have not offered what is most dear to you but what you dislike most, the Lord 
also offers to you what you dislike most. The reward for such dubious offerings to God is that 
instead of health you get disease. If you offered what is good, will not God give you what is 
good for you? 


As is your offering so is your reward 


This is illustrated by the example of Harishchandhra. He made an offering of what was most dear 
to him, namely, Sathyam (Truth). He was prepared to give up his kingdom, his wife and son and 
sell himself in bondage to uphold Truth. Truth is God. God is Truth. Where there is Truth there 
is God. Therefore adore Truth. Make all your offerings truthfully. Thereby you will reach the 
abode of Truth. As is your offering so is your reward. This is the truth demonstrated by 
Vinaayaka. 


There are other examples of Vinaayaka's greatness. Vinaayaka will not inflict trouble on anyone. 
However, apprehending that if Vinaayaka accompanies anyone, he will cause trouble, he is given 
a food offering and kept in the corner of the house. But Vinaayaka is not a lover of sleep like 
Kumbhakarna (Raavana's younger brother). Seeing his big belly people imagine that he is 
slothful. 


Gajaasura and Shiva 


There was once a demon by name Gajaasura. He was a demon King. He performed severe 
penance. Eeshvara appeared before him. Eeshvara is easily propitiated, and He gives readily 
whatever one prays for, without examining whether it is right or wrong to confer such a boon. He 
gives whatever the devotees pray for. This was what happened in the case of the demon, 
Bhasmaasura. He prayed to Shiva to grant a boon that whomsoever He touches by his hand 
should be reduced to ashes. Shiva granted the boon. Immediately Bhasmaasura wanted to test the 


power he had received by trying to place his hand on Shiva Himself! Ultimately Shiva had to be 
saved from Bhamaasura by a stratagem of Vishnu who made the demon place his hand on his 
own head. He was then reduced to ashes. 


Likewise, Gajaasura also performed penance and prayed to the Lord. Eeshvara appeared before 
him and asked him what he wanted. Gajaasura said' "Lord! you must merge in my stomach." 
Shiva granted the boon and lodged himself in the demon's stomach. Paarvathi, not finding 
Eeshvara, went out in search of her Lord and could find him nowhere. She went to here brother, 
Vishnu, and appealed to him to trace her missing Lord. 


Vishnu knew that Shiva was in the habit of granting boons indiscriminately and getting into 
difficulties. He told her: "Paarvathi! I know what has happened. Be calm. You go to your abode. 
I shall bring Eeshvara there." 


Vishnu took Shiva's Nandhi and decorated it to appear like a performing bull. Assuming the role 
of a bull-performer, Vishnu led the bull to the city of Gajaasura, playing on a pipe all the way 
while the bull danced to the tune. The bull was dancing to the music of the Divine embodiment 
of all mysteries. Gajaasura was intensely watching the performance of the bull and its master. 
Pleased with their performance, Gajaasura asked the bull trainer, "What do you want?" The latter 
said: "You should not go back on you word. Will you grant me what I want? You are Gajaasura, 
a great king." "Yes," he said. Give me Eeshvara who is in your stomach," said Vishnu. Only 
Vishnu knew this fact, none else. Gajaasura immediately fell at the feet of Vishnu and said' 
"Svaami! This secret is not known to anybody except yourself. I will keep my word even at the 
cost of my life. But there is one condition. My head should be worshipped by all and Eeshvara 
should wear my skin." Vishnu agreed to it. That is the reason why Eeshvara wears an elephant's 
skin. The head of Gajaasura is worshipped as Vinaayaka's head. 


Significance of Puraanik stories 


These are some of the puraanik stories relating to Vinaayaka. They are only stories. But such 
stories have been related to turn people's minds God-ward. 


If a deep enquiry is made, it will be realised that there is only one God. God is present in all. 
Vinaayaka is not separate from us. The indwelling principle in our hearts is the Divine Aathmik 
Principle. 


What is it that you should offer to God? Is it unripe or a ripe fruit? You should offer only a good 
ripe fruit. Likewise, you should offer your good thoughts to the Divine. That is the supreme 
significance of the Vinaayaka Chathurthi festival. Without realising this, people install a mud 
idol, decorate it with meaningless flowers, make offerings of useless things and seek the most 
valuable things from Him. What kind of bargain is this? You should offer to the Lord what is 
most sacred. Look at the example of a cow. It is offered all kinds of grass and other fodder. But it 
offers in return the most nourishing milk. Even the cow offers to man something pure and holy. 
But what does man offer to God? He keeps the pure things for himself and offers the impure to 
God. This is not right. You should offer to God what will please Him. You pray to God to give 
you all kinds of things. How are you entitled to ask for them? Only if you offer to God what will 
please Him. If you do not perform acts which will please God, how do you expect God to do 
things that will please you? 


Inner truth about Vinaayaka 


Therefore, at the outset you have to do things which will please God. Then God will offer what 
will please you. This is one of the truths to be learnt from the Vinaayaka festival. 


Vinaayaka is the Lord of life. Men should learn to shed selfishness and cultivate love of the 
Supreme Self. This is the inner truth about Vinaayaka. Vinaayaka should not be considered as 
merely an elephant-headed deity riding on a mouse. 


Similar mistakes are made about other deities. For instance, Sarasvathi is represented as a 
Goddess riding on a swan. Sarasvathi is the Goddess of Speech. Speech is based on the inhaling 
and exhaling of breath. In this process of respiration, the sound So-Ham is produced and when it 
is repeated regularly, you have the sound Ham-So, which is identified with a swan. The inhaling 
and exhaling process is the chariot on which the Goddess of Speech moves. 


The inner meanings of the terms and symbols used in Vedhaanthik parlance have to be properly 
understood. 


Everything is for your good 


The best way to please God is to act according to His injunctions. For instance, I advise students 
not to indulge in excessive talk. Carry out your duties. Contemplate on God. Is all this advice 
being given for God's sake? No. Whatever Svaami tells you is for your own good. Recognise that 
everything is for your good. 


I would relate a story in this context. There was a minister to a king who was in the habit of 
declaring that whatever happened was for one's good. Once the king cut his finger while slicing a 
piece of sugarcane. Seeing the bleeding finger of the king, the minister remarked that the cut was 
for the king's good. The king got so angry that he committed the minister immediately to prison. 
Even then the minister remarked that the prison sentence was for his own good. A few days later 
the king went alone for hunting in a forest and was resting under a tree. The servants of the tribal 
chief of the forest seized the king to be offered as human sacrifice for the tribal goddess. When 
the king was about to be beheaded, it was noticed’ that the king's finger was mutilated and such a 
mutilated person could not be offered as sacrifice. The king was freed. He remembered the 
minister's words and realised that the injury to his finger had saved him from death. He went to 
the prison straight and asked his minister how he could declare that the prison sentence was good 
for him. The minister replied that but for his being confined in prison, he would have 
accompanied the king and the tribal would have chosen him in the place of the king for their 
sacrifice. 


The lesson of this story is that one should learn to welcome everything that happens as for one's 
own good. Recognition of this truth is the means to acquire God's grace. Develop the firm 
conviction that whatever God says or does is for your own good. 


This is what all the Bhaaratheeya festivals seek to teach. Underlying every festival is a profound 
spiritual message. Unfortunately present-day students, caught up in modernity, are unable to 
comprehend this truth. They are obsessed with trifles and do not realise that education is for the 
purpose of leading the good life and not for earning a living. Yearn to lead an ideal life. 


Consider Vinaayaka as the Indweller in your heart. He is constantly warning you against what is 
bad. You ignore the warning and get into trouble. How much will you benefit if you "follow the 


Master" within you. Your conscience is the Master. Above all, heed the dictates of the Divine. 
That will be your best safeguard. 


Vinaayaka is one who has all the five elements under his control. Arjuna did penance for 
acquiring the Paashupatha Asthra from Shiva and overcame the powers of the five elements by 
the power of his penance. Vinaayaka is the embodiment of all potencies. He has no superior 
above' Him. 


In our bhajans, the first prayer is addressed to Vinaayaka. The bhajan starts with Om, the 
Pranava. It is the combination of Pranava with Vinaayaka which serves to redeem our lives. 


Discourse in the Sai Kulwant Mandap on 29-8-1995. 


24. Offer everything to God 


As in the sesame seed oil exists, 

As in milk ghee is present, 

As fragrance resides in a flower, 

As the juice exists in a fruit, 

As fire is latent in a faggot 

So is the Divine immanent in subtle form. 


EMBODIMENTS of Divine Love! Oil is present throughout the sesame seed. Ghee is present in 
every drop of milk. Fragrance is present in an invisible form in a flower. A fruit is filled with 
sweet juice. In every piece of wood fire is latent. In the same manner the Divine is immanent in 
the entire cosmos in a subtle form. God is present not in some country or some body. Like vision 
in the eye and hearing in the ear, God is present in the mind as Chaithanya (Consciousness). The 
cosmos is the visible manifestation of the invisible Supreme Self. 


While the Divine is in such close proximity to him man in his ignorance goes seeking God 
everywhere. The Divine is effulgent in every man as Sath-Chith-Aanandha (Being-Awareness- 
Bliss), the Cosmic Consciousness. 


Reflections of the sun shining in the sky can be seen in the oceans, rivers, the lakes and in wells. 
Though the reflections are varied, the sun is one alone. The Divine is present in man like the 
unseen thread which holds a garland of gems together. The entire cosmos is permeated by the 
Divine and is the visible manifestation of the Divine. 


Man's essential humanness is common to one and all 


Nothing in the world, no object, no human being, no creature can be found wherein God is not 
present. Though man appears in the world in different forms, speaking different languages, his 
essential humanness is common to one and all. There is only one race, that is the human race. 
God is only one. He is Sath-Chith-Aanandha. 


Just as a seed sprouts and grows into a plant wherein a flower blossoms, so does the Divine seed 
grow in the heart of man and blossoms as a flower, Sath-Chith-Aanandha. Just as it is natural for 
a seed to become a fragrant flower, so is it natural for man to experience the bliss of the Divine-- 
Sath-Chith-Aanandha. 


There are many evidences to demonstrate the Divinity that is inherent in man. But few men are 
ready to make the sacrifice that is required to experience this Divinity. 


The ancient sages regarded human life as full of fragrance to be enjoyed. They considered life as 
full of nectarine sweetness. When man is oblivious of this sweetness, he ceases to be human. 
Thyaaga (sacrifice) is the sweetness in Maanavathva (humanness). The scriptures declare’ "Only 
through sacrifice can man realise the eternal Divine." But, immersed in selfishness, man fails to 
recognise this truth. 


Thyaaga and Bali 


A synonym for the word Thyaaga (sacrifice) is Bali. The term Bali has several meanings such as' 
offering, dedication, sacrifice and a tax levy. What is meant by tax? Bali means that which has to 


be given as an offering in human life. But the ancients regarded Bali as offering a living object as 
a sacrifice. This is not the proper meaning of Bali. Bali is the recognition of the Divinity in man. 


People pay a water tax to the authorities who make available water at their dwelling from a 
distant source. Likewise people have to pay dues for the electricity supply which they receive. 


What is the tax you pay to the Divine for implanting divinity in you when you consider yourself 
to be remote from God because of your involvement in worldly affairs? You pay for small 
amounts of water supply and electrical energy. But what do you pay for the heavy downpour of 
rain which you get from Providence? God fills the tanks and rivers with water. He provides man 
with the life-giving oxygen in the air he breathes. The sun illumines the whole world by his light. 
What is the tax we pay for all these services? The arpitham (offerings we make to God) is the 
tax. That has been called Bali. One should not be frightened by the term Bali. It means only 
offering one's self to the Divine. 


Greatness of Emperor Bali 


In making such an offering, Emperor Bali was supreme. He was the grandson of Prahlaadha. 
Emperor Bali was dedicating his entire life to God. He was a great devotee. Moreover he 
excelled in acts of charity. He made his subjects rejoice. He never went back on his plighted 
word. He was full of such great virtues. Emperor Bali took good care of his people, promoting 
their welfare and endearing himself to them. 


Bali's father, Virochana, was also a godly ruler. Thus from Prahlaadha to Bali the whole line of 
rulers were filled with love of God. They were influenced by the Divine power. Originally 
Prahlaadha's father, Hiranyakashipu, was Lord Vishnu's gate-keeper. Whatever their differences 
in behaviour and attitudes, all three (Prahlaadha, Virochana and Bali) were equally inspired by 
devotion to God. 


In spite of the strong opposition from his preceptor Shukraachaarya to Bali for giving an offering 
of land to Vaamana as promised by him, Bali was firm in surrendering to Vishnu all that he had. 
He told the Preceptor: "Guruji, what is the use of my possessing anything which is not of use to 
God? The seeker is God Himself. God has really no desires. But to redeem us from the 
consequences of our past deeds He creates situations which call for offerings, When the infinite 
Divine appears in the role of the seeker of favours, what greater blessing can there be than 
making the offering to the Divine? I do not seek any greater blessing than this. I am ready to 
offer my mind, my body and my life itself to God. There is no greater fortune than this." 


This is the meaning of surrender. God does not ask for any offering of wealth or position. God is 
said to be pleased if a sincere devotee offers a leaf, a flower, a fruit or even water. What is this 
leaf? It is the body. The heart is the flower, the mind is fruit. The water that is to be offered is 
that from the tears of joy shed by the devotee. This is what God expects from you. The Lord tells 
you' "My dear man! The body does not belong to you. Who gave it to you? It is precious gift 
from God. It is inert like a leaf." 


Eradi referred to the Gaayathri manthra: "Om! Bhur-Bhuvas-Suvaha". In this manthra, 'Bhu' 
refers to the body, which is made up of material substances. It may be compared to a leaf, (which 
is also a material object). 'Bhuvah' refers to that which activates the inert body. That Praana 
(Life Force) operates as vibration. ‘Suvah" What is the basis for the life Force? It is Prajnaana. 
The Upanishath declares: “Prajnaanam Brahma." The Prajna operates through radiation. ‘Suvah' 


refers to this power of radiation. Humanness is made up of these three constituents’ Radiation, 
Vibration and material inertness. 


Make God your life-breath 


The flower to be offered-to God is a pure heart free from all taints and evil tendencies like lust, 
anger, and pride. The fruit to be offered is a mind free from all bad thoughts and feelings. It 
should be filled with the sweet juice of goodness. The water that should be offered to God is the 
water that flows from the eyes out of joy in experiencing God. Tears are of two kinds: tears born 
of grief resulting from attachments; tears spontaneously arising from Aanandha (blissful 
experience of the Divine). Make God your life-breath, the sweetness of your existence. 


It was with such sacred feelings that Emperor Bali offered himself to the Lord appearing as 
Vaamana. People make all kinds of offerings to God. But the greatest of them all is to offer 
oneself. That is what Bali did. He declared- "Oh Lord! I am offering to you the heart which you 
gave me. What else can I offer you? Please accept my offering at your feet." 


Bali is such an example of supreme sacrifice. Thus he pleased God. God has no desires because 
He contains within Himself everything. Whatever He does is only for the good of the devotees. 


The supreme quality of Emperor Bali is his spirit of sacrifice. He taught the people of Kerala the 
lesson of sacrifice. He also demonstrated that when it comes to upholding one's plighted word, 
one can disregard even the advice of one's preceptor. Nothing should be allowed to come 
between a devotee and the Lord. Bharata, Prahlaadha and Bali are examples of devotees of the 
Lord who set aside the Vedhic injunction regarding reverence for the mother, the father and the 
preceptor in their allegiance to the Divine. 


Bali recognized that not a blade of grass moves without the power of the Divine in it. "No one 
knows the supreme power of God's will. He permeates everything in the cosmos from an ant to 
Brahman. Men are ignorant of this truth," declared Bali (Svaami recited a verse from the 
Bhaagavatham). 


Significance of Onam 


Emperor Bali surrendered himself totally to the divine. Under his reign, all the subjects were 
happy and led godly lives. Saddened by the thought of having to go away from his people, he 
told them' "Dear people! I cannot be without you and you cannot be without me. Every year I 
shall appear before you and give you joy." 


Onam is the day on which Bali fulfills his promise. Waking up early in the morning taking a 
bath, wearing new dresses and worshipping God mark the celebration of Onam. What is the 
significance of wearing new Vasthra (clothes)? Vasthra is one of the names for the heart. 
Wearing new Vasthra (clothes) means purifying the heart. When the heart is pure the Divine 
elects to dwell in it. There is no meaning in wearing new garments if the heart remains impure. 


Hence, the heart has to be kept pure. The ruler must be worthy of the subjects and the subjects 
must be worthy of the ruler. Harmony between the two is vital. 


It is not easy to understand the ways of the Lord. Even the ancient sages felt that god's ways are 
inscrutable and that His attributes are beyond reckoning and praise. The Gopikas declared: "Oh 
Krishna! How can we know your true nature? You are subtlest among the subtle and vaster than 
the vastest. You are omnipresent. How can we know you?" 


All belongs to God 


The sages, probing the mystery of the Divine, came to the conclusion that God is everything and 
no one can claim anything as one's own. By this attitude they were able to realise the Divine. 
However, because of the influence of Kali Age, today everyone claims everything as "Mine." 
Indeed, nothing belongs to anyone. Men are immersed in the false and foolish concept of 
ownership. Possessiveness is rampant in every thought and action. And this leads to the inflation 
of the ego. Egoism has to be utterly eradicated. Possessiveness should be banished. Divinity 
should be installed in the heart. Be aware that all things belong to God. "You came with empty 
hands and you depart with empty hands." All that was got or spent in between are mere passing 
clouds. Emperor Bali taught this profound truth that nothing belongs to anyone. All are gifts 
from God. 


Bali was a great devotee. Devotion has five qualities and nine paths to adore the Divine. These 
nine paths begin with shravanam (listening to the glories of God) and end with Aathma 
nivedhanam (complete Self-surrender). Bali taught his subjects the profound truths about 
devotion. 


From then to our own times, the people of Kerala have been celebrating Onam as a festival dear 
as life itself. They greet the festival with ineffable joy. Not for the delicious dishes prepared on 
the occasion. It is the holiest of the holy days for them. They should come together to chant the 
Lord's name. (Bhagavaan sang a poem which glorifies how a holy festival day should be 
celebrated. By chanting the Lord's name, by listening to the stories of the Lord and by playing 
the host for godly men). Only that day is a sacred day when you chant the name of God, yearn 
for proximity with God and experience the bliss of His grace within you. All other days are days 
of mourning. The Divine is within each one. When one seeks this inner vision, there is no greater 
experience. 


The Keralites have retained their faith in God despite conditions not conducive to theistic beliefs. 
Their devotion is deep and firm. As worshippers of Padmahabha, their devotion stems from the 
depths of their being. 


Embodiments of Divine Love! Realise that you are not separate from God, who is the very 
embodiment of Love. God can be attained only through Love and not by any other means. 


Discourse on 5-9-1995, in Sai Kulwant Mandap, Prashaanthi Nilayam. 


25. Earn the esteem of society by service 


EMBODIMENTS of Love! Human life is immensely precious. But this sacred life is haunted by 
troubles of various kinds of daily living. Life is like an ocean carrying waves of pleasures and 
pain. In his ordinary life man is driven by innumerable desires to seek worldly pleasures of 
various kinds. This precious life is rendered meaningless and worthless by the pursuit of these 
mundane desires. 


The body is essential for living. Without it man cannot accomplish anything. Human life is a 
composite of body, mind, and spirit. But man today ignores the mind and spirit and wastes his 
life by preoccupation with the body alone. 


The mind is the most important organ in the body. It is vital for doing anything. Man's life is 
based on the mind. The universe is filled with mental consciousness. The cosmos is rooted in the 
mind. The mind is a bundle of thoughts. Hence man has to purify the mind by sacred thoughts. 
Only when he has noble thoughts he can lead an ideal life. Out of thoughts are born the desires. 
Desires activate the mind. Hence it is necessary to keep desires under control. 


Dharma can be achieved through the body alone 


Society tends to look askance at persons with physical disabilities. But limbs are not so very 
important. What is more essential is a pure mind. If all one's limbs are perfect, but if one's mind 
is impure, of what use are the limbs? 


However, man can achieve what he desires, only if all the limbs in the body are in good shape. 
Man should make good use of all his organs to lead an ideal life. Every living being has come 
into existence for a purpose. Hence everyone should strive to use his body for the purpose for 
which he has been endowed with it. 


Through the body alone can Dharma be achieved, declares the scripture. The body is given to 
man to carry out his duties in life. Men today tend to use the body for eating and sleeping, 
without recognizing the duties they have to perform. Should men live like beasts and birds, with 
no higher aims than eating, mating and sleeping? There is in man an immortal spirit, whose 
presence should be realised. 


People pursue various studies, engage themselves in various activities, but make no attempt to 
understand what is humanness. Of what use is knowledge, wealth and position if man ignores his 
essential eternal spiritual reality? Every man's life should be dedicated to the service of others. 


Na thapaamsi na theerthani 
Na thanthrani, japaanapi 
Samsaara saagarothaare 
Sajjana sevanam vinaa. 


("Neither penance, nor baths in sacred waters, neither rituals nor chanting of the divine name 
will help one to cross the ocean of worldly life without service to good persons.") 


Whatever pilgrimages one may perform, whatever yaagas and japas one may do, without using 
the body in the service of others, no one can achieve liberation. Every one should be prepared to 


serve and be served. This body has been given so that one may do seva (serve others) and not for 
Naayakathvam (lord it over them). 


Service is the supreme aim in life. Everyone should seek to redeem his life by service to his 
fellow-human beings. Render service to the extent of your capacity. 


How can anyone be called human, if being born a human being and growing in a human society, 
he does not recognise human values? You must see that you don't harm any living being. "He 
alone is a redeemed being who causes no pain to others and avoids pain to himself," says a 
Thelugu poem. 


Advice to the handicapped 


Those who are handicapped need not lament over their plight. They should develop good 
qualities. People today worry about their possessions, positions and associates, but not about 
their virtues. What is the value of riches, acquaintances and positions? There is need for a certain 
amount of material possessions. But excessive wealth is harmful. Of what use are fair-weather 
friends who surround you when you have money and position, but desert you when you lose 
them? God alone is an unfailing friend, who is with you at all times and protects you. When you 
cultivate such an attitude you can face any situation in life. 


At birth all are pure and innocent. But as they grow, they develop arrogance, pride and 
ostentation. But this is not proper. People should cultivate humility and discipline, which are the 
hall-mark of humanness. Humanness means harmony in thought, word and deed. The absence of 
this harmony is degrading. Men should learn to respect one another. The divine is present in 
everyone. Strive to make others happy as far as possible. 


Everyone should manifest his divine essence as a spark of the Divine. It is a fruit of many lives 
to be born as a human being. Man must lead an exemplary life. Education and wealth are good in 
themselves, but when they are misused they become harmful. The fault lies in the conduct of the 
persons concerned. Humanness-consists in leading a life free from egoism and acquisitiveness. 


Every man should recognise what it is to be human. He should realise that his tongue, eyes, ears 
and other organs are given to him to glorify God, not to disparage or cause hurt to others. 
Jayadheva exhorted his tongue to revel in singing the greatness of the Lord. This is the task 
before every one. He should keep his tongue under control, serve society with dedication and 
lead a worthy life. Life is essentially transient. Hence while life lasts, one must earn the esteem 
and regard of one's fellowmen. One should not waste one's life. It must be filled with bliss. This 
is the true path for everyone. 


Discourse in the Sai Kulwant Mandap on 1-10-1995. 


26. Hanumaan : the ideal for mankind 


EMBODIMENTS of Love! Everything in the world has a value, but the value of the spoken word 
cannot be easily measured. By his words man can acquire every kind of wealth. By their words 
Rulers lose their kingdoms. By one's speech one can acquire friends and relations. By words one 
may make enemies, engender hatred and make himself miserable. Good words are a man's best 
kinsfolk. Nor is that all. It is one's speech which contributes to his progress in many ways. One's 
words are the root cause of one's prosperity, courage, bliss or even death. One's speech 
determines almost everything in one's life. 


Hence one's speech should be sweet, wholesome and pleasing to others. "Anudhvegakaram 
vaakyam sathyam hitham preethikaram" (One’s speech should not cause excitement. It should be 
truthful, pleasing, and well-meaning). Even truth should not be uttered in harsh language. It 
should be soft, sweet, pleasing conducive to peacefulness. Hanumaan was the supreme exemplar 
of such speech. 


Hanumaan was a dauntless hero who by his sweet and persuasive words promoted friendship 
between Shri Raama and Sugreeva. He was tranquil, valorous, and virtuous. He was a great 
scholar in Sanskrith and proficient in many languages. He was a master even of the Paisaachi 
language (the language of evil spirits). Sanskrith is the mother of all languages. It was esteemed 
as the language of the Gods in ancient times. 


God and the cosmos 


There have been different conceptions regarding the phenomenal world, some considering it as 
mithya (illusory) and some considering it as real. The Vedhik seers viewed the world as a 
projection of the Divine. From very early times many sages devoted their lives to the discovery 
of the Divine. Only a few persisted in the quest throughout their lives. Their ecstatic experience 
of the Divine is expressed in the Purusha Shuktha, which declares' "Vedhaaham Etham, 
purusham mahaantham." This means: "We have seen God. He is shining with the effulgence of a 
billion Suns. He is beyond the bounds of Thamo guna. His effulgence defies description." 
"Aadhithyavarnam Thamasah Parasthaath" (He is effulgent like the Sun and is beyond the 
darkness of ignorance). 


The world is made up of the five basic elements (ether, air, fire, water and earth). The sages 
demonstrated that the Cosmos is the embodiment of God. The Vedhas, the Upanishaths, the 
Ithihaasas and Puraanas also proclaimed the same truth. “Sarvam khalu idham Brahma" (All this 
is verily Brahmam). "Eeshvaras sarva bhoothaanaam," "Eesaavaasyam idham Jagath" (The 
entire cosmos is the abode of God). For experiencing this Divinity, Vairaagya (detachment) is 
essential. Detachment does not mean renouncing health and home and retiring to a forest. True 
detachment means giving up worldly feelings, developing godly thoughts. The Reality is One 
only. "Ekoham Bahushyaam" (The One willed to become the Many). The scholars declared! 
"Ekam sath' Vipraah Bahudhaa vadhanthi" (There is One only; the wise call It by many names). 


Reason for advent of avathaars and sages 


To propagate this great truth to the world, from time to time many sages and saints and 
Avathaars made their advent in Bhaarath. They had total knowledge of the Supreme Self -- 
Paripuurna Brahma Jnaanis. Why did such realized souls take birth in the phenomenal world? 
In the modern world it is essential for people to comprehend the truth underlying this. Although 


these realized beings have no need to take human birth, they elected to do so for the purpose of 
redeeming the people on earth by their teachings and actions. Unless they are total Brahma- 
Jnaanis, they cannot make others perceive the truth. Hence they come down in human form to 
dispel the ignorance of people in the world and reveal to them the Prajnaana (highest wisdom). 


Krishna was a Paripuurna-Jnaani (One who possessed the Supreme Wisdom). Why did he take 
on a human body? "Parithraanaaya Saadhunaam" (to protect the good). Krishna incarnated in 
human form to teach the highest truth to the pious and the godly persons who were filled with 
good thoughts and performed good deeds. The sage Vyaasa, who codified the Vedhas, was a 
Paripuurna Jnaani. Vyaasa is Naaraayana Himself. What need was there for such a Realized 
Divine Being to make his advent on the earth? Vyaasa incarnated as a man to elevate the 
ignorant and show them the path to a higher life. Shuka (the son of Vyaasa) was also a 
Paripuurna Jnaani. He, as well as the others, chose to be born on earth for the sake of promoting 
the welfare of the world and not because of any karma-bonds. 


Two types of spiritual aspirants 


The knowledge of the Supreme Self is associated with total freedom from Ahamkaara (egoism). 
Those who have no taint of ego in them are totally free from the consequences of actions, 
regardless of what actions they do. Today there are in the world two types of saadhakas 
(Spiritual aspirants). One type of aspirants regard the cosmos as a manifestation of God. The 
other type consider the cosmos itself as God. The difference between the two can be illustrated 
by an example. Many kinds of jewels are made from gold. Some may consider the jewels as 
different from gold. Others may consider gold as the basic substance from which the jewels have 
been made. The Paripuurna Jnaanis belong to the category of those who realise that without 
gold there can be no jewels. Those who consider the jewels as more important than the gold, out 
of which they have been made,.-belong to the category of those with half-knowledge. The truth 
is that without gold there can be no ornaments. Ornaments can be of various kinds and may have 
various forms and labels. But gold has no specific name or form like the jewels. 


God is without attributes, is eternal, infinite and immutable. Everyone born in the world has a 
form and name. But the divinity within him has no name or form. The individual with name and 
form is filled with egoism and possessiveness. This egoism and possessiveness are the cause of 
one's pleasure and pain, happiness and sorrow. Hence everyone must strive to curb these two 
tendencies. 


Guru and the disciple 


Once a disciple went to a preceptor and requested him to impart to him the Supreme Knowledge 
of Omni-Self--Brahma-thathvam. The guru gave him a manthra and asked him to recite it 
continually without any selfish desire. The guru told him that after he has done this whole- 
heartedly for a year he could come and receive the Brahma-Jnaana (knowledge of the Self). The 
disciple came back after a year duly carrying out with devotion the instructions of the preceptor. 
Filled with the hope that the preceptor would impart the Supreme Knowledge, the disciple had a 
sacred bath and was on his way to the preceptor. 


Unaware of the presence of the disciple, a maid was sweeping the aashram (hermitage) premises 
and the dust from the ground fell on the young man. Immediately, he lost his temper, as he felt 
that his purity after a sacred bath had been sullied by the dust that fell on him. He was angry with 


the maid for allowing the dust in fall on him. He looked at her with anger. The maid was filled 
with fear. 


The disciple went in and offered his salutations to the guru and said' "Guruji! I have been 
waiting for a year to secure your grace. The time is now ripe for realising it. I am eager to receive 
the Supreme Knowledge from you." The preceptor said' "You are not yet competent to receive 
that knowledge. You have the qualities of a snake. You got angry with a girl who unwittingly 
caused some dust to fall on you. How can Brahma-Jnaana be imparted to one who has not even 
this amount of forbearance? Go back and practise the saadhana for one more year. 


At the end of the second year, when the disciple was about to come to the aashram, the preceptor 
instructed the maid to see that as she swept, all the dust fall on the disciple. The maid told the 
guru that on the previous occasion the disciple had been angry with her, and this time if she 
repeated the offence, he might beat her. The guru told her to do as directed by him. In 
accordance with the directive of the guru, she let the dust fall on the disciple in full measure. 
Enraged at her conduct, the disciple went to beat her but refrained from doing so. 


He then went into the aashram and paid his respects to guru. The guru told him' "You have not 
yet acquired the competence to receive the knowledge. You are exhibiting the qualities of a dog. 
Come back after ridding yourself of these animal qualities." 


At the end of the third year, the disciple was coming to the aashram after a sacred bath. Carrying 
out the instructions of the guru, the maid of the aashram poured some dirty water on the disciple. 
The latter calmly offered his pranaams (obeisance) to the maid and said' "Mother! My 
salutations to you. You have helped to strengthen my forbearance so that I can be worthy of the 
preceptor's grace." Without getting angry with her, he told her that he would be always grateful 
to her for what she had done to him. 


When he went in, the guru welcomed him and said: "Son! To-day you have become eligible to 
receive the Supreme Spiritual Knowledge." 


The lesson of this story is that every spiritual seeker has to get rid of attachment to the body. But, 
that is not enough. The egoistic feeling should be totally eliminated. The sense of possessiveness 
should be expelled. Only then can one realise Divinity. 


The preceptor drew the disciple close to him and imparted to him the Brahma-Jnaana (Supreme 
Spiritual Wisdom) and filled him with bliss. 


Hanumaan's humility 


There are in the world today millions of people who recite the Lord's name. But while reciting 
the name, they do not realise the greatness and glory of the Divine name. 


When Hanumaan entered Lanka, the land of Raakshasas, the first friendly person he encountered 
was Vibheeshana. All the Raakshasas in Lanka, who had not seen a monkey, were curious to 
know all about the simian visitor. They asked him' "Who are you? Wherefrom have you come 
and at whose behest? How did you enter Lanka?" 'Hanumaan was unruffled. He told them, "I am 
the servant of the Lord Kosala, Shri Raama", though he was very powerful. This means also that 
in any situation one should remain calm and unperturbed. 


How is this tranquility to be secured? When the heart is pure, peace is assured. Without purity of 
the heart peace is unattainable. Even if one appears to be at peace, it is only a pretence. When 
one has both purity of heart and peace of mind, one can achieve anything. There are three P's. 


The first 'P' stands for purity. The second 'P' for patience. The third 'P' stands for perseverance. 
When these are present, one can acquire the grace of Shri Raama. This was amply demonstrated 
by Hanumaan. 


But Vibheeshana was full of anguish. He told Hanumaan: "Oh Hanumaan! How lucky you are, 
how meritorious to earn the company of Raamachandra! I have not had that good fortune. I have 
been meditating on Raama's name for many years. But so far I have not got the Dharshan of 
Raama. You have not only enjoyed the company of the Lord, but you are privileged to carry out 
the commands of Raama. Please tell me how I can secure such a blessing." Hanumaan replied! 
"Vibheeshana! It is not enough if you merely recite the name of Raama. You have to carry out 
the injunctions of Raama and engage yourself in the service of Raama. Only then you will 
experience the power of Raama within you." From that moment, Vibheeshana resolved to 
participate in the service of Raama. 


Naama japa without service is no use 


Today in the Kali Yuga, there are any number of persons chanting Raama's name. Naama-Japa 
(chanting the name) is not enough. Whatever name you recite, you must also be active in the 
service of the form associated with the name. What is implied by the term, Raamakaarya 
(service to Raama)? Raama is immanent in the entire cosmos. Raama is present everywhere. 
Hence, you have to take part in social service. 


By rendering service to one's fellow beings, rendering help to the helpless and performing sacred 
acts of dedicated service, one becomes eligible for Shri Raama's grace. 


Although Hanumaan was highly intelligent, in matters relating to the Divine, he made no 
distinction between good and bad. He carried out implicitly whatever he was ordered to do. He 
did not care to enquire whether it was right or wrong. Why? Because he regarded whatever 
Raama said as Vedha Vaakya (Gospel truth). God's word is beyond question. Hanumaan felt that. 
he was not competent to sit in judgement on the 'Lord's words. "My duty is to carry out whatever 
Raama says." "Karthavyam yogam uchyathe" (Duty is Yoga), says the Geetha. What is this yoga 
? "Yogah karmasu Kaushalam" says Geetha. Yoga is excellence in the performance of duty. 
Hence you should embark on all actions in accordance with the Divine injunctions. Then alone 
you experience all kinds of knowledge. 


Do not give room for doubt and disbelief 


Today everyone is racked by doubts' "To do or not to do." To meditate on God why should there 
be this doubt? No one filled with such doubt will be worthy of God's grace. You should not give 
any room for disbelief. Even if a person abuses you, you must seek to recognise the divinity in 
him. Every individual may have his own name and form, but the Divine is in everyone equally. 
This broad-minded view should be developed. There is no one in. the world without the Divine 
in ‘him. Hence service should be rendered to one and all with this conviction. 


Many hanker after Self-Realisation. But how can they have Realisation when they have no self- 
confidence? What does Self-Realisation mean? It is not discovering one's lineage and mundane 
identity. These relate to the body. But you do not belong to any family or clan. You are yourself. 
Even to declare, "I am God", implies dualism. It is difficult to comprehend the Divine Principle. 
The nearest approach to comprehending the Divine is to consider Divinity as all pervasive. 


Leave no taint of self interest in your actions 


Embodiments of Love! All devotional exercises today appear to be a kind of business. This is not 
the way to relate to 'the Divine. Whatever you do, regard it as an offering to the Divine. "Who 
am I? I am yours"---this should be the attitude towards God. There should be no taint of self 
interest in your actions. (Svaami related how Raama taught to Kaikeyi the Vedhaanthik message 
of egolessness as the means of Self-Realisation). 


Men are dominated by the feeling of possessiveness. But what is it that really belongs to them? 
They are only Trustees for their properties. Nothing really belongs to them. You imagine that the 
body belongs to you. But how much control have you over it? Can you live as you please? No. 
The body is not yours. Everything belongs to God. One can become a true devotee only when he 
has this feeling. "Nothing is mine. All belongs to you (God)." This should be the feeling of the 
devotee. 


The difference in attitudes between the gopikas and the denizens of Dhvaaraka consisted 
precisely in this' The gopikas declared’ "Krishna, we are yours!" The people of Dhvaaraka 
developed pride and egoism over their kinship with Krishna. That egoism brought ruin on the 
Yaadhava clan. The Yaadhavas boasted about their kinship with Krishna in various ways. The 
gopikas had no such conceit. They were content to declare: "We are yours, Krishna!" 


The difference in attitudes indicates the distinction between dualism and non-dualism. The non- 
dualist has no problem. "Adhvaitha dharshanam jnaanam" (Perception of the one without a 
second is the Supreme Knowledge). What everyone has to realise today is the omnipresence of, 
the Divine. "Sarvam khalu idham Brahma” (Verily all this is Divine). The unity of the body, 
mind and spirit should be understood. No actions can be performed without the body. Without 
actions the eternal verities cannot be recognized. There can be no Self-Realisation without 
recognizing the verities. 


Hanumaan's devotion 


Hanumaan was always engaged in the contemplation of Raama. Every hair on his body chanted 
the name of Raama. Hanumaan is adored by devotees as an example of total devotion to the 
Lord. When some had doubts whether Hanumaan could leap the ocean to search for Seetha in 
Lanka, Hanumaan told them that Raama had given him the task and He would also give him the 
strength to accomplish it. This absolute faith was the cause of his success. When people entertain 
doubts as to their capacity to carry out the tasks assigned to them by the Divine, they will be 
weak and powerless. Hence, to accomplish anything, firm faith is essential. Doubts have to be 
expelled. Everything that happens should be accepted as for one's own good. That is the means 
to qualify for God's grace. To go on speculating over Svaami's words is an insane exercise. 
Hanumaan exemplified complete freedom from doubts. He had only two desires. To be dear and 
near to Raama. Hanumaan intensely yearned to be always near to Raama. He had no use for any 
object, however valuable, which did not proclaim the' name of Raama. He threw away the pearl 
necklace presented to him by Seetha because the pearls did not recite Raama's name. (Svaami 
sang a ballad, in which Raama praised Hanumaan as the greatest of devotees and embraced him). 
Raama declared' "Hanumaan! No material object is fit enough to be given to you as a present. 
You live in the world of the Spirit. You have no attachment to the things of the world. Let you be 
present wherever my glory is sung." 


Hanumaan was intoxicated by his devotion to Raama and was always in a state of ecstasy in 
chanting Raama's name. He was all humility in the presence of Raama. He was utterly fearless 
before Raavana. Before the Divine he was a suppliant. Before a Raakshasa he was a hero. 
Hanumaan knew how to conduct himself in any situation. He was supremely, intelligent. He 
stands out' as ideal for mankind. 


Human action and Divine aim should go together 


People today lead meaningless mechanical lives with no ideals to inspire them. The purpose of 
life is to experience the Divine that is subtle and invisible like the roots that sustain a tree. Men 
today want fruits without considering the roots. The ancient sages searched for the roots to 
realise the fruits. Bhaaratheeya culture was based on this concern for what is fundamental and 
primal. Today people forget the basic truths and pursue the ephemeral. Worldly life is 
inescapable. But it should be lived with the ultimate goal in view. Human action and Divine aim 
should go together. To forget the Divine is to descend to the level of the animal. A hero becomes 
a zero if he forgets God. 


All over the world men are perpetually haunted by fears of every kind because they have not 
secured the freedom from fear which God alone can give. (Bhagavaan sang a ballad describing 
the fears experienced by man). 


God's grace alone can free men from fear. All should strive to secure Divine grace by developing 
firm faith in God. You may worship any form, chant any name, but have firm faith in God. Call 
the Divine by any name, Raama, Krishna, Allah, Jesus or Buddha--all names are the same. The 
one Lord is adored by different names. 


Devotion should not be converted into a form of business. You should not say you will offer 
something to God if you get a certain thing which -you desire. God needs nothing from you. 
Everything belongs to God. You brought nothing with you at birth and leave the world with 
nothing. Only the Divine is with you. Hence, cherish faith in God. - 


People ask, "How is one to believe in something that is not perceivable?" This is an absurd 
question. The qualities of a man are not perceived while the physical body can be seen. But the 
qualities are more significant than the physical features. 

Likewise, faith in the Divine is more important than faith in the phenomenal world. God can be 
realised only through Love. 


Discourse in Sai Kulwant Mandap on 14-10-1995. 


A wave of service, if it sweeps over the land, catching everyone in 
its enthusiasm, will be able to wipe off the mounds of hatred, 
malice and greed that infest the world. 


Baba 


27. The bliss of Self-Realisation 


At nightfall the moon is the illuminator; 
At dawn it is the Sun who illumines; 
Righteousness illumines the three worlds; 
A virtuous son is the light of the family. 


EMBODIMENTS of Love! At night the moon is the source of light for us. During the day the sun 
sheds light and serves mankind. The three worlds are illumined by Dharma (Righteousness). A 
virtuous son is a beacon for the family. From ancient times, Bhaaratheeya culture has been 
illumined, fostered and inspired by didactic sayings of this kind. 


It is purity of mind that helps to sublimate mankind, directs it towards God and enables it to 
manifest the inherent divinity in man. "What is perceived is liable to perish" (says an aphorism). 
That which is seen, that which appears to be real, is bound to pass away in the stream of time. 
All that is apparent in the phenomenal world is bound to disappear sometime or other. We should 
make every effort to know that which is invisible but imperishable. All external objects seen with 
the eye are bound to disappear. 


Acquire the eyes of wisdom 


It is not right that man, who is endowed with immense potencies, should be content with what is 
seen by the physical eyes. Such eyes are possessed equally by beasts and birds, as well as insects 
and germs. What, then is the uniqueness of the sight given to man? It must be realised that it is 
difficult to secure human birth. Having acquired this privilege, human beings should not be 
content with what is seen by the physical eyes. Man should acquire Jnaana nethra (the eyes of 
wisdom). 


It may be argued that even the physical eyes help to acquire knowledge. The eyes see everything 
but cannot see themselves. Eyes which cannot see themselves, how can they see the mind or see 
Maadhava (the Divine Lord)? To have a vision of the Lord, the physical eyes are not competent. 
One must acquire the eyes of wisdom for this purpose. 


The eyes are there, but when they develop a disease the eyes are not aware of it. When the ears 
lose the power of hearing, they are not aware of the loss. The senses which cannot know their 
own state, how can they know God? The physical eyes can only serve to see external objects in 
Nature and examine their properties and explain them, but cannot recognize the Divine. 


The external world is made up of the Panchabhuthas (five great elements) ether, air, fire, water 
and earth. The five senses are transient, momentary and prone to disease. Senses which are liable 
to become victims of the disease of attachment, how can they serve to recognise the Divine? 
Those senses which cannot recognise their own condition are enveloped in ignorance. 


What is meant by the phrase "knowing one's self"? Does self knowledge mean knowing one's 
lineage or profession? Knowledge of the Self transcends knowledge of the body, the senses, the 
mind and the Anttzahkarana (the Will). 


Get the vision of God 


Today people worship God in various ways. They pray to God' "Oh Lord! Let me have a vision 
of you! Free me from all my troubles." When one listens to these prayers, one is tempted to feel 


that they arise only from ignorance. People who offer such prayers seem to have no idea of the 
nature of God. Who is God? The scriptures, the Vedhas and the Upanishaths, give the answer to 
this question that God is: Sath-Chith-Aanandha. What you should seek from God, who is Sath- 
Chith-Aanandha, is Sath-Chit-Aanandha, and not trivial things relating to the world. All things 
are included in that Aanandha (Supreme Bliss). What is happening today is that people invoke 
the name of God but are really worshipping the devil. All mundane desires are associated with 
the devil and not with the Divine. The more desires are controlled, the more blissful one will be. 


What, then, is the meaning of the call "know thyself"? You have to get a vision of God. You 
have to experience the Divine. You have to converse with God. Man must realize God; see God; 
feel God; talk to God. This is religion. Without understanding this true meaning of religion, 
people regard various forms of worship and prayers as religion. "Realise is Religion." This 
means that to realize the eternal reality is true religion. 


Man is the embodiment of the eternal Truth. He is the embodiment of Sath-Chith-Aanandha 
(Being-Awareness-Bliss). But he is unable to recognize his true identity because egoism and 
possessiveness, pomp and pride envelop man's true form of "Being-Awareness-Bliss." The man 
who is able to get rid of attachment and hatred, egoism and acquisitiveness, will recognize his 
Sath-Chith-Aanandha (divine nature). The Divine within is covered by these tendencies like 
ashes over a burning charcoal. When the ashes are blown away, the fire will reveal itself. 


Sath-Chith-Aanandha is the true wealth of a human being. Everyone should try to secure this 
treasure by overcoming the dragon of self-conceit which is barring the access to it. Everyone has 
to think for himself how he is viewing this treasure. 


Men appear to worship God, but in reality they are pursuing worldly objects. How can they 
expect to realise God? There should be harmony in' thought, word and deed. The Divine whom 
you seek is within you. Your yearning for the Divine must be total and all-absorbing. 


The body is a trust and not your private property 


People speak about Moksha (liberation). What is it from which they have to be liberated? Is it 
from family, wealth or position? No. Liberation from these is an easy affair. Liberation is from 
the sense of identification with the body. The body is only an instrument and not your true self. 
The body is a gift from God. It does not belong to you, but you have to protect it as an 
instrument given to you. Everything belongs to God. You have to treat it as a trust and not as 
your private property. It is therefore, your duty to make right use of the body and senses given to 
you. 


God's ways are astonishing, inscrutable, and mysterious. God has made ample provision for all 
man's needs. He has also given to man much more in the form of luxuries. In addition, He has 
conferred on man the power to control all these things. God has told man' "You are free to use as 
you like all the things given to you, subject to one condition. You will have to face the 
consequences of your actions." This means that you cannot abuse the freedom given to you to 
misuse the things that are provided for you. When you misuse anything, you have to bear the 
resulting misery. When you make good use of anything, you will enjoy the benefits therefrom. 
You have to take note of the purpose for which you use your senses or the objects given to you. 
Any 'misuse of them will bring misery in its wake. 


Understand your true Self first 


You came with nothing into the world and leave it with nothing. What happens to your wealth or 
to yourself? Of what use is all other wealth unless a man realises the bliss of oneness with the 
Divine (Sath-Chith-Aanandha)? (Svaami sang a song, in which he lamented the plight of man 
who ceaselessly worked for feeding his stomach, forgetting God) All these, pursuits are utterly 
worthless. Scientists who are exploiting the moon are not trying to understand their own minds. 
Without understanding one's own true self, all other knowledge is meaningless. 


The moon dispels the darkness of night. The moon shines through the reflected light of the sun. 
Moonlight is cool while sunlight is warm. The mind is like the moon. When the rays of the 
Aathma fall on the mind, it acquires coolness. When the same rays fall on Buddhi (intellect), it 
gets hot. Today there is more concentration on development of the intellect than on broadening 
the mind. Man, who has come from the Divine, should aim at the perfection of the Divine. The 
famous Italian violin manufacturer Anthony Stradivarius, took one year to make one perfect 
violin because he regarded the making of the violin as an offering to God, who is perfect. 


Consider the body as the flute of God 


All actions should be done wholeheartedly. This was exemplified by the total devotion of the 
Gopikas to Krishna. They were lost in ecstasy over the melodious music of Krishna's flute. They 
found in that music the essence of all the Vedhas and the scriptures. (Bhagavaan sang a song in 
which the Gopikas pray to Krishna to fill their hearts with the nectarine melody of his flute). 


What is the significance of the flute? It symbolises the human body. The flute has nine holes. 
The human body has nine openings. The body should be considered as the flute of God. It should 
be rendered completely hollow, so that the Divine may blow through it. Today the body is 
anything but hollow. It is filled with all kinds of desires. Only when the desires are removed, the 
body will be a fit instrument for the Divine to fill it with nectarine music. This is the process of 
surrender to the Divine. Then one gets intoxicated with the music of the Divine. 


Pomp and pride have to be given up to experience the Divine. People talk about meditation. But 
how much of it is concentrated on God? Nor is formal meditation necessary when you realise 
that the Divine is within you. 


The purpose of meditation is to recognise one's unity with God. This realisation can come only 
when one removes the three-layered cloak that covers the Aathma in the form of the three 
Gunas---Thamas, Rajas and Sathva. 


Trust everything as God's work, whatever your vocation or profession, By dedicating all actions 
to God, you sanctify every act in daily life. That is the message of the Vedhas. 


Offer love to God 


People are used to making edible offerings to idols or pictures, but consume them after the ritual. 
These are not what should be offered to God. You should offer your Love to God as the food that 
God loves. Regard even this love as a gift from God. You offer to God what God has given to 
‘you. This was what Jayadeva said in a famous song. "Oh Lord! That heart which you gave to 
me, I am offering to you." It is only when one is filled with this feeling that one can become a 
complete devotee. 


There should be no sense of separateness. This was finely expressed by Pothana when he 
declared that his entire poem was inspired and composed by the Divine. Thereby his 


Bhagavatham achieved unique sacredness. The way Pothana described the Goddess Lakshmi's 
dilemma when she saw her consort, Vishnu, rushing in haste to the rescue of Gajendhra (the lord 
of elephants), how she was anxious to know where the Lord was going, but felt that it would be 
inauspicious to ask him, is one of the memorable passages in the Bhagavatham. (Bhagavaan 
recited the poem with such verve that the entire audience burst into applause). Even Goddess 
Lakshmi may be swayed by fear on occasions, but the true devotee is always without fear. 
Raamadhas expressed this fearlessness in one of his songs. That fearlessness stems from total 
surrender to the Divine. But today we witness only part-time devotion. The reward is also partial. 


No danger from Solar Eclipse 


The day after tomorrow, there will be a Solar Eclipse and people are filled with apprehensions 
about the effects of the eclipse on the world. There is no need for fears of any kind, because such 
events occur from time to time. The earth came out of the sun. The moon came from the earth. 
The moon sometimes comes between the Sun and the Earth. At those times the sun cannot be 
seen. This is the eclipse of the sun. When the sun, the moon and the earth are in one line, it is 
wrong to think that any disaster will happen to the earth. No dangers are in prospect. Such 
natural phenomena are part of the mysteries of creation. Scientists are keen to study the eclipse 
as an experiment. If they are preoccupied with experiments, when will they acquire experience? 
"When people are immersed in family life, what will they get from it? They will continue to 
suffer till the end of-their lives." says a Thelugu Poem. 

If all your life is spent on experiments, when will you begin to experience life? When will you 
start putting into practice the knowledge you acquire? There is joy only in practising what you 


know, not in the acquisition of knowledge. The delight of the pudding is in the eating. Practise at 
least a fragment of what you have learnt. Cultivate love for God. Love is God; Live in Love. 


Discourse in Sai Kulwant Mandap on 22-10-1995. 


28. Fight the forces of evil 


Life in the world is impermanent; 
Impermanent are youth and wealth; 

Wife and children are not permanent; 

Only Righteousness and renown are enduring. 


EMBODIMENTS of Love! In this phenomenal world, life is like a water bubble. No one can tell 
when, where and how this bubble will burst. One's youth and wealth are transient stages in one's 
life, coming and going. No one can predict when they will come and when they will pass away. 
Is there any reason for feeling proud about one's youth, which is purely transitory? It is not the 
unchanging reality. Wife and children are not permanent. They are like passing clouds. 


They are like lightning flashes, bright one moment and disappearing the next. None of these is of 
a lasting nature. “Dharma keerthi dhvayam sthiram." The righteous acts performed by one and 
the reputation earned by one, these two alone endure for ever, as long as the sun and moon last. 


Embodiments of Love! The primary goal of a human being is to realise his inherent divinity and 
redeem his life by that realisation. Man's heart, which should be an ocean of milk, has been 
polluted so much by evil today that it has become an ocean of brine. Ksheerasaagara (the ocean 
of milk) is regarded as the bed on which the Lord reclines. It is pure and white like milk. But by 
polluting his heart man is a prey to all kinds of worries. 


The ocean of milk has no room for whales and crocodiles. But the main evils of attachment and 
hatred, infesting the heart like whales and crocodiles, have turned it into an ocean of salt. 


Festivals are designed to promote lofty feelings 


The tainted life of man has to be purified by expelling the pollutants within man. What is pure 
and sacred has to be taken in. This duty has been forgotten. If you want to fill the stomach with 
wholesome and delicious food, you have to empty it of what is impure. One cannot relish good 
food when the stomach is full of bad stuff. This is borne out by every one's daily experience. 
Hence every one should get rid of all the bad thoughts, evil intentions and bad feelings in him 
and fill the mind with good thoughts and noble feelings. All Bhaaratheeya festivals have been 
designed to promote such lofty feelings and not for indulging in feasting and revelry. 


From ancient times Bhaarath has upheld high spiritual ideals and proclaimed the principle of 
universal well-being. "Lokaas-Samasthaas sukhino bhavanthu" (May the people of all the worlds 
be happy). The ancient sages led lives based on these sacred ideals. These ideals have almost 
disappeared today. Immersed in endless worldly desires people have become strangers to the 
Divine. 

People today are keen to secure shortcuts for achieving anything. This is not so easy. "Anithyam 
asukham lokam idham praapya bhajasva maam" (Having come down into this ephemeral and 
hapless world, worship Me), says Krishna in the Geetha. This world is impermanent and "a vale 
of tears"--Asukham. Having taken birth in such a world, men desire true lasting happiness. When 
they do not get what they desire, they blame God. World is governed by the rules: As you sow, 
so shall you reap. Only when you sow good seeds can you reap a good harvest. How can you 
hope to get sweet fruits by sowing poisonous seeds? If you want to enjoy good results you have 
to perform good deeds. 


Man today is dominated by selfishness and self-interest. Every action is based on selfish interest. 
Man has become a plaything in the hands of Selfishness. Consequently he has forfeited peace of 
mind. 


The real meaning of Punya 


In life, everything has to be governed by restraints. These restraints should be for the purpose of 
directing life in the ideal path. Men desire the fruits of good deeds without doing good deeds and 
want to avoid the consequences of bad actions while indulging in them. 


What, indeed, are Punya karmas (meritorious actions)? Vyaasa defined them as actions to help 
others. Causing harm to others is sinful. These are secular interpretations of the terms Punya and 
Paapa. Real Punya is the endeavour to recognise one's true self. Although man is the 
embodiment of Sath-Chith-Aanandha (Being-Awareness-Bliss) he is searching for them 
elsewhere. When man realises that the Bliss he seeks is within himself, that is Punya 
(meritorious). This Aanandha is within him and not in the external world. Whatever joy he may 
find in the external world is impermanent. "Papaaya parapeedanam" (To cause harm to others is 
sinful). To realise that "the same Aathma that is in all others is within me and is in all living 
beings" is Punya. This Ekaathma bhaava (spiritual oneness) is meritorious. To regard all beings 
as diverse in spirit is a sin. The sense of separateness is sinful. "That is full and this is full." This 
oneness of Spirit has to be experienced. Causing harm to others is only a sign of animality. The 
real sin is to regard what is spiritually one as manifold and diverse. 


Man is the embodiment of the Divine. All human bodies are animated by the same Spirit, like the 
current that makes all bulbs shed light. The Divine subsumes everything though invisible. 


Make efforts to realise the Divine 


The Divine is omnipresent. The entire cosmos is permeated and sustained by this Divine energy. 
Everyone should endeavour to experience the Divine. Man must make the effort and he is bound 
to realise the experience. The necessary sacrifice must be made. All the bad qualities have to be 
renounced the moment they invade the mind. True devotion means elimination of all the animal 
tendencies in man. Man should seek to realise the eternal Divine within him. That is the primary 
purpose of human life. All other accomplishments are valueless. Man should raise himself from 
the animal to the Divine. There is nothing great in earning a fortune. What one should seek is 
purity of the Self--that is the essence of humanness. Today is described as Naraka Chathurdhasi. 
What is Naraka ? Whatever is associated with suffering is called Naraka. "Ka" stands for 'bad 
qualities’. Naraka means human life with bad qualities. That is a hellish life. How did Krishna 
deal with Naraka? Krishna is the Divine, one who attracts by His magnetic vibrations. These 
vibrations represent the. Life Force. The Consciousness that animates the Life Force is known as 
Prajnaanam, the source of radiation. When radiation and vibration are active in the body, you 
have the whole human being. 


The bad qualities in man, in the form of Narakaasura, have to be destroyed. Krishna came to 
destroy these bad qualities. He enlisted the aid of Sathyabhaama, who represents the bearer of 
Truth. This means that with the help of truth, Krishna destroyed the bad qualities. Thyaagaraaja 
sang ecstatically about the glorious achievements of the Lord. On Deepaavali day, people should 
pledge themselves to get rid of their bad qualities. 


"There is no greater virtue than Truth." Truth is not limited to one nation or one people. It 
belongs to all mankind. Truth sustains the cosmos. Therefore Truth is God. Follow the path of 
Truth. Speak the Truth. That is the foremost spiritual exercise. 


Fight evil forces 


Embodiments of love! Your duty today is to destroy the demonic qualities in you. Evil thoughts 
and evil actions are rampant everywhere You cannot remain a mere witness to these happenings. 
Placing your faith in God, you have to fight evil forces as a human being. You have to 
demonstrate your human estate. You have to earn a name as a good man. That alone counts. All 
other acquisitions are worthless. Only a good man endures. Every moment of one's life should be 
devoted to practising Dharma (righteousness) and earning a Keerthi (good name). Fill every cell 
in your body; with the spirit of Truth. 


Naraka Chathurdhasi is the day on which you resolve to get rid of your bad qualities and follow 
the path of righteousness. Deepaavali is celebrated today as a festival of lights, with the firing of 
crackers and display of fireworks. In olden days the ancients rejoiced over the destruction of the 
demon Narakaasura and let off fireworks. 


There is another meaning in the burning of crackers on Deepaavali day. This is the rainy season. 
All kinds of germs fill the atmosphere. The smoke from the crackers destroys these germs. The 
joy derived from the burning of crackers should really come from the elimination of bad qualities 
within one. For this, it is essential to meditate on God. Listen to Divine discourses. Participate in 
Bhajans. 


Discourse in the Sai Kulwant Mandap on 23-10-1995, Deepaavali Day. 


Work done for the welfare of the world is thapas (true penance), 
while work done for selfish purpose is thamas (useless). 


BABA 


29. Render unto the people what is theirs 


EMBODIMENTS of Love! "Sarve Bhavanthu Sukhinah" (Let all people be happy!). This is the 
primal call of Bhaaratheeya Culture All people in the world should live happily and comfortably. 
Bhaaratheeya culture has handed down this call from ancient times that no one should experience 
suffering or sorrow. 


This sacred land of Bhaarath has shown, from ancient times, to the rest of the world, not only the 
path of Spirituality but also the ideals to be pursued in the fields of Social, Ethical and Moral 
values. Forgetting these eternal verities, Bhaaratheeyas have become victims of disorder and 
discord because of total preoccupation with worldly pursuits. Because of the advances in science 
and technology, people seem to be content with physical comforts, oblivious to their Divine 
heritage. A Nation's well-being or troubles are dependent on the actions of the people. Actions 
are related to men's thoughts. If the country's condition is not what it should be, what is the 
reason? Men's thoughts and actions are not what they should be. 


Human values should predominate in men's thoughts. Human life has no meaning without these 
values. To be a true human being, one has to practise these values in daily life. 


The two organs of unique importance 


There are two organs in man which are of unique importance: the Head and the Heart. All that 
emanates from the Head is related to the physical world. In Vedhaanthik parlance, this is called 
Pravritthi Lakshanam (externalism). These external activities include studies, moving about,. 
earning and spending and ultimately passing on. All 'these relate to the mundane and are not 
enduring reality. Qualities like kindness, sympathy, compassion, truth and forbearance arise from 
the Heart. These are described as Nivritthi Lakshanas (Internal traits). Of the two tendencies, the 
external and the internal, it is not good to follow the Pravritthi Lakshanas (external traits). The 
quest for truth means understanding the difference between the two paths. This quest embraces 
every kind of action seeing, speaking, doing, etc. For instance, the eyes see the mother, the son, 
the daughter, the daughter-in-law and others. The quest for truth means understanding how each 
of these different persons are to be viewed, though it is the same eye that sees all of them. 


Similarly, the tongue is prone to speak the truth or utter lies or indulge in delusions. The quest 
for truth means that the differences in the role of the tongue should be properly understood. For 
instance, scientists look at the branches, flowers and fruits of a tree and study the different 
aspects and draw their conclusions. There are others who realise that the branches, flowers and 
fruits are sustained by the roots which are below the ground. The persons who searched for the 
roots were esteemed by our ancient Vedhik seers. The Vedhaanthins thus teach things which are 
unknown to the scientists. Science teaches things which are not dealt with by the Vedhaanthins. 
The real quest for truth consists in combining the explorations of the scientist and the spiritualist. 
Branches cannot exist without roots. But roots without branches are useless. Both are 
interdependent. Likewise, everyone should recognise the integral relationship between the 
external and the internal. Only then can one know the whole truth and base his life on it. 


Exploration of energies present in the cosmos 


The world is passing through many changes. Whatever power functions in the Cosmos is present 
in the individual. You find waves of energy in the world. You also notice the rays of light 
illumining the world. Radio waves also fill the atmosphere. Laser beams are also present. 


Invisible X-Ray waves are also present. While these are given different names, all these 
radiations are different manifestations of the same energy. The ancient sages had explored these 
different forms of radiations and experienced the bliss to be derived therefrom. They were able to 
accomplish many things on the basis of their knowledge of these powers. 


For many millennia, the exploration of these energies has been going on. The first scientist to 
know about them was Hiranyakashipu. He had total control over Panchabhuthas (five great 
elements). But, his son, Prahlaadha, taught a few lessons to his father. "Oh father! You have 
conquered all the worlds in a trice. But you have no control over your mind." Churchill (the 
British Wartime Prime Minister) pointed out the same truth when he observed’ "Man has 
conquered many things. But he has made no effort to know himself." 


Scientists today have explored everything, but have not understood their own reality. Of what 
use is all other knowledge if you do not know the truth about your own self? That is why 
Vedhaantha summons man to embark on Self-Knowledge. 


Everyone should seek to know his true nature, his motives and his consciousness. Man is 
endowed with all potencies and all forms of energy. Man has limitless magnetic energy in him. 
Possessing all these powers, it is a pity that man regards himself as weak. Energy and matter are 
not different. They are present like the tree that is latent in a seed. 


"Nothing is Mine" 


People do not comprehend the preciousness of human life and all its potentialities. Men should 
learn to lead a moral life. When one's thoughts are pure, one's life becomes sacred and blissful. 
No room should be given for bad thoughts and bad actions. 


From earliest times, Bhaaratheeyas had sought to base their lives on noble ideals. Today, 
Bhaaratheeyas are asking. "Where is God?" The truth is' "You are God." 


With regard to the Drinking Water Project, people have been praising Svaami in laudatory terms. 
Svaami is not happy with these eulogies. Nothing is mine. All these are gifts from devotees. 
They have taken the form of water. To demonstrate the exemplary character of this devotion, I 
launched the water project. I am only a trustee. I am a postal runner. Whether the messages 
delivered by the postman are pleasant or unpleasant, only the recipients can know. Hence, it is 
not right to attribute to Svaami responsibility for anything. God seeks nothing. What you have to 
offer to God is only your love. 


True sacrifice is to provide amenities for the poor 


There are in the world many great men and wealthy men. There are any number of aashrams and 
temples. Wherefrom are these aashrams and temples getting funds? They come from the 
earnings of the public. Hence, such funds, received from devotees, should be utilized for the 
benefit of the devotees. Whether it be an aashram or a temple or a wealthy person, their income 
comes from the labours of poor persons. If the poor did not do the work, how could the rich 
become rich? It is their labour which has enabled the rich man to acquire wealth. Hence, what 
has been acquired from the labours of the poor should be used for their good. Therefore, the 
authorities of aashrams or temples in any area should use their resources for providing education 
or medical relief or other amenities in their areas and make them happy. This is true sacrifice. 


Many devotees offer all kinds of ornaments for the idols in temples. For God the only ornament 
is Love. No other ornament can fittingly adorn God. Hence, instead of offering ornaments, it is 
better to use the money for the benefit of Naaraayana in the form of needy human beings. 


It is not good to look to the Government for everything. People should come together and try as 
far as possible to get their requirements met by their own co-operative efforts. Only then they 
will become one human family. All, indeed, are brothers and sisters and should work together in 
this spirit. How do you expect Government to provide all amenities? They have to get the money 
from public. It is better to let the people use their money for their own benefit along proper lines. 


This kind of mutual co-operation in all endeavours has been commended by the Vedhas from 
ancient times. The Vedhas have declared that sacrifice is the only means to achieve immortality. 
It is necessary to devise means to ensure that the resources of aashrams and temples are used 
solely for the public good. 


Unity among the rural folk is essential 


There is the problem of maintenance of the facilities created by the Water Project. If, for 
instance, a pipe put up in a place fails to work, there is no meaning in waiting for the official 
machinery to set it right. The villagers themselves should arrange to get it repaired. Why should 
not there be such unity and co-operation among the rural folk? Most of our troubles are due to 
lack of unity and co-operation among the people. Only unity can ensure the prosperity of the 
people. 


Let unity prevail. Let the affluent sections realise that their wealth comes form the labours of the 
masses. There is no need to glorify what I have done. I have given back to the people what has 
been given by them. I have given to you what is essential for you. Nothing is mine. If anything 
can be called mine, it is you. You are my greatest property. If you are happy, I am happy. If you 
pursue the right path, that is my food. When you are united, I feel happy. Therefore, do not speak 
about what Svaami has done. Svaami served to you what you offered to Him. I have nothing in 
my hands. People will call them empty hands. But this nothing is everything. 


Real 'art' should emanate from the 'heart' 


During the past few days, the people have been enjoying the music concerts and dance 
programmes. In the past these fine arts were patronized by rulers. Today the word ‘art' has lost its 
meaning. Real art should emanate from the heart. Artistic expression-should reflect what is in the 
heart. All arts like music, painting, dance, etc. should, be developed as sacred activities. You 
experienced joy when you witnessed the concerts. That joy came from the heart. By promoting 
such arts the people can experience perpetual joy. Hence people should encourage such sacred 
arts, which are part of Bhaarath's great cultural heritage. 


The Vedhas have held forth the message of people living in amity striving together for common 
ends and sharing the fruits of their co-operative efforts. Equally, they have proclaimed the 
omnipresence of the Divine. The cosmic form of the Divine encompasses every being in the 
universe. Forgetting this fact "Sarvam Vishnumayam Jagath" (The Divine is immanent in the 
Cosmos), people search for the Divine. Every human being is a spark of the Divine. Hence, there 
should be no ill-will towards anyone. 


People wish Happy Birthday. For whom is this birthday? It is only for the body, which cannot 
experience happiness. Do not follow the body, which is perishable, or the mind, which is like a 
mad monkey. Follow your conscience. Human life is based on the body (actions), the mind 


(thoughts) and the Aathma (Consciousness). The body has to be kept in a sound condition. It has 
to be used for the service of others. Put into practice Vyaasa's motto: "Help ever; Hurt never." 
This is my advice to everybody. 


Secret of Svaami's strength 


This body (of Svaami) will enter on its seventieth year on the 23r~. As far as I can remember, I 
have not done all these years any harm to anyone in any form. Even the idea of causing harm to 
anyone has never entered my mind. Because of this, inspite of my seventy years, I appear like a 
small boy. As I don't find the time or the opportunity, I don't ran, but I can do so. Wherefrom has 
this strength come? There are three factors responsible’ three P's. First P, Purity. Second P, 
Patience. Third P, Perseverance. If you develop these three qualities, you can also acquire the 
same strength. 


Today, most people lack purity. Whether you believe it or not, I must tell you that there is no 
trace of self-interest in me. I am keen to do something or other for this or that person, but I have 
no concern about myself. Develop this attitude and you will experience your Divinity. 


So far, I have not stretched my hand to seek anything from anyone. I ask for only one thing: pure 
love. That is God. Only the love of God is true love. All others are merely different forms of 
attachment. There is no greater achievement or ideal than love of God. Dedicate every action to 
God. Work will be transformed into worship. 


Whether people believe it or not, it is a fact that I have never known what it is to worry. Persons 
working in the Super Speciality Hospital have asked me: "Svaami! The Hospital is costing two 
crores of rupees a month. 


The Institute of Higher Learning is being run without getting anything *from the Govt. or the 
students. How are these being done? Svaami appears to be totally free from worries. Why should 
there be any worry? If you are engaged in good work for the public, there is no room for worry. 
It is purely an aberration of the mind. I have no such worry: I am engaged in good work. Where, 
then, is cause for worry? If you are not doing good work, you have to worry. 


Therefore, embark on good work with faith. You will have no worries. Develop love! Fill your 
hearts with love and share it with all beings, thereby experience bliss. Regard the entire world as 
one family. That is the message of Bhaaratheeya culture. Countries are building up arms for 
defence. But Bhaarath has believed in Dharma as the real safeguard for nations or individuals. 
Hence you should protect and cherish Dharma. 


Atomic weapons should be given up. Prime Minister Narasimha Rao has been pleading for the 
abolition of atomic ‘weapons. I agree with him. Bhaarath's most powerful weapon is Dharma- 
asthra. Let us adhere to Dharma. That will protect us. 


Embodiments of love! It is a blessing to be born in Bhaarath. There are doubtless troubles and 
difficulties. These have to be faced and overcome. 


There is only one thing which you have to offer as a birthday gift. Develop love and live 
fraternally. Banish hatred and jealousy. Set an example to the world. 


Discourse in the Sai Kulwant Mandap on 17-11-1995. 


30. Fill the world with love 


There is no worse disease than greed; 

No enemy worse than anger; 

Nor is there any misery worse than poverty; 
There is no greater happiness than wisdom.. 


AMONG the numerous diseases prevalent in the world, the disease of Jobha (greed) has grown 
beyond bounds. There is no disease worse than this. This greed undermines humanness and turns 
man into a monster. The second disease is krodha (anger): There is no enemy worse than anger. 
It is possible to overcome external foes, but it is very difficult to subdue this internal enemy. 
Anger can destroy all human qualities and make a man forget his real nature. It is man's worst 
enemy. There is no misery equal to poverty. Poverty does not merely mean lack of wealth. You 
have poverty of the mind, poverty in wisdom. This poverty also causes misery to man. 


Man is ravaged by these three: Greed (or miserliness), anger and lack of wisdom. There is no 
greater source of happiness than Jnaana (wisdom or the Higher Knowledge). Jnaana is not 
confined to worldly knowledge. There are other kinds of knowledge-bookish, superficial, etc.--of 
which the most valuable is practical knowledge. 


Understand the purpose of life 


Everyone should strive to acquire that knowledge by which he can get rid of greed, anger and 
material and spiritual poverty. It is to achieve this purpose that you are participating in this 
conference. 


At the outset you have to consider what is the purpose of life. "Is it for involvement in endless 
work or for eating and sleeping or indulging in gossip that the Divine has conferred this human 
birth?" (Svaami sang a Thelugu poem). The gift of intelligence is being used for many trivial 
purposes but not to understand the goal of life. 


Society today is riddled with discord and disorder. The progress of civilization has undermined 
morality and decency in all walks of life. Obsessed with worldly values, men ‘have lost all 
concern for moral values. Selfishness reigns supreme everywhere. Even in the spiritual field, 
people seem to be more interested in themselves than in the welfare of society and the promotion 
of public good-. 


The delegates assembled in this conference appear to be concerned about the functioning of their 
centres. Why were these centres started? The primary objective of the Sai Organization is to raise 
the human consciousness to the Divine by eliminating all animal tendencies. People do not seem 
to be aware of their true nature. Only those who understand their true selves can help to elevate 
others. The Upanishaths have given the clarion call to mankind to wake up from their ignorance 
and go forward towards their 'supreme divine destiny of self-realisation. 


The three paths of Sai 


You have to engage yourselves in Seva (Service). Service does not mean mere rendering help to 
others of one kind of another. True service means participation in social activities after ridding 
yourself of egoism and possessiveness and manifesting your qualities of compassion and 
kindness. The aim is the refinement of your own good nature rather than giving succour to 


others. There is a Sanskrith saying which declares that greater than penance or pilgrimage, 
meditation or worship, is service to good people. 


In rendering service, there should be unity of heart, head and hands (three H's). Only then service 
becomes sanctified. The significance of the three letters in Sai should be understood. "S" stands 
for Service. "A" stands for Adoration. "I" stands for Illumination. These three represent Karma. 
Bhakthi and Jnaana respectively. Sai teaches these three. All the three concepts are equally 
important. Sai is a combination of the three spiritual paths of Action, Devotion and Wisdom. Just 
as the Pranava sound is made up of the three letters "A", "U","M" (OM), Sai stands for the triple 
forms of spiritual saadhana. In the Sai organization, this threefold exercise has to be properly 
understood. 


Sai sevaks have to develop the love in them, share it with others and fill the whole world with 
love. True love should be distinguished from attachments of various kinds. That love is a 
synonym for God. Love is God. Live in love. The love of God comes from the depths of the 
heart. Sai sevaks should understand this love and render service in the right spirit to all mankind. 


Fill the world with love 


People ask how they can experience God. The answer was given by Raamakrishna 
Paramahamsa, when he told a questioner that if he loved God with the same intensity with which 
he loved his wife and children he would be able to experience God. 


Perform all actions as an offering to God. Do not make any distinction between your official 
work and your work in the Sai organization. Spirituality cannot be divided into compartments. 
The Sathya Sai organization was set up solely to enable members to manifest their love in all 
their activities. You should manifest the divinity within you. That is Self realisation, realisation 
of your oneness with the Divine. 


The setting up of Sai Centres is not an exercise in numbers. The emphasis should be on quality 
and not quantity. The International President and the National President of our organization have 
mentioned how the Samasthalu (centres) have grown. But has Samathvam (fellow-feeling) 
grown to the same extent? Fellow-feeling should grow. On the contrary, divisiveness is growing. 
I want quality, not quantity. 


Promote harmony among members. You cannot avoid making such distinctions as President, Co- 
ordinator, Member and the like. But these distinctions are functional and have no place at the 
spiritual level. God is present equally in all, from the president to the ordinary member. You 
should recognise this oneness. Positions, names and forms may vary but the Supreme Truth is 
one. This spirit of Samathvam (oneness) should be fostered. Then there will be no jealousy or 
discord. Where there is oneness there will be no trouble. 


Foster the spirit of Samathvam 


Society today is racked by jealousy and hatred. Jealousy is a disease, which gives rise to hatred. 
Develop forbearance and goodwill. That is the cure for jealousy. I have often declared: "My life 
is My message." Often many have extolled Me or derided Me. I do not get elated by praise or 
depressed by criticism. I treat everything alike. 


"Samathvam yogam uchyathe." That equal-mindedness is yoga. What do I lose when someone 
criticizes me? That is his opinion. It does not affect me. Those who criticize Baba are suffering 
from a disease, like those who reject a sweet because they suffer from diabetes. The fault lies not 


in the sweet but in the person who is unable to relish it. They know that Baba is engaged in 
beneficial activities and they want him. But because some of their selfish interests are not served, 
they turn against Svaami. That is a malady. When you see the facts in this light, you will realise 
the truth. 


Today you have to cultivate a serene equanimity that rises above these trifles. The development 
of equanimity is more important than the growth of centre. You should recognise the Divinity in 
one and all. "The one Supreme Spirit dwells in all beings." Bulbs are many but the current that 
illumines them is one. Develop this spirit of oneness. Unity will lead to Divinity. Many who are 
working in the Organization do not recognise the need for unity. Lack of unity breeds enmity and 
groupism. 


The organization exists not for my sake but yours. When Svaami administers what may appear as 
bitter medicine, it is for your own good. God is the physician for the ills of human existence. 
You may not relish the taste of His medicine. But whatever Svaami does, says or gives, is all for 
your good. 


Above all, unity is-the foremost need of the hour. "Nations are many, but the earth is one." All 
are denizens of the earth. All are children of Mother Earth. Recognise this truth. 


In the realm of the Spirit, it is foolish to ask for proofs of direct external perception. The spiritual 
is subtle. It has to be experienced within. The Divine is present within us incognito like the 
Paandavas during the last year of their exile. Does the external form of a person reveal anything 
about his internal qualities? He himself may not be aware of all of them. He may be full of love 
or hatred. Can anyone perceive it? Without knowing his qualities, is it proper to judge him by his 
physical features? 


You see this magnificent hall, but you do not see its foundations. Likewise, God is the basis, 
Nature is the superstructure. The spirit is the basis, the body is the superstructure. The body is 
like a rose in which the spirit is present as invisible fragrance. 


"T am always blissful" 


This conference should consider how the Sai Organizations can improve their service activities. I 
have nothing to gain from the organization. I am always blissful. There is no need to wish me 
"Happy Birthday". I am always happy. Embodiments of Love! Develop love, so that you may 
deserve this appellation. 


The Thamil Naadu President, T.G.Krishnamurthy said, that when Svaami reincarnates as Prema 
Sai he should be given the privilege of serving Svaami. Ayyaa! Take good care of what you 
already have. Why hanker after something in the womb of the future? The present is very 
important. Past is past. Don't worry about the future. Take care of the present which will 
determine the future. Do your duty now. Duty is God. Work is worship. This is the way to run 
the organization on ideal lines. 


What is being inaugurated today is the search for the supreme truth about the Divinity within. 
Youth is not related to age 


People have referred to the Seventieth Birthday. The body is constituted of the five elements, the 
five sheaths, the five life-breaths and the five senses. Upto one's fiftieth year, one may be 
described as experiencing Yauvanam (youth). Youthhood should be dedicated to purposeful 


activities. Youth is not related to age. Bheeshma, who was 112 years old, was the commander-in- 
chief of the Kaurava forces. It is will power that determines one's age. 


When one reaches sixty, it is a Bhaaratheeya custom to perform Shaanthi puuja for the purpose 
of subduing the six internal enemies (lust, pride, etc). On reaching seventy, a person attains the 
state of the Seven Sages, the Seven Oceans, the Seven musical notes, the Seven colours. The 
seven colours come from the sun's rays. The sun's rays are eternal. The Seventieth year 
symbolises the attainment of the saintliness of the Saptharishis (Seven sages who constitute the 
constellation of Ursa Major, the Great Bear). On attaining the eightieth year, you must become 
one of the Ashtagrahas (eight planets). On reaching the ninetieth year, you have to acquire the 
strength of one of the Navagrahas (nine planets). On reaching the hundredth year one should 
merge in the ten indhriyas (organs of sense and action’) and get rid of the body consciousness. 


The acquisition of the love of God should be the primary aim of members of the Sai 
organizations. The spiritual path is the easiest to follow. The giving up of worldly desires is 
easier than clinging to them. Hold fast to God. 


Inaugural address to the Sixth World Conference of Sai Organisation on 18-11-1995. 


Bhakthi does not consist in wearing ochre robes, the organization 
of uthsavas (religious festivals), the performance of yajnas, the 
shaving or matting of hair, carrying of kamandala (bowl) or danda 
(stick), etc. A pure heart, uninterrupted contemplation of God, 
feeling that everything is the Lord's creation and therefore One, 
unattachment to sense objects, embracing all in equal love, 
dedication to true speech--these are, indeed, the characteristics of 
Bhakthi. 


BABA 


31. Supreme need for national unity 


EMBODIMENTS of Love! In this vast world, in which countless, human beings are leading 
miserable lives, pursuing endless desires and unattainable aspirations, the spirit of sacrifice is 
most essential. Trees bring forth fruits for the benefit of others. Rivers carry water for the use of 
others. Cows yield milk to benefit others. Likewise, man should share in harmony with others his 
qualities of goodness, compassion, forbearance and charity. 


The earth follows its Dharma (natural duty) to make use of its five elements to produce 
sustenance for all living beings. Born on the earth, men are not following the example of the 
earth. It is not the creeds that men profess--whether Christianity or Islam or other religion--which 
lend value to their lives. The highest value is the fact of their humanness. All faiths combine to 
invest man with a unique effulgence. 


The various talents with which man is endowed should be used-for good purposes on the basis 
that individual good is linked to social well-being. Man today has to go through transformation at 
three levels: First and foremost is spiritual transformation. Second comes transformation in the 
attitude towards society. The third change is at the individual level. When spiritual transfor- 
mation takes place, there is an automatic change in the attitude towards society. When society 
becomes harmonious and prosperous, the individual also changes. 


Three-fold transformation 


This three-fold transformation is implicit in the term Sai. "S" stands for Spiritual change. "A" 
stands for Association change. This is change in one's relationships with others in society. "I" 
stands for Individual change. Sai--this signifies changes at all three levels---Spiritual and 
Individual. This triple transformation is what Sai desires. When this transformation takes place, 
the whole world will be prosperous and happy. 


The question today is' "How can spiritual transformation take place without changes at the 
individual and social level?" The basis for all the threefold transformations is the love principle. 
This love has to be experienced by one and all. 


How is individual transformation to be achieved? There are some bad habits among individuals 
such as smoking, drinking liquor, meat eating and gambling. These bad habits not only degrade 
the individuals but also inflict hardships on their families. These bad habits have to be given up 
for the individual to manifest his inherent goodness. One's personality can blossom only when he 
leads a moral life. 


How should one's attitude to society be changed? One should give up talking ill of others, 
reviling them or ridiculing them, feeling envious of good people. Evil traits like these lead to loss 
of peace in society. People should develop friendly and loving attitude towards their fellow- 
beings in society. To develop a sense of helpfulness, there should be the spirit of sacrifice. 
People should also cultivate the feeling of sympathy and understanding. 


For spiritual transformation, the qualities that are needed are Dhaya, kindness, love, forbearance 
and compassion. Bhaarath throughout the ages has fostered these qualities among the people. 
People today have forgotten these sublime qualities because they have lost the fear of sin, ceased 
to love God and do not observe social ethics. What greater misfortune can there be for the 
nation? 


Love of God and fear of sin 


Love of God should be a natural feeling in everyone. It is our immemorial heritage. When there 
is love of God, fear of sin follows naturally. Today fear of sin has gone and everywhere the most 
heinous crimes are being committed. In such a situation, how can there be morality in society? 


How are we to transform this state of things? The Prime Minister, Sri. E V. Narasimha Rao, in 
his speech referred to the grave problems facing the country. Who is responsible for all the 
troubles, disorder and violence? Maname (We alone) are responsible. The truth has to be 
recognized. People are blaming others for their own faults. If there is unity among the people, 
there will be no problems. Unity is strength. 


Today righteousness has declined among the people. As the level of righteousness goes down, 
the water level also goes down! If good qualities arise in men, the water level will also rise. 


What is the reason for the failure of timely rains and the shortage of food crops? It is the decline 
of morals among the people which is the cause of natural calamities. The people must cherish 
sacred thoughts. Then the people's aspirations will be fulfilled. 


I have to utter a warning in the presence of the Prime Minister. Bhaarath achieved its freedom 
through the sacrifice of innumerable patriots, who gave up their lives. Freedom has been 
achieved, but not unity. Without unit)~ the nation is weak like the hand of a man who cannot use 
all his fingers. We must achieve unity in every field. 


Need for national approach to sharing-river waters 


All natural resources of the country should be enjoyed equally by all the people, regardless of 
caste or community. There are many rivers in our country which flow across State boundaries. 
Bhaarath is not lacking in water or other resources. We have many perennial rivers and vast 
areas of fertile land. But these resources are not being fully used. The nation's perennial rivers 
like Kaaveri, Ganga and Krishna should be treated as national property. Then there will be no 
room for inter-State disputes. All river waters should be used for the benefit of all the people. It 
is because of lack of unity and the assertion of separatist claims that a good deal of river waters 
is going to waste. If the Prime Minister endeavours to promote a national approach to the 
harnessing of river waters, the nation will prosper. The States also are prone to put their claims 
against the claims of others. They should adopt a co-operative and fraternal attitude towards each 
other and behave as good neighbours. If this is done, there will be no shortage of food or water in 
this country. The people also should develop this co-operative attitude. 


It is well known that quite often, sections of the public adopt an adversary attitude towards 
measures taken by the Government. The people should recognise that these measures are taken 
in their interest. Moreover, the public should not remain idle, leaving everything to the 
Government. They have to do their duty. They have to live up to certain ideals. The body should 
be used for rendering help to others. The spirit of helpfulness must be fostered. 


There is an old Sanskrith saying which declares' "Charity is the ornament for the hand; Truth is 
the ornament for the throat; Listening to sacred lore is the ornament for the ears." These are the 
ornaments which should be valued. 


Education, health and water should be free for all 


Svaami had resolved from the beginning on the provision of three vital things for the people: For 
health, the heart is important. For education, the head is important. For the body, water is vital. I 


feel that these three should be provided to the people free. Today a heavy price has to be paid for 
medical care and for. education. Even water has to be bought. A heavy capitation fee has to be 
paid for getting admission even in a primary school. Illness is incidental to human life. Doctors 
should be prepared to make any sacrifice to relieve the sick. Money should not be the primary 
consideration. There are many educated students present here. They should take a pledge to serve 
society after finishing their studies. Instead of going after high salaried jobs in the cities they 
should go to the villages to serve the poor living there and earn their love and gratitude. Only 
then their education would be worth while. Students should be quite content with modest 
emoluments in the villages, with which they can be more comfortable than with larger earnings 
in the cities. They can lead more healthy and happy lives in the villages. 


The water project 


With regard to the water project, it should be noted that much was accomplished in a short 
period. In the execution of the project changes had to be made in response to the appeals of 
people in different villages. Because of this, the entire project has not yet been completed. Some 
villages are yet to get water. This should not cause any disappointment. Whatever may happen, 
all villages will get water and the project will be fully carried out. 


The inauguration of the project by the Prime Minister does not mean that further work will be 
held up. We are prepared for any sacrifice to honour the plighted word. Work will be resumed 
from tomorrow and we shall see that by January the entire district is supplied with water. We 
will give no room for anyone to complain that he has not got water. 


Embodiments of Love! It is a matter for gratification that today the Prime Minister, who belongs 
to Andhra Pradesh, has inaugurated the water supply scheme for Ananthapur District. All of you 
should live in amity, without differences of any kind and offer your cooperation to the 
Government. Not only will the nation benefit from your unity, but you will also be setting an 
example to the world. Give up hatred and jealousy, participate with love in measures taken by 
the government for the well-being, of the people. Love can achieve anything. 


Discourse in Sai Kulwant Mandap on 18-11-1995. 


Bhakthi, to be effective, must be regularised through self- 
discipline; it should not be allowed to grow wild and untended. 
You rush forward to touch My feet or to prostrate before Me, 
ignoring the children, the aged and the sick, upon whom you fall 
when you press forward towards Me. Do not forget the Sai in those 
people, when you rush forward towards this Sai. The merit of all 
the hardship you underwent to see and hear this Sai is as good as 
cancelled when you inflict pain on the Sai who resides in them. 
That plus and this minus add up to zero. In your frenzy to offer 
homage, you should not forget others who have been waiting long 
for the chance; you must provide facilities for their dharshan. 


BABA 


32. When women are honoured 


Asthiram Jeevanam loke (Life in this phenomenal world is 
impermanent) 


Yaddhrishyam tannashyam (Whatever is perceived is bound to 
pass away some time or other) 


Asthiram yauvanam dhanam (Youth and wealth are transient) 
Asthiram dhaara puthraadih (Wife and children will pass away) 
Sathyam Keerthi dhvayam sthiram (Only Truth and Fame endure). 


EMBODIMENTS of Love! In this infinite universe, among the myriads of living beings humanity 
is eminent. Among human beings, it is a privilege to be born as a woman. There are many 
examples to demonstrate the preeminence of women. 


Was not Raama born as a Divine incarnation in Kausalya's womb? 
Did not Lava and Kusha (the twins) become great because they were born to Seetha? 
Was it not Jeejeebai's loving care which made Shivaaji great? 


Was it not Putlibai's piety which made Gaandhi a Mahaathma? 


" 


All the greater sages, and saints, heroes and warriors were born to women "who made them 


great”. Woman is the Goddess of Nature. 


Gaayathri, which enshrines the essence of the Vedhas, is a goddess, venerated as Vedha Maatha 
(the mother of the Vedhas). 


It is obvious that feminine birth is estimable, adorable and sublime. The Vedha also adores the 
feminine principle in various ways. Vedhik rituals and practices accord a high place to women. 


Feminine aspect of Divinity 


The woman is adored under different names as Sathyavathi, Anyavathi, Angavathi and 
Nidhaanavathi. Sathyavathi proclaims the truth that the Divine pervades the cosmos, God is not 
separate from Prakrithi (Nature). Nature is a form of the Divine. The Vedha testifies to the 
omnipresence of the Divine like the presence of butter in every drop of milk, 


Next is Anyavathi. The five elements are present everywhere in the universe: earth, water, fire, 
air and ether. These elements vary in subtlety in a progressive order. The Vedha declares that 
even the five elements, are manifestations of the Divine. This aspect of Nature is called 
Angavathi. 


The Anyavathi principle points, out which deity is responsible for what function and describes 
the deity's special characteristics. Eeshvara is described as Thrishuula-dhaari (the bearer of the 
Trident) and Thrinethra dhaari (the deity with three eyes) Vishnu is described as the bearer of 
the conch, the discus and the mace. Krishna is described as one having the peacock's feather (on 
his head). Raama is described as the wielder of the bow. The Angavathi ritual worships the 
different deities with their distinctive features. 


The Nidhaanavathi ritual-lays down nine. different ways in which the Divine can be worshipped, 
such ,as listening, chanting the name, etc. 


All forms of worship, are presided over by these four feminine deities. Though the names, are 
different, the goal is one. 


Women should be revered 


From ancient times the feminine aspect of the Divine has been worshipped in various ways. The 
Vedha declares that where women are honoured and esteemed, there divinity is present with all 
its potency. Unfortunately today men consider it demeaning to honour women. This is utterly 
wrong and is a sign of ignorance. 


Sthree (Woman) is Grihalakshmi (the Goddess of Prosperity for the home). She is hailed as 
Dharmapathni (the virtuous spouse). She is called - ///alu (the mistress of the house) and 
Ardhaangi (the better half). People gloat over petty titles conferred on them. But women have 
been conferred the highest titles which are valid for all time. A home ‘without a woman is a 
jungle. 


Men should realise the high status of women and honour and respect them accordingly. They 
should not make women weep and shed tears. A home where the woman sheds tears will be 
ruined. Men should give an honourable place for women and lead a respectable life. 


The archetypal woman is described as Aadhishakthi (the primal source of all energy) having a 
whole array of powers. She is hailed as the mother of the Amrithasyaputhraah (children of 
immortality). 


The thrigunas in the word "Sthree" 


The word Sthree is made up of three, consonants, "Sa", "Tha" and "Ra". "Sa" signifies the 
Saathvik nature of women. It represents also the triple aspects of experiencing divinity 
Saalokyam (vision of the Divine), Saameepyam (proximity) and Saayujyam (mergence). "Tha" 
signifies the Thaamasik quality. But this Thaamasik quality is' not indolence and slothfulness. It 
includes qualities like humility, kindness and modesty. This means that women begin with 
qualities like meekness and-modesty so that they may serve the family and society in the right 
spirit. There is a saying in Andhra Pradesh: "Judge a house by its mistress." 


"Ra" represents the Rajoguna. This does not mean pugnacity and querulousness. This quality 
signifies the preparedness of women, where necessary, even to sacrifice their lives for the sake of 
their honour and the honour of their family. Bhaarath's history is full of examples of women 
who fought valiantly and gave' up their lives to protect their husbands and their honour. 


Sthree thus represents the combination of the three gunas. Woman, who should be highly 
honoured for these qualities, is being treated as a Abala (weaker vessel) and assigned an inferior 
status. 


It will not be out of place to mention here that women who have wielded power in Bhaarath or 
other countries have proved themselves to be exceptionally able and successful. There have been 
many kings in Britain - but no one ruled the country so well as Queen Victoria, Her rule was 
marked by righteousness, prosperity and efficiency. There was no discontent during her reign. In 
more recent times, Indira Gandhi ran the Government with courage and consummate skill. She 


was prepared for any sacrifice in the interests of the country. Among Prime Ministers, she 
headed the Government for over twelve years. Many others had only brief tenures! 


There are several organizations which are being run by women with great dedication and zeal for 
the benefit of the people. Valmeeki extolled the sweetness of womanhood. What is the cause of, 
this sweetness? The spirit of sacrifice is the cause, according to Valmeeki. 


Spirit of sacrifice is found-only in women 


A mother is ready to sacrifice everything even her life, for the sake of her child. Such a spirit is 
to be found only among women. If a child is grievously ill, the father may say that the child may 
as well die. But the mother will try to save the child at any cost. It is for this reason, that woman 
is described as Thyaagamuurthi, the embodiment of sacrifice. Men do not have the same spirit 
of sacrifice as women. Men may present a heroic pose, but do not have the determination and 
perseverance to carry on the struggle to the end. Valmeeki described woman as the Bhakti 
svaruupini (embodiment of devotion). Man was described as Jnaanasvaruupa. The Jnaani has 
limited access to the Divine mansion. But the woman devotee has access to innermost 
apartments. The preeminent status accorded to women will be evident from all the ancient 
scriptures. 


In this context the role of women as mothers should be understood. The great hero, Shivaaji, was 
moulded entirely by the teachings of his mother. Raama was taught by his mother Kausalya to 
follow the sacred path of Dharma. The lives of the great show to what extent they were the 
products of their mothers. 


Gandhiji became a staunch adherent of truth after a lesson he learnt from his mother, who could 
not bear her son telling a lie even to make her break her fast. 


It is the mothers who make their children take to the right path, not so much the fathers. Today 
we find the father's teaching the children to utter lies. For instance, when the telephone rings in 
the house, the father who is in the house tells his son to inform the caller that the father is not at 
home. 


The practice of fathers allowing the sons to go astray has a long ancestry. It started in the 
Dhvaapara Yuga with Dhritharaashtra, father of Dhuryodhana. Whatever evil deeds his son did, 
Dhritharaashtra used to say he was a good man. Fathers who allow their sons to go astray are not 
real fathers at all. Prahlaadha observed: "Only he is father who advises the son to seek God. Only 
he is a true guru who instructs the pupil about God." 


The mother is the first preceptor for the child 


Mothers in ancient days used to teach, the children about right conduct, morality and devotion. 
The first preceptor for a child is the mother. For this reason, Bhaaratheeya culture gave the first 
place to the mother among the four persons to be revered as divine: mother, father, guru and 
guest. The mother gets the first place because she bears the child in the womb for nine months 
and nourishes him with her own blood. 


Even in mentioning the names of deities, the first place is given to the goddess, as in Seetha- 
Raama, Paarvathi-Parameshvara and Lakshmi-Naaraayana and the reason for the feminine, name 
getting priority is she is Prakrithi svaruupini--the embodiment of Prakrithi (nature). The 
implication in this usage, is that you should realise God through the-propitiation of Prakrithi. 


Earn the blessings of the mother 


In this world, all things are transient. Only righteousness and good name endure. How is one to 
acquire a good name? By revering the mother. Never go against the wishes of the mother. The 
son who causes pain to the mother’ can never' be happy. Hence, earn the blessing of the mother. 


In this context, it should be noted that Russians observe December 8th as Ladies Day. On that 
day the women have free time. The men have to do the cooking. The women go out to do service 
in hospitals and other places. 


Men and women have to understand each other so that they can live in harmony, in the family. 
Today people want to live happily but not to lead ideal lives. Parents, for instance, do not set a 
good example to the children. In the modern age, the father does not instruct the children 
properly and the children do not pay heed to the words of the mother. The vast majority of 
fathers today behave like Dhritharaashtra. Where there are some good children, leading a pious 
life, the fathers rebuke them, saying, "Have you gone crazy? Don't take part in Bhajans or social 
service." Parents who behave in this manner are like Hiranyakashipu, who could not tolerate his 
son worshipping Hari. Today we have many parents like Dhritharaashtra and Hiranyakashipu, 
but few who encourage, their children to adhere to righteousness. 


Children today do not relish edifying works like the Raamaayana, the Mahaabhaaratha and the 
Bhaagavatham. They waste their time on reading trash. Parents should see that children do not 
read bad books. 


Now, for a few words of advice to women. It is found that women are given to excessive talking. 
From today you have to take a pledge not to indulge in talking. Women are found talking not 
only, in the auditorium but even in the bhajan mandhir. Men are fond of strolling around as they 
please, They observe no restraints as to where they should not go and what places they should 
avoid. 


If women observe restraint in speech and men control their movements, it will be good for both. 


Ladies day should be observed every year 


If the nation has to prosper, improvement must start with the parents. Without peace and 
harmony at home, there can be no peace in the nation. This message should be propagated 
throughout the country on every November 19", by observing it as Ladies' Day. You should 
teach people how to run their homes well and how to bring up children on right lines. You must 
deal calmly and tactfully with the men, if they are no cooperating. Though Raavana was evil- 
minded, his noble wife, Mandodhari, tried to correct him as much as possible. She advised him 
strongly not to keep Seetha in Lanka, but to restore her to Raama. 


From today learn to see the good in others and examine your own defects. Thereby you will. 
benefit both ways. Those who go about finding faults in others are like dogs which go after cast 
off shoes. 


Call to women 


Embodiments of Love! Mistakes may sometimes be committed in the organization. See that they 
do not recur. Buddha learnt the proper lesson through a single experience of seeing an old man, 
a sick man and a dead corpse. He understood the entire nature of human existence from this. 
People today have similar experiences over and over again. But their minds remain unchanged. 


Every experience should bring out a change. For years you listen to Svaami's discourses. How 
many have changed? How many have developed good qualities? Very few indeed. 


Develop pure thoughts wherever you may be. Only then your visit to Prashaanthi Nilayam at 
great expense would have served a purpose. 


As today is a sacred day dedicated to women, they should change themselves and help to change 
the men and the children. They should develop the qualities of sympathy, compassion; love and 
sacrifice. Study the lives of our great women, who were models of patience, fortitude, 
compassion and sacrifice. I desire that you should take up the reins of leadership and bring peace 
and prosperity to the nation by leading ideal lives. 


Discourse on 19-11-1995 in the Puurnachandra Auditorium 


33. From the individual to the Divine 


Divine MBODIMENTS of love! All, over the world, mankind is racked today by various difficult 
problems. When one problem is solved, another-series crop up. The reason for this situation is 
the absence of right relationship between the individual and the society. 


At the very outset, we have to take note of four entities: The first is the power that can solve .any 
problem in a moment. This is Parameshti (the Supreme Self). The second entity is Shrishti (the 
created universe). The third is Samashti (the collective entity--society or community). The fourth 
is Vyakthi (the individual). These four are not separate entities. A body consists of different 
organs performing different functions but they are integral parts of one body. For instance, the 
hand has a palm, which has fingers. All are integrally related. Similarly, the primary role of 
Parameshti has to be recognized. It is only when Parameshti is understood that the secret of 
creation can be grasped. When this secret is understood, the significance of society will be 
evident. Then the individual's role can be understood. 


How to recognise Parameshti? By-developing sacred qualities and adoring the Parameshti 
(Supreme Self), the individual understands the secret of Shrishti (creation) and the importance of 
society. Today if you want to understand Prakrithi (Nature or the phenomenal Universe), you 
have to understand Samashti (Society). 


The term Samashti encompasses all social organizations. A Samashti (community) is made up of 
individuals coming together. This union of individuals is essential for realisation of the Divine. 


Three rules for promoting collective action 


Take, for instance, the present conference, Here people from different countries, professing 
different faiths and belonging to different cultures, have come together. But what is their 
common unifying factor? It is the belief in the Sai Principle that has, brought you together. All 
of them are trying to find unity in diversity. To promote unity, the concept of Samashti 
(collective action) has to be understood. There are three rules to be observed in promoting 
collective action, Sathyam bruuyaath (Speak the truth). Priyam bruuyaath (Speak what is 
pleasant). Na bruugaath Sathyam apriyam (Never speak what is true but not pleasing). Truth is 
of the highest importance whether we consider morality, worldly life or spiritual progress. From 
the ethical point of view you have to speak the truth. In the context of worldly life, you have to 
speak what is pleasing. From the spiritual point of view you have to avoid what is not pleasing 
even if it is true. The Geetha also teaches that one should not utter words that cause excitement, 
but speak the truth, which is both pleasing and wholesome. 


Three faces of reality 


There are similarly three concepts in Vedhaantha relating to what constitutes truth: 
Paaramaarthika, Vyaavaahaarika and Praathibhasika. Paaramaarthika relates to the Supreme, 
Vyaavaahaarika to worldly existence and Praathibhasika to the superimposition of the physical 
on the spiritual. These three are not at variance from each other. They are the same thing in three 
different forms like the ocean, the waves and the foam. The same coolness and taste that exist in 
the ocean are to be found in the wave and the foam. 


When you are considering matters relating to the world, you use the term vyaavahaarika. When 
you are considering experiences relating to the mind, you call them Paaramaarthika 


(concerning the Divine). When you consider matters relating to thoughts, you describe them as 
Praathibhasika. While the epithets are different, the underlying truth is one and the same. 


To know the nature of the Divine, the first step is to understand the social process. Starting with 
Parameshti (the Divine), you understand Srishti (creation) and become aware of Samashti (the 
society or community) and realise the role of Vyakthi (the individual). The process of 
understanding is an integral one related to each other. Without the individual there can be no 
society. Without society, creation has no meaning. Although different terms have been used in 
Vedhaantik parlance to describe the different levels of awareness, the entire understanding of this 
unifying process is that the individual proceeds from the social to the cosmic and then to the 
Divine. 


The relationship between the individual and God should be properly understood. God is the 
Samashti (all-embracing whole). The individual has to experience his oneness with the universal. 
This universal has been called the Vishva-Viraata-Svaruupam (Cosmic form of the Divine). All 
the beings you see here are manifestations of the cosmic form. This means that all are inherently 
Divine. By obsession with the separateness of the individual, one fails to see his cosmic essence. 
Forget the ego in you and recognise your spiritual essence. It is attachment to the body that is the 
cause of man's loss of peace. 


Man has explored everything in the external world but has failed to know his own true nature. As 
a result he has created Bhinnathvam (divisiveness). Once he knows his true self, he will have no 
feeling of divisiveness. He will recognise the oneness of all life. 


Role of Sai sevaks 


Why is this conference being held? In this context three things are highly significant. First, what 
should be the characteristics of persons in the Sai Organization? Their hearts should be cool like 
the moon. Their minds should be pure like butter. Their speech should be sweet like honey. It is 
only when you have a heart cool as the moon, a mind pure as butter and speech sweet as honey, 
will you be a worthy member of the organization. When these three qualities are present, there 
will be Divinity. 


In the Geetha, Krishna advises Arjuna to give up all Dharmas and take refuge in Him. The 
Dharmas that are to be given up are related to the body and are the cause of innumerable worries. 
Sai love is the sure solvent for all these worries. (Bhagavaan sang a Thelugu poem describing all 
the different worries from birth to death to which men are subject). As long as you do not 
understand the workings of Nature, everything will be worry. But once you understand them, 
you will be always happy. That understanding will lead you to the awareness of Parameshti 
(Divine). Once the nature of the Divine is understood, all experiences will be blissful like the 
sweetness, of sugar which is present in different kinds of sweets. 


Vedhaantha and science proclaim the same truth 


Recognise that the Divinity that is present in everyone is the same. This was the truth 
proclaimed by Vedhaantha. Scientists are now coming to the same view through a different 
approach. The ancient sages proclaimed the omnipresence of God, many millennia ago. 
"Raamadhas and Pothana also gave expression to this truth in their poems. Scientists are now 
declaring that the entire Cosmos is composed of energy. 


Some years ago, at a meeting in the Institute of Science, Bangalore, one scientist referred to" the 
‘age of the sun, giving a figure running into billions of years. The ancients referred to the sun as 
anaadhi, meaning that its origin is indeterminate. By merely assigning a definite number running 
into billions, has science-made the fact more meaningful than what the sages said? Anaadhi. 
(Beginningless) is a truer description of the age of the sun, than the scientists reckoning in 
billions of years. 


The ancients understood the secrets of creation by seeking to understand the Parameshti 
(Supreme creator). Through understanding creation, they realised the truth about society and the 
individual. 


Self-enquiry is the means to Self-Realisation. Self-enquiry reveals that you are not the body, the 
senses or the mind. You are their master. You are the Aathma (Spirit). The knowledge based on 
the body is Bhouthika Jnaanam (worldly knowledge). The knowledge based on the mind is 
sujnaanam (rational knowledge). The knowledge based on the heart is' Aathma Jnaanam 
(Spiritual Knowledge). 


We are one family 


The most important concern of this conference should be how to enable members to realise the 
Parameshti (Divine). The first requisite for this purpose is good company. Good company is 
conducive to good thoughts. Anil Kumar referred to the "Latest God" in his speech preceding 
Bhagavaan's discourse. This is a misconception. There is only one God and He .is eternal. Dr. 
Safaya expressed thanks for the gift of blankets by devotees from Korea. Inspite of proximity to 
Svaami over many years many have not understood Svaami's teachings even on minor matters. 
When do you express thanks? You thank a third person. But you don't thank your own 
people. When you go out for a dinner you express thanks to the host, but does anyone thank the 
mother for serving food? There are no "others" in 'the Sai Organization. We are one family. The 
'Word "thanks" should not be used in the Sai Organization. It is purely a conventional 
expression, in the ordinary world. The member of a family who works for the family is different 
from a worker who labours for wages. Members of the Sai Organization should render service 
without expectation of any reward or recognition. 


Members of the Sai Organization should endeavour to improve themselves to some extent at 
least as a result of their participation in this conference. Don't bother about the past. Concentrate 
on the present. From now on, all of you should tread a sublime path. Don't give room for mutual 
jealousy, hatred or ill-feeling. Follow the role' "Help ever, Hurt never." 


Discourse to the Sixth World Conference of Sri Sathya Sai Seva Organizations in the Sai 
Kulwant Mandap on 20-11-1995. 


The fulfilment, of man's life on earth consists in filling himself with 
the love of God and channelising, that love into acts of service, 
service of all who are embodiments of God. There is really no 
‘other' no ‘neighbour’. Everyone is oneself, for all belong to an 
indivisible whole. Service uplifts us, delights us, satiates our 


hunger, expands our horizons. Service to man is worship of God, 
in the one who gives and the one who gets, in the helper and the 
helped. 


BABA 


34. Spiritual significance of loving service 


EMBODIMENTS of Love! A pure, unwavering, compassionate heart, truthful speech and use of 
the body for dedicated service to others are sublime qualities in a human being," says a Sanskrith 
poem. 


Mankind has been engaged in the quest for. Truth from the earliest times. Bhaarath is the birth- 
place of many sages who explored the realms of the spirit, discovered the highest truths and 
proclaimed them to the world. In more recent times others have been engaged in pursuing 
scientific investigations to discover a different set of truths. Whatever the truths discovered by 
science or spirituality, the ultimate reality is the energy of the atom. All that is perceived or 
experienced in the manifested Cosmos is the combination of atoms. The five basic elements are 
made up of atoms. The food you eat, the water you drink, the air you breathe, the sounds you 
hear are all expressions of atoms. The Cosmos is made up of atoms. 


It has taken science a thousand years (of investigation) to discover this truth. But many millennia 
ago, a young child Prahlaadha, proclaimed this truth. He told his father, "Do not have any 
doubts as to whether Hari (the Supreme Lord) is at one place and not at another. Wherever you 
search for Him, you will find Him. (Svaami recited a poem from the Bhaagavatham) Prahlaadha 
taught that the Divine permeates the entire universe in the form of atoms. This omnipresence of 
the Divine was also proclaimed in the Geetha. 


See the Divine in all 


What pervades the entire universe is a manifestation on of the Divine Energy. To experience this 
omnipresent energy, certain spiritual processes have been indicated. One of them is to see the 
Divine in whatever you do, whatever you perceive and whatever you experience. 


"Love and Service represent the same truth" (Thelugu saying). For man, love and service are 
like-two 'wings with the help of which man should strive to realise the Spirit. The quest for Truth 
really means discovering one's own inner reality. This eternal Divine Principle is in one and all. 
To experience this Divine, one has to develop certain sacred qualities. 


Morality is a mark of a human being. Truth is the rule. Righteousness is the path. Sacrifice is the 
glory. These three are the hall-marks of humanity. Mankind is distinguished by these three 
qualities. Man today has lost the spirit of sacrifice. Morality has been undermined. 


There is no concern for truth. He is lost totally in mundane pursuits, forgetting his divinity. The 
Sai Organizations were set up to make people realise their true divine nature. What is the 
primary purpose of the Sai Organizations? It is to make the people realise that they are sparks of 
the Divine and not embodiments of the physical products of Nature. The inherent divinity of man 
has been clearly proclaimed in the Geetha. This truth is not the opinion of any person, subject to 
changes. 


Spiritual value of service 


Some of the speakers at the Conference have stated that Svaami is bringing about transformation 
in individuals When does transformation take place? After a person has received information. 
Therefore, the first requisite is to get the information about the presence of the Divine Principle 
in all. The Sai Organizations have been engaged in propagating this "information." Seva 
(Service) is the ideal means by which this message can be conveyed. You should all realise that 


the human body has been' given to you solely to render selfless service. Such service broadens 
the heart, destroys the ego and generates bliss. Service also helps to promote consciousness of 
the brotherhood of man and the Fatherhood of God. Your task does not end there. You have at 
the same time to propagate the idea of Ekaathma-Bhaavam (spiritual oneness of all mankind). 
Mankind has to be led from dualism to non-dualism. 


Arguments over the existence or non-existence of God are entirely futile and foolish, as Buddha 
pointed out. According to the minds of different persons, views and beliefs are bound to differ. 
But irrespective of these controversies, the Truth is one. That Truth is God. Dharma is God. 
Ahimsa is God. Adhere to these three: Truth, Righteousness and Non-violence. Follow the path 
of Truth. There is no greater virtue than truth. The truth you speak must emanate from the heart 
and should be filled with love. Where there is love there is truth. 


Stick to truth in whatever you do. This may not be easy. But through persistence truth will 
become a natural habit. Act according to the dictates of your conscience and not the promptings 
of your senses. 


Love is the basis for all actions 


Make love the basic impulse for all your actions. Share your love with others. Be unselfish. Self 
lives begetting and forgetting. Love lives by giving and forgiving. Develop confidence in your 
self. Through self-confidence you can achieve self-realisation. 


The Sai Organizations have been enjoined to carry out a programme of ceiling on desires. 
Everyone should try to control desires as much as possible. The promotion of human values is 
another item in the programme. These human values are inherent-in every person. All that is 
needed is, for everyone to manifest them in his daily life. Truth, Righteousness and Peace are all 
in you. You are the embodiment of Truth, Peace, Love and God. Recognise this fact. Members 
of Sai Organizations should cultivate certain desirable practices. For instance, they should 
regulate their diet, because one's food influences ones thoughts. Smoking and intoxicating 
drinks have to be given up. They are ruinous for the health. Meat eating should also be given up 
because eating animal food promotes animal tendencies. The fourth evil that has to be got rid of 
is gambling. Those who take to the Spiritual path should avoid as much as possible these four 
bad practices. It is sinful to slaughter poor animals for one's food' Sai members should follow the 
motto' Help ever; Hurt never. There is no meaning in professing to respect human values without 
observing the rule that you should cause no harm to others in any form whatsoever. 


God loves those who serve others because He is in all of them. Whomever you may serve, 
consider it as service to God. Divinise all your actions. Treat every action you perform as God's 
work. 


Love to love; heart to heart 


Sai Organizations have not been set up for propaganda purpose. We do not need any publicity. 
Who invited all of you here? You came out of your love. It is an outpouring of your love for 
Svaami. What is the nature of your relationship? Love to love; heart to heart. It is your love for 
me and my love for you, which has brought about this enormous gathering here today. 


You have to bear in mind yet another fact about our Organization. The services rendered by the 
Seva Dal to maintain cleanliness and security in the Nilayam Campus are beyond praise. They 
are true sevaks. In our seva organizations there are hundreds of thousands of workers who are 


rendering service of various kinds. The office-bearers should not feel that they are apart from the 
workers. All are workers. No one can consider himself a master. Service can assume any form. 
What a mother does for her child is service. A husband and wife render mutual service. In this 
sense all are servants. God is the only Master. All others who call themselves "masters" like 
post-master, station-master, etc. are not masters at all. 


In rendering service, see that you do it for the satisfaction of your conscience and not to impress 
others. Treating service as an offering to the Divine, do it perfectly Remember that God is 
watching everyone of your actions. Be your own watchman to scrutinize what you do. When you 
do everything to satisfy your conscience, you are well on the way to Self-Realisation. 


Saadhana of overseas devotees 


I am-well aware that our Sai members are doing excellent work. Without boasting about it, we 
can claim that there are no organizations in the world like the Sathya Sai Seva Organization. The 
way the sevaks have been serving food and water to lakhs of people is inconceivable elsewhere. 
Moreover, you have to appreciate the patience shown by overseas devotees. They are used to 
living in spacious houses with all amenities. Here they have been living .in sheds adjusting 
themselves to the lack of many amenities. That adjustment .is an index of their devotion. The 
adjustment is itself a form of spiritual saadhana. Adjustment is possible when there is 
understanding. It is because they cherish the feeling, "Here is our Svaami, our God," they are 
able to adjust themselves. This understanding is also a form of saadhana. Acquire this 
understanding and then act on that basis. Then you will experience bliss. 


There is no use merely going on reading books. Practising what you have learnt is more 
important than filling the mind with book knowledge. In our organization all are well-read 
persons who are keen to practise what they have learnt. You are all treading the path of Truth. 
The whole world is one. Respect all faiths alike. The world is like a veena with many strings. 
When the strings are in harmony, the world will be happy. All should behave fraternally towards 
each other. There should be no differences on grounds of religion. All worship the same God. No 
religion preaches hatred. Truth and righteousness are common to all religions. Adhere to them, 
Observe morality and integrity, in daily life. 


Love for Svaami is cause for transformation 


Today everyone in Prashaanthi Nilayam is living as a member of one family. Whatever your 
language, religion, nationality or custom,; you feel as one here. This is great spiritual saadhana. 
No one brought about this transformation. It was an-individual transformation, each by himself 
or herself. How did they effect this transformation? Out of their love for Svaami. That love 
accounts for this prodigious transformation. 


In the Sai Organization, because it functions in the work-day world, some regulations have been 
laid down. Rules and regulations are essential. First of all, whatever resolutions have been passed 
at this conference, they should be carried out whole-heartedly. All sorts of conferences are held 
all over the world. Resolutions are passed. But they are ignored after the conference is over. In 
the Sai Organizations, this should not happen. Having passed resolution, you must "pass" in it! 
You would have scored a "pass" only when you implement the resolution. Therefore, you must 
carry out the decisions you have taken. That is the meaning of discipline. Discipline grows out. 
of devotion. Devotion stems from duty. Observe the three D's: Discipline, Devotion, Duty. This 


is true spirituality. In the performance of every duty there should be devotion. There should be 
devotion and not diversion! 


Devotion signifies love. Love for the Divine is the only true love. All other expressions of love 
are merely attachments of one sort or another. Love is God. Live in love. Start the day with love 
Fill the day with love. End the day with love. That is the way to God. This love should be 
considered. Divine by people of every faith. Manifest your love ‘regardless of how others 
behave. 


Share your bliss with others 


Cultivate this love. Iam not concerned about the numerical growth of centres or devotees. I want 
only quality. Increase in quantity should be accompanied by improvement in quality. This is the 
service you have to render. The bliss which you experience should be shared with others. 


Do not violate the rules of the organizations. Thereby your love will grow. It is that love, which 
is responsible for your putting up with all inconveniences and discomforts. Develop the spirit of 
sacrifice. 


Realise that true happiness consists in union with God. You need not wish me Happy Birthday. I 
am' always happy. I am a tank of happiness. Draw from it as much as you wish. Drink that water 
and sanctify your life. It was the thirst for Divine bliss that drew you here. Drink deep and 
experience that bliss. Live in peace in Prashaanthi Nilayam, ignoring the attractions of the outer 
world. When you return to your respective countries, share your experience with your 
countrymen. 


Enjoy the love I confer on you. It is totally free from self-interest. Receiving selfless love, make 
your love unselfish. 


Discourse of Sixth World Conference of Sathya Sai Seva Organizations on. 21-11-1995. 


35. Cherish Bhaaratheeya culture 


EMBODIMENTS of Love! Education lends beauty to man. Education is man's secret wealth. 
Education is the source of fame and happiness. It is the teacher of teachers. Education is the true 
kinsman for one going abroad. It is the third eye for man. Rulers honour the scholar more than 
the man of wealth. One without education is an animal. This is the message of Bhaaratheeya 
culture. 


Life goes on whether a man acquires culture or not or pursues studies or not. But the life-span 
melts like ice from day to day. Even before he realises his duties, his life comes to an end. In 
the sphere of education, every thinking man is confronted with baffling problems. Educational 
institutions have forgotten their obligation to make education a source of strength and happiness 
in daily life. Educational ideals have lost their appeal. Education has ceased to be creative. It has 
become a destructive force. Respect and reverence are down in the dumps. Education has been 
commercialized. Students are more keen to make money by any means rather than to acquire 
knowledge. Educational institutions which ought to be citadels of morality, integrity, sacrifice 
and character, have cease to foster morality. 


Students don't make any attempt to develop good qualities, while cultivating friendships and 
participating in common activities. All associations without good qualities are valueless. 
Character is most important for a student. It is the essence of Bhaaratheeya culture. 


Without cultural refinement, can anyone hope to earn honour? Without morals, can you acquire 
the esteem of others? If you preach righteousness without practising it yourself, will anyone 
respect you? Without fear of sin, with sinful thoughts, you commit sinful acts. At least from now 
on, recognise the truth and live upto the name of sons of Bhaarath. 


It is not a good index of pure education, if having been born in Bhaarath, you do not live up to 
the ideals of Bhaarath and lead a mundane existence. 


Bhaaratha Maatha's lament 


Students! Awake! This is not the time for slumber. Don't you see the tears Mother Bhaarath is 
shedding? Why is she shedding tears? Because her sons have forsaken the sacred path and are 
leading sub-human existence. Morality and integrity have been given up. To wipe the tears of 
Mother Bhaarath, every Bhaaratheeya should cherish the culture of Bhaarath. 


Every student should observe the three principles of equality, unity and co-operation. The nation 
is going to pieces because of the lack of mutual respect and unity. Education is not confined to 
reading, writing and listening. Degrees do not constitute true marks of learning. Without wisdom 
and spiritual knowledge, can there be real education? 


Education is not for earning a living but for leading the good life. All education which imparts 
worldly knowledge and develops intellectual activities without promoting character is utterly 
worthless. 


Morality imparts value to human life 


True education should promote morality, character and spirituality. Science and Technology are 
undoubtedly necessary for comfortable living. But there is an unseen power which underlies the 
physical world. Today students should acquire both physical knowledge for living and spiritual 


knowledge for understanding that .which sustains life. The two together help to make humanness 
blossom. It is morality that imparts value to human life. 


Morality and Integrity are today confined to books. 

The heart is utterly polluted. 

Hands are engaged in selfish pursuits. 

This is the progress of modern education. (Thelugu Poem). 


Man has progressed in science and technology. But morality and integrity are going down from 
day to day. The immediate task is to promote moral values. There are ninety crores of 
Bhaaratheeyas, but few who will assuage the agony of Mother Bhaarath. Of what use are these 
myriad sons? 


There was a time when Bhaarath stood out as the example for the world in holiness and purity. 
The ancient sages enthroned righteousness and gave the highest place of honour for the spirit of 
sacrifice. They adored justice and revered truth. In this way, they bequeathed to the nation its 
greatest cultural heritage. 


Lessons of history of Bhaarath 


Students! Recall for a moment the past history of Bhaarath. There is no record at anytime of 
Bhaaratheeyas having invaded other countries. Bhaaratheeyas always adhered to justice. They 
protected Righteousness. They esteemed truth as their life-breath. They took to arms only when 
foreign hordes invaded the country. Otherwise they never committed aggression on any country. 


Many foreign nations plundered the wealth of Bhaarath, but Bhaarath never coveted the wealth 
of any country, Not only did they loot Bhaarath's wealth, but they desecrated the sacred culture 
of Bhaarath. They created divisions between persons. They set at naught the sanctity of the 
plighted word. They undermined human relationships. It is because of these outrages that 
Bhaarath is in a deplorable plight today. 


Reflect for a moment on the glorious record of Bhaarath's past history. Bhaarath has always 
cherished noble virtues. Unable to recognise the purity, sacredness and spiritual heritage of 
Bhaarath, students treat it with levity. They consider it as uncivilized. This is totally wrong. 
Bhaarath has been the home of prosperity, morality, sacrifice and fraternity. But modern 
education has polluted all these qualities. Evils like corruption, dishonesty, injustice and 
falsehood were unknown to Bhaaratheeyas in ancient India. Today the people have become 
victims of exotic modes of living and have no respect for the transitional culture. 


Bhaarath has upheld the collectivist ideal as against the concept of individualism. Community 
singing of Bhajans was preferred, not individual singing. Collective action was promoted. The 
Vedhas also glorified the collective spirit. It was Guru Naanak who initiated the practice of 
congregational bhajans. 


Students today should take a pledge to go to the villages and serve the rural populations. Most 
students soon after they get their degrees, either wish to go abroad or desire well paid jobs. 
Students should realise the importance of our villages and try to improve them. Money is not 
important. It is character that counts. 


The ancients attached value to the four goals of life: Dharma (Righteousness), Artha (Wealth), 
Kaama (Desires) and Moksha (Liberation). They followed righteous means to acquire wealth and 


transformed their desires into yearning for liberation. Thus they gave primary importance to 
Dharma and Moksha. Today people have given up Dharma and Moksha and are pursuing only 
Artha and Kaama. 


Consider Dharma as the basis for everything 


Students! Examine your hearts. Rectify your thoughts and earn money by moral means. Our 
ancients considered Dharma as the basis for the world. Today Dhana (wealth) is esteemed as the 
basis for everything. 


The achievements of our ancients and the greatness of their qualities are beyond praise. Emperor 
Sibi was prepared to offer his own flesh to save the life of a pigeon. Many sacrificed their lives 
to protect the lives of others. Harishchandhra gave up his kingdom and even his wife and son to 
honour his word. Students today do not cherish the lives of these heroes. 


The educational system should not be subject to changes according to changes in Education 
Ministers. Education, like Justice, should be free from governmental interference. Students 
should realise that what matters is not the religion they profess, but how far they are truly human 
in their life. They should realise the sacredness of their Motherland, Bhaarath. It is a name which 
is anterior to either Bharatha, Shri Raama's brother, or Shakunthala's son, Bharatha. 


Five qualities represented by H-i-n-d-u 


Foreigners should understand the precise meaning of the word "Hindu," the name which they 
associate with India. The five letters in the name of "Hindu" represent five qualities--Humanity, 
Individuality, Nationality, Divinity and Unity. Unity is essential not only for Bhaaratheeyas, but 
for the entire world. 


Today students tend to migrate from villages to cities after their education is completed. Students 
who come from villages should stay on. in their villages and improve the quality of life of the 
villagers. Students should learn three essential things: Cultivate the company of the good. Avoid 
evil associates. Do ceaselessly meritorious deeds. 


Students should dedicate themselves to social service, striving always for public welfare. Social 
service leads to the ripening of wisdom. Wisdom is the source of good qualities. Develop good 
qualities and good conduct. Realise that service is the means to overcome the ego, broaden the 
vision and promote love. Arise, awake and stop not till the goal is reached! 


Mother Bhaarath is shedding tears. Find out the cause, as Lava and Kusa did when they found 
their mother Seetha was in tears. They asked their mother: "Oh Mother'! Why are you weeping? 
Here we are, more valiant than Shri Raama. We can bring for you a Golden Mountain if you 
desire it." (Bhagavaan sang a Thelugu song which was both sweet and deeply moving). The boys 
held her feet and declared that they would not leave until she revealed the cause of her grief. See 
what the children of Seetha, the daughter of the Earth Goddess, did to assuage the grief of their 
mother. Which son of Bhaarath today is trying to wipe the tears of Bhaarath Maatha? This is 
deepening her grief. She laments: '"I have ninety crores of children. But of what use are they? 
They are not relieving a mother's sorrow." Mother Bhaarath's grief affects the whole world. 


What Sai expects 


The Motherland should be revered as divine. Only then there will be worldly peace. Make your 
studies useful to the country. Values are necessary for acquiring education. Education is for life. 


Life is for love. Love is for service to the nation and the world. Then there will be peace. Starting 
with values you end up with peace. There can be no peace without values (cheers). 


When students acquire education in this manner, they will promote the well-being of the country 
and the world. Students should take a resolve to develop their native places and make their lives 
meaningful. This is what Sai expects from you. This is what you should offer to me. Be good and 
make the country better. Be ideal students. Ensure security and prosperity in the country. 
Experience bliss by taking to the spiritual path. 


Discourse to the Fourteenth Convocation of Sri Sathya Sai Institute of Higher Learning at the 
Vidhya Giri Stadium on 22-11-1995. 


36. Love and sacrifice will save mankind 


The Embodiment of all forms ever tranquil, 
Bearing all names, ever auspicious, Shivam 
Sath-Chith-Aanandha Ruupam, Adhvaitham 
Sathyam, Shivam, Sundharam 


More effulgent than the sun, 

Purer and whiter than snow, 

Subtler than the firmament, 

Immanent in all beings, 

There is no particle without the Self. 
The cosmic consciousness 

Is within you and you are the Brahman. 
What more can I tell you; 

The good people gathered here? 


EMBODIMENTS of Love! Sathyam (Truth) has manifested itself in the cosmos. Without Truth 
there can be no universe. Everything has emanated from Truth. "The lord created everything out 
of truth. There is no place anywhere without truth. That is the pure absolute self," says a Thelugu 
poem. 


All wealth, all pleasures come from Truth. The Vedhas, the Upanishaths and all scriptures have 
their origin in Truth. Truth is the proper abode of God. Truth and God are inseparable. 


God is present in subtle form everywhere 


Truth is God. The Upanishaths declare: "Raso vai Sah" (God is all sweetness). This means that 
God 'is 'present in subtle form everywhere, like sugar in sugarcane and butter in milk. Although 
it is difficult to have a direct perception of God, His presence can be experienced in many ways. 
The sweetness in sugar, the sourness in lime fruit, the bitterness of the margosa leaf, all testify to 
the presence of the Divine. When you see a mountain or waterfall or a forest you feel happy. All 
these proclaim the presence of the Divine. Light shines, the stars twinkle, the sun blazes, the 
planets revolve in their orbits. All these-phenomena are manifestations of the Divine. By 
understanding the nature of a flame you can understand the nature of fire. By examining a drop 
of water you know the nature of the Ganges. Likewise by understanding Maanavathvam (the true 
nature of humanness), you can understand Dhaivathvam (Divinity). 


Despite all the activities in which man is engaged from dawn to dusk, he has no understanding-of 
his true nature. He identifies himself with the body,., the senses and the mind, forgetting that his 


true self is beyond all these. They are only instruments. Vedhaantha calls man to know himself. 
The insignia by Which a man is identified in ordinary life are not the indicators of one's true self. 
There are two entities in a man Dheha or Kshethra (the body) and the Dhehi or Kshethrajna 
(indwelling Spirit). To know the Kshethrajna is to know one's true Self. 


The Trinity and the three gunas 


In this human body, constituted by the five elements, God dwells in the form of the three gunas. 
Bhaaratheeyas adore the Trinity--Brahma, Vishnu, Maheshvara. The Trinity are not embodied 
beings. No one has ever seen them. Nor is it possible to experience them in any way. The trinity 
dwell in the human body as the three gunas: Sathva, Rajas, and Thamas. The three qualities are 
forms of the Divine. Brahma is responsible for creation. The process of creation is subtle and 
cannot be perceived by any of the senses. This transcendental process is taught by the mother. 
All are creations of the mother. Hence, the Upanishath declares: "Revere mother as God." The 
mother is to be adored as Brahma, the Creator. Revere the mother, serve the mother and trust the 
mother. This symbolises worship of God. 


Next comes the father. He protects the child, takes care of his upbringing and leads him to God. 
This protective function is attributed to Vishnu. The father symbolises Vishnu as the protector. 
Hence the injunction: "Revere the father as God." Thus the mother and the father are images of 
Brahma and Vishnu. 


Then there is Eeshvara. He is called Bholaashankara. He gives whatever one prays for. He never 
says no to any suppliant. Such an embodiment of truth cannot be hidden. To experience this 
embodiment of auspiciousness (Shiva), Thamas is the mean. The Thaamasik quality is usually 
associated with slothfulness and indolence. But this is not the proper meaning of Thamas (as an 
attribute of Shiva). Shiva's role is to lead man on the right path to realise his divinity. 


The Trinity, in the form of the three gunas, are present in every human being, This is borne out 
by the scriptural aphorisms: "Eeshvaras-sarvabhuuthaanaam" (the Divine dwells in all beings), 
"Eeshaavaasyam idham jagath" (the Lord is the indweller in the cosmos). When the significance 
of the three gunas is understood, the nature of the trinity can be understood. 


Body, mind and conscience 


God is not somewhere outside. He is the indweller in the body. Sin is the result of one's own 
actions. Hence it is folly to seek God elsewhere. Man wants to know all about the world and 
ventures to explore outer space. But he is unable to know his own true nature. How is he to know 
his self? The self is called conscience. The spiritual quest means making use of the vibrations 
from the conscience to understand the truth. Today man follows only the body and the mind and 
becomes a prey to all kinds of troubles. 


Man has to discover his divinity. The answer was given by Raama in the Raamaayana. Without 
troubling to find out where God is, it is enough if one worships the mother and the father who are 
the living embodiments of God. By pleasing and acting according to their wishes one can get 
their blessings. To ignore the deities who are directly visible, in the form of one's parents, it is 
delusion to search for an invisible God. 


Raama exemplified this truth when he told king Janaka that without the consent of his parents he 
would not consent to wed Seetha, although he had won her hand by lifting Shiva's bow. 
Similarly; when Bharatha and Vashishtha came to the forest to appeal to Raama to return to 


Ayodhya to rule over the kingdom, Raama firmly declared that he had to fulfill the pledge given 
by his father to Kaikeyi and complete his term of exile in the forest. Honouring the words of the 
parents is the highest virtue. This has to be observed by one and all. 


Brahma and Vishnu are therefore to be worshipped in the physical forms of one's parents. The 
two deities have no forms. The forms seen in the paintings of Ravi Varma are the products of his 
imagination. They have no basis in reality. 


The formless divine has to be experienced in the respiratory process which proclaims the oneness 
of the individual and the cosmic Self in the sound So-Ham. In breathing in with the sound ‘So’ 
and breathing out with 'Ham,' the life-breath is declaring: "I am God," "I am God." 


Disastrous consequences of lust, greed and anger 


For Bhaaratheeyas, the Raamaayana, the Mahaabhaaratha and the Bhaagavatham are the most 
sacred texts. The Raamaayana points out the disastrous consequences of Kaama (lust). The 
Mahaabhaaratha teaches that Lobha (greed) brings utter disaster. The Bhaagavatham shows the 
consequences of Krodha (hatred) towards God (Hiranyakashipu's example). 


The world reveres. Raama but despises Raavana. Why? Raama is the repository of all virtues. He 
is described as "Sarva bhoothahithe rathah"---one who rejoices in the well-being of all living 
creatures. He was the fountain of all wisdom. He exemplified the quality of equanimity in all 
situations. Raavana was the embodiment of arrogance. His lust and pride destroyed him. 


Lust, greed and anger are demonic qualities. When Sathva, Rajas and Thamas are cultivated in 
the right way, they can help man to realise his higher nature. 


Let your love embrace the whole world 


Embodiments of love! You have supreme duty to revere the mother, and the Motherland. 
Wherever you may go or work, never forget the Motherland. Students today should follow the 
good teachings of our ancient sages and seers and lead ethical lives. "Let us live together, strive 
together, bear no ill-will towards each other." This was the message of the Vedhas. Let your love 
embrace the whole world. Treat all man-kind as one family. All nations should be happy and 
prosperous. 


You must realise that life is like a two winged bird. The two wings are Love and Sacrifice. With 
these two you must aspire to reach the supreme goal. 


What is that men should do to promote the welfare of society? People claim to render social 
service, but their motives are self-centred. On the contrary, they should be conscious of all that 
they owe to society and render service in a spirit of selflessness. They should recognise their 
identity with society. You should recognise your true spiritual reality and engage yourselves in 
helpful activities. Make service the badge of your life. 


In this conference, people from many countries have taken part. What is the foremost message of 
this conference? Rendering service whenever it is needed, you must be prepared to dedicate your 
life for service. You can become a leader only when you are filled with the spirit of service. 
Today you pray to a river: "Oh river! overflow with water." Don't pray to the river. Address your 
prayers to rain. When the rain responds, the rivers will get filled automatically. Likewise, when 
you serve society as the Divine, automatically your desires will be fulfilled. 


Svaami belongs to you 


Devotees expect all kinds of things as a result of their devotion to God. Today, on the seventieth 
birthday of this body, you 'have to take note of one thing. Svaami needs nothing. Do not offer 
even a small robe. Svaami belongs to you. He is not separate from you, nor are you separate 
from Svaami. This is an inextricable relationship. Promote the well being of the backward and 
poor villages. 


You must have listened to the list of offerings of gold ornaments by some devotees. What is the 
ornament for Bhagavaan? Only bliss. Why cover Him with a shower of jewellery? A sculptor 
carves a beautiful idol. Why submerge that beauty under clothes, jewels and garlands? All these 
are artificial. Natural beauty alone gives real joy. 


Don't take the trouble to bring such ornaments. You should not entertain such thoughts at all. Let 
not the devotees feel otherwise. Bhagavaan has told the central Trust to put up for auction on this 
stage itself all the ornaments given by devotees. The money raised thereby should be used by the 
Trust. These jewels should not be taken even to Prashaanthi Nilayam. I have not sought anything 
from anybody. But I will be happy with any kind of service you render. Spend your money to 
help the needy. Assist in the provision of water. Meet the educational needs of the people and 
provide medical relief. Do everything for the good of society and not for the sake of an 
individual. Have the nation's welfare in your mind. 


In addition to jewels, offerings of money have also been made. All these funds will be used for 
the completion of the drinking water project. The water problem of Raayalaseema will have to be 
completely solved. This is a dry area. There is not enough water to drink. How can trees be 
grown in such an area? But without trees, the people cannot have a sufficient supply of oxygen. 
Water, therefore, is essential for life. I had been considering this problem for a long time. For 
health, the heart is important. For knowledge the head is important. For the body, water is 
essential. All these three should be provided free. They should not be commercialized. All these 
come from God. 


Like oil for a lamp, Love is essential for life. Without oil or love, darkness will prevail. Render 
loving service to all. Recognise that the Divine is within you and you have all the potency for 
great deeds. 


Serve Dharidhra Naaraayana 


From today, our organization should grow from day to day and encompass the whole world. Set 
aside private interests. Let welfare of society be your primary concern. Wherever you may be, in 
whatever country or place, take part in the service activities there. 


Today devotees from 137 countries have gathered here. How much work is being done in these 
countries? That is the test. In all countries there are people who are hapless. They are 
embodiments of Dharidhra Naaraayana (God in the form of the poor). What need is there to 
serve Shriman Naaraayana? He has a host of persons to serve Him. You must serve the poor 
Naaraayanas, who have nobody to serve them. 


"Your welfare is your gift to Me" 


Sow the seeds of such noble thoughts, let them grow into giant trees and let people take shelter 
under them. This is the only birthday gift I seek from you. Your welfare is your gift to Me. 
Become exemplary persons. When you return to your countries from this conference, you must 


develop your centres without hindrance, from day to day. Make good use of the Divine Trinity in 
you. Recognise the Divine in your mother, father and preceptor and revere them. Develop the 
conviction that the Divine you adore, who is your favourite deity, is within you. That Divine is 
Sathyam, Shivam, Sundharam (Truth, Goodness and Beauty). Plato (the Greek philosopher) 
declared that Truth, Goodness and Beauty are God. Irrespective of the country, these three are 
the eternal verities. With these truths in your hearts, embark on service and bring a good name to 
Bhaarath. 


Raayalaseema should be ensured water supply all through the year. Today it is a "Raallaseema" 
(a stony region). This region must be transformed into a "Rathnaalaseema" (a region glittering 
with gems). This is the collective responsibility of the people concerned. 


Make yourselves into a garland and I shall be the thread holding all the flowers together. 
Consider yourselves the children of one mother, belonging to the human family. Do not give 
room for differences of race, creed and nationality. All belong to the caste of humanity, the 
religion of love and the language of the heart. The same object, water, is called by different 
names in different languages. Likewise God is one, whatever the name that is used - whether 
Allah, Jesus, Buddha or Raama - have that faith. Don't criticize any religion. By developing this 
universalism, bring joy to Bhagavaan. 


Many overseas devotees greeted me in the morning with "Happy Birthday." I am always happy. 
It is enough if you are happy True happiness consists in union with God. 


From today you have to take to a new path. You must spend your lives in harmony, co-operation 
and mutual esteem. See the Divine in all things. That is the source of true and lasting bliss. It can 
be got only through Love. 


Discourse in the Vidhyagiri stadium on 23-11-1995. 


What is the happiest day in your life? All are happy days to a 
person of true knowledge. Happiness is an internal conscious 
experience which comes as an effect of the extinction of mental or 
physical desire. The less the desire, the greater is the happiness, so 
that perfect happiness consists in the destruction or satisfaction of 
all desires in the Absolute being. 


BABA 


37. Treat patients with love 


The first message conveyed by Bhaaratheeya culture to the whole of mankind is this "Let all 
people live happily, in good health and cheer." It desired that no one should experience suffering 
or misery in this world. 


Health is the English term for Aarogyam in Sanskrith. The word health is derived from the Latin 
word "Healy." Aarogyam has several meanings. One is sacredness. Another is Paripuurnam 
(Wholeness). The term thus indicates that all the organs of the body should be perfect and holy. 
If any organ is afflicted, the body cannot be said to be Whole. 


Hence men should aim at achieving perfect health and help others to do so. "Karmaath Jayathe 
Narah Karmanyeva Prabodhathi." (Every man takes birth as result of past actions. Karma is the 
cause of death). Thus Karma is the cause of birth and death. 


Every action has an effect. In any action done by man, its consequence is present in a subtle 
form. Action thus is related to its fruits. Moreover, time is also related to action. Action and time 
are inextricably inter-related. 


Time is measure of duration between two actions 


Every action has its own Maarga (course). One object is separated by space from another. 
Likewise, time is the measure of the duration between one action and another. Here is a tumbler. 
Beneath it is a plate. The space between the glass tumbler and the plate is termed Dharma. There 
can be no separateness between one object and another without this Dharma. Dharma defines 
the inter-relationships between two objects. 


Now regarding time: A doctor fixes 8 A.M as the time for performing an operation. By 11 A.M, 
the operation is completed with the stitching of sutures. The three-hour interval between the 
commencement of the operation and its completion indicates the time taken for the surgery. In 
reckoning time, action is also involved. Action is the interval between two points of time. Thus 
time and action go together. Hence everyone should recognise the intimate relationship between 
action and time. 


Every action, whether good or bad, has its consequence. There is no action in the world which is 
devoid of consequences. This is law of nature. For instance, a finger is cut by a knife. 
Immediately the finger starts bleeding. The result of the cut is instantaneous. When man slips on 
a step while walking, he sustains a fall and a limb is fractured. Here again, the result of the fall is 
instantaneous. Take another example. You had your breakfast this morning. It takes two hours to 
digest the food you have consumed. In the two earlier examples the results of the actions were 
instantaneous. But in the case of digestion of food you have consumed, it has taken two hours. 


Another example: You sow a seed. It becomes a sapling after some days. To bear fruit it takes 
some years. Thus every action has a consequence, but the time interval between action and result 
varies from case to case. Bhaaratheeya culture recognized the truth about action and 
consequence. Others have also got to realise this truth. 


One who is aware of this truth is unlikely to commit any wrong action, because he knows that 
good actions produce good results and bad deeds have bad consequences. Recognition of the law 
of Karma will make men lead proper lives. Man today takes to wrong paths because they have 
not realised this truth. 


Way to maintain heart in a good condition 


Health is essential for the body. A healthy mind can exist only in a healthy body. Only a man 
with a healthy mind will take part in joyous activities. 


This conference is concerned mainly with the heart. Many consider the heart as the most 
important organ. There is a way to maintain the heart in good condition. Most of the organs in 
the body are in an immobile state. But the heart is continually active. It is difficult to perform an 
operation on an organ which is ceaselessly at work. If the heart has to be stopped beating for 
performing an operation, this cannot be done for more than two or three minutes. No operation 
can be done in such a short time. Hence heart specialists investigated the methods by which the 
heart could be kept inactive for a few hours so that cardiac operations could be performed. The 
heart-lung machine was designed to enable heart operation to be done. 


The heart is the primary organ for keeping the body well. Only when the heart is sound there can 
be proper blood supply to the whole body. 


Who invented the heart-lung machine? It is a product of human, intelligence. This shows that 
intelligence is even superior to the heart. It is this intelligence that has been responsible for the 
discovery of numerous devices. 


Recognise the relationship between time and action 


It is by the use of intelligence for a practical purpose that doctors have found the technique of 
carrying out heart operations. The intelligence is as important as the heart. It is the combination 
of the intelligence and the heart that helps to keep a person healthy. A doctor may be extremely 
intelligent in performing operations. But if during an operation his mind wanders, the operation 
will not be successful. The combination of qualities required for success should be properly 
understood. 


The relationship between time and action should be recognized. Modern man tends to ignore the 
consequences of his actions. Purely for the sake of worldly pleasures, he considers wealth as the 
most important thing. The Chinese were accustomed to a certain traditional practice. Every 
morning on waking up they used to remember the saying: "Difficulties are our friends; let us 
welcome them." Today people regard difficulties as enemies. Without difficulties you cannot 
obtain a comfort. 


People consider, wealth as, essential for physical comforts and thereby become slaves, of wealth. 
As long as they remain slaves of wealth, they will have no respite from troubles. 


"Serve Bhavanthu Sukhinah. Sarve Santhu Niraamayaah" 


(All should be happy. All should be free from sufferings). If you are to pray in this manner, you 
must have these feelings in you. 


Dr. Bhatia urged that Svaami should indicate to the doctors the right path and give them strength 
to pursue it. You are not lacking in strength. God has endowed you with strength, but you are not 
using it on right lines. Every human being is endowed with a divine energy, which has to be used 
for proper purposes. It has to be used righteously according to the dictates of one's conscience. 
When the conscience is satisfied the energy gets sanctified. Man today misuses the Divine 
energy for selfish purposes. 


Duty of doctors today 


Men should realise the sacredness of action and time. The presiding deity of Karma is all- 
powerful. Hence a prayer is addressed to the deity requesting him to see that one's actions are 
good. 


The human race is called Mankind, because sacred feelings, thoughts and intentions are there in 
man. It means "humanness" is synonymous with kindness. The sage Vyaasa wrote eighteen 
Puraanas (sacred epics). Who has the time to read so many Puraanas? Therefore, ruminating on 
this point, sage Vyaasa declared the quintessence of these Puraanas just in these words: "Help 
ever; Hurt never." 


This is the duty of doctors today. They have acquired valuable knowledge. This should be used 
for public good. The more it is used this way, the more it will grow. Always be prepared to serve 
a patient when he comes to you. It is a sign of weakness to turn away a patient on a plea of 
inability. You have the God-given power. Be conscious of your power. 


Doctors should recognise the importance of the five human values: Truth, Righteousness, Peace, 
Love and Non-violence. Love is the basis for all the other values. Doctors can infuse courage in 
patients by the love they show towards the patients. If doctors carry out their duties with love 
they will be crowned with success. 


"Old is Gold" 


In the discussion at the conference, several conflicting views were expressed by the participants. 
One of the issues was whether the latest technique should be preferred as against earlier 
techniques. Svaami was of the view that the older techniques had much to be said in their favour. 
The older technique, though they may not produce quick results, are slow and sure. The latest 
techniques appear successful momentarily but their long term results are not always good. While 
the latest technique should be employed where necessary, the earlier techniques should not be 
rejected out of hand. "Old is Gold" The old techniques have the merit of proven value. 


A caveat should be said about heart transplant. The operation may be easy, but how easy is it to 
get a heart for transplanting? A transplanted heart may serve for a time, but cannot serve as long 
and as well as the God-given heart. 


A word of caution has to be uttered with regard to heart transplant or transplanting the cornea for 
the eye. The character of the person from whom the transplanted heart or cornea has been got 
should also be taken into account. The practitioners of medicine in ancient times considered 
these factors in treating patients. 


The antecedents of families were fully examined in the past, before marital alliances were 
concluded. But today these factors are ignored. People are indifferent to family backgrounds, 
while they are concerned about the pedigrees of dogs in dog show! This indifference to lineage 
accounts for the breakup of many marriages after a short time. This should not happen. Marriage 
should be a life-long partnership. 


Good thoughts are more efficacious than drugs 


It is better to remedy the original heart of a patient than to try to replace it with another heart of a 
person whose antecedents may not be good. The heart is the most vital organ in the body. To 


keep it in a healthy condition, one's thoughts should be healthy. Good thoughts are more 
efficacious than drugs. 


The doctors who have gathered here are estimable persons. They are broad-minded, gentle and 
kind hearted persons. You may receive fees from the rich patients. But you should treat the poor 
free. Dedicate one day in a week to render free medical service to people, irrespective of creed or 
nationality. Such service will give you spontaneous joy and enable you to experience the Divine. 


Make love the capsule you offer to your patients. When a weak patient comes to you do not be 
content with offering him glucose or some other thing. Give him the injection of love. That will 
give him instant strength. Speak to him with love, offer medicines with love and keep him in 
good humour. That is the way to make him happy. Happiness is union with God. Anything you 
do with love will be rewarding. 


The participants have stood for great ideals. Their experiences are beyond praise. As they related 
their varied experiences, it was thrilling to hear them. They are all experts in their field. Your 
presence at this conference and the encouragement you have given to our doctors are deeply 
appreciated. Symposia and conferences are held all over the world. But at this conference 
everyone was deeply involved. Everybody experienced Divine vibrations wherever they met. I 
bless you all that you may return to your countries enriched by your experiences here and serve 
your respective countries well. Wish you all peace and happiness, which you should share with 
your people. 


Valedictory address to the International Conference on Cardio-Vascular Diseases at the 
Institute Auditorium, Prashaanthi Nilayam on 18-12-1995. 


Life is an experience meant to train the individual for a higher, 
deeper and more expanded state of existence through the 
experience of the results of action. The aim of everybody's life is 
the attainment of complete perfection in the spiritual Absolute. 


BABA 


38. Realise God through Pure Love 


All the objects in this visible universe are 
Extremely beautiful, attractive and pleasing. 
The Divine is immanent in the entire cosmos. 
The cosmos is filled with love. 

The Supreme Self is the embodiment of love; 
Hence if love encounters love they merge; 
Hence if you develop your love 

You become eligible to achieve 

Oneness with the Divine. 


LOVE exists for love and nothing else. It is spontaneous and imparts delight. Everything is 
permeated by love. Love sees with the heart and not the eyes. It listens not through the ears but 
by the tranquillity of the heart. It speaks not with the tongue but out of compassion. Compassion, 
kindness and love are separate words which mean the same thing. Love has many synonyms. 


Love can emanate only from the heart and not any other source. Love is immortal, nectarine, 
blissful and infinite. A heart filled with love is boundless Just as rivers with different names and 
forms merge in the ocean and become one with it, love in many forms enters the ocean of the 
heart and gets identified with it. 


True love has no beginning or end 


Love can conquer anything. Selfless, pure, unalloyed love leads man to God. Selfish and 
constricted love binds one to the world. Unable to comprehend the pure and sacred love, man 
today is a prey to endless worries because of his attachment to worldly objects. Man's primary 
duty is to understand the truth about the Love principle. Once he understands the nature of love, 
he will not go astray. The various contexts in which the word love is used today have no relation 
to the true meaning of love. The affection, between a mother and child or between a husband and 
wife is incidental to a certain temporary relationship and is not real love at all. True love has 
neither a beginning nor an end. It exists in all the three categories of time--past, present and 
future. That alone is true love which can fill man with enduring bliss. 


One's thoughts, one's words and looks should be filled with love. This is divine love. One who is 
saturated with this love can never be subject to suffering. Men today are affected by praise or 
blame. But one who is filled with divine love transcends praise or censure. He is unaffected by 
criticism or flattery. He treats alike joy and sorrow, profit and loss, victory and defeat. 


It is not easy to experience such love. It is easy to blame God but difficult to realise God. Men 
today prefer the easy path to the rough, one. They should realise that there can be no pleasure 
without pain. 


The mission of Jesus 


It was to teach mankind the greatness of divine love that Jesus came. His father passed away 
when Jesus was ten years old. Thereafter, with the permission of his mother, he embarked on his 


ministry of service to the people. He resolved on three tasks: one, to be filled with Divine love 
and to share it with others was the main purpose of his life; two, he should not succumb to praise 
or censure in carrying out his mission; three, to inspire in others the conviction that the Divinity 
within is omnipresent. Jesus considered spreading the gospel of love as his foremost task. He 
encountered many ordeals in carrying out his mission, but he regarded them all as challenges to 
be overcome. He was determined to treat pleasure and pain, sickness and failure with 
equanimity. He could not bear to see any one suffer. He was opposed to the traffic in birds going 
on in the temple in Jerusalem. The affected persons turned against him. But Jesus carried on. 
regardless of their hostility. In the end he sacrificed his life for the sake of others and out of his 
love for all. 


Every human being is potentially a messenger of God. But, today, men have become messengers 
of the Lord of Death. They are traitors to their true human state. Humanness demands that 
everyone should manifest the Divinity within him. Everyone should be a real messenger of God 
and strive to promote-peace and security in the world. There is no other path to be followed. 
God's message is sacred and totally free from self-interest. 


When Christ was born, three kings came to see the infant. One of them declared that the child 
would be a lover of God. The second one said that he would be the beloved of God. The third 
one declared that he was God. A lover of God is a messenger of God. The one whom God loves 
is a "Son of God." When one experiences both of these, he becomes one with God. "Father and 
Son are one." 


Therefore, at the outset you must prepare yourselves to be messengers of God. This means that 
you should live up to the message of God. The message calls for service to all. Compassion, 
morality and integrity are essential elements in the message. In propagating this message faith in 
God should be promoted. Love should be the watchword. The absence of love gives rise to 
hatred. Today there is no unity among the people. Without unity how can there be bliss? Without 
bliss how can anyone experience God? 


Men should lead selfless lives. This may seem difficult. But, in reality there is nothing easier. It 
is selfishness that creates all kinds of difficulties for mankind. Selfless love will give no room for 
any evil. Unselfish love may meet with opposition from one's kith and kin and from worldly 
persons. But one should not be deterred by such opposition. Love should be cherished as one's 
life breath. 


The elements and the Divine 


It is essential to have faith in God. The five elements are manifestations of God. They are the 
earth, water, fire, air and ether (or space). In the earth God exists in the form of Prajna 
(Awareness). In fire, God is in the form of Jaagratha-Swaruupa (wakefulness). The Vedhik 
warning is, "Be awake". In air, God exists as the Praana (vital breath). In ether (or space) God 
pervades it as the primal sotmd, Omkaara. Every element thus proclaims the manifestation of 
one aspect of God. 


All beings experience the presence of the Divine through the five elements, the five senses, and 
the five life breaths. Some may ask, "When the Divine is omnipresent and is in all beings, why is 
He not visible to us?" If investigation is made on right lines, God can be perceived. Some human 
effort is essential to get this perception. Just as the reflection of the sun can be seen in all its 
purity only in clear and still water, though reflections may be noticed in ponds, wells and oceans, 


God can be perceived only when the heart is pure and unselfish. How can God be expected to 
appear before a person whose mind is wavering and whose outlook is self-centred? The wavering 
mind will experience only a hazy figure. In a steady mind, God will present a clear image. 


Mind is the cause of man's bondage 


The mind, according to the scriptures, is the cause of man's bondage or liberation. The mind has 
three qualities: Thamas, Rajas and Sathva. The Thaamasik quality makes the mind ignore the 
truth, pursue the false and impels man to indulge in what is unholy and improper. It is necessary 
to correct this tendency of the Thamo-guna. The Rajo-guna is responsible for a person living in a 
kind of dream-state and treating it as real. The Saathvik quality makes a person see good even in 
a bad person or object. The Saathvik person sees God in the whole cosmos and fosters the godly 
approach to creation. 


Today people all over the world are racked by fears of various sorts. There is no peace anywhere. 
But people should not give way to despair. They should face the situation with courage, without 
bothering about the results. 


Make love the basis for all your actions. The Gopikas prayed to Krishna to play on the flute and 
fill their barren hearts with love so that love may grow and ripen in their hearts. The love of God 
should be free from any desire for favours. God judges the devotee's love by the intensity of the 
feeling and not by the number of ways in which worship is offered. 


Love of God does not mean giving up your normal duties. In the performance of these duties, 
every action should be done as an offering to God - Bhaagavath preethyartham (for the sake of 
pleasing God). Look upon the body as a moving temple, wherein God' resides. Recognise that 
God is always with you and around you. 


Messengers of Sathya Sai 


The Messengers of Sathya Sai are doing excellent work. They are helping to build dwellings for 
the poor in the villages. They also arrange for the marriage of poor villagers, raising the money 
from among themselves. Many old students of the Women's College (at Ananthapur) are living 
in overseas countries like Germany, U.S.A, Australia and Japan. It is an index of their devotion 
to Svaami that they have come from these distant places for this annual meeting of "the 
Messengers" at great expense. I asked the President of the Association why the members are 
wasting money in this way. Why should they not use it for helping some poor people in their 
places? Every trip costs about a lakh of rupees per person. Her reply was: "Svaami! We are not 
concerned about the expense. We come to Svaami to get our spiritual batteries recharged go that 
we may render, better service Money comes in one way or another: But we have to develop our 
spirit of sacrifice. It is for this reason that we are coming here. Even the money we earn is not 
really ours. We are merely agents. We are a kind of trustees for our incomes." 


This attitude has to be appreciated. People should regard all wealth as coming from God to be 
used for sacred purposes. No one brings anything with him at birth and carries anything with him 
at death. All relationships in between are transient. Treat all alike. Even bad people will be 
transformed if you treat them with love. 


Show love to those who dislike you also 


St. Paul was an example of one who originally hated Christ but later became his foremost 
apostle. When you show love towards all, even to those who dislike you, God will love you. 
Then you become a "Son of God." You earn the right to inherit the Kingdom of God. You can 
become one with God. 


Among the Messengers of Sathya Sai, consisting of men and women, it is the women who are 
carrying on more service activities. This is all the more commendable because of the handicaps 
they labour under as housewives with in-laws and others who dominate over them. Nevertheless 
they are persuading their husbands to come to Svaami. This is true seva because they are 
converting sceptics to believe in God. 


The male old students have more freedom but are not equally zealous in rendering service. They 
should realise the true meaning of freedom, namely, carrying out the dictates of the Spirit. 


As a nation we have achieved freedom, but we have not achieved unity. Unity can be achieved 
only through love. This was the message of Jesus. 


Make yourselves worthy of calling 'Sai Devotees' 


Students! When you are observing today the birthday of a divine personality you have also to 
follow his teachings. You have to remember what constitutes the greatness of the person whose 
birthday you celebrate. We celebrate Shri Raama's birthday, but how many respect the words of 
the father as Raama did? How far are you prepared to sacrifice position and power as Raama 
did? People insist on rights to which they have no claim. How can they call themselves devotees 
of Raama? You should follow the ideals of Raama. 


What is meant by calling yourselves devotees of Sai? You have to foster love and develop unity. 
You must consider yourselves as members of one family, the children of one God. Only then you 
are entitled to call yourselves Sai devotees. Whatever others may say, do not bear any ill-will 
towards them. Welcome everything as for your good. 


The more you serve God, the more the bliss you will experience. Hence, fill your life with love, 
grow in love and end your life in love. 


Christmas message in the Puurnachandhra Auditorium on 25-12-1995. 


