SATHYA SAT SPEAKS 


VOLUME 33 


Discourses of 


BHAGAWAN SRI SATHYA SAT BABA 
Delivered during 2000 


PRASANTHI NILAYAM 


SRI SATHYA SAI BOOKS & PUBLICATIONS TRUST 
Prasanthi Nilayam - 515 134 
Anantaupur District, Andhra Pradesh, India 
Grams : BOOK TRUST STD : 08555 ISD : 91-8555 
Phone : 87375. FAX : 87236 


© Sri Sathya Sai Books & Publications Trust 
Prasanthi Nilayam (India) 


All Rights Reserved 


The copyright and the rights of translation in any language are 
reserved by the Publisher. No part, para, passage, text or photograph 
or art work of this book should be reproduced, transmitted or utilised, 
in original language or by translation, in any form, or by any means, 
electronic, mechanical, photo-copying, recording or by any 
information, storage or retrieval system, except with and prior 
permission, in writing from the Convener, Sri Sathya Sai Books & 
Publications Trust, Prasanthi Nilayam, (Andhra Pradesh) India, except 
for brief passages quoted in book review. This book can be exported 
from India only by Sri Sathya Sai Books and Publications Trust, 
Prasanthi Nilayam (India). 


81 - 7208 - 337-8 
International standard book no. 


81 - 7208 - 118 - 9 (set) 





First Edition : 


Published by 

The Convener, 

Sri Sathya Sai Books & Publications Trust 
Prasanthi Nilayam, India, Pin code 515 134 
Phone : 87375 Fax : 87236 

STD : 08555 ISD: 91 - 8555 


SOOO DN eS 


11. 


12. 
13. 
14. 
15. 
16. 
Mee 
18. 
19: 
20. 
21. 
22, 
23: 


CONTENTS 


Unity And DivinityIn The New Year ___...... 
Acquire The Knowledge Of Brahman edi 
Perform All Actions To PleaseGod dtl... 
Sanctify Your Life By Chanting Gayatri Mantra.. 
Sheaths Of The Self 0, 
Sanctify Your Life With Sacred Feelings __..... 
Sanctify Your Life By Sacred Actions —_—_s.... 
Install Rama Principle In Your Heart —_—s_.... 


Easwaramma—The Embodiment Of 
Love And SacrifiC 4 42 0 aaa, 


RealName Of GodIsLove on. 


Women Are The Embodiments 
Of Nobility And Virtue aa. 


Flowers That Never Fade ——Cidsasan. 
Ganapathi Confers Buddhi And Siddhi_ 
Eradicate Immorality To Attain Immortality. ..... 
Education Should Foster Values ia... 
EducareIs Human Values  ——ii(isa. 
The Source And Centre Of Values sit... 
Impact Of Mother’s Thoughts On Children __..... 
God Incarnates To Serve Mankind —s__l... 
Education For Supreme Bliss isa. 
Love Is My Only Wealth na. 
Righteous Practice—The True Sadhana ___..... 
Overcome Jealousy With Love  — a... 


17 
a1 
20 
69 
87 
107 
121 


135 
151 


Unity And Divinity In The New Year 


Embodiments of Love! 


People desire a pleasant time, 

A good position and a happy life. 
But none attempts to attain sagacity, 
Wisdom and character. 

What else is to be conveyed to this 
Assembly of learned people? 


(Telugu Poem) 


IT is a rare privilege to be born as a human 
being. Man is endowed with a gentle heart and a sweet 
mind. He is gifted with precious time. But it is 
unfortunate that man is unable to recognize his true 
nature. One cannot be called a human being just 
because one has a human body. Man is, in fact, the 
very form of the Virat Swarupa (the Cosmic Person). 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 2 


He is the repository of all powers that pervade the 
cosmos. But he is unable to recognize his own 
capabilities and does not make use of even a small 
fraction of them. 


First Recognise Your Own Value 


Today man is devoid of peace and happiness. 
Why is it so? How its it that man endowed with a 
precious and rare life, a soft heart, a sweet mind and 
valuable time is unable to enjoy the benefits of these 
valuable possessions and enjoy peace? Unaware of his 
innate potential and forgetting his true nature, man 
becomes narrow-minded, selfish and suffers from lack 
of mental peace. In fact, he is being gobbled by the 
demon of selfishness. 


Ancient man led a very peaceful and happy 
life. Restlessness of the mind was alien to him because 
he adhered to Sathya and Dharma. Why does man 
today lack peace of mind? What is it that contributes to 
the transformation of human heart? As is the fire, so is 
the smoke; as is the smoke, so is the cloud; as is the 
cloud, so is the rain; as is the rain, so is the crop; as is 
the crop, so is the food and as is the food, so is the 
mind. Even the habits of eating and drinking of men 
today are not proper. 


What is the true ornament of man? Lotuses are 
the ornaments of lakes. Houses and buildings are the 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 3 


ornaments of villages and towns. The waves of the 
ocean are its ornaments. The moon beautifies the sky. 
Character is the true ornament of man. The loss of this 
ornament is the source of all his suffering and misery. 
Man does not realize the purpose for which he has 
been created by God. God’s creation is endowed with 
several truths, mysteries and ideals. But man has 
forgotten these ideals. He is unable to appreciate the 
significance of his legacy. Of all the powers in the 
world, human power is the greatest. In fact, it is man 
who assesses the value of all the materials of the 
world. Who gives value to a diamond or, for that 
matter, to gold? Who attaches value to land? Is it not 
man? Man assigns value to everything in this world, 
but he is unable to recognize his own value. Then how 
can he ever understand the value of divinity? First of 
all, man has to realize the values of human life. Only 
then will he be in a position to understand divinity. 
God does not reside in paradise or Kailasa. These are 
His temporary camping stations. The true dwelling 
place of God is the heart of man. You don’t need to go 
in search of God. He is not in a foreign land. Similarly, 
sin does not exist in some foreign land; it is attached to 
your actions. Not being able to recognize your innate 
divinity is ajnana (ignorance). You have to enquire 
into the reason for this ignorance. This is mainly 
because you follow pravritti marga (outward path) all 
your life under the influence of sense organs, which are 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 4 


projected outward. You are not making any effort to 
follow nivritti marga (inward journey). All that you 
see, hear or think are outward acts. In fact, everything 
that you do is outward. Thus, you are fully engrossed 
in the outward activities and are completely neglecting 
the inward path. 


Wisdom Dispels Ignorance 


Embodiments of Love! 


You need to make an effort to understand the 
value of man. In fact, there is no divinity other than 
that present in man. Thus, first it is necessary to under- 
stand man before you can even attempt to understand 
divinity. In fact, there is no difference between man 
and divinity. Man is God; God is man. There is only 
difference of perception. You see the world with a 
worldly view and do not recognize the divinity that 
pervades it. You have to make an effort to change your 
vision from outward to inward to perceive this divinity. 


Here is a rose. From the worldly point of view 
it is just a flower. But, from the divine point of view it 
is the flower of the heart. Wherefrom do you have this 
capacity to perceive the shape and smell of a rose? It is 
from the Divine. Your inability to perceive the 
omnipresent divinity is the main cause of all the pains 
and miseries you suffer in this world. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 5 


Madalasa imparted the knowledge of this 
basic truth to her children from their childhood. She 
told them, “My dear children, you are not this physical 
body. Do not mistake physical things for spiritual 
realities. Don’t become a victim of delusion due to 
your attachment. This delusion gives you the mistaken 
impression of the physical reality. Just as the dream 
state disappears when you wake up from sleep, the 
delusion caused by moha (attachment) disappears 
when you awaken into the state of jnana (wisdom).” 


Moha Makes You Forget Your True Form 


When do you get dreams? You attribute dreams 
to your food or your thoughts. But this is not true. 
Give up this attachment of samsara (world) and wake 
up from the sleep of delusion. Moha makes you forget 
your true form. If there is no sleep at all, there is no 
dream possible. Therefore, sleep is the main cause of 
dreams. For the dream of ajnana (ignorance), avidya 
(lack of true knowledge) is the cause. Therefore, do not 
fall into the sleep of avidya. Teaching this way, she 
transformed all her children into great Yogis. 


Human birth has not been gifted to man merely 
to indulge in worldly pleasures. None of the worldly 
pleasures is capable of conferring true satisfaction. 
They only increase your desires more and more. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 6 


Therefore, man should give up worldly desires and 
recognize the principle of divinity. 


New Year Augurs Well For Humanity 


From the physical and worldly point of view, 
today marks the beginning of the year 2000. This is not 
a universal measure of time as it is restricted only to a 
particular calendar. Moreover, it applies only to vyashti 
(individual) and not to samashti (cosmos) because 
cosmos is beyond worldly time - frame while 
individual is bound by time and space. Cosmos, in fact, 
is divinity itself. The individual is jeeva while the 
cosmos is deva (divinity). From the point of view of 
divinity, 2000 years form merely an infinitesimal 
speck. Several million years have gone by in the past. 
Hence, 2000 years carry little significance from this 
aspect. 2000 years have passed from the era of Jesus 
Christ. What about the hundreds of thousand years that 
have preceded the advent of Christ? Some of the 
names of months of English calendar are related to 
various Roman kings and Greek gods and goddesses. 
Periods of time have been named after humans, but the 
truth about human nature is being ignored. 


Man is the very embodiment of divinity. In the 
word manava (man), the three letters stand for: 
‘ma’—ajnana (ignorance), ‘na’—without, ‘va’—to 
act. So, man is one who acts without ignorance. There 





Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 fi 


is another way in which this word can be interpreted. 
‘ma’—not, ‘nava’—new, 1.e., man is not new. He is 
purathana (ancient) and sanathana (eternal). Man has 
been in existence for countless number of years. 


Disputes about dates are meaningless. Every 
second is the birth of a new year. Seconds add up to 
minutes, minutes to hours, hours to days, days to 
months and months to years. Every second of your life 
is new. Thus, there is no particular sanctity about the 
beginning or ending of a year. There are people who 
attribute special significance to this day and speculate 
on some extraordinary or awesome events to take 
place. The time or date is not the cause of your 
happiness or misery. Your own Karma (actions) in the 
past is the cause of both your happiness and misery. As 
is the seed, so are the plant and fruit; they cannot be 
different. Do not waste your mental energy in 
speculations of this or that happening. 


When you are born, there are no 
ornaments around your neck. 


There are no necklaces of pearls or 
diamonds nor are there any chains of gold, 


But there is an invisible necklace of the 
consequences of your past karmas 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 8 


around your neck. 
All your good and bad actions, 
counted one by one, have been strung 
together 
By Brahma, and this is the ornament 
around your neck. 


(Telugu Poem) 


Pure And Proper Actions Yield Good Results Only 
Embodiments of Love! 


When actions performed by you are proper and 
pure, you will get good results only. 


On the whole, the coming year would be good 
for all of you. Actually, today is the beginning of the 
year 2000 and the ending of the year 1999. The year 
2000 will end on 31“ December. So, the consequences 
of the past years will be unfolded during this period. 
This period is going to be generally beneficial for the 
people of this country as well as for the rest of the 
world. The first three months, January to March, may 
have some ups and downs. Why? For man on the earth, 
time relates to the motion of the planets around the 
sun. Some other subtle phenomena of non-material na- 
ture are also associated with these physical phenom- 
ena. Some changes in the subtle phenomena may take 
place in the first three months of the New Year and 
may carry with them some favourable as well as 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 9 


adverse consequences. But after March 2000, there 
will definitely be a better and stable period. But this 
does not mean that people should do nothing and 
merely wait for that period; effort from your side is not 
to be left under any circumstances. 


Treasure Divine Gold In Your Heart 


Today human values are on the decline. There 
is no trace of love anywhere. Truth and righteousness 
are hard to find. In these conditions, how can peace 
manifest? If you give some gold to a goldsmith, you 
can get any ornament made as per your choice. 
Hiranyagarbha is another name for God. Hiranya 
means gold. If you place this divine gold in your heart, 
you can make any ornament of your choice like santhi 
(peace), sathya (truth) and dharma (righteousness). 
Just as no ornaments can be made without gold, you 
cannot obtain santhi, sathya or dharma without 
divinity. Hiranyagarbha is immanent in everyone. 
That is why Swami calls everyone ‘Bangaru’ (gold). 
Only when you recognize this truth and have the firm 
conviction of immanence of God, will you obtain all 
kinds of benefits in your life. But you have forgotten 
the indwelling divinity, and are running after external 
objects. It is impossible to have success in life in this 
way. Therefore, first of all, develop faith in God. 


Since ancient times, Bharat has been 
disseminating the knowledge of divinity to the rest of 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 10 


the world. The culture of Bharat is truly great. But, 
unfortunately, very few are recognizing this fact. The 
students are also not trying to understand its 
significance and sanctity. Our culture is divine, pure 
and ever new. Its scriptures set great ideals for 
mankind. Take, for example, the story of the 
Mahabharata. The priority of the Pandavas was God 
first, world next and themselves last. On the other 
hand, the priority of the Kauravas was themselves first, 
world next and God last. As a consequence, not only 
did the Kauravas lose God, they lost their life also. 
God should be your first priority. With such an 
attitude, no danger will touch you. With God in your 
mind and heart, serve your country. 


Patriotism Leads To Divinity 


Embodiments of Love! 


Your country and your body are not different 
from each other. Both are composed of the same five 
elements. They are inseparably interrelated and totally 
interdependent. They are like mirror images of each 
other. Try to recognize this truth. The youth of today 
are the leaders of the future. If the future is to be 
prosperous, the modern youth should perform their 
duties with firm faith in God. You are not separate 
from the country, but a part of it. Have the firm 
conviction that this country belongs to you. But, 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 11 


unfortunately, patriotism is a scarce virtue in the youth 
of today. One who does not say with pride, this is my 
motherland, this is my mother tongue, this is my 
religion can be compared to a living corpse. (Telugu 
Poem) Every person, whichever country he may 
belong to, should have patriotism firmly ingrained in 
his heart. Abdicating their duty towards their 
motherland, people go to other countries and become 
completely alienated. How can such people ever 
understand divinity? 


Embodiments of Love! 


God is the basis of everything. He is omni- 
potent, omniscient and pervades all creation. 


Who can say only this is Brahman 

And that is not. 

The only eternal existent entity is Brahman. 
The rest is all evanescent. 


(Telugu Poem). 


Just as without cotton, there can be no cloth, 
similarly, there can be no world without God. Do not 
mistake this deha (transient body) as real. It is the dehi 
(indwelling divinity) that is the true reality. This 
divinity is beyond birth and death; the one without any 
beginning, middle or end. This birthless, deathless God 
is the eternal witness of the entire cosmos. Recognise 
this truth. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 12 


Recognize That Human Birth Is A Rare 
Occurrence 


You are celebrating this day as the beginning of 
the New Year 2000. Do not consider that the year 2000 
is related only to the Christians. Do not have any such 
narrow distinctions. Humanity in the whole world is 
one. All men of all countries belong to one race, the 
race of humanity. Keep this truth firmly in your heart. 
You must recognize that human birth is a rare 
occurrence. Consider time as highly valuable. The 
heart must be soft and the mind must be sweet. Human 
mind, which is supposed to be sweet, has become 
highly poisonous today, because man is allowing it to 
indulge in sensual pleasures, which are like deadly 
poison. Do not poison your nectarous mind by 
associating it with the objects of your senses. By doing 
so, you are making your soft heart also hard like stone. 
Do not waste time. Time is the very form of God. 
Hence, it is said in the Vedas: Kalaya Namah, Kala 
Kalaya Namah, Kala Darpa Damanaya Namah, 
Kalatheetaya Namah. God is the master of time. He 
transcends time. Therefore, have firm faith in God and 
not in your body. The body is impermanent. It grows 
and declines with the passage of time. 


Embodiments of Love! 


You are considering this day as very sacred. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 13 


“Yad Bhavam Tad Bhavati” (as you think so you 
become). In any event, the year 2000 is not bad in any 
sense. It will promote very high ideals and propagate 
divine principles. It will foster the principle of unity. In 
a very short time, all the people of the world are going 
to be united. Today you consider America, Russia, 
Japan, China, Pakistan, and India as separate from each 
other. Very soon there will be unity amongst all these 
countries. Even those whom you consider as your 
worst enemies are going to become your best friends. 
You should not hate anybody. You are all brothers and 
sisters. In a short time, you are all going to witness the 
“Brotherhood of Man and Fatherhood of God.” With a 
pure heart, all of you should pray for this to happen at 
the earliest. 


There are many people in the world in great 
distress. The people who have been recently hijacked 
were under a severe strain. Prayer is the only remedy 
for the alleviation of such misery. There is nothing in 
the world that cannot be achieved by prayer. Prayer 
melts the hardest hearts. Pray wholeheartedly, “Loka 
Samasta Sukhino Bhavantu”’ (May the whole world be 
happy). Do not pray only for the welfare of your fami- 
ly, friends and relatives. Such narrow-minded prayers 
are futile. Your prayers should be for the welfare of all 
people in all the countries of the world. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 14 


Start A New Life With Ideals Of Service And Love 
Embodiments of Love! 


The one principle that you have to uphold and 
develop is that of love. When love dominates, there is 
no room for hatred. If there is no feeling of love ear- 
lier, at least sow the seeds of love now. The Gopikas 
prayed to Krishna: 


Oh Krishna, play your sweet flute 
And sow the seeds of Love 

In the desert of loveless hearts. 
Let the rain of love fall on earth 
And make the rivers of love flow. 


(Telugu Poem) 


You must sow the seed of love in loveless 
hearts. Water it with love. Let love flow in a flood and 
reach all. You should cultivate this pure, steady, 
unselfish love in this New Year. Modern man directs 
his love towards wordly objects and gets entangled in 
several complications. “Love lives by giving and 
forgiving, self lives by getting and forgetting.” Selfish 
love is like the foul smell of fish. Cultivate selfless 
love. Love all. Let others feel and think as they like. 
Do not bother about that. There is no need to fear 
anyone. Make your love pure. Then the whole world 
will become pure. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 15 


Meet All Contingencies With Love 


Many people are worrying and speculating as 
to how the year 2000 will unfold. There will be no 
formidable difficulties. In this world all things, good 
and bad, come and go. World devoid of happiness and 
misery cannot exist. Nothing is bad for the world. 
Pleasure is an interval between two pains. How can 
you feel pleasure if you have never felt pain? These 
come and go like passing clouds. One should neither 
dread one nor crave for the other. Meet all 
contingencies with love. Transform everything into 
love and suffuse your lives with love. Then there shall 
be peace and stability in the world. 


Why do you repeat the word “santhi” (peace) 
thrice? You pray that you may have peace at all the 
three levels—physical, mental and spiritual—for you 
are not one individual, but three—the one you think 
you are (physical body), the one others think you are 
(mental body) and the one you really are (atma). All 
three aspects of your being must be in a state of peace. 
This can be achieved only through love. Swami 
Himself is the proof of this. Infinite love is Swami’s 
only wealth. Who sent out invitations to this large 
congregation? Your love toward Swami and Swami’s 
love towards all of you has attracted all of you here. 
Hence, convince yourself that everything can be 
achieved with love. The evil traits of hatred, jealousy 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 16 


and pride should be cast aside. These are not human 
qualities, but animal traits. You are a human being. 
Love is the chief quality of man, truth is his basis and 
righteousness is his very life. The combination of all 
these ensures peace. If you possess all these, peace is 
your property by right. 


Give up selfishness and work for the unity of 
your country. Pray for the welfare of all and lead an 
ideal life. Human life is not gifted to you to hanker 
after worldly objects. You have to set an ideal to the 
world. What is the ideal that you have to set? You 
must help all to your utmost capacity. The best way to 
love God is to love all and serve all. Adopting service 
and love as your ideals, you must start a new life from 
this moment—this is My blessing and benediction to 
you. 


New Year, 1-1-2000, Prasanthi Nilayam. 


2 


Acquire The Knowledge Of Brahman 


Embodiments of Love! 


Once you wake up from 

The sleep of Moha (attachment), 

You will understand that this Samsara 
(worldly life) 

Is but a dream, and you are pure, 

Unsullied and eternal Atman. 


(Sanskrit Sloka) 


You are neither the body, which is nothing 

But a conglomeration of flesh, blood and 
bones 

Nor the mind, which is a combination of 

Thoughts and vain desires. 

It is the delusion, born out of attachment, 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 18 


Which takes you away from liberation. 
You are essentially Divine. 
(Telugu Poem) 


THE youth of today are the future leaders of 
the nation and the architects of the new society. The 
future of a nation depends on its youth. The strength of 
the youth lies in their spirit of patriotism. The primary 
duty of the youth is to render service to the society. 
The physical and mental strength of the youth is the 
foundation on which a nation is built. 


Primary Duty Of Man 


Young men and women! 


This is not the time to relax. Do not waste time. 
Wake up from the slumber of selfishness and narrow- 
mindedness and resolve to serve the nation. Perform all 
activities keeping the esteem and honour of the nation 
uppermost in your heart. Understand the mystery 
behind human birth. Every individual has a goal. It is 
unbecoming of the youth to forget divinity and the goal 
of life, and to waste time in physical and materialistic 
pursuits. The youth should express human qualities by 
cultivating noble character and by rendering service to 
the society. They should discharge their duties with 
sincerity and re-establish the ancient culture of Bharat 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 19 


by practising and propagating its pristine values. But 
modern youth are neglecting their duty to the nation. 
They are not giving priority to the progress and 
prosperity of the nation. First of all, they should 
understand that the well-being of the individual lies in 
the safety and security of the nation. 


Understand the truth that in the myriad forms 
of life, human life is the most sacred. Lead your life in 
a way so as to uphold Dharma, not merely to eat and 
sleep like birds and animals. Birds and animals act 
according to their innate nature, but man is forgetting 
his responsibility of fostering righteousness. Modern 
youth are under the mistaken notion that education is 
meant for udyoga (job). udyoga without yoga is futile. 
Contemplation on God is true yoga and udyoga. That 
is the primary duty of man. Without understanding this 
truth, some people take pride in their jobs. Ahamkara 
(ego) is the pest which attacks the root of the tree of 
human life. Raga (attachment) and dwesha (hatred) 
foster ahamkara. The three together spell doom for 
human life. Man’s life will shine forth brilliantly only 
when his mind is filled with divine love. The life of 
one who forgets God and gets immersed in selfish love 
is heading towards disaster. The one who has total 
faith in God and love for God will lead a life of joy and 
bliss. Therefore, man should make an effort to 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 20 


understand his innate divine power, which is truly 
immeasurable. 


Man And Brahman Are Intimately Related 


Bharat is the source of the Vedas and _ sacred 
rituals like yajnas and yagas. How is it that such a 
sacred land is passing through hard times? The people 
of yore considered Truth as God and sacrifice as true 
human quality. They adhered to them and experienced 
the bliss derived therefrom. But the modern students 
and the educated consider money as God and think that 
they can lead a happy life by holding positions of 
authority. This is not the true human quality. One 
should aspire for bliss, which can be experienced only 
by acquiring the knowledge of Brahman (divinity). 
Brahman is that which is changeless in all the three 
periods of time. This eternal principle is referred to in 
the Vedas as Prajnanam (Constant Integrated 
Awareness), which is immutable and invariable. 


From the principle of Brahman emerged 
Akasha (ether). From Akasha, Vayu (air) originated. 
From Vayu, Agni (fire) emerged. From Agni, Jala 
(water) emerged. From Jala came Prithvi (earth). From 
Prithivi, Oshadhi (vegetation) emerged. Oshadhis gave 
rise to Annam (food) and man is born out of food. 
Thus, you can see that man and Brahman are intim- 
ately related. On this basis, Lord Krishna declared: 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 21 


“Mamaivamso Jeevaloke Jeevabhuta Sanathana” (the 
eternal atma in all beings is a part of My Being) 
Without the principle of Brahman, nothing can exist, 
be it ether, air, fire, water, earth, vegetation or food. 
And man cannot survive without food. On this basis, 
the Vedas declared: “Annam Brahma” (food is God). 
What is food? Does it constitute merely cereals and 
vegetables that we consume? No. The whole world is 
composed of food. One body is the food for the other 
body. That which is consumed is food and the one who 
consumes food is also food. Everything that exists in 
this world is food. Therefore, it is said, food is God. 
You offer food to God chanting the Sloka, 
“Brahmarpanam...” before you partake of it. But 
where is Brahman? He is very much in you. That is 
why He responds to your prayer immediately from 
within: “Aham Vaishvanaro Bhoothva...” meaning, “I 
am in you in the form of Vaishvanara (digestive fire) 
digesting the food that you consume.” 


Sathyam Is That Which Creates Food 


Sathyam (truth) forms the basis for food. What 
is Sathyam? It is that which creates food. Sathyam 
comprises three syllables—Sath, Ye, Yam, which stand 
for the jiva (individual), annam (food) and the sun, 
respectively. Sunlight produces food, and food sustains 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 22 


the individual. So Sathyam is the primordial principle 
and the basis for everything. Our ancients considered 
truth as their life and righteousness as their breath. 
They considered human life as a combination of truth 
and righteousness. Therefore, truth is God. Man today 
has forgotten truth and he aspires only for food. He 
fails to understand that truth is the basis for food. 


Brahma (divinity) is the basis for everything. 
Who is Brahma? All pervasive Nature is Brahma. 
Brahma pervades the air, the sound, the water, the 
earth and the sky. The five elements are the 
manifestations of Brahma. That is why people worship 
earth as Bhudevi, water as Gangadevi, air as Vayu- 
deva, etc. But they do not realize that the same Brahma 
permeates all the five elements. All the five elements 
are present in the human body. So, Divinity is not 
separate from man. Man is the very form of Brahma. 
He is the embodiment of Truth. He should make every 
effort to manifest his latent divinity. That is true 
sadhana. Brahma is not a four-faced god as shown in 
pictures. Brahma permeates the entire uni-verse. So, 
every living being is the embodiment of God. Man 
should therefore recognise his innate divinity. 


Divine Love Is The Ultimate Goal Of Life 


Students participated in various sports and cul- 
tural activities and emerged victorious. But this should 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 23 


not inflate their ego with the mistaken notion that they 
are responsible for their victory. They should realize 
that it is the divinity within that does all. Students, who 
had never sung earlier in their lives, also sang melodi- 
ously. Similarly, some of you participated in those 
games, which you had never played earlier, and 
emerged victorious. How could you do that? In fact, 
everything is the reflection of the inner being. This 
proves that it is the divinity within that brings forth the 
latent talents and skills. Brahman dwells in you. In 
what form do you see Him? You see Him in the Soham 
mantra, which is echoed in your each breath and 
proves the presence of divinity within. Soham means 
That I am. You repeat this Soham Mantra 21,600 times 
a day, which reminds you of your divinity as many 
times. When power of divinity is in you, why should 
you consider yourself weak and helpless? In fact, man 
is the embodiment of all powers and faculties. 


You are under the false impression that knowl- 
edge is acquired through books. In fact, it is the mani- 
festation of that which already exists within you. Noth- 
ing is possible without divinity. There are flowers, 
thread and needle, but they cannot form a garland by 
themselves. There should be someone to string them 
together. Similarly, separate letters by themselves do 
not convey any meaning, unless there is someone to 
combine them into words. For example, G, O, D are 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 24 


three letters. When they are brought together, they 
form the word God and you get a meaningful word. 
You have curd and a churning rod, but can you get 
butter out of curd without churning? No; likewise, the 
infinite power latent in the individual should be 
manifested through self-effort. It is possible only when 
you fill your mind with love for God. It is evident that 
self-effort and grace of God are essential in any human 
endeavour. The reason for all misery and grief is that 
your mind is not directed toward divine love. You will 
lead a blissful life only when the mind is suffused with 
divine love. Divine love is the ultimate goal of life. 


Do Your Duties Sincerely 


Perform all actions with divine feelings. Do 
your duties sincerely. Only then the udyoga (job) that 
you do will be transformed into yoga (spiritual 
practice) and work will be transformed into worship. 
But man lacks such noble feelings. He differentiates 
between his work and others’ work without 
understanding the truth that the same divinity exists in 
all. “Sahasra Seersha Purusha Sahasraksha Sahasra 
Paad” (the Supreme Being has thousands of heads, 
eyes and feet). The entire universe is His manifesta- 
tion. divinity exists in one and all, be it an asthika 
(theist) or a nasthika (atheist). There is God even in a 
nasthika. Na + Asthi = Nasthi. Asthi stands for 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 2D 


divinity. This means divinity is the basis even for 
nasthika. 


Experiencing Brahmananda 


Man uses words without understanding their 
inner meaning. This is due to his ignorance. He gets 
immersed in worldly pleasures and says that he is 
experiencing Brahmananda (eternal bliss). Worldly 
pleasures are transient, whereas Brahmananda is 
eternal. The type of joy that man derives out of worldly 
comforts and conveniences is manavananda (human 
joy). Hundred times more than Manavananda is 
Indrananda. Hundred times more than /ndrananda 1s 
Devendrananda. Hundred times more than Deven- 
drananda is Devananda. Hundred times more than 
Devananda 1s Brihaspathiananda. Hundred times 
more than Brihaspathiananda is Prajapathiananda. 
Hundred times more than Prajapathiananda is 
Brahmananda. This is the true measure of Brahm- 
ananda. It is not that which comes and goes; it is with 
you permanently. But you have forgotten this blissful 
state. “Brahmanandam Paramasukhadam...,” only 
Brahmananda confers supreme joy. All the joys 
relating to body and mind are like passing clouds. 
They are related to waking state alone. But Brah- 
mananda can be experienced in all three states, 
namely, jagrat, swapna and sushupthi (waking, dream 
and deep sleep states). It is changeless in all three 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 26 


periods of time. Man aspires to be blissful always, but 
he is sub-jected to misery because of narrow feelings 
and unsacred thoughts. He can experience eternal bliss 
only when he gives up narrow feelings and becomes 
broad-minded. 


Embodiments of Love! 


You can experience the eternal bliss only 
through love. There is no bliss greater than love. 
divinity is omnipotent, omnipresent and omniscient. 
The Vedas declare: Sathyam Jnanam Anantham 
Brahma (divinity is Truth, Wisdom and Eternity). This 
infinite wisdom is latent in man, but he fails to 
understand this truth. He has become weak-minded 
due to wrong food and bad habits. He is totally 
ensnared in his body attachment. All his thoughts, 
words and deeds are engulfed in body attachment. He 
should get rid of body attachment and develop 
attachment towards the Self to realize his innate 
divinity. Body is not permanent. It is bound to perish 
one day or the other. None can predict with any degree 
of certainty when one would leave one’s mortal coil. 
This physical life is but a dream. So, do not develop 
undue attachment to the body. So long as you are alive, 
discharge your duties sincerely. Suffuse your thoughts, 
words and deeds with divine feelings. Then you will 
verily become God. Modern youth should recognise 
this fundamental truth. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 27 


Imbibe The Spirit Of Patriotism 


The youth should resolve to eradicate poverty, 
suffering and injustice from this country. This can be 
accomplished only by developing sacred thoughts, 
adhering to truth, righteousness and justice and 
realizing that God is omnipresent. 


Students! 


You are the emancipators of Bharat. Take 
refuge in divinity, serve the nation and resolve to script 
a golden chapter in the history of Bharat. That is the 
essence of true education. Do not take pride in the 
acquisition of bookish knowledge. Bookish knowledge 
only helps in eking out a livelihood. It will not confer 
total wisdom. Perform your activities with unflinching 
faith in God. Then you are bound to be successful. Do 
not therefore study just for the sake of acquiring of 
degrees. 


In spite of his education and intelligence, 
a foolish man will not know his true 
Self and a mean-minded person will 
not give up his wicked qualities. 
Modern education leads only to argumen- 
tation, not to total wisdom. 
What is the use of acquiring worldly 
education if it cannot lead you to 
immortality? 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 28 


Acquire the knowledge that will make you 
immortal. 


(Telugu Poem) 
Virtue Cannot Be Attained Without Discipline 


That is true education. That is Brahma Jnana 
(knowledge of divinity). There can be no greater bliss 
than realizing the truth that God is everywhere. No 
doubt, worldly education is also essential, but it should 
be under a certain limit; otherwise, it will corrupt the 
mind. When you are thirsty, is it not foolish to desire 
for the whole of river Ganga? A glass of water is 
enough to quench your thirst. Likewise, it is foolish to 
entertain excessive desires. Na Sreyo Niyamam Vina 
(virtue cannot be attained without discipline). 
Everything should be within a certain limit. Proper 
discipline has to be maintained in eating, earning and 
spending. Only then will your life be blissful. 


Students! 


Sports and games are essential to keep your 
body and mind in good shape. There is no point in 
having a healthy body if it is not used in the service of 
the society. Likewise, all your intelligence will be a 
waste if it is not used to discriminate between good 
and bad. Before undertaking any activity, enquire 
whether it is good or bad. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 29 


Never Forsake Your Motherland 
Embodiments of Love! 


Do not spend all your lifetime in acquiring 
degrees. All your physical, mental and spiritual powers 
come from God. God is the giver and also the receiver. 
He is the one experienced. Understand the truth that 
everything, be it good or bad, happens according to the 
Divine Will. Do not develop craze for acquiring 
degrees, going abroad and amassing wealth. The true 
wealth is within you. Never forsake your motherland. 
For the simple reason that your mother is not beautiful, 
can you forsake her and consider another lady who is 
beautiful as your mother? Preferring a foreign land to 
one’s own motherland amounts to doing the same. 
Janani Janma Bhoomishcha Swargadapi Gareeyasi 
(the mother and the motherland are greater than even 
heaven). So, one should have love for one’s mother- 
land. Develop desabhimanam (spirit of patriotism), not 
dehabhimanam (attachment to the body). 


The physical body, made of five elements, 
is weak and no one knows when it 
would perish. 

Though one hundred years of life span is 
prescribed, you cannot take it for 
granted. 

You may have to leave your body at any 
point of time - either in childhood or in 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 30 


youth or in old age, either in 

town or in forest or in deep Sea. 
Understand that death is certain. 
Therefore, use your intellect to know 

your true nature while you are alive. 


(Telugu Poem) 


If you do not know the purpose of your birth, 
you will become a burden on mother earth. The 
purpose of human birth is to experience divinity. Try 
to understand your true nature. Do not compare 
yourself with others. Follow your own conscience and 
enjoy bliss. Do not imitate others. Imitation is the 
quailty of the weak-minded. Suppose, you come to 
know that someone has found a wallet on the road 
while passing through a particular locality. If you go to 
the same locality expecting to find another wallet on 
the road, you may even lose your own wallet! In order 
to progress in the field of education, imitation is desir- 
able to a certain extent, but in all other fields imitation 
is deplorable. Imitation is weakness, creation is divine. 
Let your thoughts be sacred; the result will be sacred. 


Life Is A Long Journey, Not A Short cut 
Embodiments of Love! 


This Sports and Cultural Meet has given 
immense joy to one and all. Do not consider sports and 
games as merely an annual affair. Your life itself is a 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 31 


game. Each moment that you spend is a part of this 
game of life. Play this game in the true spirit and 
emerge victorious. Human life is highly valuable and 
noble. Do not squander it in mean activities. Life is a 
long journey, not a short cut. Don’t waste time. Time 
waste is life waste. Undertake righteous actions. 
Render service to the society. Strive for the welfare of 
your fellowmen. The Puranas affirm Paropakaraya 
Punyaya Papaya Parapeedanam (one attains merit by 
serving others and commits sin by hurting them). So, 
Help ever, Hurt never. This is the essence of the 
Mahabharata. The Kauravas always tried to hurt the 
Pandavas. Ultimately, not even one out of hundred 
brothers survived in the Kurukshetra war. Lord 
Krishna foretold this before the commence-ment of the 
war. He told Dharmaraja, “Do not give scope to worry. 
Follow your Dharma and do your duty sincerely. You 
will certainly emerge victorious.” He infused courage 
and confidence in Arjuna, saying, 


Arise Dhananjaya! None can escape the 
destiny. 

Justice will prevail and selfishness will 
perish. 

This has been the case in every Yuga 
(Age). 

You will see for yourself that King 
Dhritarashtra, father of hundred sons, 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 32 


will not be left with even one son to perform 
his last rites. 
(Telugu Poem) 


Revere The Mother And Father As God 


The Kauravas ruined themselves because they 
forgot God and reposed their faith in the world. I do 
not advise you to forsake the world, but do not get 
totally immersed in worldly life. Have faith in God. 
Respect your parents and make them happy. The 
Vedas say, Matru Devo Bhava Pitru Devo Bhava 
(revere the mother and father as God). Do not hurt 
their feelings. Perform all your activities as an offering 
to God. Then you will certainly emerge victorious in 
all your endeavours. 


Embodiments of Love! 


You gave immense joy to thousands of people 
with your performance. However, pleasing the entire 
world without pleasing God is of no use. Even if the 
whole world is opposed to you, so long as God is with 
you, you need not fear. When God is with you, the 
whole world will follow you. When God is pleased 
with you, the whole world will be pleased with you. 
Therefore, let all your efforts be towards pleasing God. 


Tirumalacharya, the author of Sri Sathya Sai 
Suprabhatam, used to live here. He had served in the 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 33 


royal court of Venkatagiri. He was a great scholar in 
Sanskrit and Sastras. He accompanied Bhagawan to 
Badrinath at the advanced age of ninety. Bhagawan 
asked him whether he was fit enough to undertake such 
an arduous journey. He affirmed that with Swami by 
his side, he would travel any length of journey without 
any discomfort. 


He said, “Sai Matha, if You forsake me, my 
entire existence is a waste. If you accept me as Yours, 
it is as if I have everything at my command.” This was 
the state of Bhakti and surrender in which 
Tirumalacharya spent his life. He was constantly 
meditating on Sai Matha. He spent all his time in 
Swami’s proximity, whether it was here or in 
Brindavan. His Bhakti was beyond measure. 
Consequently, his end was peaceful. 


He very well knew that his end was approach- 
ing and one day expressed his feeling. On being ques- 
tioned as to how he knew about it, he replied, “Swami 
is telling me from within.” He went for his bath, 
brought some water, washed Swami’s feet and sipped a 
few drops of the sanctified water and said, °Swami, my 
life has found fulfilment. Poornamada Poornamidam 
Poornat Poornamudachyate Poornasya Poornama- 
daya Poornameva Avashishyate (The whole is all That. 
The whole is all this. The whole was born out of the 
whole. Taking the whole from the whole, what re- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 34 


mains is also the whole). Physically, mentally and 
spiritually. I have attained this wholesomeness. Now 
the time has come for me to merge in You.” There- 
after, he cast off his mortal coil and merged in Swami. 


There is no shortage of men filled with Bhakti 
of this kind in the world. It is only because of the 
presence of such devotees that the world is able to 
sustain itself. 


Students! 


Wherever you may go, never forget truth. The 
only form of gratitude that you can express towards 
this university is by adhering to truth. Earn a good 
name to the Institute through your good conduct. That 
is all I expect from you. 


Earn A Good Name For Yourself And Your 
Institute 


You know Swami sent a few students to Ban- 
galore for training in horse-riding and driving of go- 
karts. Lt.Gen. Mehta gave them all help and facilities. 
He arranged the horses and also the trainers. The train- 
ers were astonished at the skill and dexterity displayed 
by the boys, who learnt the art of horse-riding within a 
short span of time. They extolled the character of the 
students of Sri Sathya Sai Institute of Higher Learning, 
saying they were knowledgeable, smart and intelligent. 
Such a good name is what Swami expects you to earn 
for yourself and the Institute. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 a5 


There are a lot of people in the world who wear 
white dress, but they may have black hearts. Students 
of our Institute are pure both from inside and outside. 
Just as the dress they wear is white in colour, so also 
their minds are pure. That makes Swami very happy. 


Swami is always near you, with you, in you 
and around you. You should all become men of 
character and propagate spiritual values. You know the 
state of the country now. There is strife, misery and 
turmoil everywhere. Strive to alleviate this misery. 
This is what Swami expects from you. Do not wait 
until the next sports event. Perform your daily 
activities with diligence and constantly contemplate on 
God. Sanctify your life with divine love. 


14-01-2000, Prasanthi Nilayam. 


People cannot stand the Lord in 
superhuman form. It is only when the 
Lord comes in human body that people 
are able to approach Him and learn to 
love Him even a little bit. But one 
should not make the mistake of thinking 
that, that is all there is to the Lord. For 
instance, the aeroplane flying high in 
the sky descends to the airport. But one 
should not think that the plane is the 
ground machine because one sees it on 
the ground. Once it has taken on its 
load of passengers, it again zooms up 
high into the sky. In like fashion, 
although the Lord has made a landing 
here on the earth, so to speak, He is not 
limited by His human form. 


—Baba 


3 


Perform All Actions To Please God 


The principle of Atma has neither birth nor 
death; 


It has neither beginning nor end; 
It is the eternal witness and all-pervasive; 
Atma is Brahman and Brahman is Atma. 


(Telugu Poem) 


The Lord of Puttaparthi will always protect 
you. 
He is the ocean of compassion. 
Holding your hand, He will take care of you. 
He will never forsake you. Recognise this 
truth. 
(Telugu Poem) 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 38 


Bharat is the holy land of the Vedas and 
the Sacred rituals like Yajnas and yagas. 
It is the motherland of many noble souls. 
It is the land of sacrifice that has taught 
To the world morality and code of conduct. 


(Telugu Poem) 


Embodiments of Love! 


BHARAT is the centre of truth, righteousness 
and morality. It is your great good fortune to have been 
born in this sacred land. This is the land of merit, 
penance and sacrifice (tyaga). Such a tvaga bhoomi 
(land of sacrifice) is being converted into a bhoga 
bhoomi (land of pleasure). We do not need a bhagya 
bhoomi (land of wealth) or bhoga bhoomi (land of 
pleasure). It should remain a tyvaga bhoomi. So, every 
citizen of Bharat should develop the spirit of sacrifice 
and work hard. 


Spiritual Wealth Of Bharat 


Bend the body, mend the senses and end the 
mind—this should be your endeavour. Live up to the 
reputation of muddu_ biddalu (dear children) of this 
motherland. Do not become moddu biddalu (foolish 
children) or chedda biddalu (bad children). Your 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 39 


motherland will feel proud of you only when you 
become noble and ideal. You may not hold any 
worldly qualifications, but you can take pride in the 
fact that you are the sons of this sacred land of Bharat. 
This in itself is the great qualification. 


Bharat is the land endowed with the wealth of 
spirituality, sacrifice and bliss. Born in this sacred 
land, every Bharatiya should resolve to foster spiritual 
values and spirit of sacrifice. Consider service as your 
duty. Service is God. Divinity can be experienced only 
through service. 


On deep enquiry, you will know that you are in 
God, God is in you and you are God. Understand this 
truth and act accordingly. You should be able to say 
with conviction that you are a spark of the Divine. If 
someone were to question where is God, say with 
courage and conviction that God is everywhere. 


Never doubt the omnipresence of God 
or say that He is here and is not there. 
In fact, you can find Him 
wherever you search for Him. 
(Telugu Poem) 
God does not exist for those who deny Him. He 


exists for those who believe in His existence. He says 
‘yes’ for those who say ‘yes’, and ‘no’ for those who 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 40 


say ‘no’. You may say ‘yes’ or ‘no’, but for Sai, 
everything is ‘yes, yes, yes.’ 


If someone were to tell you that God does not 
exist, teach him a lesson saying, “God may not exist 
for you but He does exist for me. You have no right to 
deny the existence of my God.” With such courage and 
conviction, you should uphold your ancient culture. 
Being born as the children of this land of courage and 
valour, do not give scope for weakness of any kind. 
You are not weak. You have all the strength in you. 
Take a pledge to accomplish the task of restoring our 
ancient culture with courage and determination. 


God Himself Has Taken Three Pledges: 


(i) He will incarnate Age after Age for the 
establishment of Dharma—Parithranaya Sadhunam 
Vinashayacha Dushkritam, Dharma Samsthapa 
narthaya Sambhavami Yuge Yuge 


(41) He will take care of those who constantly 
contemplate on Him—Ananya Chinthayantho mam Ye 
jana Paryupasathe, Thesham Nithyabhiyukthanam 
Yogakshemam Vahamyaham 


(ii1) He will grant lberation to those who 
surrender to Him completely—Sarvadharman Parith- 
yajya Mamekam Saranam Vraja, Aham Twa Sarva- 
papaebhyo Mokshishyami Ma Sucha. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 4] 


Likewise, you too should take three vows— 


(1) that you will firmly believe in the existence of 
God, 

(41) that you will experience Him and 

(11) that you will become one with Him. 


Make every effort to fulfil these vows. 


Happiness Results From Victory Over Difficulties 


The year 2000 has commenced. Many have 
given a bad picture of what lies ahead in this year. But 
there is nothing bad in this world. Even that which 
appears to be bad is also good. So, never consider 
anything bad. How can evil enter God’s creation? 
Everything happens according to God’s Will. There is 
no scope for bad events when the Divine Will is 
always good and pure. How can you point out 
something as bad when divinity pervades everything? 
Good and bad lie in your drishti (vision), not in srishti 
(creation). 


Have firm faith that whateverhappens is good 
for you and face any eventuality with courage. Stu- 
dents having such courage and conviction are needed 
today. You all know that the people in the world are 
undergoing a lot of suffering. Human life will find 
fulfilment only when one acts with courage and con- 
viction in the face of adversity. Never get disheart- 
ened and never retrace your steps. God has created you 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 42 


not to lead a selfish hfe. Uphold Dharma for the 
welfare of humanity, even at the cost of your life. After 
all, death occurs only once in a lifetime. Everything 
happens according to God’s Will. Man who has been 
created by the Divine Will should sanctify his life by 
following the Divine command. 


No matter what others say or do, have 
unflinching faith in God. Only the good face obstacles 
in their path. Whatever happens is for your own good. 
When a student fails in an examination, he does not 
give up effort. He works hard to attain success in the 
next examination. Similarly, never give up in the face 
of adversities in life. 


Pleasure is an interval between two pains. 
Vyasa said, Na Sukhath Labhyathe Sukham (happiness 
cannot be gained from happiness). Happiness results 
only when you overcome difficulties. Happiness has 
no value in the absence of difficulties, just as light has 
no value in the absence of darkness. Difficulties are 
part and parcel of human existence. So, take them in 
your stride. 


Once Kunti prayed to Krishna to give her 
difficulties in life so that she could remember Him 
always. She said, “Krishna, when my husband, King 
Pandu was alive, hardly did I remember You, because I 
was immersed in pleasures and comforts. After his 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 43 


death we were put to untold suffering, as a result of 
which we remembered You always. Now I realize the 
value of difficulties. They help me to remember You 
always. I am ready to face any hardship, but kindly 
ensure that my love for you never diminishes”. 


Be Equal-minded In Pleasure And Pain 


Forty-two years had passed after the 
Kurushetra war. Arjuna was returning from Dwaraka. 
The entire clan of Yadavas was embroiled in squabble, 
as a result of which they all perished. Krishna too had 
left His mortal coil. Sighting Arjuna at a distance, 
Dharmaraja went up to him and enquired about the 
well-being of Lord Krishna. With deep agony, Arjuna 
informed Dharmaraja that their friend, mentor and 
God, Lord Krishna was no more. On hearing this, 
Kunti collapsed and breathed her last on the lap of 
Dharmaraja. A grief-stricken Dharmaraja bemoaned. 
“Oh Mother! Have you gone in search of our dear Lord 
Krishna? It appears to be so. Life is meaningless 
without Krishna. All along we lived with Krishna, 
earned name and fame and emerged victorious in the 
war. All this was possible because He was on our side. 
There is no meaning in life after Him.” 


He summoned Bhima and asked him to make 
arrangements for mother Kunti’s funeral. Arjuna was 
asked to make arrangements for the coronation of his 
grandson, while Nakula and Sahadeva were asked to 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 44 


make preparations for going to the forest for final 
journey. All the three activities—Kunti’s funeral, 
coronation of Parikshit and the Pandavas’ final journey 
were to take place on the same day. Only Dharmaraja, 
being the recipient of divine grace, could execute these 
diverse duties with equanimity. 


After performing the last rites of their mother 
Kunti and crowning Parikshit, the Pandavas left 
Hastinapur for the forest. Droupadi who considered the 
five Pandavas as her five life-breaths also followed 
them. The Pandavas remained united both in pleasure 
and pain. Such unity is lacking today. Happiness and 
sorrow are like passing clouds. One should not be 
elated in times of pleasure or depressed in times of 
pain. One should remain equal-minded, unaffected by 
happiness or sorrow. This is the sign of true devotion. 


Devotion Stands For Steady Love For God 


Devotion does not mean performing Puja or 
undertaking rituals. Devotion stands for steady love for 
God. It also means implicit obedience and 
subservience to the Will of God. Lakshmana followed 
Rama to the forest as he considered Him to be his very 
life-breath. On reaching Chitrakoota mountain, Rama 
instructed Lakshmana to make a hut. When Lakshma- 
na asked Him to show the location, Rama replied, 
“Erect it at a place of your choice.” Hearing this La- 
kshmana was overcome with grief. He said, “What sin 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 45 


have I committed to hear such harsh words from You? 
Have I not surrendered to Your Will? Do I have likes 
and dislikes of my own?” Seeing Lakshmana’s plight. 
Sita remarked, “Lakshmana, why are you so agitated? 
Rama neither beat you nor did he admonish you.” 
Lakshmana replied, “Mother, I would have been happy 
if beaten or scolded by Him, but I cannot bear to hear 
that my likes and dislikes are separate from His. There 
is no greater sorrow than hearing such words from 
Lord Rama.” This incident reveals the intensity of 
devotion and total surrender of Lakshmana. 


Obey The Divine Command Implicitly 


Surrender implies that the individual will 
should become one with the Divine Will. Obey the 
Divine command implicitly without questioning. That 
is the sign of true devotion. Whatever God does is for 
your good. The Pandavas had to undergo innumerable 
hardships. Ultimately, victory was theirs as they 
obeyed God’s command implicitly. Through devotion 
and sincerity you can achieve anything in life. Do not 
crave for bhoga (pleasure); aspire for yoga. Yoga 
means union with God. The Bhagavad Gita starts with 
the chapter Vishada Yoga. Arjuna’s vishada (sorrow) 
turned into vijaya (success) on account of his 
association with Krishna. Before attaining success in 
any endeavour one has to face hardships. Pleasure and 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 46 


pain come together just as the bitter rind and the sweet 
juice coexist in an orange. You cannot enjoy the sweet 
juice of sugarcane unless it is crushed. Likewise, gold 
has to be put in fire, hammered and cut before it is 
made into a beautiful jewel. Similarly, humanness will 
shine only when one undergoes trials and tribulations. 


Earn Divine Grace Through Love 


Hiranyagarbha is another name of God. If you 
place this divine gold in your heart, you can make any 
ornament of your choice like truth, righteousness and 
peace. Just as no ornament can be made without gold, 
you cannot obtain the jewels of Sathya, Dharma and 
Santhi without divinity. Hiranyagarbha is immanent in 
everyone. That is why Swami calls everyone ‘Bang- 
aru.’ You say this prayer: Loka Samastha Sukhino 
Bhavanthu (May the whole world be happy!). Develop 
love for all in order to earn divine grace. You cannot 
get even a handkerchief unless you pay for it. You are 
asking God for peace, happiness and liberation. But 
what are you giving to God in return? Offer your love 
to Him and receive His grace in the form of peace, 
happiness and liberation. Everybody has this right. But 
you have to give first to earn it. Only through love and 
service will you earn this right to ask. There is no other 
way. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 47 


I said this morning, Annam Brahma (food is 
God). In fact, human body is composed of five sheaths, 
namely, Annamaya Kosha, Pranamaya_ Kosha, 
Manomaya Kosha, Vijnanamaya Kosha and 
Anandamaya Kosha, each sheath being subtler than the 
other in that order. In order to attain liberation, one has 
to reach the subtlest of these sheaths, 1.e., Anandamaya 
Kosha. The ananda you experience after this is 
referred to as Brahmananda. Such bliss can be 
experienced only through Divine Love. 


Chanting of the Divine Name of Sai Rama will 
destroy mountains of sin. I often tell you Pibare Rama 
rasam (drink the nectar of Lord Rama’s Name). 
Tulasidas prayed to Rama for the nectar of His love. 
When sugar and water are mixed, syrup is formed. 
Likewise, when your love becomes one with Divine 
Love, then it becomes nectar, the experience of which 
makes you immortal. 


“Kach Word Of Mine Has Immense Value” 


Do not hate anybody. Love all. Many of you 
feel bad, thinking that Swami does not speak to you. 
But you do not enquire whether you are following 
Swami’s teachings or not. I too follow certain rules 
and regulations. When I give you something, you 
should make proper use of it. Otherwise, what is the 
point in My giving? When I give you what you ask for, 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 48 


is it not your duty to do what I say? I feel it is better 
not to speak than to speak and lose the value of My 
words. Each word of Mine has immense value 
associated with it. I will fulfil your wish only when 
you obey My command. God does not have anger or 
hatred towards anybody. But, you have actions. As is 
the action, so is the reaction. Yad Bhavam Tad 
Bhavathi (as is your feeling, so is the result). 


If you are good, I will certainly yield to your 
request. Sometimes, I behave as if I am angry, only to 
put you on the right path. Without understanding this 
truth, you sometimes feel that Swami is ignoring you. 
What place have you given to Swami in your heart? To 
what extent are you putting His teachings into 
practice? I take all this into consideration. When a 
beggar asks for alms, the lady of the house gives him 
food. Sometimes she even forgoes her own share of 
food to serve the beggar. But if she finds the beggar 
throwing away the food, would she serve him the next 
time? No; likewise, Swami too stops talking to you if 
you do not follow His teachings. I do not have any 
desire whatsoever. I do not need anything from 
anybody. I do not hate anybody. If you make proper 
use of what is already given, you will be given much 
more. Enquire whether your actions are in accordance 
with Swami’s teachings. It is not easy to attain God. It 
is possible only when you get rid of evil qualities. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 49 


When your heart is filled with negative thoughts, how 
can you expect God to fill it with His love and grace? 
First of all, cleanse your heart of all evil qualities. Only 
then can God fill your heart with His love and grace. 


Earn The Love And Grace Of Your Parents 


Students should develop good character along 
with acquisition of knowledge. Education without 
culture is useless. Just as the electric current flows 
when the positive and negative come together, likewise 
your life will be redeemed when education is coupled 
with culture. Students are good, but they do not know 
the right path. Some know what is good, but they do 
not follow because of limitless desires. As worldly 
desires increase, naturally the desire for Divine grace 
diminishes. Head can be filled with noble feelings only 
when it is empty. It is not possible to do the same if it 
is already stuffed with worldly desires. So, first and 
foremost, rid your head of all desires. | am giving you 
time for that and I am waiting to shower My grace on 
you. I will certainly fill your heart with Divine Love. I 
am always ready, ready, ready. Those who keep the 
vessel of their heart pure attain Me easily. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Human life is highly sacred and divine. It is 
gifted by God. Make proper use of it. Make your 
parents happy. How can you please Swami if you 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 50 


cannot please your parents? First and foremost, earn 
the love and grace of your parents. Only then will you 
be the recipients of Swami’s love and grace. 


Sports Meet Delighted Everyone 


Students! 


The Sports Meet was most wonderful in all 
respects. I begin My discourse with a poem, which is 
like a plate full of delicious items and end it with a 
Bhajan, which is like a lid that covers these delicious 
items. The same can be said of our Sports Meet too. 
The programmes of the Institute students were like 
delicious dishes served on a plate. The Primary School 
children covered the ‘plate’ with the lid of love. As a 
result, this Sports Meet has left an indelible impression 
on the hearts of one and all. Make everybody happy. 
That will make Swami also happy. The Primary School 
children are highly virtuous. They are of tender age. 
They do not have in them even a trace of worldly 
desires. 


I told you the story of Madalasa this morning. 
After putting her child in a cradle, she used to sing a 
lullaby revealing to the child its true identity and 
explaining the ephemeral nature of this world. She 
would tell the child, “My dear one, you are one of 
purity, wisdom and supreme bliss. Wake up from the 
sleep of moha (attachment), then you will realize that 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 Si 


the samsara (world) is but a dream.” She transformed 
her sons into renunciants. Seeing this, her husband got 
annoyed. “Who will take care of this kingdom if you 
send all the children to the forest?” She replied, “How 
long can one rule over a worldly kingdom? It is only 
for a temporary period. I am making my sons the 
emperors of hridaya samrajya (kingdom of the heart), 
which is true and eternal.” There are many mothers 
like Madalasa, who impart sacred teachings to their 
children. 


It Is A Great Mistake To Criticize God 


Every human being is essentially pure, divine 
and without attachment. But due to the impact of Kali 
Age, even young children are getting enamoured of 
worldly life. If you get caught in the web of worldly 
life, even God may not come to your rescue. Once you 
get carried away by the sleep of attachment, you will 
certainly get dreams of bad thoughts. If you have 
chosen the worldly path, enter the family life and be 
happy. Gradually develop detachment and devotion. 
Discharge your duty sincerely. Having chosen family 
life on your own, it is sheer ignorance on your part to 
blame God for your suffering. 


People commit sin and consequently when they 
are confronted with difficulties, they blame God that 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 D2 


He does not come to their rescue. There can be no 
greater ignorance than this. So, never commit sin. 
divinity can be experienced in all the four Ashramas, 
namely, Brahmacharya, Grihastha, Vanaprastha and 
Sanyasa. Do not blame God for your suffering. You 
have to reap the consequences of your actions. God is 
the eternal witness. It is a great mistake to criticize 
God. Leave everything to His Will and perform all 
actions to please God—Sarva Karma Bhagavad 
Preethyartham. Then you can achieve anything in life. 


14-01-2000, Prasanthi Nilayam 


4 


Sanctify Your Life By Chanting Gayatri 
Mantra 


Dear Boys! 


THIS is the most auspicious moment of your 
life. Human life can be compared to a four-storeyed 
mansion. The four storeys correspond to four stages of 
man’s life, namely, Brahmacharya, Grihastha, 
Vanaprastha and Sanyasa (celibate, householder, 
recluse and renunciant). Today you are laying the 
foundation of the mansion of your life. The safety and 
security of the mansion is assured once you make the 
foundation strong and sturdy. 


Man has four births. His first birth takes place 
from his mother’s womb. He gets a second life when 
he is initiated into the Gayatri mantra. His third birth 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 54 


occurs when he studies the Vedas. He becomes a 
Brahmin when he recongnises the principle of 
Brahman. This is his fourth birth. One becomes a 
Brahmin not merely by birth, but by knowing the 
nature of Brahman. For this, chanting of Gayatri 
Mantra is very essential. 


Man is the embodiment of all gods. In fact, the 
gross form of the food that man consumes refers to the 
principle of Brahma. On this basis, it is said, “Annam 
Brahma, Raso Vishnu” (food is Brahma and the es- 
sence is Vishnu). The subtle form of the food denotes 
the principle of Vishnu. The subtlest form symbolizes 
the principle of Easwara. The gross part of the food 
strengthens the body. The subtle part of the food 
strengthens the mind; the subtlest part of the food puri- 
fies the speech. So, food plays a vital role in strength- 
ening and purifying the body, mind and speech. 


Gayatri Is The Mother Of The Vedas 


Gayatri is sarvadevata swarupini and sarva- 
mantra swarupini (embodiment of all gods and all 
mantras). It is said, Gayatri Chhandasam Matha, 
meaning Gayatri is the mother of the Vedas. There is 
no need to chant any other mantra if you chant the 
Gayatri mantra. Gayatri has three names: Gayatri, 
Savi-tri and Saraswati. Gayantham Trayate ithi Gaya- 
tri (Gayatri protects the one who recites it). Gayatri 1s 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 55 


the master of the senses. Savitri is the presiding deity 
of the life principle. When Gayatri acts as the protector 
of life force, she is known as Savitri. You might have 
heard the story of Savitri, a woman of chastity, who 
brought her dead husband, Sathyavan, back to life with 
the power of her prayer. Savitri protects those who 
lead a life of Sathya (truth). This is the inner meaning. 
Saraswathi is the presiding deity of speech. Man has to 
earn the grace of Gayatri, Savitri and Saraswati to 
sanctify his life. 


First and foremost, man has to purify his 
speech. Only then will his life be safe and secure. If 
you slip and fall, the injury can be cured, but the injury 
caused by the slip of the tongue is incurable. It will 
make your life miserable. So, you should have control 
over your speech. Excessive talk will lead to untruth 
and unpleasantness. That is why the ancient saints and 
seers used to observe silence. You can uphold truth 
and attain fame only by talking less. Limited talk will 
confer happiness. Excessive talk will put to grave 
dangers. 


Gayatri, Savitri and Saraswati are latent in 
everybody. Bhur, Bhuvah and Suvah in the Gayatri 
mantra refer to body (materialization), life-force 
(vibration) and soul (radiation). Bhur means Bhuloka 
(the earth), which is nothing but the combination of 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 56 


materials. This denotes the human body, which is also 
a combination of materials. Bhuvah refers to the life- 
force, which makes the body vibrate. Suvah refers to 
Prajnana Shakti, which sustains the life-force. This 
Prajnana Shakti is known as Constant Integrated 
Awareness. This is also termed as radiation. All the 
three, namely, materialization, vibration and radiation 
are present in man. I tell you often, you are not one, 
but three—the one you think you are (physical body), 
the one others think you are (mental body) and the one 
you really are (Atma). 


Heart Should Be Pure And Compassionate 


Human life is the combination of body, mind 
and atma. Body is the basis for attaining wisdom. So, it 
should not be misused. One has to purify one’s body 
and mind by undertaking sacred actions. The principle 
of atma is always pure and unsullied. Human life is 
highly sacred. Janthunam Narajanma Durlabham 
(human birth is the rarest of all beings). Sareera- 
madyam Khalu Dharma Sadhanam (body indeed is the 
first medium for the pursuit of Dharma). Do not 
underestimate the potentialities of human body. In fact, 
human body is the basis for attaining the goal of life. 


Work for the redemption of your hfe by 
chanting the Divine Name and undertaking sacred acti- 
vities. You need not make any special effort to acquire 
the human values, namely, Sathya, Dharma, Santhi, 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 57 


Prema and Ahimsa. They are with you right from your 
birth. But you have forgotten them, as you have not put 
them into practice. Instead of giving tons of speeches, 
it is better that you practise at least an ounce of what 
you have learnt. Today humanness is on the decline 
because man does not practise human values. Man is 
developing asalu (desires), forgetting adarsalu (ide- 
als). His attachment to the body is becoming stronger, 
whereas his attachment to the spirit is on the decline. 
No doubt, attachment to the body is essential, but it is 
desirable only when it comes to performing actions. 


Cultivate Spirit Of Patriotism 


You should give up dehabhimanam (attach- 
ment to the body) and cultivate deshabhimanam (spirit 
of patriotism). After Ravana was annihilated, 
Lakshamana prayed to Rama to rule over Lanka. He 
said, “Brother, it is not proper on our part to disturb 
Bharata, who is ruling over Ayodhya. Moreover, the 
kingdom of Lanka is more affluent and beautiful than 
Ayodhya. So, it is my humble prayer that you should 
become the king of Lanka.” Vibhishana too fell at the 
feet of Rama, saying, “Swami, I surrender myself, my 
wealth and the kingdom at your Lotus Feet.” 


But Rama was not carried away by the 
affluence of Lanka. He said, “Janani Janma 
Bhoomischa Swargadapi Gareeyasi (the mother and 
the motherland are greater than even heaven). I cannot 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 58 


leave my mother-land even if it is not that affluent as 
Lanka.” This shows the love and respect Rama had for 
his motherland. 


Himachala (the Himalayas) forms the northern 
boundary of Bharat. ‘Hima’ means ice. It is white in 
colour and melts easily. Whiteness symbolizes purity. 
‘achala’ means that which is steady. Your hridaya 
(heart) should also be like Himachala, pure and steady. 
It should melt with compassion. Hri+Daya=Hridaya. 
Daya means compassion. God resides in your heart 
only when it is pure, steady and full of compassion. 
But to-day human heart has lost purity, compassion 
and steadi-ness due to limitless desires. Life is a long 
journey and your desires are the luggage. “Less 
luggage more com-fort make travel a pleasure.” The 
journey of life will become enjoyable only when you 
reduce the luggage of desires. The lesser the desires, 
the happier you will be. The Gita teaches that you 
should offer everything to God. Sarva Karma 
Bhagavad Preethyartham (perform all your actions to 
please God). Only then will you be free from all 
difficulties and hardships. 


Turn Your Mind Toward God And Overcome Maya 


The Vedas declare: “Mathru Devo Bhava, 
Pithru Devo Bhava” (rervere the mother and the father 
as God). I keep telling the students very often that their 
blood, food, head and duddu (money) are all the gifts 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 59 


of the mother. So, first and foremost, one should show 
gratitude to the mother. You should never forget your 
mother who gave you birth after carrying you in her 
womb for nine months and brought you up providing 
all care and comfort, unmindful of her own 
discomforts. The mother always has your well-being 
uppermost in her mind in whatever she says or does. 
You may be highly educated and your mother may be 
illiterate, but still you should have utmost regard for 
her. You should consider the teachings of your mother 
as the Veda itself. 


Gayatri is the embodiment of the mother- 
principle. You should chant the Gayatri mantra 
everyday, in the morning, noon and evening. These are 
referred to as Prata Sandhya, Madhyahna Sandhya and 
Sayam Sandhya. When your back is towards the sun, 
your shadow will be in front of you. It will fall behind 
you only when you stand facing the sun. Similarly, 
maya (illusion), which is like your shadow, will 
overpower you when you turn your mind away from 
God. It can be overcome only when you turn your 
mind towards God. 


Spiritual Education Is True Education 


Due to the impact of Kali Age and the 
advancement of modern education, man’s intellect is 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 60 


getting perverted. There is no point in acquiring 
education bereft of character. Worldly education, 
which comprises mere bookish knowledge, can never 
help you to lead a divine life. No doubt, worldly 
education is essential, but along with worldly 
education, one should have spiritual education too. 
“Adhyatma Vidya Vidyanam” (spiritual education is 
the true education), ”’Nadinam Sagaro Gatih”’ (rivers 
ultimately merge in the ocean). Worldly education is 
like rivers and rivulets, while spiritual education is like 
a mighty ocean. So, of all the forms of education, 
spiritual education is the highest and the noblest. 


Today even the highly educated parents are 
acting without any sense of discrimination. They 
discourage their children from worshipping God and 
participating in Bhajans. They tell them that they 
would have ample time to think of God after retire- 
ment. This is a grave mistake, “Start early, drive slow- 
ly, and reach safely.” One can remember God in old 
age only when one thinks of Him right from childhood. 


Students! 


Childhood is the right age to contemplate on 
God. This is the golden age as it is a very sacred age. 
Do not misuse it. Some parents want their children to 
go abroad immediately after the completion of their 
graduation. What is there in foreign countries that is 
not available in Bharat? In fact, that which is not 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 61 


present in Bharat is not present anywhere else in the 
world. Most of the students who go abroad to pursue 
higher studies develop perverted minds and lose their 
character. I have Myself seen that many students who 
went abroad lost their character. People send their 
children abroad because they want them to become 
dhanavantulu (wealthy), but not gunavanthulu 
(virtuous). Money may provide all the comforts and 
conveniences, but can it confer mental peace? No. 
Only spirituality can grant peace of mind. 


Excessive Money Gives Rise To Arrogance 


Today people are crazy to go to foreign 
countries, whereas the foreigners themselves are 
coming to Bharat in search of peace of mind. They 
have all the material comforts, but lack peace of mind. 
They have money in abundance. Excessive money 
gives rise to arrogance, which in turn leads to all 
wicked qualities. So, one should not go abroad in 
search of wealth. One should remain in Bharat if one 
wants to cultivate noble character. Take Swami’s own 
example. Thousands of devotees have been praying to 
me to visit their respective countries. But till today I 
have not even entertained the thought of going abroad. 
What is the reason? Bharat is the centre of all dharmas. 
It is the land of sacred rituals and sacrifice. Here is a 
small example. The train has an engine in the front and 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 62 


many compartments attached to it. You will find coal, 
fire and driver in the engine only, and not in other 
compartments. Bharat can be compared to the engine. 
In Bharat alone you find the sacred fire of yajnas and 
yagas. The other countries are like different 
compartments attached to the engine of Bharat. Some 
‘compartments’ may get disjoined. What is the reason? 
They do not have proper ‘link’ with the ‘engine. The 
culture of Bharat is highly sacred. The Bharativas 
should be attached to their motherland; they should 
practise and propagate its sacred culture. 


Upanayanam Necessary At Early Age 


Gayatri is known as Panchamukhi, meaning 
she has five faces. What are they? Om is the first face; 
Bhur Bhuvah Suvah, the second; Tat Savitur 
Varenyam, the third; Bhargo Devasya Dheemahi, the 
fourth; Dhivo Yo Na Prachodayat is the fifth. Gayatri 
mantra has three parts: praise, meditation and prayer. 
First, the Divine is praised, and then it is meditated 
upon in reverence and, lastly, prayer is offered to the 
Divine to dispel the darkness of ignorance and to 
awaken and strengthen the intellect. Dheemahi relates 
to the meditative aspect. Dhiyo Yo Na Prachodayat 
relates to the prayer. Chanting of the Gayatri mantra 
purifies the mind and confers devotion, detachment 
and wisdom. Young men must necessarily chant the 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 63 


Gayatri mantra. Today we find that they get initiated 
into the Gayatri mantra at an advanced stage of their 
youth. Intellect will blossom and shine in all its 
splendour after initiation into the Gayatri mantra . That 
is why it is essential that Upanayanam be done at the 
age of eight. One who is initiated into the Gayatri 
mantra at an early age will become highly intelligent. 
Man’s life will be sanctified by chanting this mantra. 


It is because man does not think of God with 
devotion and sincerity that fear and restlessness have 
become the order of the day. Chanting of Divine Name 
alone can make one fearless. God is referred to as 
Hiranyagarbha. Hiranya means gold. Only when you 
place this ‘gold’ in your heart, can you get the jewels 
of Sathya, Dharma, Santhi and Prema. Once God is 
installed in your heart, only divine feelings will 
originate from it. When sweet pudding is poured into a 
vessel with a number of holes, what comes out of the 
holes will also be sweet pudding. Likewise, when you 
fill your heart with divinity, all your actions will 
become divine. But man lacks faith in divinity. He has 
swasa (breath), but no viswasa (faith). Such a life is 
useless. 


Evil Qualities Are Gateways To Hell 


The youth should work for the progress of the 
country. They should always help their fellowmen. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 64 


Sage Vyasa gave the essence of 18 Puranas thus: 
Paropakaraya Punyaya Papaya Parapeedanam (one 
attains merit by serving others and commits sin by 
hurting them). So, Help ever, Hurt never. This is the 
true devotion and surrender. Devotion does not mean 
offering worship or doing bhajans. They are all 
external activities. All these are futile if there is no 
inner purity. So, develop love. 


Love is God, God is love. So, live in love. Love 
your parents. Serve them, obey their command and 
satisfy them. They have immense love for you. But, 
sometimes, they may try to put you on the wrong path 
unknowingly. In such a case, explain to them, what is 
right and what is wrong and convince them. If they 
want you to go abroad to earn more money, tell them 
that character is important, not money. If you explain 
to them in a proper way, there will certainly be a 
transformation in them. 


Boys! 


If you chant the Gayatri mantra whole- 
heartedly, you will never face difficulties or hardships 
in life. Chant the divine name incessantly. You know 
the story of Prahlada. His father Hiranyakasipu 
commanded him to stop chanting the name of Lord 
Narayana. Prahlada never argued with his father. He 
smilingly listened to all that his father said but 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 65 


ultimately followed the dic-tates of his conscience. 
Huge elephants were let loose to trample him under 
their feet, poisonous snakes were set on him to bite. He 
was pushed down from mountain cliffs, thrown into 
the deep sea. But never did he give up chanting the 
Lord’s name. As a result, the elephants, poisonous 
snakes, mountain cliffs and mighty oceans transformed 
into Lord Narayana Himself. The Lord came to his 
rescue whenever he was put to danger. Likewise, if 
you have divine feelings in your heart, God will 
protect you wherever you are. Have unwavering faith 
in Him and chant His name with love. 


Love Can Transform Even A Foe Into A Friend 


Do not give scope to the evil qualities of desire, 
anger, and greed. They are like gateways to hell. 
Ravana was highly educated and powerful, but he 
ruined his entire clan and kingdom as he became a 
victim of kama (desire). Hiranyakasipu symbolized 
anger and ultimately ruined himself. Duryodhana was 
greed personified and he too suffered the same fate as 
that of Ravana and Hi-ranyakasipu. You may have 
immense knowledge, wealth and valour, but you are 
bound to suffer if you become a slave to anger, desire 
and greed. Do not take pride in your wealth, physical 
strength and education. Develop strength of love. Love 
can transform even a foe into a friend. Only through 
love can your life be redeemed. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 66 


Some people may argue that it is foolish to 
believe in the existence of God whom you cannot see. 
But, in fact, you are seeing God all the time, because 
the entire universe is the form of God. Right from 
microcosm to macrocosm, all forms are His. The 
Vedas declare: Easwara Sarva Bhutanam (God is 
present in all beings). You are unable to see Him 
because you see Nature from the physical point of 
view. Give up the worldly feeling and see Nature with 
divine feelings. Then God will certainly manifest 
before you. Just as fragrance is present in the flower, 
divinity is latent in you. Flower can be seen by the 
naked eye, but can anyone see its fragrance? Mother 
loves the child. She has a form, but her love has no 
form. That love is God. 


Divine Power Exists In All The God Forms 


Gayatri mantra is highly sacred. As Sastri Garu 
pointed out, Gayatri mantra contains the essence of all 
the mantras. Gayatri is the embodiment of all gods and 
goddesses. Just as a single thread runs through all the 
flowers in a garland, the same divine power exists in 
all the god forms. Understand this unity in diversity. 
One who has understood this unity will never be put to 
suffering. Develop faith in God. Do not get carried 
away by what others say. Follow the dictates of your 
conscience. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 67 


Dear Boys! 


Today is a sacred day. In fact, it is the founda- 
tion day of your life. Make this foundation strong and 
sturdy. Then the mansion of life raised on this foun- 
dation will also be strong and secure. This will give 
strength to the grand edifice of our nation. You should 
develop national and patriotic feelings. The spirit of 
nationalism is absent in the youth of today. This is due 
to the influence of those politicians who keep their 
self-interest above the interests of the nation. But, you 
should be ready to sacrifice even your life for the 
nation. This should be your ideal in life. If you develop 
such lofty ideals, you are sure to experience divinity. 


If you have the strong desire to see God, 
contemplate on Him with unwavering faith. Then you 
can certainly see Him. Never doubt His existence. He 
exists for those who believe in His existence and does 
not exist for those who deny His existence. He acts 
according to your feelings. So, develop faith in Him. 
Chanting the Gayatri mantra three times a day, L.e., 
morning, noon and evening, is not enough. Chant this 
mantra perpetually. Why should you stipulate a parti- 
cular time period for chanting His name who is beyond 
time? Sarvada Sarvakaleshu Sarvatra Harichintanam 
(contemplate on the name of God at all places, at all 
times and under all circumstances). 


10-02-2000, Prasanthi Nilayam 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 


At first, God stands at a distance 
watching your efforts. He is like the 
teacher who stands aside while the 
student writes the answer to _ his 
questions. When you shed your 
attachment to the material world and 
turn to doing good and serving others, 
God comes encouragingly near. 


— Baba 


68 


) 


Sheaths Of The Self 


Embodiments of Love! 


ONE who has recognised the truth that the 
same atma exists in all, experiences unity with God 
and enjoys divine bliss, whether he is a renunciant or a 
householder, or whether he follows the path of action 
or not. The principle of atma cannot be understood by 
merely studying the Vedas and sacred texts or listening 
to discourses. Just as a gigantic tree originates from a 
tiny seed, so also the entire universe has its origin in 
the principle of atma. 


Embodiments of Love! 


You are verily the embodiments of bliss and 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 70 


happiness. Is it not sheer ignorance to search for bliss 
and happiness in the external world when they are very 
much present in you? True spiritual transformation lies 
in understanding one’s own real nature. 


Both the present and the former Vice Chan- 
cellors of our Institute have prayed to Me (in their 
speeches earlier) that I should explain in detail the 
concept of Pancha Koshas (five sheaths of the Self). 
The pure Atma is enveloped by five sheaths; and due to 
its association with these sheaths, it acquires their 
traits. The physical body is referred to as the Anna- 
maya Kosha (food sheath). The atma associated with 
gross body in its waking state is called ‘Viswa’ as it is 
endowed with jnanendriyas and karmendriyas (organs 
of perception and action). As this body is involved in 
various external activities, it is also known as Vyava- 
harika. Thus, the Vedas have given various names to 
this sheath which comprises the sthula sareera (gross 
body). The Pranamaya Kosha (life sheath), Manomaya 
Kosha (mind sheath) and Vijnanamaya Kosha (wisdom 
sheath) form the sukshma sareera (subtle body) as they 
are not visible to the naked eye. Mind in its subtle form 
is all-pervasive. That is why it is said, Manomoolam 
Idam Jagat (mind is the basis for the entire world). 
Anandamaya Kosha (bliss sheath) refers to the karana 
sareera (causal body). One should go beyond all the 
five sheaths in order to experience bliss. This state is 
known as turiya, which is beyond sushupti (deep sleep 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 71 


state). This refers to the Mahakarana Swarupa 
(supreme casual aspect). This is Paramarthika (the 
ultimate spiritual principle). The bliss experienced in 
this state is true bliss. This bliss cannot be obtained 
through the senses, mind or intellect. 


There are five types of kleshas (obstacles), 
which come in the way of experiencing this bliss. They 
are: Avidya Klesha, Abhinava Klesha, Asthitha Klesha, 
Raga Klesha and Dwesha Klesha. Man is unable to 
have the vision of the Atma and experience atmic bliss 
due to these five kleshas. One who has excessive 
attachment to the body suffers from avidya klesha, 
which leads to various desires and diseases and makes 
one’s life miserable. The abhinava klesha arises when 
one does not exercise control over one’s mind. Man 
gives undue importance to the body and gets carried 
away by the vagaries of the mind and as a result is put 
to suffering. The asthitha klesha arises out of interest 
in worldly pleasures. The raga klesha results from 
attachment towards wealth and material objects. The 
dwesha klesha arises when one’s expectations are 
frustrated and desires are not fulfilled. 


Give Up Body Attachment 


Some devotees worship God expecting 
something in return. They are happy if their desires are 
fulfilled or else they will start hating even God. They 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 ye: 


do not enjoy the fortune on hand. On the contrary, they 
desire for something more which they do not deserve. 
As a result, they are subjected to destress. Today even 
the relationship between mother and child, husband 
and wife and between one brother and another are 
marred by dwesha. 


The sheaths other than Anandamaya Kosha put 
man in bondage and subject him to k/eshas. In order to 
understand the principle of Paramarthika, one should 
get rid of the mind or at least have control over it and 
gradually give up body attachment. 


The body is made up of five elements 
and is bound to perish some time or the other. 
But the Indweller has neither birth nor 

death. 
He does not have attachment or bondage. 
Truly speaking, the indweller is God 
Himself. 

(Telugu Poem) 


One cannot realize the indwelling divinity until 
and unless one gives up body attachment. Body 
attachment is an obstacle on the path of spirituality. 
Just as a gigantic tree is contained in a tiny seed, 
likewise the five Aleshas are ingrained in body 
attachment in the subtlest manner. Attachment to the 
body is the main cause for man’s unhappiness, anxiety, 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 i) 


misery and lack of peace. One should consider the 
body as an instrument and lead a life of truth keeping 
in view the indwelling divinity. 


First of all man should travel from the food 
sheath to the life sheath. Life sheath is referred to as 
vibration as it is responsible for the movement of the 
body. What is mind sheath? Mind is all-pervasive. 
Mind can travel any distance in a trice. Man has death 
but not the mind. Mind will follow man life after life. 
What is wisdom sheath? It is not connected with 
material world. The material world is associated with 
reaction, resound and reflection. For example, you hit 
the table with your hand. Then the table also hits you 
in turn. As is the action, so is the reaction. This is the 
principle of Pratibhasika. That which is related to 
Pratibhasika is only worldly and secular knowledge. It 
cannot be termed as wisdom. True wisdom lies in 
understanding the constant integrated awareness. It 
leads to the changeless eternal bliss. This can be 
experienced only after transcending the five sheaths, 
namely, Annamaya (gross form), Pranamaya, Mano- 
maya, Vijnanamaya (subtle form) and Anandamaya 
(causal form). Then you reach the state of turiya 
(supreme causal state). That which is beyond the 
causal state is supreme causal state. In order to attain 
this state one should understand very clearly the nature 
of five sheaths. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 74 


Primordial Basis Of The Universe 


The entire world has a primordial basis. Here 
is a silver plate and a silver tumbler. Silver is the basis 
for these. The name and form of the object can be 
changed, but silver remains the same. Likewise, all 
names and forms are bound to change, but the 
primordial basis remains changeless. 


The principle of Atma is ancient and 
eternal. 
It has neither birth nor death, neither 
beginning nor end. 
(Telugu Poem) 


It is the primordial basis for the body, the mind 
and the life principle. Divinity is the foundation of 
everything. 


The water of the ocean becomes vapour due to 
sun’s rays. The vapour in turn become clouds. The 
clouds come down in the form of rain, flowing down 
as rivers and streams, which ultimately merge into the 
ocean, (Nadinam Sagaro Gathi). Just as the rivers, 
which originate from the ocean, ultimately become one 
with it, so also all the living beings and objects, which 
originate from Divinity, will ultimately merge into it. 
This in Vedantic parlance is called mukti (liberation). 
The Bhagavata also says, it is but natural for all the 
living beings to go back to their place of origin. The 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 5s) 


individual soul has originated from divinity and is 
bound to merge into it. 


The Principle Of Atma Is One And The Same 


Embodiments of Love! 


Spirituality does not mean a life of solitude. 
True spirituality lies in understanding the unity of the 
entire humanity, and giving up the sense of attachment 
and hatred. The principle of atma is the same in 
everyone. 


What is the form of the Atma? Sugar has a 
form, but can anyone describe the form of sweetness? 
Sweetness can only be experienced, it cannot be 
explained. Similar is the case with the atmic principle 
too. It is ancient, eternal, attributeless, formless, pure, 
unsullied and immortal.The sweets such as mysore 
pak, gulab jamoon, burfi, etc., may vary in name and 
form, but sugar is the same in all. Likewise, names and 
forms are different, but the principle of atma is one and 
the same. 


One Should Have Purity Of Mind 


Today, man undertakes various spiritual prac- 
tices such as sravanam (listening), kirthanam (sing- 
ing), vishnusmaranam (chanting), padasevanam (serv- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 76 


ing the Lotus Feet), vandanam (salutation), archanam 
(worship), Dasyam (servitude), sneham (friendship) 
and atmanivedanam (self-surrender). But they provide 
only external and temporary satisfaction. It is futile to 
argue which spiritual practice is more beneficial. As 
long as one gets sleep, it hardly matters where one 
sleeps, be it in a choultry or a palace. Similarly, one 
should have purity of mind whatever may be the 
spiritual practice one undertakes. Once the mind is 
pure, one can achieve anything in life. In order to 
purify the mind, one should develop the principle of 
love. The light of love can never be extinguished. Once 
you develop the principle of love, you will transcend 
the three states of Viswa, Taijasa and Prajna and attain 
the ultimate bliss. The individual soul in the waking 
state is known as Viswa, as it is associated with 
karmendriyas and jnanendriyas. In the dream state, it 
is called Taijasa (the effulgent one), as it 1s associated 
with the effulgent principle of antahkarana (inner 
instrument). In deep sleep state, it is known as Prajna. 
It is associated with the bliss sheath. 


Amarasimha, an ancient scholar par excellence, 
composed many verses describing the principle of 
divinity. But some people unable to underastand his 
sacred nature put him through hardships. They branded 
Amarasimha as an atheist. He was put to a lot of 
suffering and all his books were set on fire. When his 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 Tih 


works were burning, Sankara intervened and retrieved 
Amarakosha. Amarkosha is like another Veda. It is an 
enchanting and thrilling book. It is utter foolishness to 
destroy such a sacred book. In fact, people do not try to 
understand the teachings of the Vedas and sacred texts. 
That is why they have forgotten their true Self. 


Chanting Divine Name On Sivarathri 


The nights you experience on other days are 
ordinary nights. But Sivarathri is an auspicious night. 
How is it auspicious? It is auspicious when you spend 
your time in an auspicious way singing the glories of 
the Lord. The mind has sixteen aspects. The moon is 
the presiding deity of the mind. Of the sixteen aspects 
of the moon, fifteen are absent today. If you sing His 
glory throughout the night wholeheartedly, even the 
remaining one aspect can also be merged with the 
Divine. On this day, it is possible to get full control 
over the mind by contemplating on God. Hence it is 
considered as an auspicious night. Unfortunately, in 
this Kali Age, people observe the vigil of Sivarathri by 
seeing cinema shows or playing cards all through the 
night. This cannot be called Sivarathri. Every moment 
of the night should be devoted to the thoughts of God 
and chanting of His name wholeheartedly. The 
chanting should come from within. This is what is 
called the reflection of the inner being. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 78 


God has thousands of names. Of all those 
names, ‘Satchitananda’ is the most important and 
significant. ‘Sath’ stands for the changeless eternal 
principle and ‘Chith’ denotes total awareness. The 
former can be compared to sugar and the latter to 
water. When sugar and water are mixed, what results 
is syrup. Likewise, the combination of ‘Sath’ and 
‘Chith’ results in Ananda. Fill your heart with love and 
chant the Divine name. Only then can you attain 
divinity. Perform all your activities with love. Love 
should originate from the source, 1.e., the heart and not 
by force. Today people chant the divine name, not 
from source, but out of force. No benefit accrues from 
chanting the divine name unless it is done 
wholeheartedly. Chant His name wholeheartedly at 
least for half a minute, that is enough. One tea 
spoonful of cow’s milk is better than barrels of 
donkey’s milk. God is interested in quality, not in 
Quantity. 


Secret Of Remaining Ever Young 
Students! 


You should understand that body is but an 
instrument and the Atma is the doer and enjoyer. Give 
up body attachment. What are you studying for? You 
want to earn money and lead a happy life. But, are you 
getting happiness from your studies? No. After your 
studies, you want a lucrative job, then a promotion and 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 79 


so on and so forth. There is no end to your desires. 
Then how can you expect to be happy? True and 
permanent happiness cannot be attained in the physical 
world. It can be experienced only in the state of turiva. 
Bliss is not present in physical worldly objects. 


One day, Adi Sankara, along with his thirteen 
disciples was going to the river Ganga for a holy dip. 
He came across a Brahmin sitting under a tree and 
repeating Dukrunkarane, Dukrunkarane... Sankara 
asked him what he would gain by repeating the 
rudiments of grammar? The Brahmin replied that he 
would become a great scholar, join the royal court and 
earn money. Then Sankara questioned him as to how 
long the wealth would ensure him happiness.The 
Brahmin said, he could lead a happy life till his death. 
Then Sankara asked him, what would happen after 
death. The Brahmin replied that he did not know. Then 
Sankara sang the following verse. 


Bhaja Govindam Bhaja Govindam 
Govindam Bhaja Moodhamathe 
Samprapthe Sannihithe Kale 

Nahi Nahi Rakshati Dukrunkarane. 


(Oh! Foolish one, when the hour of death 
approaches rudiments of grammar will not come to 
your rescue. So, chant the name of God). Only God’s 
name will protect you in all periods of time and under 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 80 


all circumstances. Everything in this world is like a 
passing cloud. Only bliss and love are permanent. 
Love is God God is love. So, live in love. 


Students! 


Youth is very sacred. Do not misuse it by 
indulging in limitless desires and building castles in 
the air. Pursue your education keeping God uppermost 
in your mind. Do not get entangled in unnecessary 
activities and bondages, which will cause restlessness. 
Today people are in search of peace. But peace cannot 
be found in the external world. You find only pieces! 
Peace is in you. You are the embodiment of peace, 
you are the embodiment of truth and you are the 
embodiment of love. So, first of all know thyself. Only 
then you can be blissful always. Modern students are 
acquiring various degrees. But, what is the use? 


In spite of his education and intelligence, 

A foolish man will not know his true self 

And a mean-minded person will not give up 
his wicked qualities. 


Modern education leads only to argumentation, 
not to total wisdom. 


What is the use of acquiring worldly 
education 


If it cannot lead you to immortality? 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 81 


Acquire the knowledge that will make you 
immortal. 


(Telugu Poem) 


Only God Is Permanent 


Embodiments of love! 


Love all, do not hate anybody. This is the 
teaching of our ancient culture. Sage Vyasa gave the 
the essence of 18 Puranas in a few words: Paropakara- 
ya punyaya papaya parapeedanam. So “Help ever, 
Hurt never.” It is enough if you put this into practice. 
Along with worldly education, spiritual education is 
also essential. It is said, “Adhyatma Vidya Vidyanam”’ 
(spiritual education is true education). That alone can 
confer the knowledge of Brahman, which transcends 
dualities and the three attributes, namely, satwa, rajas 
and tamas. Only God is permanent. Everything else is 
temporary. Today people have faith in world, but not 
in God. Do not take pride in your youth and physical 
beauty. 


What will happen to you 

When you become a decrepit old man, 
When your body becomes weak, 

Legs stagger and vision fails 

And you are no better than a leather 


puppet. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 82 


And the children laugh at you 
Calling you an old monkey? 


(Telugu Poem) 


How long will your youth last? Just as a flash 
of lightning is followed by pitch darkness, likewise, 
youth is followed by old age. The flower that blossoms 
in the morning fades in the evening. Such is the nature 
of human body. Have control over your body and 
mind. Do not depend on others. Will your hunger be 
satiated if someone else partakes of food? No. Self- 
effort is very essential in order to progress on the path 
of spirituality. 


If you want to remain young always, you 
should have control over your senses. Swami is the 
direct proof of this. My body is full of energy. There is 
absolutely no weakness whatsoever in Me. Even now I 
can run fast. Can anyone imagine that Swami is 75 
years old? What is the secret behind this? Purity, 
patience and perseverance are mainly responsible for 
this. Swami’s feelings are always pure and steady. Try 
to emulate Swami in this regard. 


Happiness Lies In Union With God 


You claim yourself to be Swami’s devotees. 
Then is it not your duty to cultivate at least a fraction 
of Swami’s purity? You do not have the patience to 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 83 


give a proper answer, if someone were to ask you for 
some information. But, I talk to thousands and yet 
remain peaceful and blissful always. I am engaged in 
multifarious activities. None can describe the job I do. 
I do the work of all departments. All departments 
belong to Me. But, I am never restless. I am always 
full of bliss. During the birthday celebrations, some 
devotees wish Me Happy Birthday. I tell them, ’You 
do not need to wish Me Happy Birthday, because I am 
always happy. Give happiness to those who are not 
happy.” Happiness lies in union with God. If you have 
the firm conviction that God is in you, with you and 
around you, you will never face any hardship or misery 
in your life. People talk of worries and misery. But, I 
do not know what they are. They do not come near Me 
because of My purity. Only those with bad thoughts 
and bad character are affected by misery and worry. 
So, 


See no evil, see what is good 
Hear no evil, hear what is good 
Talk no evil, talk what is good 
Think no evil, think what is good 
Do no evil, do what is good 

This is the way to God. 


When faced with difficulties, do not get dis- 
heartened. Consider that they are for your own good. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 84 


A Devotee’s Firm Faith Earns Bhagawan’s Grace 


You would have noticed Swami talking to a 
devotee on this platform a few minutes ago. His name 
is Narayana. He is from Chennai. Last week he had a 
heart problem. His son, who is a student of our college, 
telephoned his father asking him to come to Puttaparthi 
immediately. He came here and doctors who examined 
him told Me that the four valves of his heart were 
blocked and it was difficult to perform operation on 
him. Three doctors who had come from America 
examined him. In fact, they were surprised to find him 
to be alive with such a serious heart problem. 


Narayana told them that he had no pain and 
that he was very happy as Swami was with him 
always. But the doctors were not satisfied. They 
performed open heart surgery on him for five hours. 
Four bypasses were done. This operation was per- 
formed day before yesterday and today he has come to 
the mandir. In the normal course, after a bypass 
surgery, a patient has to be on the bed for at least ten 
days. But Narayana walked three hundred steps 
yesterday itself. Isn’t this incredible? Today he has 
come here wearing pant and shirt looking like a college 
boy. I told him that his faith was responsible for this. 
Right from the beginning he has been saying that 
Swami was with him and that He would take care of 
him. He feels that his heart problem did good for him 
in the sense that it brought him to the abode of Swami. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 85 


He said, our hospital was not just a hospital, but a 
temple of healing. His operation was performed day 
before yesterday. Yesterday the doctors served him 
idlis and today he has come to the mandir for Swami’s 
darshan. Is it possible in any other hospital? Ask any 
doctor, he will give an emphatic ‘No’ as answer. Such 
is the nature of human body, but God can change even 
the nature of the body and grant a bright future. God 
can transform earth into sky and sky into earth, but you 
should have firm faith in Him. Today man has become 
blind, losing the eyes of faith. He does not have faith in 
God. How can he, who does not know himself, know 
Divinity? 

Develop Love For God 


First know yourself, then you can easily 
understand divinity. Have faith in God. There is 
nothing that God cannot do. One with proper eyesight 
can see even the small glow-worm. But a blind man 
cannot see even the brightly shining sun. Likewise, one 
without the spiritual eye will find only darkness all 
around him. A spark of spiritual light is enough to see 
the entire cosmos. 


The Age of Kali has become the Age of kalaha 
(quarrels). There are quarrels and conflicts everywhere. 
Students should resolve to eradicate hatred and 
restlessness. On this holy day of Sivarathri, develop 
the principle of love more and more. I love everybody. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 86 


Everybody loves Me. But sometimes students feel that 
Swami is not talking to them because He is angry with 
them. I am never angry with anybody. But in order to 
correct you, sometimes I may pretend to be angry. 
When one falls sick, one needs to be given medicine. 
Also one has to follow dietary regulations. Only then 
your sickness will be cured. Similarly, to cure your 
‘diseases’, Swami gives you ‘medicine’ in His own 
inimitable way. In order to bring about transformation 
in you, sometimes I remain quiet and do not talk to 
you. 


Do not breed hatred, greed and jealousy. You 
know what happened to Hiranyakasipu, Ravana and 
Duryodhana who developed hatred towards God. The 
Pandavas led a happy life as they had immense love 
for God. They were subjected to innumerable diffi- 
culties, yet their love for God did not diminish. So, 
develop love for God. The more you develop love, the 
more you experience happiness and the closer you go 
to ultimate bliss. 


Sivarathri, 4-3-2000, Prasanthi Nilaya 


6 


Sanctify Your Life With Sacred 
Feelings 


THE sunlight illuminates the entire world and 
helps the people to carry out their tasks. But the sun 
has nothing to do with the pleasures and pains of 
human beings. Likewise, the innumerable problems 
man faces are related only to his senses and the mind; 
his consciousness has nothing to do with them. It is 
said that the devotees search for God. But there is no 
need for a devotee to go in search of God as He is 
everywhere. In fact, God is in search of a true devotee 
whose heart is filled with the spirit of senses. 


When you touch a hot iron ball, you say, that 
your hand is singed by it. But it is not the ball that 
singed your hand. The fire present within the ball 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 88 


singed your hand. The world, like the iron ball, is not 
the cause either for the pain or for the pleasure you 
experience. The divine power is present within you. 
You do not recognise that power and wail over your 
sufferings and difficulties. 


Foster Divine Thoughts 


Strange is the nature of modern man today. He 
thinks something and speaks something else. He 
laughs outwardly to conceal his inner wickedness. He 
appears to be weeping outwardly but inside he really 
laughs. His outward appearance is that of a human 
being but his mind is that of a monkey. Such 
hypocrites and wicked people can never find God. God 
expects that human beings should live like human 
beings devoid of such animal qualities. Pure and pious 
qualities are immanent in man. He should manifest 
these inherent pure feelings and not the animal and 
artificial qualities. But man today is going down-hill 
morally. With all these contrived situations, the world 
has become a morose and lifeless place. 


If money is lost, it can be earned again. If 
health is lost, it may be possible to regain it. But if 
time is lost, it can never be regained. So, man should 
utilise the time at his disposal in the right manner. 
Money decreases only when you spend it. But man’s 
life-span decreases on its own with the passage of 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 89 


time. Every individual should be aware of the sharp 
scimitar called time hanging over his head ever ready 
to strike. You should not become its victim. You 
should be careful. Time wasted cannot be regained. It 
is not like health and money, which can be regained. 


Embodiments of Love! 


To sanctify time, you should take up virtuous 
actions. Good actions are the result of good feelings 
only. You should cultivate such pure and divine 
feelings. Clouds are caused by the sun, but these very 
clouds overshadow it. Likewise, the clouds of thoughts 
that originate from the heart cover the heart. So, the 
source is overshadowed by the elements that emanate 
from it. That which originates from Brahman cannot be 
anything else but Brahman. What is the source of this 
creation? It is the splendour of the Divine. It is the Will 
of the Divine. As the Divine Will is the cause of man’s 
existence, he should have divine feelings only. The 
creation born out of the Divine Will is called Nature. 
So, man being the product of Nature should manifest 
the qualities of Nature. He should not possess qualities 
alien to Nature. Desire, anger, avarice, attachment, 
arrogance and jealousy originate from the food you 
consume. They are also the consequence of the 
samskaras of your past lives. They are not your natural 
qualities. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 90 


You introduce yourself as ‘I’. That ‘I’ is the 
foremost name of the Divine; all the other mystical 
words originated later. In the Vedic proclamation 
Aham Brahmasmi (1 am Brahman), the letter ‘I’ stands 
for Brahman. So, the first name of Brahman is ‘I’. The 
second name is Atma. The third name is ‘Self’. 
‘Brahma’ is the fourth. God 1s the fifth. These five are 
the different names of one Divinity. You should 
understand the true meaning of these words. Where did 
this ‘I’ come from? It is the very form of the Self and 
the Divine. But man is putting it to much misuse by 
associating it with physical body. It should be put to 
sacred use. 


Recognise Your True Nature 
Embodiments of Love! 


You should try to know the ways and means to 
adhere to truth in daily life. Without recognizing the 
path of truth, people undertake spiritual practices like 
prayer, meditation and yoga. But this is not enough. In 
addition to the spiritual practices, you should also 
nurture good feelings. Good qualities, good feelings, 
good acts and good thoughts should manifest in you. 
These are natural divine traits. Despite the truth that 
Nature is your origin, you are discarding the qualities 
of Nature and are adopting artificial behaviour. You 
should not lead such an artificial life. You should 
speak what you think and do what you speak. The 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 91 


Vedas say, Antar Bahischa Tatsarvamvyapya Naraya- 
na Sthita (That all-pervasive God is present within and 
without). The proper study of mankind is man. Who is 
this man? The one who maintains harmony in his 
thought, word and deed is the true human being. He 
alone can be called man. God is in search of such a 
true human being. He is not searching for the one who 
is a human being merely in appearance. 


The Intellect Can Be Compared To A Mirror 


Man is granted sacred intellect so that he can 
recognise his true nature. The intellect is pure and 
unsullied which can be compared to a mirror. On the 
rear side of the mirror, a chemical is applied. Without 
this chemical, you cannot see your reflection in the 
mirror. You can see the objects that exist behind the 
mirror and cannot see the objects that exist in front of 
it. Likewise, if you want to recognise your true nature, 
you should coat your intellect with the chemical of 
love. Today you keep the mirror without the coating of 
love and try to see your reflection and fail in the 
attempt. God has given the mirror of intellect to man to 
see his own form. But modern man today is not at all 
trying to recognise his true form with the help of this 
mirror. He is holding the mirror before the faces of 
others. Likewise, every individual is using his intellect 
to know the world outside. People question the 
whereabouts of others, but they do not try to find out 
their own whereabouts. Hence, stop asking others, 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 92 


“Who are you?” and start questioning yourself, “Who 
am [?” 


The intellect is granted to you to enable you to 
look at yourself, not to look at others. Man is 
forgetting his true nature as he is associating himself 
more and more with worldly affairs. Everyone, from a 
child to an adult, is immersed in worldly affairs. Man 
today is not satisfied with the affairs of world only; he 
is trying to probe the space and stars also. He is turning 
towards everything else but he is not turning inward. 
He is traveling lakhs of miles into the space but is not 
traveling even half an inch into the inner recesses of 
his heart. So, his feelings are taking an ugly turn. We 
find only selfishness in him. He is not attempting to 
realize his true nature. 


Strive To Know Your True Nature 
Embodiments of Love! 


To realize one’s real nature, one’s innate 
disposition, is the foremost aim of spirituality. This 
aim is not confined to spiritual practices alone. Man 
should realize his true nature in every field of 
activity—temporal, ethical, physical and secular. You 
are enthusiastic in finding the faults of others but you 
are not trying to know your own faults. You will be 
able to improve yourself when you try to know your 
own faults. Such a man will become an ideal human 
being. He alone is the true human being. If you behave 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 93 


like a monkey, who will treat you like a human being? 
At the most, people may show respect to you just for 
the sake of courtesy. But in your absence, they may 
criticize you in many ways. So, you should not tread 
that path. You should act according to your 
conscience. You should follow the sacred path and put 
the divine qualities present within you to right use. 


Embodiments of Love! 


You need not go in search of the innumerable 
aspects of the world. You should strive to know your 
true nature. Yesterday, I explained to you the nature of 
the five sheaths. The body is physical and gross. It is 
the cause of innumerable troubles. With the increase of 
attachment towards the body, attachment towards the 
Self declines. Without the Self, the body cannot 
survive. You should take care to reduce your attach- 
ment toward the body gradually. If your attachment 
toward the body increases, desires and avarice too will 
increase. 


Develop Inner Vision 


The subtle body constituted by the Pranamaya, 
Manomaya and Vijnanamaya Koshas is called Taijasa. 
How did it get the name TJaijasa? It got this name 
because it is associated with the resplendent inner 
thoughts and feelings. You should recognise this 
divine aspect of your being. The innumerable worldly 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 94 


affairs you indulge in give you ephemeral pleasures 
only and cannot give true, everlasting bliss. So, you 
should develop inner vision. External vision is the 
vision of the animals. You should not go down to their 
level. This is not the true nature of man. You should 
purify your feelings. You should develop pure, 
unwavering and selfless intellect. Only then will you 
be able to love all and serve all. 


But modern man has no faith in himself. This is 
the main mistake of man today. First, he should have 
faith in himself. That is self-confidence. Self- 
confidence is the foundation of the mansion of life. 
You can raise the walls of self-satisfaction on this 
foundation. Self -sacrifice is its roof. Supreme bliss of 
self-realisation can be attained in this mansion. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Do not try to find others’ faults. First identify 
your own faults. But you will not be benefited if you 
simply see good in others without cultivating good 
qualities in you. Nurture pious feelings. You should 
not hate anyone. Why? Sarvata Pani-padam Tat 
Sarvathokshi Siromukham Sarvata Sruthimalloke 
Sarvamavruthya Thishthati (with hands, feet, eyes, 
heads, mouth and ears pervading everything, He 
permeates the entire universe.). Divinity is immanent 
in every being. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 95 


Today, it is necessary to develop broad 
outlook. Narrow-mindedness and self-centred feelings 
should be annihilated. You should give up selfishness 
and self-interest. The size of the eyes is not even one 
inch. But this small eye is able to see the magnificent 
stars in the sky. It is able to see far off objects. That is 
the power of the eye. You can see even greater things 
if you develop inner vision. So, you should have 
broad-mindedness. Many foreigners call it broad heart. 
It may denote heart enlargement. Such hearts are 
treated by the doctors and not by the Divine. Develop 
broad-mindedness in which broad feelings manifest. 


Divinity Is Invisible And Cannot Be Understood 
Students! 


You are born in this vast universe. You are 
living in this vast world. So, you should have broad 
feelings. Man living in this vast world should not have 
narrow feelings. It is wrong to find faults in others. 
There may be faults in them. But do not see their 
faults, see their good qualities. Then the entire universe 
becomes one family. This is the spirit of the brother- 
hood of man and fatherhood of God. Such feelings 
promote universal brotherhood. Mamaivamso Jeeva- 
loke Jeevabhuta Sanathana (the eternal Atma in all 
beings is a part of My Being). The Divine is the source 
of the entire creation. He is the creation, the Creator 
and the director of the universe. Divinity is invisible. It 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 96 


cannot be understood. Recognise that you all are the 
reflections of the Divine. Then you will not hate 
anyone or feel jealous of anyone; you will be free from 
egotism. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Cultivate love. Love is God, live in love. That 
should be the aim of your life. There is no God greater 
than love. If someone questions you, “Where is God?”, 
you should tell him that He is immanent in every 
being. What is His form? Love is His form. You 
should recognise that form of love and tell it to others 
with full conviction. It is not enough if you say ‘love’, 
‘love’, ‘love’. You should express it through your 
conduct. Only then can you command respect and 
honour. That is the real attainment of true human 
nature. 


Find Fulfilment In Serving Your Country 
Students! 


You are young and possess great energy. You 
have all the powers of mother earth. Despite 
possessing all the powers of the earth if you feel that 
you are powerless, it is a sign of your weakness. 
Whenever any calamity occurs at any place in the 
country, you should rush there and help the people. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 oF 


You should not treat them as different from you. Do 
not harbour the feeling of separateness. Cultivate the 
feeling of oneness and participate in social service. 


The society is the principal limb of Nature. Just 
as hands, nose, eyes, stomach and feet are the limbs of 
the body, the body is the limb of the society. The 
society is the limb of humanity. Humanity is the limb 
of Nature. Nature is the limb of the Divine. So, you 
should recognise this truth and participate in social 
service with love. Only then does human life attain 
fulfilment. Limbs like hands and nose belong to the 
body. But the body belongs to the society. So, it should 
serve the society. You should work with the active 
participation of all your limbs. Identify the different 
needs of different people and act accordingly so that 
they will be benefited. That is true social service. 


These days many people go to villages, sweep 
the roads, whitewash the temple walls and feel 
satisfied that they have done social service. No, no. 
That cannot be treated as service as it is your duty. 
What is true service? Find out the main problems being 
faced by the people in the villages. What are the unfav- 
ourable circumstances? What are their immediate 
needs? You should do your best to fulfil their needs. 
Summer is the next season.. Drinking water is not 
available in some villages. Water is the very life of 
man. You should help them out either by digging 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 98 


borewells or by channeling water through some other 
source. When you take up such acts, which have utility 
value, you can claim that you have done some social 
service. In fact, you should not treat this good work as 
service. If you feel that you are doing service to 
someone else that may promote egoism in you. You 
should feel that you are serving your own people. All 
are human beings. All belong to one caste—the caste 
of humanity. All belong to one religion—the religion 
of love. There is only one language—the language of 
the heart. You should cultivate such broad feelings. 
Only then the service you render becomes true service. 
In this way, you should serve people and make your 
education and skills useful and meaningful. 


The Purpose Of Education 


The purpose of education is not to go abroad 
and amass wealth. This is the weakness of the 
Bharatiyas. The moment a student gets a degree in 
engineering or medicine, he applies for a passport. 
Serve the people in your own village instead of going 
abroad. People are going abroad to earn money but not 
to earn good qualities. You should foster your culture. 
Lord Rama said, Janani Janma Bhoomishcha 
Swargadapi Gareeyasi (the mother and the motherland 
are greater than even heaven). But are you emulating 
Rama while performing your duties? He followed the 
command of his father, sacrificed his kingdom and 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 99 


spent fourteen long years in the forest. Your body, 
intellect and mind are the gifts of your parents. Your 
head, your blood, your food and the money you spend 
are all the gifts of your parents. So, you should show 
your gratitude to them. That is the true service to God. 
It will give you the true service of peace. Today man is 
shouting ‘peace,’ ‘peace’ while holding atom bomb in 
his hand. Although he has conquered space and 
reached the moon, he has no peace in his heart. How 
can it be attained? Fill your heart with divine feelings. 
Throw the bomb away. Then you can experience 
peace. Peace is the reflection of your inner being. 
Everything comes from within. 


Nourish The Sacred Culture Of Bharat 


Embodiments of Love! 


You are good, highly educated and intelligent. 
But selfishness is destroying your every other good 
quality. One drop of poison can infect the whole pot of 
milk. So, you should eschew anger and hatred and 
serve the society with love. You may be able to do 
service in a small way. Do not get disheartened if you 
cannot do service in a grand way. Enter every tiny 
hamlet and identify the needs of the people there. In 
case you do not have the required money or capacity, 
do not worry about it. You students come together, join 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 100 


your hands and work together. There is nothing in this 
world which cannot be accomplished with unity. 


Today in Bharat, we find difficulties, suffer- 
ings, sadness and fear everywhere. What is the reason? 
We attained independence but lost unity. Lack of unity 
is the cause of all these sufferings. Even brothers fight 
with each other. First achieve unity. That should be the 
aim of your life. Unity should underline the tasks you 
undertake. Only then does all your learning become 
meaningful. You say that you have passed MBA, 
MFM, M.Tech. Then you go abroad begging for jobs. 
If you want to beg, do it here in your own country. Do 
not become a beggar in a foreign land. As you are 
beggar there, you are losing respect here also. Look 
after the welfare of your own country. 


Bend Your Body And Work Hard 


Your mother may be ugly. Still you call her 
mother. She brought you up. Do you treat someone 
else’s mother as your mother just because she is more 
charming and beautiful? You call your country a poor 
country. This is the weakness of the youth. Know that 
India is not a poor country at all. What cannot be found 
in India cannot be found anywhere else. India pos- 
sesses all the powers. This is the land of Yoga. This is 
the land of virtuous actions. These days people are 
trying to convert such a great land into a land of 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 101 


ephemeral pleasures. You should not crave pleasures. 
They breed diseases. You should dedicate everything 
to God through sacrifice. Bend your body and work 
hard. Your hands should be busy in work and your 
mind should be filled with good feelings. If you do so, 
there will be no greater man than you. Such human 
being is a true human being. God is in search of such a 
true human being. Devotees need not search for God. 
He is everywhere. Instead make every attempt to make 
your mind pure and pious. You should become a good 
man and not a great man. Is the world gaining in 
anyway from these so-called great people? 


Students! 


You should not feel otherwise. Understand the 
truth properly. Educated people are the cause of diffi- 
culties, losses and sufferings of this country as most of 
them are motivated by self-interest. They are utilizing 
their learning and skills to serve their own interests and 
not the interests of the nation. There are many great 
intellectuals in India. They have brought the nation to 
this sorry state. They are not at all selfless. If they had 
sacred feelings, the country would have made giant 
strides on all fronts. They are utilizing their 
intelligence for their personal benefit only. In our 
country, some people take Rs.10,000 as salary and do 
not do work worth even Rs.10. How much is the 
country losing that way? Question yourself. Is the 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 102 


work put up by you in a month worth Rs.10,000? But 
such people when they go abroad work very hard. 
They even do extra work. They work at night also. If 
they can work like that in foreign countries, why not 
in their own country? You should express your love, 
sacred feelings towards your country with broad 
outlook. This is true devotion. Devotion does not mean 
worshipping the photo of God. Such activities can be 
treated as good actions. You should cultivate good 
feelings. Without good feelings, good actions yield no 
beneficial results. 


Fill Your Mind With Positive Thoughts 
Embodiments of Love! 


What is the significance of Sivarathri? Siva 
stands for auspiciousness. You should sanctify your 
life with pious feelings on this day. You did bhajan 
throughout the night. It has given you happiness. But it 
is confined to the external activity of listening and 
chanting only. The happiness should be felt in the 
innermost recesses of the heart. 


What is the use if you involve in positive and 
constructive activities with negative thoughts in your 
mind? Get rid of negative thoughts first. Fill your mind 
with positive thoughts. Then the entire world will 
flourish; the society will flourish; your village will 
flourish and your home will flourish. Social service 
should expand from the individual to the society and 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 103 


from the society to the entire nation. Do not observe 
any differences while doing service. It can be any 
organization. It does not matter. Go and participate. 
Service 1s your aim; sacrifice is your aim. Nurture 
pious and divine feelings. Only then will your life find 
fulfilment. 


Have A Broad Outlook 


Many youth waste their time and face 
innumerable problems till they get suitable jobs after 
completing their education. They blame the 
government for not providing them employment. How 
many jobs can the government create? If it goes on 
giving jobs this way, is it possible for it to run the 
country? Moreover, the employees are asking for a 
hike in their salaries. But the treasury is empty. There 
is no expected income. If the government imposes 
taxes, people blame it, saying that it is harassing the 
public. If the government does not impose taxes, how 
can it look after the welfare of the people? So, you 
should pay attention to this viewpoint also. In our 
institution, no fee is charged from the students, but in 
other institutions students object when the tuition fee, 
exam fee, etc., are raised. They insist that the fee 
should be reduced whereas the teachers demand that 
their salary should be raised. Wherefrom can the 
government get the funds? It collects from the public 
and spends for their welfare. Without taxes, it is not 
possible to pay salaries or to spend for the education of 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 104 


the children. So, you should have a broad outlook. 


Indian culture preserved for posterity from 
ancient times spread to other lands and attained great 
glory. But today the Indians themselves are looking at 
it with indifference and thereby harming the nation and 
the world. No other country had a culture of its own 
for such a long time. Others follow one culture today 
and adopt another tomorrow. But for the Indians there 
has been only one culture which is eternal, pure and 
virtuous. This culture alone can help you to cultivate 
the true nature of man. You should uphold this truth. 
You should nurture human values. The process of 
development should not be restricted to the fields of 
science and industry only. If you go on establishing 
more industries, risk of environment pollution will also 
go on increasing. So, you should nurture sacred 
feelings in your heart to your utmost capacity. 


Money Comes And Goes, Morality Comes And 
Grows 


Embodiments of Love! 


You are studying many branches of knowledge 
and are attaining degrees. When you finish your 
studies and leave Prasanthi Nilayam, serve the villages 
with the permission and help of your parents. Do not 
crave government jobs. You should yearn to serve the 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 105 


public. If you serve them, they will look after your 
welfare. You do possess divine powers, but you 
behave as if you are powerless and weak. Today you 
are trying to have friendship, wealth and strength. But 
you are not fostering good character. What is 
friendship? It is just hello, hello. If you eat well, you 
get physical strength. You can also earn a lot of money 
by working hard. But are you living just for the sake of 
these things? These are all passing clouds. Money 
comes and goes, morality comes and grows. You 
should cultivate virtues. You should respect elders and 
officials and love your parents. You should have faith 
in your parents. You should have faith in your 
teachers. You should nurture such sacred feelings. 
Humanness and human values will unfold within you, 
which should be nurtured and developed. Without 
these human values all your learning becomes useless. 
Contentment is the hallmark of true education. 


If you help others, you will be able to set an 
ideal to the world. The ideal never dies. It does not get 
dissolved. It grows day after day. You should foster 
such ideals and for that youth is the right age. It is the 
golden age. This sacred age should not be put to 
misuse. Utilise it in the right way. Only then will all 
your learning become fruitful and valuable. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 106 


Embodiments of Love! 


Cultivate love. Whatever you do, do it with the 
spirit of love. Without love, all your actions become 
unsacred. 


5-3-2000, Prasanthi Nilayam. 


Knowledge of the Atman destroys 
illusion, doubt and sorrow. Hence, 
Atmajnana confers the _ steadiest 
santhi, and with it holiness and 
happiness. 


—Baba 


7 


Sanctify Your Life By Sacred Actions 


A person having ego and pomp 
Will not be loved by anybody, 
Not even by his own wife and children. 
Only when he gives up these evil qualities, 
He will be loved by one and all. 
Anger is one of the main causes of man’s misery. 
A man filled with anger can never experience 
Happiness in his life; 
He will always be drowned in misery. 
So long as one is filled with desires, 
One can never attain peace. 
A greedy man can never be happy. 
Therefore, ego, anger, desire and greed 
Are mainly responsible for man’s 
Misery, anxiety and restlessness. 
(Sanskrit Verse) 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 108 


WHEN the New Year begins, people start 
speculating as to what the New Year has in store for 
them and also for the world at large. The future of the 
world depends on the actions of man, not on the New 
Year. Actions depend on the mind, the mind on 
thoughts. As are the thoughts, so is the action. Hence, 
for the world to be peaceful and prosperous, man 
should foster truthful thoughts. The world will enjoy 
safety, security and peace only through men of truthful 
thoughts. 


Actions Determine Your Future 


Karmanubandheeni Manushya Loke (Human 
society is bound by action). It is action alone that is 
responsible for creation, sustenance and dissolution. 
Merit and sin, pleasure and pain are contained in 
action. But man, unable to understand this truth, acts 
according to his own whims and fancies. He performs 
evil deeds wilfully and feels happy while doing so 
without realizing the truth that consequently he will 
have to face mountains of misery. Man is bound to 
face the consequences of his actions, be they good or 
bad, small or big. It is most essential for man to 
understand this truth and act accordingly. Before 
undertaking any action, enquire whether it is good or 
bad, right or wrong. Do not act in haste. Haste makes 
waste, waste makes worry. So, do not be in a hurry. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 109 


The Upanishads taught Thasmai Namaha 
karmane (one should offer salutations to the action 
before undertaking it). One should pay one’s respects 
to the presiding deity of action so that one may 
perform only sacred actions, which are beneficial to 
one and all. This is one of the major principles of the 
culture of Bharat. For example, we find dancers paying 
their obeisance to the anklets before they tie them and 
start their performance. Likewise, various instru- 
mentalists offer their salutations to the respective 
instruments they play at the beginning of their 
programme. The sum and substance of this is that man 
should pay his respects to the work he undertakes and 
do it in such a manner so as to sanctify his life. 


Essential Qualities Of A True Human Being 


Since ancient times, the culture of Bharat has 
attached utmost importance to the principle of action. 
It is rather easy to do evil deeds, but it is very difficult 
to face their consequences. Do not be under the false 
impression that you can perform an evil deed and be 
done with it; remember that you will have to face the 
consequences for the rest of your life. Having been 
born as human being and having known Divinity, 
sanctify your life by undertaking sacred actions. Life 
devoid of sacred actions is useless. A true human being 
is one who adheres to sathya (truth), Dharma (righ- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 110 


teousness) and thyaga (sacrifice). Truth is neethi (mo- 
rality), righteousness is reethi (procedure) and sacrifice 
leads to khyathi (fame). All these three constitute 
manava jathi (human race). Today man has strayed 
away from this three-fold path of truth, righteousness 
and sacrifice. As a result, humanness is on the decline. 
It makes one really wonder whether a true human 
being exists in this world at all! It is said, “The proper 
study of mankind is man.” A true human being is one 
who has harmony in thought, word and deed. 


Manasyekam Vachasyekam 
Karmanyekam Mahatmanam 
Manasyanyath Vachasyanyath 
Karmanyanyath Duratmanam 


(Those whose thoughts, words and deeds are 
in complete harmony are noble ones; those who lack 
harmony of these are wicked). Man does not want to 
be called wicked, but he lacks harmony in his thoughts, 
words and deeds. 


Human Body Is The Temple Of God 


Embodiments of Love! 


Human life is the noblest and the most sacred. 
It is divine in nature. Where is God? You are God 
yourself. Deho Devalaya Proktho, Jeevo deva Sana- 
thana (body is the temple and the indweller is God). 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 111 


Understanding this truth is the goal of all spiritual 
pursuits. In this temple of body, God is installed in the 
form of Atma. This principle of atma is described as 
nirgunam, niranjanam, sanathana niketanam, nithya, 
shuddha, buddha, mukta, nirmala swarupinam (attri- 
buteless, pure, final abode, eternal, unsullied, enligh- 
tened, free and embodiment of sacredness). Having 
such divine principle in you, why do you go in search 
of divinity elsewhere? There are 6000 million temples 
in this world, which means every human body is a 
temple of God. Divine consciousness exists in each 
and every human body. 


The Vedas declare: Easwara Sarva Bhutanam 
(God is the indweller of all beings). But, unfortunately, 
people are unable to realize this truth. Have the firm 
conviction that every human body is the temple of 
God. Do not hate or hurt anybody. One who has real- 
ized the truth that God exists in all is a true devotee. 
How can you call yourself a devotee if you hurt others’ 
feelings and indulge in criticism and slander? Criticis- 
ing others amounts to criticising God Himself. Human 
body, being the temple of God, is highly sacred. It has 
to be respected and revered. Do not get carried away 
by the outward looks of the ‘temple’. Direct your 
vision on God (the Atma) installed in the ‘temple’ and 
experience the bliss derived therefrom. Make proper 
use of the body by undertaking sacred actions. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 112 


Emperor Asoka And The King Of Magadha 


The life of Emperor Asoka bears ample 
testimony to this. He used to undertake various social 
welfare activities with the money collected from his 
subordinate kings in the form of taxes. Without collect- 
ing taxes, it is very difficult to run a kingdom. The 
same thing holds good even today. How can the gov- 
ernment provide comforts to the people unless it 
collects taxes from them? It is foolishness to expect the 
government not to levy taxes and yet expect it to pro- 
vide comforts and conveniences. Once on his birth- 
day, all the subordinate kings of Emperor Asoka, ex- 
cept the ruler of Magadha, brought taxes and filled his 
treasury. On being questioned by the emperor, the king 
of Magadha replied, “O king, this year my kingdom 
suffered from severe drought. Consequently, people 
did not have water to drink and were afflicted with ter- 
rible diseases. I had to spend a lot of money to rehabi- 
litate the drought-affected people. I made arrangements 
for the supply of drinking water. I also got many hospi- 
tals constructed to treat the sick. Not merely that. I 
established schools at various places for the education 
of children. All my revenue was spent on these social 
welfare activities. As a result, I am not able to pay tax 
this time.” Emperor Asoka was immensely pleased 
with his reply. He made him sit by his side and said, 
“O king of Magadha, your ideal is worth-emulating. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 113 


Pure drinking water, good medical and educational 
facilities are very essential for the welfare of citizens. 
So, in this regard, I will extend to you all my coopera- 
tion.” Asoka was one of truth and sacrifice. His name, 
A-soka, itself implies that he was one without soka 
(grief). The king of Magadha won his heart by his 
public welfare schemes. 


Education is related to the head, medical care is 
related to the heart and water is very essential for the 
sustenance of life. He is a noble one who provides all 
these facilities to the people. Such a person is equal to 
God Himself. This was the ideal taught by Emperor 
Asoka. He earned name and fame by his spirit of 
sacrifice and sacred actions. 


Good actions are very important. One who 
undertakes sacred actions excels everyone. That is why 
I often exhort you to undertake service activities. You 
are born and brought up in the society. You owe your 
education, wealth and happiness to the society. Then is 
it not your bounden duty to show gratitude to the 
society? You can express your gratitude to the society 
by undertaking service activities. Serve one and all 
because God is present in everybody. 


Keep Control Over Your Food And Habits 


Embodiments of Love! 


Do not waste time speculating over what would 
happen in this New year. If your actions are good, your 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 114 


future is bound to be good. The future of the nation 
depends on your actions. God is a witness. He neither 
protects you nor punishes you. In fact, it is you who 
protect or punish yourself. Whatever you utter, be it 
good or bad, God always blesses you saying, “So shall 
it be.” God blesses everybody. Each one is responsible 
for his pleasure or pain. 


Today the world is in utter chaos. Humanness 
is becoming extinct. Human being does not merely 
mean the physical body consisting of five senses. True 
human being is one who makes proper use of the five 
senses without giving scope to evil qualities like lust, 
anger, greed, infatuation, pride and jealousy. One 
should not fall prey to them. Foster the noble qualities 
that originate from the heart. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Wherefrom do the evil qualities like lust, greed, 
etc., arise? They arise out of the food you consume. 
So, keep control over your food and habits. Take only 
sathwic food. Then you will get only sacred thoughts. 
God has gifted you with many noble qualities. They 
are innate in you. But you are neglecting them. 
Reading, writing, taking up jobs, earning money, 
building mansions, etc., originate from the head and 
are related to the pravritti marga (outward path). These 
are all acquired by you with some effort. But you do 
not need to make any special effort to acquire the noble 
qualities like compassion, love, forbearance, etc., as 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 115 


they are latent in you. Head is the source of bad 
thoughts and heart of noble thoughts. 


Follow The Heart, Not The Head 
Embodiments of Love! 


Follow the heart, do not follow the head, lest 
you should be caught up in the mire of worldly life. 
Head puts you in many dangers. If you follow the 
head, you may lose your head itself! Turn your vision 
inward. Follow the heart, which is the source of all 
noble qualities like truth, righteousness, peace, love 
and non-violence. Here we find many bulbs glowing in 
this Hall. How? Current flows through the wire, enters 
the bulb and gives us light. Likewise, when the current 
of truth flows through the wire of righteousness and 
enters the bulb of peace, we get the light of love. A 
true human being is the perfect combination of these 
five human values. These are, in fact, the very life- 
principle of man, without which he is just like a 
corpse. But, unfortunately, these are missing in the 
modern man. 


Embodiments of Love! 


It is said, “Janthoonam Narajanma 
Durlabham” (Human birth is the rarest among all 
living beings). You cannot buy or borrow it. Human 
life is God’s gift. Make proper use of it by rendering 
service to the society. Do not indulge in slander. 
Slander is the worst of sins. We find some people 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 116 


indulging in slander always. It is nothing but the result 
of their innumerable sins acquired over past lives. 
Hasthasya Bhushanam Danam, Sathyam Kanthasya 
Bhushanam, Srotrasya Bhushanam Sastram (charity is 
the true ornament of the hand, truth is the true 
ornament of the neck and listening to the sacred texts 
is the true ornament of the ears). Hands have been 
given to undertake sacred actions, not to fight with 
others. Why has God given you ears? You listen to 
vain gossip with rapt attention, but when it comes to 
listening to the glories of the Lord, your ears get 
clogged. Recognize the truth that ears are meant to 
listen to the glories of the Lord. Why has God given 
you eyes? You are never tired of watching cinema 
shows one after the other, but your eyes find it difficult 
to concentrate on the divine form even for a minute. 


Today we find even small children wearing 
spectacles because most of the time their eyes are 
glued to T.V. sets. Consequently, they have cataract 
even before attaining the middle age. My body is 75 
years old, but there is no trace of cataract. My vision 
is perfect because I have never seen cinema till this 
day. You should try to see the reality, 1.e., divinity and 
not the unreality of the cinema and the world. 


Do not take pride in your youth and physical 
beauty. 
Very soon you are going to become a decrepit old 
man. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 117 


Your body will become weak, legs will stagger, 
Vision will get blurred, hair will turn grey 
And there will be wrikles all over your face. 
Then children will laugh at you 
And make fun of you calling you an old monkey. 
Realise the truth that you are no better 
Than a leather puppet. 
(Telugu Poem) 


Bliss Is My Form 


Modern youth are highly egoistic. They get 
carried away by their senses and are enamoured of 
physical beauty. Consequently, they forget humanness, 
misuse the body wasting a lot of energy. Is it for this 
purpose that God has given the human body? No. 
Serve the society, help the poor and the needy. When 
you involve yourself in such sacred activities, your 
body will remain young for any length of time. Many 
foreigners often ask Me, “Swami, how come you look 
so young and energetic even at the age of 75?” I tell 
them that the three Ps in Me are responsible for this. 
They are purity, patience and perseverance. If you 
develop these three virtues, you too will remain young 
and energetic always. 


Beauty is not related to the body, it originates 
from character and purity. Do not indulge in slander 
and jealousy. Do not censure anybody. If you find a 
mistake in others, try to correct them lovingly. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 118 


Spirituality does not mean giving up everything and 
leading the life of a recluse. One should always be 
cheerful and have good thoughts. Never put on a 
castor-oil face. Let your face be with a smile always. 
Happiness is union with God. One who is in constant 
communion with God will always be cheerful and 
blissful. One should be cheerful even in the face of 
adversities. Believe it or not, no one has as many 
problems as I have. When one’s desires are fulfilled, 
one praises Me or else blames Me. But praise and 
blame are confined to one’s own lips. They do not 
affect Me. I am always blissful. The letters SSS stand 
for Sri Sathya Sai. Everything is contained in this 
name. 


Sai says ‘Yes’ to those who say yes 
And ‘No’ to those who say no. 

Yes and no correspond to your mouth, 
But for Sai everything is ‘Yes, Yes, Yes’. 


(Telugu Poem) 


If one voices one’s criticism loudly, it will be 
lost in thin air; if one criticizes within, it goes to one’s 
own self. Either way it does not reach Me. I am always 
filled with bliss. Bliss is My form. I am beyond 
pleasure and pain. Only those who have body 
attachment are elated by pleasure or depressed by pain. 
But I am absolutely not conscious of the body. You are 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 119 


always conscious of the world and are related to it. 
That which is related to the atma is consciousness. I 
am Absolute Consciousness. In fact, all are the 
embodiments of consciousness; so, all are divine. Once 
you realize this truth, you will never take to wrong 
path. 


Bookish Knowledge Is Not Enough 
Students! 


You are young and this is your golden age. Do 
not misuse it. There are three important things which 
one has to bear in mind. The first, once it comes will 
not go away, i.e., wisdom. The second, once it goes 
will not come back, i,e., ignorance and the third, it 
neither comes nor goes, i.e., the principle of Brahman. 
Your faith also should be such that it should be steady, 
it should not come and go. But the faith of modern 
students keeps vacillating. Such faith is no faith at all. 


Students! 


What you are trying to acquire is only bookish 
knowledge, which constitutes only one-fourth of the 
total knowledge. The remaining three parts of the 
knowledge consist of putting all that you study into 
practice. You will become a truly educated person and 
a complete human being only when your bookish 
knowledge is transformed into practical knowledge. 
Practical knowledge is your true strength. Try to 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 120 


acquire it. Only then will your education find 
fulfilment and you will earn a good name. 


In this New Year, develop new and sacred 
feelings and make everybody happy. Do not strive for 
money; strive for love. Once you develop love, there 
will be no scope for evil qualities like anger, jealousy, 
etc. If your thoughts and actions are good, your future 
is bound to be good. Then the whole country, nay, the 
whole world will prosper. Pray for the peace and 
prosperity of the entire world. Peace can be attained 
only through practice of human values. 


5-4-2000, Brindavan 


8 


Install Rama Principle In Your Heart 


On enquiry, one will realize that charity, 

Acts of sacrifice like Yajnas and Yagas, 
Position of honour, adherence to truth, 
Sacred rituals or even Sanathana Dharma 
Pale in comparison with the principle of Love. 


(Telugu Poem) 


Embodiments of Love! 


THERE is none in this sacred land of Bharat 
who is not aware of the epic Ramayana. The 
Ramayana sets ideals for the individual, the family and 
the society at large. Since ancient times, thousands 
have heard the story of Rama. But not many have tried 
to put its teachings into practice. Man by birth is a 
human being but he is not making any effort to 
understand humanness. He is achieving progress in 
various fields but his mind is not getting transformed. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 122 


What is the use of man’s existence if the mind does not 
undergo transformation? He is changing his dresses, 
not his mind. He would do well if he changes his mind 
instead of changing his dresses. All the spiritual 
practices like meditation, penance, etc., will prove 
futile if there is no transformation of the mind. Mano 
Moolam Idam Jagat (the mind is the basis for the 
entire world). Man is not making any effort to 
understand what is most important on the path of 
spirituality. 


Three Debts Of Man 


Man is born with three types of debts--debt to 

God, debt to sages and debt to parents. God is present 
in each and every cell of human body in the form of 
Angeerasa and it is He who protects and sustains 
human life. Man is therefore deeply indebted to God 
who vibrates in every limb of his body in the form of 
divine energy. The only way man can clear his debt to 
God is by undertaking sacred actions and by working 
for the welfare of fellow human beings. That is why 
the path of service has been prescribed for man to clear 
his debt to God. Man should serve not with the feeling 
that he is doing favour to others, but with the 
understanding that he is repaying his debt to God. 
Every little act of service reduces a certain amount of 
your debt to God. 


You should not crave positions of authority. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 123 


You should realize that body has been given to you to 
serve others. A true servant is a true leader. You 
should sanctify your life by taking to the path of 
service and returning your debt to God. 


The second debt that man has to repay is the 
debt to saints and sages. The ancient sages and seers 
knew the past, present and future of man. They knew 
the secrets of Dharma. They, therefore, prescribed 
various codes of conduct and spiritual paths for man so 
that he might find fulfilment in this life and hereafter. 
Man can repay his debt to the sages by following and 
practising their teachings in letter and spirit. 


The third debt is the debt to one’s parents. 
Parents take great pains in fostering and educating 
their children. Mother is the first teacher for man. The 
Vedas proclaim, “Mathru Devo Bhava, Pithru Devo 
Bhava” (revere the mother and father as God). In 
order to repay the debt to one’s parents, one has to find 
a way So as not to be born again. 


When you are born from the mother’s womb, 
there are no garlands of pearls and gold 
on your neck. 
There are no necklaces of gems and emeralds. 
But, definitely there is a heavy garland on your 
neck—a garland made up of the conse- 
quences of your past deeds, be they good or bad. 
This is the garland given to you by God. 


(Telugu Poem) 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 124 


Once you are born with this garland of karma 
(action), you should lead your life in such a way that 
you are not born again. Man is born to repay these 
three types of debts, not for accumulating wealth and 
wasting his life in worldly enjoyments. People in the 
modern age claim themselves to be devotees of God, 
but their actions betray their claims. 


Put Rama’s Teachings Into Practice 


Once Buddha was traversing all over the 
country in order to propagate Truth. On reaching a 
particular village, Buddha felt tired and was not in a 
position to deliver his discourse. So, he told one of his 
chief disciples to address the congregation. Buddha 
went inside to take rest. As he could not get sleep, he 
was listening to what his disciple was saying. The 
disciple said, “O people, a person like Buddha was 
never born before and will never be born again in 
future. We are all very fortunate to be his con- 
temporaries. So, make the best use of this golden 
opportunity.” On hearing this, the congregation gave a 
thunderous applause. Buddha came out and asked his 
disciple, “Nityananda, how old are you?” Nityananda 
told that he was thirty-five years old. Buddha then 
asked, “Have you traveled far and wide?” Nityananda 
told that he had visited only a few cities. Then Buddha 
chided him saying, “You have not seen much of the 
world. You are just thirty-five years old. With what 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 125 


authority can you say that a person like Buddha was 
not born before and will not be born again? Many 
noble souls were born and many more will be born in 
future. The world cannot exist if there are no noble 
souls in it.” 


None Can Describe The Divine Principle 


There is no place in the world where God does 
not exist. You may not be able to see, but the whole 
universe is permeated with divinity. All that you see, 
say and do is nothing but God’s Will. None can 
describe the divine principle. Today you are 
celebrating Sri Rama’s birthday. No benefit accrues 
from celebrating the birthdays of noble personalities 
unless you put their teachings into practice. It is said, 
“Ramo Vigrahavan Dharma’’(Rama is the embodiment 
of Dharma). His speech was suffused with truth and 
His conduct radiated peace. Can there be a greater 
ideal than this? All names and forms are His and He is 
the embodiment of Truth, Awareness and Bliss. 


The four brothers Rama, Lakshmana, Bharata 
and Satrughna were not ordinary mortals. Looking 
from the worldly point of view, Dasaratha was the king 
of Ayodhya. It is a mistake to think that Ayodhya was 
a city where Lord Rama was born. Once Ashok 
Singhal asked Me as to what was the correct birthplace 
of Lord Rama. I told him Rama’s birthplace was 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 126 


mother Kausalya’s womb. I also told him not to 
confine Rama to a physical form. Rama is all- 
pervasive. What is Ayodhya? It is an impregnable 
place where enemies cannot enter, 1 e., Hridaya 
(spiritual heart). Dasaratha signifies the chariot of the 
human body consisting of ten senses. He had three 
wives, namely., Kausalya, Kaikeyi and Sumitra who 
represent sathwic, rajasic and thamasic qualities, 
respectively. These three wives had four children, 
namely., Rama, Lakshmana, Bharata, and Satrughna 
who represented the Rig, Yajur, Sama and Atharvana 
Veda respectively. True devotion and surrender lies in 
understanding the inner significance of the Ramayana. 


Kausalya was highly virtuous and even 
minded. Likewise, Sumitra too was pure hearted, and 
as her name indicates she was a good friend of 
everybody (Sumitra). Her ideals were unparalleled. 
When Rama, before going to exile, went to seek 
mother Kausalya’s blessings, she lamented saying, 
“My son! I can’t live without you for a moment.” Then 
Sumitra consoled her, “Dear sister, God Himself has 
taken birth as your son Rama. He can never be farther 
from anybody. But, He has to act according to the 
time, place, cause and circumstances. Do not feel sad 
that He is going away from you. He will come back 
very soon.” 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 127 


What was Sumitra’s advice to her son 
Lakshmana when he came to seek her blessings before 
going to the forest? She told him, “My son! Do not be 
under the impression that you are going to the forest. 
Ayodhya is wherever Rama is—Without Sita and 
Rama, this Ayodhya is but a forest. Sita is your 
mother, Rama is your father. Serve them with love. 
That is your primary duty.” She advised her second 
son Satrughna to serve Bharata. 


Sage Vasishta Reveals A Divine Secret 


What is the reason for the intimate relationship 
that existed between Rama and Lakshmana, Bharata 
and Satrughna? Here you have to take into 
consideration an incident that happened prior to their 
birth. When the sweet pudding emerged from the 
sacrificial fire of Putrakameshti Yajna (Yajna for 
begetting children) performed by Dasaratha, sage 
Vasishta told him to distribute the same to his three 
wives. Scholars have distorted the truth by saying that 
the pudding was distributed in different proportions. 
Dasaratha treated all his wives alike; he had no 
partiality towards any of them. He divided the pudding 
into three equal parts and distributed to each of them. 
He told them to have a ceremonial bath before 
partaking of the pudding. Kausalya and Kaikeyi were 
overjoyed. They kept their share of pudding at a safe 
place and went inside to have a ceremonial bath. But 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 128 


Sumitra was not all that happy. She felt “Since 
Kausalya is the first wife of Dasaratha, the son born to 
her has every chance of becoming the crown prince. 
Even Kaikeyi’s son may occupy the throne as 
Dasaratha had given word to her father. But the son 
born to me stands no chance of becoming the crown 
prince.” 


Thinking thus, she completed her bath. As 
there were no fans or hair dryers in those days, she 
went to the terrace, kept the cup containing the 
pudding by her side and started drying her hair in the 
sun. Suddenly from somewhere an eagle swooped 
down and took away the cup containing the pudding. 
Sumitra was taken aback. She was not really sad for 
losing the pudding, but was afraid that her husband 
Dasaratha might reprimand her for her carelessness. 
She approached Kausalya and Kaikeyi and explained 
to them her plight. They loved Sumitra as Sumitra 
loved them. So, they took pity on Sumitra and gave a 
part of their share to her. Out of the part of pudding 
given by Kausalya, Lakshmana was born to Sumitra, 
whereas Satrughna was born out of the share of the 
pudding given by Kaikeyi. Hence, Lakshmana, born of 
Kausalya’s share, was deeply attached to Rama and 
Satrughna, born out of the share of Kaikeyi, was 
deeply attached to Bhartata. 


Sumitra’s two children, Lakshmana and 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 129 


Satrughna, started crying as soon as they were born 
while Rama, the son of Kausalya, and Bharata, the son 
of Kaikeyi, had blissful smiles on their faces in their 
cradles. The children of Sumitra puzzled everybody by 
their incessant crying. Sumitra tried various means to 
make them stop crying but it was of no avail. Emperor 
Dasaratha consulted several physicians to cure the 
strange malady of Sumitra’s children, but nothing 
worked. Mother Sumitra then called sage Vasishta as a 
last resort to solve her problem. The eminent sage 
meditated for some time and said: “Oh mother, you 
need not administer any medicine to alleviate your 
children’s suffering. All you have to do is to keep 
Lakshmana by the side of Rama, and Satrughna in the 
cradle of Bharata.” Sumitra did accordingly and found 
that Lakshmana and Satrughna stopped crying 
immediately. The two children who had refused to 
drink milk till then started taking food and playing in 
the cradle. Surprised at this sudden change of their 
behaviour, Sumitra prayed to the sage to explain the 
cause of this behaviour. Then Vasishta explained to 
her, “O mother, Lakshmana and Satrughna are the 
amshas (parts) of Rama and Bharata, respectively. So, 
when they were united, they became blissful.” 


Put An End To Your Suffering By Uniting With 
God 


Lord Krishna declared in the Bhagavad Gita, 
“Mamaivamsho jeevaloke Jeevabhuta Sanathana” (the 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 130 


eternal Atma in all beings is apart of My Being). You 
are undergoing pain and suffering because you are not 
uniting yourself with God. You will be rid of all the 
troubles once you become one with God. Lakshmana’s 
suffering ended once he joined the company of Rama. 
He spent his entire life in the service of Rama. 
Likewise, Satrughna served Bharata all his life. It is 
next to impossible to find brothers like Rama, 
Lakshmana, Bharata and Satrughna in the present-day 
world. We find many twins bearing the names Rama 
and Lakshmana, but they fight with each other over 
property and even go to the Supreme Court to settle 
their dispute. But Rama and Lakshmana of Ramayana 
attained supreme stage through unity. 


When Lakshmana fainted in the battlefield, 
Rama threw aside his bow and arrow, placed 
Lakshmana’s head on his lap and lamented, “O 
Lakshmana, in this vast world I may be able to get a 
mother like Kausalya or a wife like Sita, but I will 
never be able to get a brother like you.” Such was the 
supreme love of Rama for Lakshmana. This is a great 
ideal for mankind. There is no point in going through 
the sacred text of Ramayana unless you put into 
practice the ideals it demonstrates. You should try to 
understand the purpose behind each of Rama’s actions 
and how he performed them. There is much more to 
Ramayana than Rama going to the forest, annihilating 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 131 


Ravana and ultimately being crowned as the king of 
Ayodhya. He incarnated in order to establish Dharma. 
What is Dharma? It is that which delights your heart. 
When man takes to unrighteous means, his conscience 
will not approve of his acts since every man is the 
embodiment of Dharma. He is born to practise 
Dharma. But as he gets carried away by worldly 
pleasures, he is afflicted with misery. 


At the time of going to the forest, Rama tried 
his best to dissuade Sita from following him. He told 
her that it would be extremely difficult for her to live 
in the forest in the midst of cruel demons and wild 
animals. But Sita was not an ordinary woman. She was 
the daughter of Mother Earth. She had all the powers 
of Mother Earth. She insisted that as his wife, it was 
her Dharma to follow him under all circumstances. She 
said, “You are the one who protects the entire universe, 
can you not take care of me?” Rama wanted her to stay 
back in Ayodhya and look after her aging parents. 
Then she replied, “I am told that You insisted on your 
mother Kausalya remaining here and serving her 
husband. But in my case, you have reversed your 
stance to say that it is my foremost duty to serve the 
parents-in-law and not the husband. For the wife, the 
husband is god. It is true not in the case of your mother 
alone; it is applicable to all women without exception.” 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 132 


She continued thus, ““You are Ramachandra, the moon 
and I am Sita, the moonlight. Is it possible for the 
moonlight to be in Ayodhya when the moon is in the 
forest? Moon and moonlight cannot be separated from 
each other. Come what may, I am coming with you to 
the forest.” With such courage and conviction, she was 
ready to withstand any hardship for the sake of being 
with Rama. You should put such great ideals into 
practice in your life. 


What happened to Sumitra’s share of pudding 
that was carried away by the eagle? It was left on a 
mountain, which Anjani Devi consumed. As a result, 
Hanuman was born to her. This is the reason for the 
intimate relationship that existed between Hanuman 
and the four brothers, Rama, Lakshmana, Bharata and 
Satrughna. Very few are aware of it. 


Hanuman’s Supreme Devotion 


When Sita and Rama returned to Ayodhya, 
people’s joy knew no bounds. At the time of his 
coronation, Rama distributed gifts to all those who had 
helped him in the war, except to Hanuman. On being 
questioned by Sita, Rama said that Hanuman did not 
care for any gift and that he had no worthy gift to be 
given to Hanuman. Then Sita took out her pearl 
necklace and presented it to Hanuman. He plucked 
each pearl, put it between his teeth, placed it near his 
ear and with a face indicating disappointment threw it 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 133 


way in disgust. Surprised at this behaviour of 
Hanuman, Sita said, “Hanuman, this is a precious pearl 
necklace given to me by my father, but you are 
throwing away the pearls without realizing their value. 
You don’t seem to have given up your monkey traits.” 
Then Hanuman replied, “O mother, I examined each 
pearl in order to see whether it had the sacred name of 
Rama in it. I could not find it in any pearl. Without the 
name of Rama, they are but stones and pebbles. So, I 
cast them on the ground. Even the hair of mine is filled 
with the name of Rama.” Saying so, he plucked out a 
hair from his hand and put it near Sita’s ear. She could 
hear Rama’s name emanating from it. Then she started 
praising Hanuman thus: 


You are the crest jewel among the monkeys 
Who fulfilled Rama’s mission. 

You are the great hero who found the 
Whereabouts of Sita and destroyed the city of 
Lanka. 


(Telugu Poem). 


It can be said that but for Hanuman, Ramayana 
would not have existed. He is the embodiment of 
devotion and surrender. Hanuman is present wherever 
Rama’s name is chanted. Rama’s name and form are 
not different. Hanuman experienced this unity. That is 
the principle of non-dualism. You call yourselves 
devotees of Rama and go through the sacred text of 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 134 


Ramayana repeatedly, but is there any transformation 
in your mind? Not at all. This is not true or real 
devotion, but only a show of devotion. Rama does not 
approve of pomp and show. He gives importance only 
to practice. Bliss can be attained only through practice. 
Try to understand the principle of Rama correctly. 


In the story of the Ramayana you must 
understand the principle of Sita. Before going to the 
forest, Rama distributed his wealth to the poor. Sita 
also followed Rama and distributed clothes and jewels. 
Thus, she attained Rama by leaving her worldly 
desires. However, in the forest she desired to have the 
golden deer, and, as a result, became distant from him. 
Today’s man likewise is bound by desire. When you 
give up desire, you can attain God. Na Karmana Na 
Prajaya Dhanena Thyagenaikena Amrutathwa Manasu 
(immortality can be attained only through sacrifice, 
neither wealth nor progeny nor good deeds can confer 
it). You can attain Rama only through sacrifice. From 
the Ramayana, you have to learn the lesson of 
sacrifice. You have to install the principle of Rama in 
your heart. Rama practised Sathya and Dharma all His 
life. You should firmly adhere to these principles in 
your life. 


Rama Navami, 12-4-2000, Brindavan 


9 


Easwaramma—Embodiment Of Love 
And Sacrifice 


Rama’s divinity blossomed under 

Kausalya’s loving care, 

Lava and Kusa could become powerful and 
famous 

Due to their noble and virtuous mother Sita, 

The love and care of Jijabai made Shivaji a great 
warrior 

Fostered with the love of his mother Putlibai, 

Gandhi became a Mahatma. 

For all the beings in the world there is nobody 

Greater than mother who gives them birth 

And brings them up with love and care. 


(Telugu Poem) 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 136 


Embodiments of Love! 


THE Goal of man’s life is neither happiness 
nor sorrow. Man can find fulfilment in life only if he 
can trace the origin of happiness and sorrow. In fact, 
man attains wisdom from sorrow and not out of 
happiness. The sages and seers of yore had to face 
great hardships and troubles before they could set great 
ideals to the rest of the world. That is why their 
teachings have left an indelible impression on the 
hearts of the Bharatiyas. Both the individual and the 
society can achieve progress and prosperity only after 
undergoing many trials and tribulations. Man has to 
face not only difficulties, but censure and criticism 
also. But noble souls will never care for difficulties or 
criticism. Welfare of the society is their main objective 
in life. 

Adhere To Truth And Righteousness 
Embodiments of Love! 


You should welcome sorrow just as you 
welcome happiness. You will attain equanimity of 
mind only when you treat happiness and sorrow alike. 
In the human body, head is considered sacred whereas 
feet are not considered sacred. When somebody comes 
to your house, is it possible to welcome only the head 
and ask the feet to get out? When you welcome the 
head, you welcome the feet also. Likewise, when you 
welcome happiness, you welcome sorrow too. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 137 


The boys and girls of today are the future 
citizens of the country. They have to uphold the glory 
and good name of Bharat by their ideal conduct. They 
should cultivate humility and reverence towards 
parents and elders. Consider the whole world as one 
family and love everyone. If you want to buy anything, 
you have to pay its price. Likewise, you can attain the 
human values, namely., truth, righteousness, peace and 
non-violence only when you possess the wealth of 
love. There is no wealth greater than love. One can 
conquer the entire world if one has love. Today human 
values are on the decline because man lacks the wealth 
of love. One can be called a human being only when 
one possesses human values. The culture of Bharat 
exhorts, “Sathyam Vada Dharmam Chara” (speak the 
truth and practise righteousness). Sathya and Dharma 
are very essential for humanness to blossom. One 
should adhere to Sathya and Dharma under all circum- 
stances. King Harishchandra sacrificed all his wealth 
and kingdom for the sake of upholding truth. He did 
not budge from the path of truth even when he had to 
sell his wife and son and he himself had to become the 
caretaker of a cremation ground. 


The whole creation has emerged from truth 
And ultimately merges into truth. 
There is no place in the world 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 138 


Where truth does not exist. 
Understand this principle of 
Pure and unsullied truth. 
(Telugu Poem) 


Love Is The True Wealth Of Man 


That is why it is said, Truth is God. Truth and 
righteousness are like the two eyes of man. One who 
does not adhere to truth and righteousness is verily 
blind. All the sacred scriptures, the Upanishads and the 
Vedas are based on these twin principles. The creation 
itself cannot exist without these two. Love is the 
undercurrent of both truth and righteousness. Love is 
the true wealth of man, be he a pauper or a millionaire. 
Just as a mother does not make any distinction and 
showers her love on all her children equally 
irrespective of their social status, so also God showers 
His love on all equally. God is the embodiment of love 
and is present in everyone in the form of love. You can 
attain Him only through love. 


The Vedas have referred to this principle of 
love as the Atma. Truth, love and righteousness are all 
synonyms of atma. The Vedas call man atmavan as 
he is endowed with the principle of the atma. The atma 
is also referred to as Brahma. Who is Brahma? The 
scriptures describe Him as one who emerged from the 
lotus that originated from Vishnu’s navel. That 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 139 


Brahma is the ‘Il’ (aham) in everyone. So, this principle 
of Brahma is present in one and all, be he a theist or an 
atheist. Soham (‘tT am Brahma’) mantra clearly 
demonstrates this truth. This process of inhalation and 
exhalation has its origin in the navel of man. It repeats 
itself 21, 600 times a day reminding man of his 
divinity. Without paying heed to the teaching of the 
inner voice, man goes through various scriptures and 
the Vedas in search of divinity. First and foremost, 
listen to the inner voice, which is your true preceptor 
and God. The Vedas describe God as amogha, as He is 
changeless, eternal and beyond description. God is also 
called Siddha as He 1s ever ready to fulfil the wishes of 
His devotees. Though God is always ready to answer 
the prayers of His devotees, He does not do so when 
their prayers are not wholehearted. When the prayers 
are sincere and intense, God will certainly answer 
them. He does not have any desires except the welfare 
of His devotees. To be a recipient of His grace, one has 
to develop sacred thoughts. 


God Is The Common Property Of Man 


Who is man? One endowed with the mind is 
man. The mind is nothing but a bundle of thoughts. 
You will be called a true human being only when your 
thoughts are based on truth. God is the common 
property of man, be he a pauper or an emperor. He is 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 140 


the friend of everybody. All have equal right to 
experience divinity. But one should have purity of 
heart to experience His grace. The heart should be 
filled with compassion. But today, there is no 
compassion, there is only fashion! 


Spirit Of Sacrifice Of Ishwarchandra Vidyasagar 


Ishwarchandra Vidyasagar was the epitome of 
compassion. He along with his aged mother lived in a 
village near Calcutta. They lived in such abject poverty 
that they had hardly anything for food other than gruel. 
As Vidyasagar had sincerity and earnestness, he used 
to study even under street lights. Sraddhavan Labhate 
Jnanam (one with sincerity and earnestness alone can 
attain wisdom). One with sincerity can accomplish any 
great task. Vidyasagar passed the law examination and 
obtained a good job. Neither happiness nor sorrow is 
permanent. One follows the other with the passage of 
time. Likewise, Vidyasagar’s days of poverty were 
over when he began to earn a handsome income. 


One day, he told his mother that he wanted to 
buy some good saris and jewels for her as he was 
earning sufficient money. He asked his mother to 
express her wish. The mother said that she did not need 
anything at that time and would express her wish at the 
appropriate time. Being an obedient son, he would 
never force his mother in any matter. As months 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 141 


passed by, his salary increased substantially. On a 
particular Sunday, he sat by his mother’s side and said, 
“Mother, I have a lot of money with me, I pray you 
express your wish at least now.” The mother said, 
”Son, I want three jewels. As there is no school in our 
village, the children are forced to walk a long distance 
to attend the school. The parents are concerned about 
their safety and spend anxious moments till they return 
from school in the evening. So, please construct a 
small school in our village. This is the first ‘jewel’ I 
desire from you.” Accordingly, Vidyasagar got a 
school constructed in his village. After some time, his 
mother expressed her second wish. She said,” Our 
villagers are suffering from lack of medical facilities. 
When the children are afflicted with any disease, the 
mothers have to carry them to the town for treatment. 
So, I want you to construct a small hospital in our 
village. This is the second ‘jewel’ I expect from you.” 
Vidyasagar built a hospital too. As days rolled by, 
Vidyasagar’s name and fame spread far and wide. 
People were all praise for his social service activities. 
After some time, his mother expressed her third wish. 
She said, “Son! The water in all the wells of our 
village has been reduced to a trickle. The villagers are 
suffering due to lack of drinking water. So, I want you 
to make arrangements for water supply in our village.” 


As per his mother’s wish, Vidyasagar provided 
drinking water to the villagers. His mother was 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 142 


overjoyed. She blessed her son saying, “I wish every 
mother had a noble son like you who dedicates his life 
to the welfare of the society. What is the use of having 
many sons who bring disrepute to the family as did the 
sons of Dhritarashtra?” 


Why does water scarcity arise? When there is a 
decline in Sathya and Dharma, the level of water in the 
earth also declines. As compassion and love have 
diminished in the human heart, water has become 
scarce. This problem is not due to divine fury as some 
people may imagine. It is because of the rise in evil 
qualities in man. If people strictly adhere to the path of 
truth and righteousness, there will never be water 
scarcity. People blame bad times for their misfortunes. 
But there is nothing wrong with time. There are 
adequate rains and perennial rivers. But they are 
merging into the ocean without being harnessed. 


Money Is Meant For Sacrifice 


There is no dearth of scholars, scientists, 
educated and rich people in India, but the country is in 
no way benefited by them. They are afflicted with evil 
qualities of jealousy and hatred and they fight with 
each other. There is no unity among them. One may be 
rich or well-educated, but all the wealth and education 
will be useless if one lacks virtues. Man should 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 143 


cultivate the spirit of sacrifice. The Vedas say only 
sacrifice confers immortality. There are thousands of 
rich people in India, but they are not satisfied with the 
wealth they have. They crave to amass more and more. 
They ruin their lives because of their greed for money. 
They leave their mortal coil after depositing their 
wealth in foreign banks. Instead, why can’t they use 
the same for the welfare of their countrymen? Why 
can’t they involve themselves in social service 
activities? They mouth sweet words, but act contrary 
to what they say. They make any number of promises, 
but translate few of them into action. Why should they 
make promises at all, if they are not going to fulfil 
them? They are heroes in giving lectures on the spirit 
of sacrifice and zeros in practice. 


Money is meant for sacrifice. This was the 
ideal demonstrated by Ishwarchandra Vidyasagar. He 
was an orator par excellence. Yet he was very humble. 
People thronged in large numbers to listen to his 
speeches. (Here Swami narrated the incident from 
Vidyasagar’s life when he taught the lesson of humility 
to an I.C.S. officer by carrying his suitcase in the 
absence of a coolie. The officer was put to shame when 
he discovered that the person who carried his suitcase 
was none other than Vidyasagar whose speech he had 
come to listen). 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 144 


Easwaramma, The Mother Of Easwar 


Today we are celebrating Easwaramma Day. 
Who is Easwaramma? She is the mother of Easwara. 
This was not the name given to her by her parents. But 
after her marriage, Kondama Raju (Swami’s 
grandfather), being one of wisdom and blessed with a 
vision of the future, started calling her Easwaramma 
(mother of Easwara). She was christened as Namagiri- 
amma at the time of her birth. But Kondama Raju told 
her that Easwaramma was the most appropriate name 
for her, as he knew that she was going to become the 
mother of Easwara. Easwaramma was born in such a 
poor family that she did not even have proper food to 
eat. All that she had to eat was ragi sankati (gruel 
prepared from a coarse grain). Even I too eat ragi 
sankati only. Many people in Karnataka eat ragi 
sankati. I like it very much. I do not relish rice, Aurma 
(curry), etc., ragi sankati with groundnut chutney is 
My favourite food. Both ragi and groundnut are 
available in our village. When I come here from 
Puttaparthi, I bring ragi flour with Me. Easwaramma 
was illiterate. When I see the egoistic attitude, per- 
verted mentality and ostentatious behaviour of the 
present-day educated people, I feel it was better that 
Easwaramma did not have any schooling. 


When I was seven and half years old, I used to 
teach Pandhari bhajans to small children in our village. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 145 


Easwaramma and Subbamma used to feel ecstatic 
watching Me sing Pandhari bhajans and dance to their 
rhythm. Sometimes, her husband Pedda Venkama Raju 
would give Easwaramma some money for the 
household expenditure. Once two annas were 
remaining with her out of this money. One could buy 
two bags of puffed rice for two annas those days. So, 
Easwaramma bought two bags of puffed rice with the 
two annas and distributed to the children. She always 
used to give away whatever she had with her. She was 
the embodiment of sacrifice. She used to talk lovingly 
to all those who came to her. When devotees would 
feel sad that Swami was ignoring them, she would 
console them saying, “Whatever Swami does is for 
your own good.” 


Easwaramma’s Kind-heartedness 


When I was being taken to Uravakonda for 
further education, all those children whom I used to 
teach many good things in the evening felt very 
dejected. At the time of leaving, ten of those children 
came to Me and offered one battu (three paise) each as 
Guru Dakshina (an offering of gratitude to the 
teacher). When I gave this money to Easwaramma, she 
was moved to tears. She held My hand and exclaimed, 
“What a spirit of sacrifice at such a tender age!” Till 
she breathed her last, she kept those coins with her. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 146 


Initially, I was staying in Subbamma’s house. 
But when the number of devotees increased, a new 
mandir was constructed. One day Easwaramma came 
in when I was having My food. When others tried to 
follow her, she told them not to come. She held both 
My hands and pleaded, “Swami, there is no hospital in 
our village. Consequently, when the children become 
sick, mothers are forced to carry them to Bukkapat- 
nam. I am unable to see their suffering. My children 
and others’ children are one and the same for me. So, 
kindly construct at least a small hospital in our 
village.” I promised her that I would fulfil her wish and 
accordingly I built a big hospital, which was inaugur- 
ated by the then Central Minister, Bejawada Gopala 
Reddy. Easwaramma’s joy knew no bounds. The 
whole day she did not feel the need for food and water 
as she felt highly contented and overjoyed. She caught 
hold of My hands and expressed her happiness as her 
wish was fulfilled in a big way. I told her, “Be happy.” 
After some time, she approached Swami again and 
wanted a school to be built in the village. As desired 
by her, I got a school constructed. Initially, it was a 
small one. Later on, I made it into a big building. She 
was very happy. She went to the school, kissed the 
children and showered her love on them. She was 
extremely happy and said, “In this Age of Kali, it is my 
good fortune to have a son like You, who has done 
whatever I wished.” 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 147 


Good Intentions Bring Good Results 


Then she wanted the village to be provided 
with drinking water. I promised that it would be done. 
I found that bore wells were being dug to overcome 
water scarcity. But they become useless within a short 
period of time. So, I got a big well dug in the Old 
Manidir. Yad Bhavam Tad Bhavati (as the feeling, so 
is the result). If the intention is good, the result also is 
bound to be good. As My intention was good, a 
copious spring of pure water gushed forth even at a 
depth of seven feet! At the back side of the Mandir, an 
entrance was provided for people to collect water. As 
you are aware, Swami has now provided drinking 
water from the river Tungabhadra to the entire district 
of Anantapur. Nearly 300 crore rupees were spent for 
this purpose. If the ministers, leaders and elders come 
together, they can undertake such public welfare 
schemes. But this requires concern about public 
welfare and spirit of sacrifice. 


Before Easwaramma passed away, I fulfilled 
all her three wishes. There is no fee whatsoever in our 
institutions. Education is offered totally free to one and 
all. Our hospitals are also free. Nowadays doctors 
charge at least two to three lakhs for a heart operation. 
No doubt doctors need money. But there should be a 
certain limit. It is very unfortunate that the Bharatiyvas 
are selling food, medical care and education. In fact, 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 148 


they are selling themselves! Bharat is a sacred land, a 
land of sacrifice and spirituality. It is being converted 
into a land of material pleasures. Spirit of sacrifice is 
very essential. Share whatever you have with others. A 
small amount of food is enough to satiate your hunger. 
Why crave for the entire river Ganga when a small 
glass of water is all that you need to quench your 
thirst? Do not harbour greed and other evil qualities 
lest you should suffer the same fate as that of 
Duryodhana and his tribe. Fill your heart with love. 


Follow The Culture Of Bharat 
Students! 


Talk softly and sweetly. You cannot always 
oblige, but you can speak always obligingly. You are 
all young. Make efforts to mould your future in the 
proper way. Develop the spirit of love and sacrifice. 
Share your love with your friends. For example, if you 
have two pens, give one to someone who needs it. If 
your parents raise an objection to this act of charity, 
convince them by saying, “What is the use of having 
an extra pen? It is better that it is given to somebody 
who needs it.” This will certainly make them happy. 
There is no wealth greater than love. Respect and 
revere your parents as God. Offer salutations to them 
when you wake up in the morning, before you go to 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 149 


school and when you go to bed at night. Never argue 
with them. Try to convince them with love. Remember 
that as you sow, so shall you reap. Whatever you do to 
your parents, your children will do the same to you. 
Never talk to them rudely. Be obedient. 


Modern education system imparts only bookish 
knowledge. It is making the students highly ignorant. 
They study by rote and reproduce the same in the 
examination. The very next day if you ask them the 
same questions, there will be no reply. More than 
education, culture is important. Indian culture is very 
sacred. Put it into practice in your daily life. Talk with 
humility even when you are talking over telephone. 
Learn to respect elders and treat the guests with love 
and humility. No benefit accrues from merely 
acquiring bookish knowledge. Adhere to the culture of 
Bharat and live in love. Only then will divinity 
manifest in you. 


6-5-2000, Brindavan 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 150 


Isavasyopanishad has declared _ that 
when every action is free from the sense 
of egotistic doership (Ahamkara) and 
all enjoyment is free from attachment 
or desire, there will be no difference 
between enjoyment and renunciation. 
Hence any enjoyment associated with 
ego and attachment will be enjoyment 
without sacrifice. When ego and attac- 
hment are absent, the actions are free 
from self-interest and hence are tant- 


amount to acts of sacrifice. 


—Baba 


10 


Real Name Of God Is Love 


It is the power of love that is responsible 

For the earth to rotate without a pivot. 

It is the power of love that makes the stars 

Stand across the sky without falling on the 
ground. 

It is the power of love that keeps the oceans 

Within their limits. 

It is the power of love that makes the wind 

Blow incessantly in all the worlds. 

That power of love is mysterious, infinite, 

Most wonderful and one without a second; 

It permeates the entire cosmos. 

The entire creation is saturated with love. 

(Telugu Poem) 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 152 


Embodiments of Love! 


GOD is love. Love is the form of God. The 
Bhagavadgita declares: Mamaivamso Jeevaloke Jeeva- 
bhuta Sanathana (the eternal Atma in all beings is a 
part of the Divine). Just as God, the embodiment of 
love, showers His love on the entire world, man too 
should share his love with one and all. The principle of 
love is beyond definition or description. As man is not 
able to recognise the sacredness of love, he is directing 
it towards worldly and ephemeral objects. 


God transcends all attributes. The same can be 
said of love too. But man conditions and limits love by 
associating it with worldly relations and wastes his life. 
He uses the sacred word love to describe the 
relationship between mother and child, wife and 
husband, brothers, friends and relatives, etc. Prior to 
birth, who is mother and who is child? Similarly, prior 
to marriage, who is husband and who is wife? The 
relationship that exists between mother and child, wife 
and husband, brothers, sisters, friends, relatives, etc., 
has physical body as its basis. This physical relation- 
ship cannot be called love in the true sense of the term. 
There is no giving and receiving in true love. Many 
modern devotees pray, “O God, if you fulfil my 
desires, I will offer you ten coconuts.” They offer their 
filthy hair and pray for mighty favours. Can this be 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 153 


called devotion? No, not at all. A true devotee is one 
who only gives and does not expect anything in return. 
Surrender is the true sign of devotion. 


World Is Combination Of Dharma And Adharma 


Human life is a combination of physical and 
spiritual aspects, which are related, respectively, to the 
head and the heart. But man follows the head and has 
only the physical world in view, thereby forgetting the 
spiritual aspect. So long as man follows his head alone, 
neither he nor the society nor the country at large can 
attain peace and security. Peace and security will reign 
supreme in this world only when man gives up body 
attachment and follows the principle of love that 
originates from his heart. The dualities of righteous- 
ness and unrighteousness, truth and falsehood, merit 
and sin, heat and cold, etc., co-exist in this creation of 
God. 


People want adharma (unrighteousness) to be 
eradicated completely from this world. They want only 
dharma to exist, but it is not possible. In this world, 
dharma cannot exist without adharma and viceversa. 
The world itself is a combination of dharma and 
adharma. It cannot exist if one of them is absent. Man 
should use his power of discrimination and lead a life 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 154 


dedicated to dharma. There lies the secret of man’s 
happiness. 


Follow Your Dharma 


Man’s dharma is different from the dharma of 
animals. But man is unable to differentiate between the 
two. Man’s dharma is to adhere to the principles of 
truth, non-violence and compassion. Man can never 
attain peace and security so long as he does not give up 
bestial qualities. Food, sleep, fear and procreation are 
common for men and animals. Then, what is man’s 
dharma? To think that you are a human being 
constitutes only half of the total truth. The other part of 
the truth lies in understanding that you are not an 
animal. You should keep reminding yourself, “I am a 
human being, not an animal.” Do not stop at this stage. 
Enquire further as to which sex you belong to and 
which stage of life you are in, whether you are a 
Brahmachari, Grihastha,Vanaprastha or Sanyasin 
(celibate, householder, recluse or renunciant). Follow 
the appropriate dharma according to the stage of your 
life. When you are a celibate, you should not follow 
the dharma of a householder. There will be decline in 
morals giving rise to troubles and turmoil when man 
fails to adhere to the dharma appropriate to his stage 
of life. Man today is unable to understand the principle 
of dharma corresponding to each of the four stages of 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 155 


life. The code of conduct is different for different 
stages of life. Never be under the mistaken notion that 
dharma is the same for all people irrespective of their 
stage of life. The cause of adharma today is that man 
is trying to follow dharma that is not appropriate to his 
age or stage of life. Each should strictly adhere to the 
dharma corresponding to his or her age and stage of 
life. 


All Belong To The Race Of Humanity 


Today people do not understand the signi- 
ficance of different faiths and different modes of 
worship that are prevalent in Bharat. They feel it is the 
existence of different castes, communities and reli- 
gions that is responsible for all the violence, unrest and 
conflicts in this country. Existence of different reli- 
gions has nothing to do with the violence and conflicts 
in this country. Absence of inner purity is responsible 
for all this. 


It is the mind of man which is responsible for 
conflicts and disturbances, not differences in religions 
and communities. It is a grave mistake to attribute 
unrest and disturbances in a country to the existence of 
different religions. For thousands of years, people in 
India have lived in unity and fraternity in spite of the 
existence of various religions and communities. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 156 


Religions are many, but goal is one, 
Jewels are many, but gold is one, 
Stars are many, but sky is one, 

Cows are many, but milk is one, 
Beings are many, but breath is one, 
Nations are many, but earth is one, 
Flowers are many, but worship is one. 


Different religions have come into existence to 
lead man to Divinity, not to create conflicts and 
disturbances. There is nothing wrong with any religion. 
Mistake lies in mathi (mind), not in matha (religion). If 
mind is good, how can one find fault with religion? All 
people belong to one jathi (race), i.e., manava jathi 
(human race). You should understand the meaning of 
Jathi. It is based on form. 


Human Race Is One, But Human Beings Are 
Different 


For example, all flowers belong to the same 
jathi, but you cannot get mangoes when you sow a 
neem seed. No doubt, all trees belong to the same jathi, 
but their fruits and tastes of their fruits vary. There are 
in all 450 kinds of tastes corresponding to the fruits of 
various trees. You should try to understand the 
underlying principle of unity of each jathi. Human 
race is one, but human beings are different; their 
feelings, thoughts and behaviour patterns are different. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 157 


It is utter foolishness to think of annihilating the jathi 
as a whole. It may be possible to kill a few individuals, 
but it is not possible to annihilate the entire human 
race. Human race is true and eternal. It is highly 
sacred. It is a sign of ignorance to give room for 
differences and conflicts without understanding the 
unity of the human race. You have to recognise the 
divinity in man as the basis of human unity. The 
ancient culture of Bharat lays great emphasis on 
understanding this unity in diversity. This is possible 
only through love. 


Love is God. God is love. 
Cultivating love is the true spiritual practice. 
If one holds on to the principle of love firmly, 
One becomes eligible to attain 
The state of non-dualism 
(Telugu Poem) 


Love Is Your True Form 


The state of non-dualism is contained in the 
principle of love alone. But man, being carried away 
by body attachment and physical relationship, 
fragments his love in various ways. This cannot be 
called love in the true sense of the term. As Swami 
repeatedly stresses on the need to cultivate love, some 
people may wonder as to what is the form of love. The 
answer is: Prem Easwar Hai, Easwar Prem Hai (Love 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 158 


is God, God is Love). Love is the fundamental basis of 
everything. atma, Brahma, hridaya, uniki (existence) 
are synonyms of love. Love is atma. Love is Brahma. 
Everything is suffused with love. Then how can 
everyone describe the form of love? The same 
principle of love exists in one and all. Once you 
understand this principle of unity, there will be no 
scope for hatred . 


Today conflicts are on the rise because unity is 
forgotten. Ekatma sarvabhutantaratma (bodies are 
different, but the same atma dwells in all). Advaitam 
Brahma (Brahma is non-dual). Brahma means 
vastness. It indicates unity and not multiplicity. So, 
give up body attachment and strengthen faith in the 
spirit of oneness. It is only the body attachment that is 
responsible for evil qualities like anger, jealousy, 
greed, etc. Some people go to the temple of Lord 
Venkateswara and pray, “Swami, if You fulfil my 
desires, I will perform Brahmotsavam for You.” Some 
others pray, “Swami,if my daughters gets married, I 
will conduct Your Kalyanam” (marriage). Can there 
be a marriage for God? Does God fulfil your wish so 
that you may perform His marriage? With such 
prayers, people are trying to cheat even God. One 
should pray to God out of love, not with expectation of 
any favours from Him. Prayer born out of selfishness 
is no prayer at all. You should see the atma everywhere 
and think that you are in the company of God always. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 159 


Confidence Is The Basis Of Love 
Embodiments of Love! 


I often address you as ‘embodiments of love’ 
because love is your true form, which is pure, 
unsullied, eternal, ancient, formless and non-dual. You 
love your mother because you have the confidence that 
she is your mother. So, confidence is the basis of love. 


Where there is confidence, there is love, 
Where there is love, there is peace, 
Where there is peace, there is truth, 
Where there is truth, there is bliss, 
Where there is bliss, there is God. 


Peace, truth and bliss are not elsewhere. They 
are in you. You are the embodiment of peace, truth and 
bliss. It is foolish to search for peace and bliss in the 
external world. Nothing exists separate from you. 
Everything is the reflection of the inner being. Try to 
visualize your reflection in everybody just as you see 
your reflection in a mirror. In order to propagate this 
truth, Lord Krishna declared in the Bhagavadgita: “All 
are a part of My Being.” I and you are not separate. 
The principle of love is one and the same in both of us. 
All your spiritual practices will prove futile, if you do 
not adhere to the principle of love. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 160 


The world is like a mirror. All that you find in 
this mirror is only the reflection, not the reality. Your 
right eye appears as left eye in the mirror. Then how 
can you consider it as reality? When the mirror is 
removed, the reflection also disappears and the reality 
remains. Consider yourself as embodiment of divinity. 
Experience your true nature of love. This is 
sakshatkara (vision of the Self). Some people claim to 
have the vision of the Self in meditation, but the 
vision of your reality is true sakshatkara. 


All the worldly relationships are temporary like 
passing clouds. They are subject to change with the 
passage of time, but the reality is absolutely 
changeless. That is the principle of love. Worldly love 
may turn into hatred with the change of time. What is 
liked today may not be liked tomorrow. But love has 
no likes and dislikes. God is no different from love. 
You may adore Him as Jesus, Zoroastra, Allah, Rama, 
Krishna, Buddha or Guru Nanak. You may call Him by 
any name. All these are pettina perlu (names given by 
somebody). Love alone is puttina peru (natural name). 
The names given are bound to change, but love is 
changeless. You should aspire for that love. That is 
true bhakti (devotion). bhakti confers on you yukti 
(discrimination), virakti (detachment) and mukti 
(liberation). 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 161 


Consider The Entire Universe As A Single Family 


Lord Krishna was the embodiment of love. His 
name consists of five letters—K, R, S, N, A, which 
represent pancha bhutas (five elements), pancha 
pranas (five life forces), pancha koshas (five life 
sheaths). Krishna is interpreted as Karshati Iti Krishna 
(because he attracts, he is Krishna), Krishiti Iti Krishna 
(Krishna is the plougher). That is, Krishna is one who 
ploughs the field of your heart and sows the seed of 
love in it. Krushyati Iti Krishna (because he imparts 
bliss, he is called Krishna), Thus divinity of Krishna 
can be perceived in every place and activity. 


In this world, everything is suffused with 
divinity. Other than divinity nothing exists. Even this 
cloth (handkerchief) is divine, this flower is divine, 
everything is divine. If there is no divinity in this cloth, 
one will not desire for it. Love pervades everything. 
You should make every effort to understand this. 
Human heart is full of love. Many students write to 
Me, “Swami, I love You.” They use the symbol of 
hridaya to denote love. This means hridaya is that 
which is filled with love and compassion. hridaya 1s 
the very form of God. Easwara Sarva Bhutanam (God 
dwells in all beings). /savasyam Idam Jagat (God 
permeates the entire universe). Sarvam Khalvidam 
Brahma (verily all this is Brahman). Share your love 
not only with your fellow beings, but also with birds 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 162 


and beasts. Stand united. Consider the entire universe 
as a single family. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Today you find disturbance and unrest all over 
the world. The reason is that man lacks broad- 
mindedness. There is no expansion of love in him, 
there is only contraction of love. Narrow-mindedness 
is man’s own creation. You are trying to limit the 
infinite atmic principle. 


Guru Dispels The Darkness Of Ignorance 
Embodiments of Love! 


Today we are celebrating the festival of Guru 
Purnima. Who is Guru? ‘Gu’ stands for Gunateeta 
(attributeless). ‘Ru’ signifies Rupavarjita (formless). 
There is another interpretation of the word Guru. 
Gukaro Andhakarasyat, Rukarasthannirodhaka (“Gw 
signifies darkness and ‘Ru’ denotes that which dispels 
darkness). So, God, who is attributeless and formless, 
is the true Guru. In the word ‘Bhagawan,’ (God) the 
letter ‘Bha’ stands for effulgence. An ordinary electric 
bulb illuminates only a limited area, but God who is 
all-pervasive illumines the entire creation. Divinity 
shines in everybody. So, do not hate anybody. In this 
world, people are driven by hatred and narrow feelings. 
They go even to the extent of killing each other. What 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 163 


a heinous crime it is! Hurting others amounts to 
hurting God Himself. Our hatred will certainly 
rebound on us. Today people derive demonic pleasure 
in causing harm to others without understanding the 
truth that one day or the other they will have to reap 
the consequences of their actions. Make others happy 
and you will certainly be happy. Today violence and 
murders have become the order of the day. Greatness 
does not lie in killing others; even an insect is capable 
of doing that. Greatness lies in saving lives. 


Embodiments of Love! 


You are bound to face the consequences of 
your actions. So, do good and you will certainly reap 
good results. Do not get disheartened if there is no 
immediate reward. Wait for a while, you will certainly 
be rewarded. Your suffering is nothing but the con- 
sequence of bad deeds in the past. Prayer alone can 
alleviate your suffering to some extent. Prayer is a way 
of expressing your gratitude to God. The sun is 
extolled as Kritaghnaghnaya Namah, (salutations to 
the destroyer of the ungrateful). It means that it will 
withdraw itself from the eyes of those who have no 
sense of gratitude. 


The Quality Of Kshama 


As Venkataraman has pointed out (in his 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 164 


speech made earlier), the quality of Kshama 
(forbearance) is the most essential for one and all. 


Forbearance is truth, forbearance is 
righteousness, 

Forbearance is non-violence, 

Forbearance is the teaching of the Vedas, 

Forbearance confers happiness and 
heavenly bliss. 


(Telugu Poem) 


Forgive those who have harmed you and 
criticized you. Have faith that whatever happens is for 
your own good. If someone hurls abuses on you, do 
not retaliate. Enquire within yourself whether he has 
criticized the body or the atma.If he has criticized the 
body, indirectly he has done a favour to you because 
body is nothing but a heap of flesh, blood, bones and 
faecal matter. On the other hand if he has criticized the 
atma, it amounts to criticizing his own self because the 
same atma exists in both of you. One should cultivate 
this kind of forgiveness and broad-mindedness. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Guru is one who dispels the darkness of 
ignorance arising out of body attachment. Body is but 
an instrument. God has given you the body to take to 
the path of action. It is God’s gift. Deho Devalaya 
Prokto Jeevo Deva Sanathana (body is the temple and 
the indweller is God). Consider all bodies as temples 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 165 


of God and offer your salutations. Salute even your 
enemies.Sarva Jeeva Namaskaram Kesavam 
Pratigachchhati and likewise Sarva Jeeva Tiraskaram 
Kesavam Pratigachchhati (whomsoever you salute, it 
reaches God and whomsoever you censure, it also 
reaches God). 


Understand The Principle Of Unity 


I often address you as bangaru (gold) because 
you are the embodiment of Hiranyagarbha. The 
principle of hiranyagarbha is present in your heart. 
You may change the shape of the jewel, but gold 
remains changeless. The value of gold decreases when 
it is mixed with various metals like copper, brass, etc. 


Likewise, man by birth is highly pure and most 
valuable. But on account of his association with evil 
desires and bad company, he loses his value. 


Thyaja Durjana Samsargam, 
Bhaja Sadhu Samagamam, 
Kuru Punyam Ahorathram, 
Smara Nityamanithyatham. 


(Discard bad company, join good company, 
perform meritorious deeds day and night and enquire 
into that which is permanent and that which is 
ephemeral). This is your dharma. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 166 


Consider All That You See As The Form Of God 
Embodiments of Love! 


It is said, Janthunam Narajanma Durlabham 
(birth as human being is the rarest of all beings). So, 
sanctify your life by making proper use of your senses. 
Do not talk as you please. Talk softly and sweetly. 
Have proper control over your vision. You all know 
what happened to Keechaka when he looked at 
Droupadi with evil intentions. Bhima smashed his head 
into pieces. That is why Buddha exhorted mankind to 
cultivate samyak drishti (sacred vision). Buddha 
attained enlightenment only after he cultivated sacred 
vision. Consider all that you see as the form of God. 
Think what is good, see what is good, hear what is 
good, talk what is good and do what is good. Only then 
can you attain divinity. 


Embodiments of Love! 


This body is approaching its 75" birthday. All 
these years, I have remained blissful because I am 
aware of the principle of unity. You too can experience 
bliss if you understand this truth. I do not hate 
anybody; nor do I have any enemies. I have absolutely 
no fear because everything is My own form; the same 
atma exists in all. When an innocent child smiles at 
you, you too smile at it. Likewise, when I smile 
blissfully, all of you do the same. Have a sacred heart. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 167 


Cultivate sacred feelings. Then the result also will be 
sacred. Have faith that God is everywhere. You may 
have to undergo trials and tribulations, but never lose 
faith in God. Consider faith as your very life-breath. 
Each one of you is an embodiment of love, but because 
of improper food and habits, evil qualities like jealousy 
and anger arise in you. As is the food, so is the head; as 
is the head, so is God. So, consume only sathwic food. 
Then you will have only sacred feelings and your 
speech will also become sacred. 


Do Not Become A Buffalo 


In order to put you on the right path, I 
sometimes pretend to be angry, but in reality I am 
never angry. The only harsh word that I use is 
dunnapota (he-buffalo). You are truly a buffalo if you 
do not undertake good actions. You can become a 
good fellow only when you do good. When there is a 
heavy downpour, the cow and calf may run away to 
safety, but the he-buffalo remains where it is because 
of its sloth and inertia. You should not become inactive 
like a he-buffalo; try to transform yourself. Human life 
is highly sacred. Do not put it to disuse. I love 
everybody. Love is My true form. All of you are the 
sparks of My Divinity. So, share your love with your 
fellow beings, just as I share My love with you all. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 168 


Then you too will become divine. When all follow the 
sacred path, the world will undoubtedly attain peace 
and prosperity. 

Embodiments of Love! 


Give up ignorance, light the lamp of wisdom 
within you and ultimately merge with the divine. This 
is Swami’s message for you today. Develop love. 
Through love alone can you annihilate the mind and 
through love alone can you get cured of any disease. 
Only love can eradicate the evil qualities in you. So, 
love all. Love the hridaya, not the physical body. Love 
the divinity that is installed in your heart. Body, mind, 
intellect and senses are merely instruments, you are the 
master. So, master the mind and be a mastermind. 
Never become a slave of your mind. Contemplate on 
the divine day in and day out. You may chant any 
name, contemplate on any form; but understand the 


truth that God is one and only one. 


Guru Purnima, 16-07-2000, Prasanthi Nilayam 


11 


Women Are The Embodiments Of 
Nobility And Virtue 


This land of Bharat has given birth to 
many noble women like Savitri, 
Who brought her dead husband back to life; 
Chandramati, who extinguished wild fire 
with the power of truth; 
Sita, who proved her chastity 
by coming out of blazing fire unscathed 
and Damayanthi, who reduced an evil- 
minded hunter 
to ashes with the power of her chastity. 
It is because of such women of character 
that Bharat has attained the reputation of 
Being the land of plenty, prosperity and 
opulence. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 170 


Among the Vratas (sacred vows) of Bharat, 
the Varalakshmi Vrata has supreme 
significance. 


(Telugu Poem) 


Embodiments of Love! 


SINCE time immemorial, the sacred land of 
Bharat has been enjoying peace and prosperity because 
of men and women of character. Bharat has always 
accorded an exalted position to the mother. The 
purohit (chief priest) made a mention of this in the 
morning during the course of Varalakshmi vrata. 


Glory Of Indian Womanhood 


Legend has it that Parvati once asked Easwara 
if there was any way to ensure auspiciousness, 
prosperity and well-being of the women. She desired 
that every woman should lead a long, happy and 
healthy life with her husband, children, grandchildren, 
friends and relatives. Easwara was pleased with 
Parvati’s prayer and told her about the Varalakshmi 
vrata, which would confer all a woman may ask for. 


The particular vrata is a boon for all women. 
Women always strive hard for the welfare of their 
family. They always aspire for samata, samagrata, 
samaikyata and sowbhratrutwa (equality, integrity, 
unity and fraternity). Their speech is truthful, their 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 171 


hearts are full of peace and their actions are righteous. 
Women, being the recipients of eight forms of wealth, 
confer prosperity and auspiciousness on the family, 
society and the world at large. 


You might have heard the story of Savitri, 
who, with the power of her character, overcame many 
obstacles to bring her dead husband back to life. Even 
in this Age of Kali, it is the prayer of wives that 
protects their husbands in times of danger. Many 
women in the past performed Varalakshmi vrata with 
devotion and sincerity and became the recipients of the 
grace of goddess Lakshmi (consort of Vishnu and 
goddess of wealth). 


Sita came out of blazing fire unscathed when 
she was asked by Rama to undergo agni pareeksha 
(the test of fire) to prove her chastity as Ravana had 
held her captive for ten months in Lanka. Though 
Rama, being omniscient, had no doubt regarding Sita’s 
chastity, he did so only in order to dispel doubts from 
the minds of people. Evil-minded people are like 
crows; they are full of doubts and pre-conceived 
notions. But will the cuckoo stop singing just because 
the crows are cawing? Likewise, the women of nobility 
and character are least perturbed by the criticism of the 
evil-minded people. They do not give scope for any 
doubts. Their pure heart is their witness and their 
sacred feelings are their dharma. They follow their 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 172 


conscience and adhere to truth and righteousness. This 
is the teaching of the culture of Bharat: Sathyam Vada, 
Dharmam_ Chara (speak the truth and follow 
righteousness). 


The Story Of Anasuya And Sumati 


You all know the story of Anasuya (wife of 
sage Atri). She was put to test by God Himself. The 
Trinity of Brahma, Vishnu and Maheswara went to her 
in disguise and begged, Bhavati Bhiksham Dehi 
(mother, give us alms). When she was about to serve 
them food, they said that they would accept it only if 
she served them without wearing any clothes. 
Immediately, she transformed them into three infants 
and fed them as per their wish. She could transform 
even Brahma, Vishnu and Maheswara into small 
babies and play with them only because of her purity 
of heart and the power of chastity. Ultimately, 
Saraswati, Lakshmi and Parvati, the wives of the 
Trinity, begged her that their husbands may be 
returned to them. Anasuya, being one of compassion, 
yielded to their request. The Trinity blessed sage Atri 
and Anasuya, saying that they would be born to them 
in the form of Dattatreya. The name Dattatreya 
signifies one who is adopted by sage Atri. 


Sumati was also a woman of chastity. She was 
pure-hearted and totally selfless. One day, a sage 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 173 


cursed her husband that he would die immediately 
after sunrise on the next day. She prayed to God with 
all sincerity and purity. It is only prayer that can atone 
man’s sins and save him from curse. Sumati prayed, 
“If my thoughts are pure and truthful, let there not be 
sunrise at all.” As a result, there was no sunrise and the 
entire world was engulfed in darkness. That is the 
power of women of chastity. All the gods and sages 
approached Sumati and prayed, “Mother, is it proper 
on your part to plunge the entire world into darkness 
for the sake of your husband?” Sumati replied, 
“Without my husband, the world has no value for me.” 
Only when the gods and sages assured her of the safety 
of her husband, did she allow the sun to rise. Thus, 
since ancient times, women of Bharat led an ideal life 
and proved to the world the power of chastity. Not 
only in the bygone ages, even in this Age of Kali, there 
are many women who are leading exemplary lives. 


Vratas Are Givers Of Boons 


Since ancient times, the women of Bharat have 
upheld the dignity and honour of the family and the 
community at large. The worship of goddess Vara- 
lakshmi earned them her grace and they could 
accomplish all this. Varalakshmi is one who grants all 
the boons that women pray for. She confers on women 
all the eight types of wealth. Noble women like Savitri, 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 174 


Damayanti, Chandramati and Sumati accomplished 
mighty tasks only due to the grace of Varalakshmi. 
Worship of Varalakshmi confers wealth, prosperity 
and bliss. But due to the effect of modern age, people 
do not adhere to such sacred practices. That is why 
their houses lack purity and sacredness. In Bharat, 
there is a proverb: “You can judge a housewife by 
looking at the house.” In those days, housewife was 
considered to be grihalakshmi (goddess of the home) 
who kept her house sacred and unpolluted. It reflected 
her own purity. 


Fill Your Heart With Love 


Today, the food you eat, the water you drink 
and the air you inhale are all polluted. Man himself has 
become highly polluted as he has filled his mind with 
negative feelings, which are nothing but worldly 
desires. No doubt, one can have desires, but they 
should be under certain limits. The letters that you 
write will appear blue when the pen is filled with blue 
ink and red when it is filled with red ink. Likewise, all 
that you see, hear and say will become negative when 
your heart is filled with negative feelings. So, first of 
all fill your heart with love. Then all that you see, hear, 
say and do will be suffused with love. Sarvam Prema 
Mayam Jagat (the whole world is permeated with 
love). So, you will find love everywhere. Yad Bhavam 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 (ES) 


Tad Bhavati (as is the feeling, so is the result). Today 
human heart has become a den of evil qualities like 
anger, hatred, greed, jealousy, pomp and show. Love 
alone can drive away these negative qualities. Desire, 
anger, greed, jealousy, etc., arise out of body 
attachment and improper food habits. So, one has to 
put a check over body attachment and control desires. 
It is said, less luggage more comfort make travel a 
pleasure. In order to have a comfortable journey of life, 
reduce the luggage of desires. One can have body 
attachment to some extent because the journey of life 
is undertaken with the help of the body. When one is 
living with family and friends, it is not possible to give 
up body attachment altogether.But one should lead a 
sacred life with the noble feelings of Loka Samasta 
Sukhino Bhavantu (may the entire world be happy!). 


All the powers that you find in the external 
world are present in man. The human body itself is a 
generator of electricity. The human mind can be 
compared to television and the heart to a radio. When a 
particular programme is broadcast on Delhi Radio 
Station, you are able to hear it at the same time by 
tuning your radio to the appraopriate frequency. Today 
we have radios, but in those days, people considered 
their hearts as radios. So, make your hearts pure and 
sacred. All that you see in the external world can be 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 176 


visualized on the screen of your mind. So, the mind 
itself is a television. All the powers are latent in man. 
All that you see outside is nothing but the reflection 
and resound. When you criticize or abuse someone, it 
means you are seeing the reflection of your own bad 
feelings in him. Good and bad arise from within, they 
are not outside. 


God Is Present In The Entire Creation 


You can see your reflection in the mirrior only 
when its rear is coated with a chemical. Your heart can 
be compared to a mirror. It should be coated with the 
chemical of love. Only then can you see your true self 
in it. Vedanta declares, Raso Vai Saha (He is 
sweetness Itself). Here is an example: When sugar and 
water are mixed, it becomes syrup. The sugar and 
water become inseparable. Just as sugar is present in 
every drop of the syrup, God is present in the entire 
creation. Easwara revealed the secret of Varalakshmi 
vrata to Parvati in order to bestow peace and 
prosperity on all women. Performance of this vrata is 
easy, though it has a potency of giving great boons. 
You are all very fortunate to have performed it in a 
sacred place sanctified by the presence of Divinity. 
These practices have the desired effect if you do them 
in the prescribed manner with purity of heart. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 bey 


Betel leaf alone cannot make a pan. It has to be 
mixed with an appropriate quantity of betel nut and 
lime before it becomes a pan. Betel leaf is green in 
colour, betel nut is brown and lime is white. When 
mixed together in appropriate proportion, they form 
red colour. Lime adds taste to the pan, but when used 
in excess, it will burn the tongue. That is why it is said, 
Na Sreyo Niyamam Vina (no good accrues without the 
observance of rules). 


Do Not Indulge In Vain Gossip 


The normal temperature of the body is 98.4° F. 
Fever sets in when the temperature crosses this limit. 
Likewise, the normal blood pressure of man is 120/80. 
When it shoots up to, say, 150/90, it becomes harmful. 
Likewise, everything should be under certain limit. 
Your speech and actions should also be within certain 
limits. Act as per your capacity. Before undertaking 
any activity, enquire, where, when and how it has to be 
done. If you do not adhere to such discipline, you will 
be inviting trouble. 


All the spiritual practices will yield good 
results only when they are performed with purity of 
heart and steady mind. If you have the grace of God, 
there is nothing that you cannot accomplish in this 
world. When God can bring the dead back to life, can 
there be anything impossible for Him? He can change 
sky into earth and earth into sky, but you should pray 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 178 


with purity of heart to attain His grace. Do not indulge 
in vain gossip. How can you expect God to fulfil your 
wishes if you talk ill of others? 


Dharma Forms The Basis Of The World 


Embodiments of Love! 


Our ancients performed these vratas with 
sacred feelings. But today people have lost faith in 
such sacred practices. They have faith in things which 
are transient and ephemeral. First of all, man should 
transform his heart. He should have the firm faith that 
God is hridayavasi (indweller of the heart). Deho 
Devalaya Prokto, Jeevo Deva Sanathana (body is the 
temple and the indweler is God). Respect and revere all 
bodies as temples of God. Then the world will be free 
from all conflicts. Today, as selfishness and self- 
interest are on the rise, the world is gripped in troubles 
and turmoil. In order to get rid of conflicts man should 
cultivate moral values, undertake righteous actions and 
love everybody. 


Human life is a combination of morality, 
spirituality and righteousness. Today, the whole world 
is centred around money. I often tell you, money 
comes and goes, but morality comes and grows. 
Money is like a passing cloud. No doubt money is 
required for your livelihood in this world. But it is not 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 179 


the be - all and end - all of life. Earlier people believed 
Dharma Moolam Idam Jagat (dharma forms the basis 
of the world). Now people consider Dhana Moolam 
Idam Jagat (wealth forms the basis of the world). 
Understand that dharma alone will confer peace and 
bliss on you. dharma alone will protect you. 


During the course of the Kurukshetra War, 
Bhishma was the commander-in-chief of the Kaurava 
army. One day, Duryodhana and Dussasana confronted 
him and said, “O grandsire, you seem to be very inac- 
tive these days. As a result, our enemies are growing 
from strength to strength. It is time that you shed your 
slackness and show your prowess.” Provoked in this 
manner by Duryodhana and Dussasana, Bhishma 
declared that he would kill all the Pandavas before 
sunset, the next day. Droupadi,who had five husbands, 
could be called a pathivrata (one of chastity). Who are 
the five husbands? They do not represent physical 
bodies. Here five husbands sym-bolize five elements 
and five life principles. Droupadi fell at Krishna’s feet 
and prayed that He should protect the Pandavas. Krish- 
na said, ”Follow My command, I shall certainly pro- 
tect your husbands.” Droupadi said, “Krishna, who can 
I follow other than You? You are our everything.” 


It was night-time. As the war was over for the 
day, all were taking rest in their respective tents. 
Bhishma was feeling very depressed. “I have vowed 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 180 


that I would kill the Pandavas tomorrow. But how am I 
to kill them who are noble and virtuous and whom I 
have brought up with my own hands all these years? It 
is the food of the Kauravas that has spoiled my head 
(mind).” Thinking thus, Bhishma was pacing up and 
down in his tent. Krishna sensed Bhishma’s predi- 
cament. He always planned according to time, place 
and situation. His was the master-plan. He told Drou- 
padi to follow him. 


Since there was no electricity in those days, 
there were only oil lamps burning in each tent. After 
walking a certain distance, Krishna asked her to put off 
her sandals as they were making noise. Droupadi 
implicitly obeyed Krishna’s command. Krishna imme- 
diately wrapped her sandals in his shawl and carried 
them with him. Once they reached Bhishma’s tent, He 
told Droupadi to hurry up and fall at Bhishma’s feet at 
once. Droupadi did accordingly. Hearing the jingling 
sound of bangles, Bhishma thought it was a married 
woman and as was his wont, he blessed her saying, 
Deergha Sumangali Bhava (may you and your hus- 
band live long). After uttering this blessing, Bhishma 
noticed to his great surprise that it was Droupadi 
whose husbands he had vowed to kill the following 
day. In the meantime, Krishna entered the scene. 
Bhishma realized that it was Krishna’s master-plan. He 
extolled Krishna saying, *O Lord, none can describe 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 181 


Your Leelas (divine play). They are most wonderful 
and most sacred in all the three worlds.” 


Krishna told Bhishma that he had come to 
Droupadi’s rescue as she was highly virtuous. What 
was the secret of Droupadi’s greatness? 


Droupadi was always contented with what 
she had. 

She was always obedient to her husbands 
and would always find time to serve them. 

There is no woman greater than Droupadi. 


(Telugu Poem) 


Today people are conferred various titles like 
Padmashri, Padma Vibhushan, etc. But the titles con- 
ferred on women such as Grihalakshmi, Illalu, Dharm- 
apathni, Ardhangini, etc., are very high and sacred. 
How can women with such exalted titles to their credit 
be inferior to men? But, unfortunately, today due to the 
effect of Kali Age, men look down upon women and 
treat them as mere servants. This is a big mistake. The 
more you respect women, the more you will be 
respected. 


Destructive Power Of Anger 


You should see to it that women do not shed 
tears. Otherwise, the family will face hardships. A 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 182 


thorn can be removed from the foot, but a harsh word, 
which has wounded the heart, cannot be taken back. 
So, never use harsh words. Talk sweetly and softly. 
The husband has the right to point out the mistakes of 
his wife, but he has no right to use harsh words and 
hurt her feelings. You cannot always oblige, but you 
can speak always obligingly. The family will attain 
peace and prosperity once you observe these 
principles. Usually, the element of anger is more in 
men than in women. If you get angry once, the energy 
gained by you from the food consumed over three 
months will be destroyed. Not merely that, it also boils 
your blood which will take nearly three months to cool 
down. Such being the case, imagine what would be 
your fate if you lose your temper time and again. 


God Always Does Only Good 


The story of Jarasandha bears ample testimony 
to this. Many a time, Krishna challenged him for a 
battle. However, when Jarasandha would come with 
fierce anger, Krishna would run away from the 
battlefield. Seeing this happen time and again, Krishna 
was asked the reason for His strange behaviour. Then 
Krishna replied, ’Don’t be under the mistaken notion 
that I am running away from the battlefield out of fear. 
I can kill him in no time, but this is not the right time 
to kill him. By arousing his anger time and again, I am 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 183 


draining out all his strength.” Gradually, Jarasandha 
lost all his strength and ultimately met his doom. 
Krishna never considered it an insult to run away from 
the battlefield because he was acting according to his 
own master-plan. He adopted this method of conquer- 
ing his enemy to teach an important lesson. All the 
plans of God are meant only for the welfare of others. 
He does not do anything for himself. God always does 
only good, which may appear to be bad to some 
people. Mistake lies in their vision, not in God’s 
creation. Whatever God does, it is always meant to 
help you and develop your sacredness. 


Mother’s Love Defies All Description 


Easwara revealed the sacred Varalakshmi vrata 
to Parvati, so that the future generations might perform 
this vrata and derive the benefits therefrom. The 
purohit (chief priest) has enumerated the benefits that 
this vrata confers. When a woman performs the 
Varalakshmi vrata, she gets the blessings that she may 
live long with plenty and prosperity as sumangali ( a 
woman whose husband is alive) with her children and 
grandchildren. Varalakshmi protects seven past 
generations and seven future generations. Noble 
women like Savitri and Anasuya enjoyed peace and 
prosperity by performing this sacred vrata. The 
purpose of Varalakshmi vrata is to atone your sins, 
develop sacredness and ultimately lead you to divinity. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 184 


The culture of Bharat considers the word matha 
(mother) as most sacred. In times of suffering,one 
naturally calls out ‘amma’ (mother), not ‘appa’ 
(father). The word amma is most soothing and gentle. It 
bestows immense strength. The first word that a child 
utters 1s amma or ma. That is why the culture of Bharat 
has accorded highest place to the mother ahead of 
father, teacher and God. None loves you as much as 
your mother does. Mother’s love defies all description. 
Varalakshmi is extolled as Lokamatha (Divine Mother 
of the world). All are her children. That is why the 
Vedas address human beings as Amrutasya Putrah 
(sons of immortality). 


Students! 


When you lose the love and affection of your 
mother, your life will lose its direction like a 
rudderless boat. Mother is the source of all your 
strength. So, respect your mother and obey her 
command. If your mother is happy with you, the whole 
world will be happy with you. If the mother is not 
pleased with you, you will become cheap in the eyes of 
the world. Do not be proud of your youth, beauty and 
physical power. Realise that very soon you will have to 
pass through old age. If you neglect your parents now, 
your children will neglect you. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 185 


Women Are Endowed With More Powers 


Varalakshmi vrata is performed by women. 
But men should not discourage them from performing 
this sacred vrata. They should provide all the 
necessary support. Its performance is beneficial not 
only to women, but also to men as women pray for the 
well-being and long life of their husbands. Men should 
not behave in an arrogant way towards women 
thinking themselves to be more strong and powerful. 
Truly speaking, women are more powerful than men. 
The scriptures declare that men have only three 
powers, whereas women have five. Women are ready 
to sacrifice even their life for the sake of their 
husbands. Savitri was ready to give up her life for the 
sake of her husband. But do we find such spirit of 
sacrifice in men? If one’s wife dies, he is ready to 
marry again. But women are not like that. They are the 
repositories of the five virtues of respect, dignity, 
sacrifice, contentment and prosperity. On the other 
hand, men are prone to evils of anger, stubbornness 
and foolishness. Women are the embodiment of virtue 
and nobility. 


Names of the Divine couples like Lakshmi 
Narayana, Radha Krishna and Parvati Parameswara 
indicate that women are given place of priority over 
men. That is why even in invitation cards, people write 
Srimati and Sri (Mrs. and Mr.) and not the other way 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 186 


round. Prakriti symbolizes feminine aspect of God. 
Prakriti and Purusha are inseparable. As the women 
are the embodiments of Lakshmi (goddess of wealth), 
the world will attain prosperity only when they are 
respected. Therefore, men must treat women with 
respect, so that they will be respected in turn. You can 
see it yourself, where there are women of character, 
there you find all prosperity. You all know that many 
countries suffered destruction during the two world 
wars. It is entirely due to the presence of virtuous 
women that Bharat remained safe and secure. Bharat 
owes its greatness and glory to its women. So respect 
women and make them happy. 


11-08-2000, Prasanthi Nilayam 


12 


Flowers That Never Fade 


Eight are the flowers that please the Lord, 


Offer Him the flowers of non-violence and 
sense-control, 


Compassion on all creatures, forbearance and 
peace 


Penance, meditation and truth above all 
These are the flowers dear to the Lord. 


(Sanskrit Verse) 


Embodiments of Love! 


GOD does not expect you to perform rituals 
nor does He want you to study the scriptures. All that 
He desires from you is eight types of ‘flowers’. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 188 


The flower of ahimsa (non-violence) is the first 
of the eight flowers that one should offer to God. Non- 
violence means not causing harm to any living creature 
by thought, word and deed. We find doctors 
performing surgeries on patients to cure them of their 
ailments. In the process of surgery, the doctors cut the 
body with a knife. You cannot call it an act of violence 
because it is beneficial to the patient. Some people 
may argue that even cutting the vegetables is an act of 
violence because the vegetables and trees have life in 
them. No doubt, vegetables and trees have life, but 
they do not have the mind. Consequently, they do not 
suffer any pain. Only man has got five sheaths, 
namely, food sheath, life sheath, mind sheath, wisdom 
sheath and bliss sheath. One with the mind experiences 
pain and pleasure. Men, animals, birds and insects are 
endowed with the mind, not the trees and vegetables. 
In some trees, you find the sap oozing out when you 
pluck their fruit. Oozing of sap from a tree is a natural 
phenomenon, but some people mistake it for the tears 
of suffering. The trees do not suffer any pain because 
they do not have the faculty of mind. 


Control Over The Tongue 


The second is the flower of indriya nigraha 
(sense control). All spiritual practices will prove futile 
if one lacks sense control. Control of the senses is very 
essential for one and all. Lack of sense control is the 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 189 


main cause of all the unrest and agitation that you find 
in the world today. How can one control the senses? 
First of all, one should exercise control over the 
tongue. 


Oh tongue, ever sensitive to sweetness, 
I tell you truly that which is sweet and 
yet yields perfect health... 

All this is contained in the sweet words- 
Govinda, Damodara, Madhava. 


(Sanskrit Sloka) 


You must control your tongue as it always 
craves for a variety of delicacies. You must ask this 
question, “O tongue, how many bags of rice, wheat 
and vegetables have you devoured! How many 
delicacies have you consumed! Fie on you if you are 
still not satisfied.” Bhikshannam Deharakshartham (a 
morsel of food is enough to sustain the body). You 
should eat for the sake of satisfying your hunger and 
sustaining the body. Do not give undue importance to 
taste. Likewise, tell your eyes to see God instead of 
watching unsacred things on the television or video. 
Teach your ears to listen to the stories of the Lord 
instead of listening to vain gossip. 


O ears, you are interested in listening 
to vain gossip and tales about others, 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 190 


but you pay least attention when the 
wonderful stories of the Lord are narrated. 


(Telugu Song) 


Think for a while, how you are benefited by 
listening to unsacred things. In fact, you are polluting 
your heart in the process. All that you see and hear gets 
imprinted on your heart. Once your heart is polluted, 
your life will become meaningless. The other day, 
while speaking to the devotees from Visakhapatnam, I 
made a mention of this. Human heart is like a pen. The 
colour of the words that you write will be the same as 
the colour of the ink in the pen. Likewise, when you 
fill your heart with love, all that you think, say and do 
will be suffused with love. God expects you to fill your 
heart with love and lead a sacred life. 


Daya And Kshama 


The third is the flower of daya (compassion) 
towards all living creatures. The Bhagavadgita says, 
Adveshta Sarva Bhutanam (do not hate anybody). Live 
in amity with everyone, but do not have too much 
connection with people. 


The fourth is the flower of kshama (for- 
bearance) which is very special and significant. The 
Pandavas suffered a lot at the hands of the Kauravas. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 191 


But never did Dharmaraja lose forbearance even when 
Droupadi was being humiliated by the Kauravas. It 
was the virtue of forbearance that protected the 
Pandavas and made them an ideal to the rest of the 
world. This flower of forbearance is very dear to the 
Lord. God will be pleased with you and confer boons 
on you only when you offer Him the ‘flowers’ which 
are dear to Him. No benefit accrues from offering the 
flowers, which fade away and decay. The ever- 
blooming flowers of ahimsa, indriya nigraha, daya 
and kshama are liked by God. 


The Story Of Abou Ben Adhem 


Students might have heard the story of Abou 
Ben Adhem who always offered sarva bhuta daya 
pushpam (compassion on all beings) to the Lord. 
Everyday he used to go round the streets to serve the 
destitute and the handicapped and return home late in 
the night. One night when he returned home, he found 
in his bedroom an angel writing something. When he 
asked her as to what she was writing, she replied that 
she was making a list of those who loved God. She 
replied in the negative when he asked her if his name 
was there in that list. The following night, when he 
returned home, he again found the angel writing 
something. He queried, “Mother, what is it that you are 
writing now?” She said, “Son, I am writing the names 
of those who are dear to God.” He again wanted to 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 192 


know if his name figured in the list. She replied that 
his name was on the top of this list. 


The sum and substance of this story is that God 
is pleased when you serve your fellow-human-beings. 
The scriptures have prescribed nine paths of devotion, 
namely, sravanam (listening to the Lord’s stories), 
kirthanam (singing His glories), vishnusmaranam 
(remembrance of the Lord’s name), pada sevanam 
(service to the Lord’s Lotus Feet), archanam 
(worship), vandanam (salutation), dasyam (servitude), 
sneham (friendship), atmanivedanam (offering oneself 
to the Lord) 1.e., complete self-surrender. But the path 
of service is the greatest of all. 


Neither by penance nor by pilgrimages 
Nor by going through the sacred texts 
Can one cross the ocean of worldly life; 
One can redeem one’s life only through 
service. 


(Sanskrit Verse). 

Abou Ben Adhem became the recipient of 

God’s love because he spent all his time in the service 

of his fellowmen. God loves all, for He is the 

embodiment of love. But He will give Himself to those 
who show compassion to all beings. 


Santhi And Thapas 
The fifth is the flower of santhi (peace). One 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 193 


should remain peaceful through all the vicissitudes of 
life. Only then can one attain divine grace. Great 
devotees like Thyagaraja, Tukaram and Droupadi 
underwent many hardships. They bore all sufferings 
with patience. Thyagaraja said, “One cannot attain 
happiness without inner peace.” Man needs peace at 
the physical, mental and spiritual levels. Peace is not 
present in the external world. It is present within. You 
are the embodiment of peace. In the worldly life, there 
are bound to be many hardships, but one should not be 
perturbed. One should bear all sufferings with fortitude 
and patience. Human life is given not merely to enjoy 
the worldly pleasures like birds and beasts. Life 
becomes meaningful only when one experiences the 
peace that originates from the heart. 


The sixth is the flower of thapas (penance). 
Penance does not mean retiring to the forest and living 
on fruits and tubers. In fact such a life can be called a 
life of thamas, (dullness), not Thapas. True penance 
lies in controlling one’s emotions, thoughts, words and 
deeds arising out of sathwic, rajasic and thamasic 
qualities. One should contemplate on God at all times 
and achieve harmony of thought, word and deed. 
Manasyekam Vachasyekam Karmanyekam Mahatma- 
nam (he is a noble one whose thoughts, words and 
deeds are in complete harmony). Do not be carried 
away by pain or pleasure. The Bhagavadgita teaches, 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 194 


Sukhadukhe Samekruthwa Labhalabhau Jayajayau 
(one should be even-minded in happiness or sorrow, 
gain or loss, victory or defeat). One should discharge 
one’s duty and serve society without any expectation 
of reward. Such even-mindedness and desireless state 
is true penance. 


Dhyana And Sathya 


The seventh is the flower of dhayana (medi- 
tation). Meditation does not mean sitting in padmasana 
(cross-legged posture) with eyes closed in contem- 
plation of God. This is physical, worldly activity. No 
doubt, this 1s also needed, but true meditation lies in 
unifying the mind with God. Just as milk and water 
cannot be separated, likewise, the mind, once merged 
with God, cannot be separated. An iron ball cast in fire 
will become one with it.Likewise, your love should 
become one with divine love. This truth is contained in 
the Vedic dictum, Brahmavid Brahmaiva Bhavati (the 
knower of Brahman becomes Brahman Himself). 
Some people contemplate on God for a limited period 
in the morning and evening. This cannot be called 
meditation. Sarvada Sarva Kaleshu Sarvatra Harichin- 
tanam (contemplate on God at all times, at all places 
and under all circumstances). Perform all tasks with 
your mind firmly fixed on God. That is true 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 195 


meditation. Thinking of God for a limited period 
cannot be termed meditation. That is only part-time 
devotion. Part-time devotion confers only part-time 
grace. You should have full-time devotion in order to 
attain full-time grace. 


The eighth is the flower of Sathya (Truth). This 
is very important. 


The entire world has originated from truth, 
is sustained by truth and ultimately 
merges into truth. 

There is no place without the principle of 
truth.” 


(Telugu Poem) 


Trikalabadhyam Sathyam (Truth is changeless 
in all the three periods of time, i.e., past, present and 
future). Everything may disappear, but Truth remains 
forever. So, Truth is God, live in Truth. 


Only Service Can Confer Bliss 


God will be pleased only when you worship 
Him with these eight types of flowers. The priests in 
temples worship God with various types of flowers. 
But God does not want these flowers. He says, “O 
priest, is it what you have learnt all these years? You 
are worshipping Me with lorry loads of roses and 
jasmines, which fade away in a short time. These are 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 196 


not the flowers that I expect from you. Worship Me 
with the flowers of peace, love, non-violence, etc., 
which will never fade.” 


Embodiments of Love! 


People worship God with devotion and 
sincerity, but God is not-satisfied with external 
worship. You should serve society. Only service can 
confer bliss on you. By rendering service to society, 
not only can you alleviate the sufferings of the people, 
but you can also bring about transformation in their 
lives. Yad Bhavam Tad Bhavati (as is the feeling, so is 
the result). If you serve with sacred feelings, it is 
bound to yield sacred results. Serve society to your 
utmost capacity. You are doing bhajans in the morning 
and evening. The satisfaction that you get by 
participating in bhajans is temporary, whereas service 
confers permanent satisfaction. A few minutes ago, the 
students sang Bhaja Govindam, in which it is said, Ma 
Kuru Dhanajana Yauvana Garvam,Harathi Nimeshath 
Kalah Sarvam (do not be proud of your wealth, 
progeny and youth; the tide of time may destroy them 
in a moment). 


Sanctify Time By Service 


Youth and wealth are like passing clouds. Do 
not entertain excessive desires. Do your duty sincerely. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 197 


Whatever happens, be it good or bad, accept it as the 
gift of God. Understand that it is good for you. Time is 
the most precious gift of God, but you are wasting it in 
vain pursuits and unsacred feelings. Sanctify the time 
given to you by serving society. Through service alone 
can one get rid of worries, ego, pomp and show and 
other evil qualities. 


The Vedas say, Chittasya Shuddhaye Karmah 
(the objective of actions is to purify the mind). Service 
alone is to purify the mind. Today people waste a lot 
of time, wealth and energy in performing activities 
which do not foster purity of the mind. That is why 
they are unable to experience peace of mind. The peace 
that one gets out of worldly activities comes and goes 
like a passing cloud. One should aspire for the true and 
eternal peace, which originates from the heart. 


Though the Pandavas were subjected to many 
hardships, Dharmaraja always remained peaceful. 
When Droupadi was being humiliated by the 
Kauravas, Bhima became furious and tried to attack 
Dussasana with his mace. It was Dharmaraja who 
pacified Bhima saying, those who adhere to dharma 
will ultimately emerge victorious. Not all can attain the 
level of peace that Dharmaraja attained. It is possible 
only for a few. Where there is peace, there you find 
Divine power, grace and fame. The Kauravas were 
many in number, whereas the Pandavas were only five. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 198 


But the fame of the Pandavas remained permanent in 
society. Dharmaraja was liked by one and all. 


Speak Sweetly And Softly 


Today unrest and violence have gripped the 
world as Sathya and dharma have declined in the 
hearts of people. All that you find outside is nothing 
but the reflection, reaction and resound of your inner 
feelings. Human life is highly sacred, most precious 
and divine. Do not fritter away this life by indulging in 
unsacred activities. It has to be lived in the proper way 
by exercising control over the ten indriyas (senses). 
Speak sweetly and softly. You cannot always oblige, 
but you can speak always obligingly. Pray for the well- 
being of all. Loka Samasta Sukhino Bhavantu (May the 
whole world be happy!). Sanctify your senses by 
serving all. If you exercise control over your senses, 
you can achieve anything in life. If God is not pleased 
with you, you will be looked down upon by everyone 
in the world. You may think that you have given away 
ten bags of rice in charity and distributed clothes to 
five hundred people. Such accounts are to be submitted 
to the Income Tax Department and not to God. God is 
not interested in quantity, He sees the feeling behind 
your acts. So, whatever may be the act of charity you 
undertake, do it with the spirit of love and sacrifice. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 199 


What Is Your Dharma? 


What is the teaching of the Bhagavadgita? 
Some people say that the path of action is the main 
teaching of the Bhagavadgita. Some others point to the 
path of wisdom as the main teaching of the 
Bhagavadgita .But none of these are correct. What is 
the first sloka in the Gita? 


Dharmakshetre Kurukshetre Samaveta 
Yuyutsava, 

Mamaka Pandavaschiva Kimakurvata 
Sanjaya? 

And the last sloka reads as follows: 

Yatra Yogeshwara Krishno, Yatra Partho 
Dhanurdhara, 

Tatra Srivijayo Bhutir Dhruva 
Neetirmathirmama. 


When you join the last word of the last verse 
and the first word of the first verse, it becomes Mama 
dharma, meaning ‘my dharma’. This is what the Gita 
teaches. What is your dharma? Your dharma is to lead 
the life of a human being. Remain yourself that you are 
a human being, not an animal. Having been born as a 
human being, you should cultivate human values. Do 
not behave like an animal. Adhere to truth and 
righteousness. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 200 


The entire creation is based on truth. Where 
there is truth, there you find plenty and prosperity. 
Human life is not meant to enjoy physical comforts 
and worldly pleasures, which are momentary. It is 
meant to set an ideal to the rest of the world. Having 
lived all these years, what is the ideal that you have 
set? What is it that you have achieved? Put a question 
to yourself. The answer is a big zero. You might have 
done a few good deeds in life, but they pale in 
comparison to the number of bad deeds you might 
have performed. That is not the quality of a human 
being. Cultivate good thoughts, speak good words and 
perform good deeds. That is true humanness. The 
names of ancient sages and seers are remembered even 
today because of the good deeds they performed. Do 
unto others what you would like others to do unto you. 
Do not indiscriminately follow the mind, for the mind 
is like a mad monkey. Follow the conscience, 1.e., the 
principle of the atma. Your life will find fulfilment 
when you please God by offering Him the eight 
‘flowers’ mentioned above. Love is the undercurrent of 
all this. So, lead a life suffused with love. 


Krishna Janmashtami, 22-08-2000, Prasanthi Nilayam 


13 


Ganapathi Confers Buddhi And Siddhi 


If money is lost, one need not be worried 
about it, 
For one can earn it again. 
If a friend is lost, one can have another. 
If wife is lost, one can marry again. 
If one loses one’s piece of land, 
One can purchase another. 
All these can be regained; 
But if body is lost, one cannot get it back. 
(Sanskrit Sloka) 


IN this physical, transient world, everything 
comes and goes. Man may acquire wealth by various 
means, but he may lose it in no time. He may make 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 202 


many friends in life, but they may leave him at one 
time or the other. While he can acquire all these again 
by some means or the other, there are no means by 
which he can get back his body once it is gone. Man 
should realize this truth and sanctify his life by 
cultivating human values while the body lasts. 


Worldly life is temporary. 

Wealth and youth are momentary. 

So too are relatives and friends. 

Only truth and righteousness are permanent. 


(Sanskrit Sloka) 


Ganapathi Is The Master Of Ganas And Sadgunas 
Embodiments of Love! 


Man should adhere to truth and righteousness, 
as these two never desert him under any circum- 
stances; they follow him in all the births and in all the 
worlds. These two principles have been the mainstay 
of ancient culture of Bharat. The Vedas, Upanishads 
and the Puranas emphasise these principles: Sathyam 
Vada, Dharmam Chara (speak the truth and practise 
righteousness). By ignoring these twin principles, man 
undergoes all sorts of sufferings and miseries and in 
the process forgets his very divine nature. It is 
impossible to experience divinity without cultivating 
human values. Having been born as a human being, 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 203 


man’s foremost duty is to cultivate human values. 
Otherwise, his life will become meaningless. What is 
the purpose of human life? Is it only to eat, sleep and 
indulge in pleasures like birds and beasts? No. Man is 
born to set an ideal to the rest of the world. Uddha- 
retatmanatmanam (one should work for one’s own 
emancipation), says the Gita. Man should redeem his 
life and also help his fellow-human-beings to work for 
their redemption. This is the spiritual knowledge that 
Ganapathi imparts. The name Ganapathi has many 
inner meanings. Ganapathi is the master of the all the 
ganas (gods) and sadgunas (virtues). ‘Ga’ stands for 
buddhi (intellect) and ‘Na’ for vijnana (wisdom). So, 
Ganapathi is the master of buddhi and vijnana. He is 
the master of suraloka (heaven). Ganapathi has no 
master above him. Being the master of all, he teaches 
the qualities of leadership. Ganapathi is being wor- 
shipped and extolled since Vedic times. The Vedas and 
the Upanishads contain hymns in praise of Ganapathi. 
So, Ganapathi-worship is not of recent origin; it 
originated in the hoary past. 


One Should Follow The Nivritti Marga 


Divinity shines in every man and illumines the 
path he ought to follow. But man is ruining his life by 
not paying heed to the promptings of divinity within 
him. He is suffering from lack of peace as he is ignor- 
ing humanness in his mad pursuit of physical and 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 204 


ephemeral attainments. Acquisition of worldly educa- 
tion and worldly powers is not the objective that man 
is supposed to achieve in life. All these attainments 
correspond to the Pravritti Marga (outward path). That 
which is related to Pravritti is transient. One should 
follow the Nivritti Marga (inward path), experience the 
joy therefrom and share it with others. 


The body is made up of five elements 
and is bound to perish one day or the 
other, but the indweller has neither birth nor 
death. 

He has no attachment and no bondage. 

Truly speaking, the indweller is God Himself. 


(Telugu Poem) 


But man wastes his time as he considers the 
body as permanent and ignores the indweller. Time is 
the most precious gift of God, but man does not realize 
the value of time. He wastes three-fourths of his time 
in vain pursuits. How can such a person redeem his 
life? To sanctify the kaya (body) one has to make 
proper use of kala (time). 


The Vedas, the Upanishads and the Puranas 
attach utmost value to humanness. Man studies all 
these scriptures. But does he understand the value of 
their teachings? Has he put them into practice? Mere 
study of sacred texts is futile unless their teachings are 
put into practice. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 205 


Peace And Bliss Are Within You 


On this day of Vinayaka Chaturthi, it is the 
practice of the Bharatiyvas to prepare delicacies and 
offer them to Vinayaka. These offerings are unique and 
special. 7i/ (seasame) seeds, rice flour and jaggery are 
mixed, made into balls, cooked in steam and offered to 
Vinayaka. You should enquire into the purpose of 
making such an offering. These steam-cooked prepara- 
tions are good for the eyes and are beneficial to people 
suffering from Asthma and Eosinophilia. These offer- 
ings are meant to improve health and confer happiness 
on man. They are not to be treated as mere ritualiastic 
practices. All that is related to God has sacred inner 
meaning. Man, unable to understand this truth, treats 
everything in the worldly perspective. 


Man is endowed with pasu lakshanas (animal 
qualities) as well as Pasupathi lakshanas (divine quali- 
ties). Pasu lakshanas originate from the head. Worldly 
education and intelligence are related to the head. The 
scientists make use of their intelligence to study things, 
which are related to the world. This corresponds to the 
Pravritti Marga. Virtues like love, compassion and 
forbearance, which originate from the heart, lead man 
to Nivritti Marga. Today man wants to be intelligent, 
not virtuous. The Gita declares: Anityam Asukham 
Lokam Imam Prapya Bhajasva Maam (as the world is 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 206 


temporary and is full of misery, attain divinity by 
ceaseless contemplation on God). Give up pravritti and 
take to nivritti. Only then can you redeem yourself. 
Today we find elders teaching the children matters that 
are related to pravritti, not nivritti. Right from a child 
to a decrepit old man, everyone is interested in 
pravritti. But is there anyone who could experience 
peace in life by treading the path of pravritti? How can 
one attain peace? Where is peace? Keeping an atom 
bomb in hand, people give lectures on the need for 
peace. Such people may be able to reach the moon, but 
can never attain peace and happiness. There is no need 
to search for peace in the external world. All that you 
get in the external world is only restlessness. Peace is 
within you. It is your form. Try to manifest it from 
within. 


All Are Sparks Of The Divine 


Embodiments of Love! 


There is no power greater than that of love. 
You can attain peace by cultivating love. Peace is your 
birthright. External peace is temporary. Man should 
try to attain inner peace, which alone is pure, unsullied, 
eternal and immortal. For this, it is necessary that man 
should make proper use of time. It is therefore his 
foremost duty to utilise time in a sacred manner. Today 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 207 


man is wasting a lot of time in vain gossip and talking 
ill of others. 


The atmic principle that exists in you also 
exists in people whom you consider as ‘others’. 
Understand that all are sparks of the Divine. [savasyam 
Idam Jagat (the whole world is the manifestation of 
God). Deho Devalaya Prokto Jeevo Deva Sanathana 
(body is the temple and the indweller is God). As all 
are divine, you should love all and hate none. Do not 
observe differences on the basis of your likes and 
dislikes. Treat everyone alike. Understand that divinity 
is one. Ekatma Sarvabhutantaratma (the same atma is 
the indweller of all beings). Once you understand this 
truth, you will lead your life with peace and happiness. 


Cultivate Purity Of Heart 


Today, devotees from Bangalore have brought 
750 idols of Lord Ganapathi to worship, as this year 
happens to be the commencement of the 75" year of 
Swami’s physical body. One may bring 750 idols or 7 
crore idols, but Ganapathi is only one. No benefit 
accrues from offering worship to a number of Gana- 
pathi idols without purity of heart. It is enough if you 
offer worship to one Ganapathi idol with the feeling of 
oneness. What is the purpose of doing pujas and vratas 
(austerities)? These rituals are prescribed to cultivate 
purity of heart. Chittasya Shuddhaye Karmah (the 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 208 


objective of actions is to purify the heart). All the nine 
paths of devotion, namely, sravanam (listening), 
kirtanam(singing), vishnusmaranam (contemplating on 
Vishnu), padasevanam (serving the Lotus Feet), 
archanam (worship), vandanam (salutation), dasyam 
(servitude), sneham (friendship), atmanivedanam (self- 
surrender) are meant to confer purity of heart. Sweets 
like mysore pak, gulab jamoon, burfi, etc., vary in 
name and form, but the sugar present in them is the 
same. Likewise, the principle of love is the under- 
current of all the paths of devotion. So, spend your life 
with love and end your life with love. This is the true 
spiritual practice. You are not separate from God. 


Divinity is the basis of human life. You can 
divinise your life by your karma (action). Offer 
salutations to karma before undertaking it. A driver, 
before taking his seat, offers salutations to the steering 
wheel. A dancer pays obeisance to her anklets before 
she wears them and starts her dance performance. A 
devotee pays his respects to the Gita before reading it. 
The purpose of offering prayer to karma is to see that 
you perform only good actions which yield good 
results. This is the teaching of our ancient culture. You 
should offer karma and its fruit to God before under- 
taking it. An illiterate lorry driver pays obeisance to 
the work he does, but not a scientist who is endowed 
with knowledge. Ego is the main cause for this. Such a 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 209 


scientist may consider himself to be very wise, but 
actually he displays ignorance. Just as our shadow 
follows us, ignorance follows one who is bloated with 
ego. Human life is a combination of wisdom and 
ignorance. It is a big mistake to consider yourself one 
of wisdom. Ignorance follows you like a shadow in all 
that you do. In order to get rid of this ignorance, you 
should consider Sarvam Vishnumayam Jagat (whole 
world as the manifestation of Vishnu). There is nothing 
in this world which is not divine. On this basis, Thya- 
garaja sang,’O Rama, right from a Cheema (ant) to 
Brahma, You are present in everyone in the form of 
love.” How can one ignore such an all-pervasive 
Divinity? 


Consider Every Moment As Divine 


Embodiments of Love! 


Consider every day as a sacred day. You do not 
need to wait for Vinayaka Chaturthi or Navaratri to 
worship God. Consider every moment as divine and 
make proper use of it. People do bhajans without 
understanding their significance. Instead of focusing 
their attention on God, they are bothered too much 
about the tune and rhythm. No doubt, the tune and 
rhythm are also essential in bhajans. But once you fill 
your heart with divine love, the tune and rhythm will 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 210 


automatically be taken care of. If you concentrate too 
much on the tune and rhythm, you will not be able to 
think of God. 


Just as the iron ball cast in fire becomes one 
with it, your mind should become one with God. Water 
cannot be separated from milk; likewise, your mind 
should get merged with God. You should not think that 
you are separate from God. One who realizes this 
principle of unity is a true human being. Do not limit 
worship of God to festival days alone. Each and every 
moment should be spent in the contemplation of God. 
You may think, “If every moment is spent in the 
contemplation of God, then how is it possible to do our 
work?” Do not distinguish between your work and 
God’s work. Your work is God’s work as God and you 
are one. It is a mistake to think that all that you do in 
the prayer hall is God’s work and outside it is your 
work. You should not entertain such feelings of 
separateness. Consider your heart as the altar of God 
and turn your vision inward. One who understands this 
truth and acts accordingly is a true human being. 


Love Towards God Alone Is True Love 


You think that you love your family and 
friends, but that cannot be called love in the true sense 
of the term. That is only attachment. Love towards 
God alone is true love. If you call yourself a devotee of 
Swami, act according to Swami’s expectation. Do not 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 211 


count the number of bags of rice and the number of 
saris and dhotis that you have given away in charity to 
the poor. You may submit such accounts to the Income 
Tax Department, not to God. God wants quality, not 
quantity. He sees the feeling behind your acts of 
charity. 


Even a small act of charity will assume 
immense significance in the eyes of God, if it is done 
with purity of heart. One teaspoonful of cow’s milk is 
better than barrels of donkey’s milk. God is pleased 
even if you offer a teaspoonful of milk with love. God 
always observes your feelings. God’s valuation is 
always perfect; none can match Him in this respect. 


Conduct Yourself In Accordance With God’s Wish 


Many students worship Vinayaka to secure 
high marks in the examination, to attain high quail- 
fications and great reputation. But they do not aspire 
for good conduct and good behaviour. They should 
cultivate qualities, which are dear to God. Before 
undertaking any task, enquire whether it is pleasing to 
God. You are bound to attain success if God is pleased 
with your actions. Do not go by your own likes and 
dislikes. Conduct yourself in accordance with God’s 
wish. Eschew selfishness and self-interest. Cultivate 
sacredness and steadfastness. This is the teaching of 
Lord Ganapathi. Ganapathi confers on you buddhi 
(intellect) and siddhi (fulfilment). One can attain siddhi 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 212 


only when one has good Buddhi. You have to love God 
wholeheartedly and offer Him all that you do. Then 
even a simple task performed by you will become 
significant. 


In this land of Bharat, Ganapathi is highly 
venerated. Ganapathi worship is prevalent in all parts 
of India. Lord Ganesh shines in every heart. Who is 
Bhagawan (God)? ‘Bha’ means effulgence. One whose 
effulgence spreads everywhere is Bhagawan. Having 
self-effulgent God in your heart, why should you 
search for Him outside? Look into your heart. 


Embodiments of Love! Students, Boys and Girls! 


Divinity can be attained only through pure and 
selfless love. You may chant hundred and eight names 
or thousand and eight names of God. But without 
selfless service, it is of no use. All these are sterile 
activities. Service alone is fruitful. 

Penance, pilgrimage, learning of the 

Sastras or endless chanting, 

None of these can help in crossing the 

ocean of Samsara 
Without service to the pious. 


(Sanskrit Sloka) 
Attain Divinity Through Selfless Service 


Service to your fellow-beings is equivalent to 
worship of God. If you find someone in distress, try to 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 213 


help him before attending to your work in the office or 
elsewhere. 


A small example: A boy from Delhi had been 
listening to Swami’s teachings carefully. One day, he 
was going to the college to appear in an examination, 
which was to begin at 8 a.m. On his way, he saw a 
beggar who stumbled as he was very sick and could 
not walk. He helped him to get up, took him to hospital 
and had him admitted there. By that time it was 10 
a.m. When he noticed the time, he found that it was too 
late for the examination. He thought, “Well this was a 
test of my conduct by Swami Himself.” He had no 
regrets that he missed the examination. He was 
actually happy. When he came to Me, he told Me, 
“Swami, one paper is gone, I will not pass this year. 
But next year is always there. I have no regrets for I 
have passed in Your test.” I told him, “Don’t worry, 
you have passed in your test also.” Next month, the 
result was out. He secured first class. 


The boy did not bother about his examination 
because he had done a noble act of service to a poor 
man. He thought that he had failed in the worldly test, 
but he had passed in the test of God. There are many 
students like this who would put service before self. 
When you have this attitude in your life, you will never 
fail. Whatever you do, do it wholeheartedly. In this 
way, you can experience Divinity. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 214 


Forbearance Is The Highest Virtue 


There are many people who consider worship 
as important. They disregard work in the process. This 
is a big mistake. Worship is important of course. But, 
what is worship? Offering of various kinds of flowers 
to the image of God is not worship in the real sense. 
You should offer the flower of your heart to God. That 
is why I told you earlier, 


Offer to God the flowers of 
non-violence and sense-control, 
compassion on all creatures, 
forbearance and peace, penance, 
meditation and truth above all. 

These are the flowers dear to the Lord. 


(Telugu Poem) 


The best flower of all is forbearance. The 
possession of this flower led Dharmaraja ultimately to 
liberation. In spite of the troubles and travails that he 
encountered, he was successful in the end. His wife 
was humiliated in public. Everyone looked down upon 
the Pandavas. But Dharmaraja was unaffected. What- 
ever is bound to happen will happen. One has to bear 
all that comes one’s way. Thinking on these lines, 
Dharmaraja closed his eyes and meditated on Krishna. 
But Bhima was boiling with anger. He was furious, 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 21S 


“Brother, enough of this dharma of yours. Now, leave 
it to us and see what happens.” Dharmaraja replied, 
“My dear Bhima, do not talk about your dharma and 
my dharma. Dharma. is one. The course of action, 
which satisfies the conscience is the dharma that one 
should follow.” Bhima said, “When our wife is being 
humiliated in public, how can we quietly close our 
eyes? I shall tear the Kauravas to pieces.” But Dhar- 
maraja pacified him. The Pandavas had such complete 
trust in Dharmaraja that ultimately they won. 


Do Not Lose Your Peace Under Any Circumstances 


When Aswatthama killed the sons of Droupadi, 
Arjuna was very much agitated. He caught hold of 
Aswatthama, tied his hands and feet, brought him 
before Droupadi and told her, “Here is the villain who 
killed your sons. I shall cut him to pieces. You can 
anoint your hair with his blood.” Droupadi pacified 
Arjuna saying, you should not do any such thing. 
Why? 

The one who is full of fear and has lost all 
courage, 
or the one who is in deep sleep or dead 
drunk 
or has surrendered to you, or the one who 
is a female, 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 216 


O Arjuna, it is not proper to kill such a 
person. 


(Telugu Poem) 


Thus saying, she held the hand of Arjuna from 
killing Aswatthama. She fell at the feet of Aswatthama 
and said, 


It is at the feet of your father, 
Dronacharya, 

That my husbands have learnt all that 
they know. 

Being the son of Dronocharya, 

Was it proper for you to kill my children? 

How could you have the heart to kill 
them, 

Who were unarmed, young, quietly asleep, 

Were not having any grudge against you, 

And were not contemplating any harm to 
you? 


(Telugu Poem) 


Though she chided Aswatthama for his cruel 
act, she was calm all the while. Such an attitude of 
calmness often solves many difficult problems. You 
should not lose your peace even under the most trying 
circumstances. Under any provocation, you should not 
contemplate causing harm to anyone. Droupadi asked 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 217 


Arjuna, “If you kill Aswatthama, will not his mother 
suffer the same pangs of sorrow as I suffer now?” In 
spite of that Bhima was still bent upon killing Aswat- 
thama. So high was his anger that he said: 


This Droupadi is a stupid woman, 

For she pleads for this wretch’s freedom. 

She feels no anger against this murderer 
of her sons. 

This assassin Aswatthama is not a 
Brahmin. 

Do not release him but kill him. 

If you do not do that, I myself will 
hammer his head 

With my powerful fist, for you to see! 


(Telugu Poem) 


But Droupadi prevailed upon Bhima and 
Arjuna with her pleadings and saved Aswatthama. 
Such was the nobility of character of the women of 
those days. Women are by nature forgiving. There 
were many women of fortitude, forbearance and purity 
in this country. It is because of such great women that 
India still holds its head high in spirituality. 


Forbearance and forgiveness are the qualities 
which should be fostered by all individuals. You must 
be able to forgive even your enemies. This day is 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 218 


consecrated to Ganapathi teaches you forgiveness and 
love, so that you may realize divinity and enjoy bliss. 


Vinayaka Chaturthi, 1-09-2000, Prasanthi Nilayam 


The educational process has not 
received proper’ attention from 
thoughtful persons. The institutions 
which ought to have been temples of 
Saraswathi (the goddess of learning) 
have become temples of Lakshmi (the 
goddess of wealth). The ideal held 
before the tender, innocent, unselfish 
children is a lucrative job rather 
than a life of peace, contentment and 


love. 


—Baba 


14 


Eradicate Immorality To Attain 
Immortality 


O foolish mind, why do you go here and 
there in search of Lord Vishnu, when He 
is very much present in you? 

Look within and worship Him with devotion 
and steadfastness just as Emperor Bali did. 


(Telugu Poem) 


EMPEROR Bali was Vishnupriva (one who 
loved Lord Vishnu). He was endowed with the virtues 
of charity and righteousness. But his reputation was 
slightly tainted because he was born in the clan of 
demons. 


As Bali had immense love for Lord Vishnu and 
he was a repository of virtues, Lord Vishnu wanted to 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 220 


grant him liberation. He incarnated as Vamana and 
approached Bali when he was performing the Viswajit 
Yajna. Emperor Bali welcomed Him and enquired if he 
could do anything for Him. Vamana asked him for just 
three footsteps of land. Bali laughed at this simple 
request of Vamana and said He could ask for much 
more than mere three footsteps of land. But Vamana 
said that He did not want anything else. As desired by 
Vamana, Bali not only gave what he was asked to give, 
but in the process offered himself also to the Lord. In 
this world, there are many people who would give 
away wealth and other materialistic acquisitions in 
charity. But true charity lies in offering oneself to the 
Lord. 


Emperor Sibi was also one of charity like 
Emperor Bali. Once an eagle was in hot pursuit of a 
small bird, which sought refuge from Sibi. The eagle 
arugued with Sibi that the bird was its rightful prey and 
food. So, he should give it at once. But Sibi Said that 
he would never forsake one who had sought his refuge. 
He offered his own flesh to the eagle in order to protect 
the bird. 


Emperor Bali Lived Up To His Name 


The word Bali means sacrifice and Emperor 
Bali lived up to his name. Lord Rama, in order to 
uphold the promise of His father, renounced the 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 221 


kingdom and spent fourteen years in exile in the forest. 
Likewise, Gangeya (Bhishma) remained a Brahm- 
achari (celibate) throughout his life for the sake of his 
father’s happiness. That is why their names are im- 
printed on the hearts of people even today. Bhishma 
means one who remains steadfast in his vow. Bharat is 
the land of many such noble souls and emperors, who 
led a life of sacrifice. 


Kerala occupies a place of prominence in this 
sacred land of Bharat, which is thyaga bhumi (land of 
sacrifice), yoga Bhumi (land of spirituality) and karma 
bhumi (land of action). The state of Kerala owes its 
reputation not only to Emperor Bali but also to the 
advent of Lord Vamana. It is the tradition of Kerala not 
to turn away anybody empty-handed. In fact, every 
Bharatiya is endowed with this spirit of sacrifice. The 
people of Kerala are not affected by the impact of Kali 
Age as they continue to follow the ideals set by Bali 
and lead their lives happily. They are righteous, 
devoted and god-minded. I wish that they live in har- 
mony like members of one family. Kerala is, in fact, 
the birthplace of sacrifice. But today people are trying 
to convert this thyaga bhumi into bhoga bhumi. 


Forbearance is the real beauty in this 
sacred land of Bharat. 

Of all the sacred virtues, adherence to 
truth is true penance. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 222 


The nectarous feeling in this country is the 
feeling towards one’s mother. 
Character is valued far more superior to 
the very life itself. 
People have forgotten the basic principles 
of the culture of Bharat 
and are following and adopting Western 
culture today. 
Bharatiyas are not aware of the greatness 
of their cultural heritage 
just as a mighty elephant is not aware of 
its own strength. 
(Telugu Poem) 


Human Beings Should Imbibe Human Values 


The sacred land of Bharat, which was once 
highly reputed for men of sacrifice, is witnessing a 
sharp decline in moral values day after day. There is no 
unity whatsoever. Hatred is spreading like wild fire 
among men. Man is expected to cultivate human 
values like compassion, forbearance, love, truth, 
tolerance, etc. Human life will lose its significance if 
man loses human values. People may belong to 
different political parties, but they should have love for 
each other. But they are devaluing love due to their 
association with political parties. Parties are, in fact, 
parting people from each other and creating differences 
among them. Man is giving up the principle of love for 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 225 


the sake of petty worldly gains. Love is the birthright 
of man. Love all and be loved by all. Give up hatred, 
brush aside all differences and lead a life suffused with 
love. Today there is a decline in human values. Evil 
qualities like hatred, jealousy, pomp and show are on 
the rise. It is a matter of great shame to call oneself a 
human being without giving up these wicked qualities. 
If you call yourself a human being, show at least one 
human quality. 


A Leader Should Always Speak Sweetly And 
Lovingly 

Man has degenerated so much that he does not 
have love even for his own children. He is always 
filled with tension and temper. How can such a person 
work for the welfare of the nation? 


Some people call themselves desha nayakas 
(leaders of the nation), but in practice they are desha 
nashakas (destroyers of the nation). One who works 
for the progress of the nation is a nayaka (true leader). 
One who calls himself a leader should always speak 
sweetly and lovingly. He should not indulge in criti- 
cism. Criticism is nothing but the reflection, reaction 
and resound of one’s wicked qualities. The bad 
qualities that one sees in others are nothing but the 
reflection of one’s own inner feelings. No one has the 
right to find fault in others. He is the worst sinner who 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 224 


indulges in fault-finding. The tongue is given to make 
others happy and to sing the glories of the Lord. You 
cannot always oblige, but you can speak always 
obligingly. The hands are given not to hurt others, but 
to earn one’s livelihood and perform acts of charity. 
The ears have been given not to listen to vain gossip, 
but to listen to the sacred stories of the Lord. In this 
manner, man should put each of his limbs to proper 
use and sanctify his life. Today science has advanced, 
but senses have become polluted. What is the use of 
acquiring education, which does not confer sense- 
control? 


A foolish person boasts of high education 
and intelligence, 

Yet does not know himself. 

What is the use of all the education he 
has acquired, 

If man cannot give up his evil qualities? 

All the worldly education will only 
lead him to vain argumentation, not total 
wisdom. 

It cannot lead him to immortality. 

So, man should acquire that knowledge 
which will make him immortal. 


(Telugu Poem) 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 225 


Abandon Everything That Is Bad 


Love alone can confer immortality. Love is 
deathless. Love is changeless. All things in the world 
change or perish, love alone is immortal. How is one to 
achieve this state of immotality? Removal of im- 
morality is the only way to immortality. You have to 
abandon bad thoughts, bad company, bad habits and 
everything that is bad. We find hatred all over the 
world these days. Deha (body) is being incinerated 
with dwesha (hatred). No separate cremation is 
required for the body; this blazing hatred itself will 
reduce it to ashes. Man brings about his own end by 
the fire of hatred. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Born as human beings, you should practise 
human values to retain your claim on humanness. All 
the powers that are manifest in the world are latent in 
man. All human virtues have been kept in high esteem 
in Bharat since ancient times. 


This motherland of ours gave to the world 
noble souls renowned in all the 
continents. 


It is the land which ousted the foreign 
rulers and achieved freedom. 


This is the sacred land which achieved 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 226 


Great heights in music, literature 
and science. 
This divine land is the nursery of 
painting, 
Sculpture and other fine arts. 
O devotees, it is your bounden duty to 
keep 
This Bharatiya tradition alive and 
flourishing. 
(Telugu Poem) 


Do Not Pay Heed To Scandal-Mongers 


This glorious tradition is slowly declining these 
days. It is enough if man retains his humanness. But 
sadly man seems to have lost his basic qualities of 
humanness. He has even lost the right to call himself a 
human being. You must have the courage of conviction 
to proclaim that you are a human being. You must also 
be able to proclaim the greatness of your motherland 
and act in such a way as to preserve its glory and 
reputation. You should declare with pride, “This is my 
motherland, this is my mother tongue!” It is sad and 
deporable that the Bharatiyas have lost respect and 
love for their mother tongue, motherland and culture. 
Men have reduced themselves to mere caricatures of 
humans. From ‘Shiva (embodiment of auspiciousness), 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 22h 


man has become shava (corpse). A person stuffed with 
hatred, jealousy, pride, ostentatiousness is no better 
than a corpse. Do not have anything to do with such 
characters. Those who bring a bad name to their 
country are worse than pests and worms. Do not pay 
heed to such scandal-mongers. 


Recognise Your Divinity 
Embodiments of Love! 


Yesterday you saw the drama on Bhasmasura. 
He wanted that everything he touched should be 
reduced to ashes. What happened finally? He reduced 
himself to a heap of ashes. All evil qualities, anger, 
hatred, etc., are destructive. People are heroes on the 
platform but zeros in life. You think that you are 
criticizing somebody else, but in fact, it is your own 
self that you are abusing. Criticising others is a bad 
habit. One who abuses others is the worst sinner. One 
who sees the virtues of others is himself virtuous. 
Sarva Jeeva Namaskaram Kesavam Pratigachchhati 
(salutations to all beings reach God). Criticising any- 
one is criticising God Himself. Honouring anyone is 
honouring God. 


Adherence to righteousness and respect for 
others are as important as the care of the body and love 
for your country. Man today is destroying his life by 
indulging in selfishness and greed. He has become so 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 228 


blind that he is unable to recognise the consequences 
of his actions. He neither knows his origin nor his goal. 
It is not the right attitude. It is not wisdom. It is 
ignorance. 


Lord Krishna declared, Deho Devalaya Prokto 
Jeevo Deva Sanathana (body is the temple and the 
indweller is God Himself). Therefore, treat every 
human body as a temple and the indweller as God. 
Every individual is an aspect of divinity. Therefore, 
respect all individuals. Only then will your life acquire 
meaning and others will also respect you. Modern man 
does not have this perspective of life. He lacks broad- 
mindedness. He respects none, but expects everybody 
to respect him. How is it possible? As is your 
company, so you become. That is why I say, tell Me 
your company, I shall tell you what you are. 


God, who is pure, unsullied, eternal, immortal 
and omnipotent is very much present in you, beside 
you, above you, below you, all around you. You do not 
need to search for God outside because you are God 
yourself. If you develop this outlook, you can realize 
God. So long as you bind yourself with human 
limitations, you continue to be man. Give up your body 
attachment and recognise the divinity in you. Then you 
become liberated. God in the form of Vamana came to 
Emperor Bali to teach him this reality. He said, “Bali, 
you are no ordinary person. I am in you always 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 229 


wherever you are. Do not identify yourself with your 
body.” 


The human body is made up of mere refuse 
devoid of any fragrance. Are you merely this body? 
No. Body is merely a leather puppet. Inside the body, 
there is the eternal being. 


The divine play between the Atma and 
Paramatma continues in the body. 
They are together and separate at the 


same time. 
God is the string-puller of this entire 
puppet play. 
(Telugu 
Poem) 


Why, wherefrom and what for have you come 
in this world? You have come from God, for God and 
to attain God. Be aware that God is with you always. If 
this kind of unity with God is attained, all your actions 
become pure. 


Students Should Never Enter Into Politics 


Students! 


You have heard the speech given by a student 
from Srisailam Vidyapeeth. All the students of Srisa- 
ilam Vidyapeeth are very pure and sacred. In fact, all 
students, everywhere have pure heart. It is the elders 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 230 


who spoil the innate goodness of the students. No 
matter what field you enter into, always have an 
attitude of service. Students should serve society. 
Serve everybody. Keep yourself pure. Do any work, 
but never enter into politics. Politics pollutes the mind. 
Politics has become synonymous with evil. If you want 
to ruin yourself, get into politics. If you want to be an 
ideal person and want to receive God’s grace, then 
cultivate all good qualities. In olden times, there were 
many ideal political leaders. They practised what they 
preached. That is why, quite a few students were 
drawn into politics. Even little urchins would collect in 
crowds to see leaders like Jayaprakash Narayan or 
Subhash Chandra Bose. They used to decorate their 
houses with pictures of such leaders. What do you see 
today? You get into any student’s room; you see 
nothing but pictures of film stars. You do not see 
pictures of ideal men today and do not listen to sacred 
words. Because people in those days were emulating 
ideal persons, their actions were also pure. 


The Magnet Of Bhagawan’s Love 
Embodiments of Love! 


You should also have a pure heart. It is the 
purity of your heart that attracts everybody like a 
magnet. The whole world, in fact, is a magnet. Every 
object howsoever small, has this magnetic power. But 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 231 


in man this magnet is further magnified. This is the 
magnet of love. Love is God, live in love. This magnet 
of love must be pure. Everybody will then be attracted 
to you. A small example: All of you are here. Did I 
send you any invitation card? Did I send word to you? 
The magnet of My love has drawn all of you here. 
Bhagawan’s greatest property is love—boundless love. 
Bhagawan is not interested in any other property. 
There is no wealth greater than love anywhere. There- 
fore, you too should enhance this property of love in 
you. Speak with sweetness and concern with everyone. 
Such pleasing speech has become scarce. We hear 
harsh words all around. Speak softly and sweetly. Then 
all will become your friends. 
Students! 

Making friendship is nothing great in itself. 
You lose friends as easily as you make them. There is 
no point in having such friendship. Have friendship 
with God for which you should be prepared to sacrifice 
everything, even your body and life. Cultivate love. 


10-9-2000, Prasanthi Nilayam 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 232 


Virtues are the most effective means 
of purifying the inner consciousness 
of man at all levels. For, they prompt 
the person to discover what to do and 
how to do. Only those who have 
earned good destiny can claim their 
excellence in discrimination. And, 
adherence to this determination is 
the raft that can take man across the 
ocean of flux and fear, the Bhava 
Sagara. The man of virtues has a 
place in the region of the liberated. 
Whatever the residual activity a 
person has perforce to engage 
himself in, the impact of that activity 
will not impinge on him, provided he 
is a man of virtues. He can merge in 
Brahman, the embodiment of Su- 


preme Bliss. 
—Baba 


15 


Education Should Foster Values 


Embodiments of Love! 


Modern education fosters 

only intelligence, not virtues. 

Of what avail is education 

if it does not inculcate virtues in man? 


(Telugu Poem) 


SINCE ancient times, the Bharatiyas have been 
using the word ‘Prapancha’ while referring to this 
world consisting of mobile and immobile objects. It is 
constituted by the five elements, namely earth, water, 
fire, air and ether. 


The Bharatiyas have been worshipping these 
five elements as the manifestations of divinity. They 
called earth as Bhudevi (goddess Earth), water as 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 234 


Gangadevi (goddess of Ganga), fire as Agnideva (fire 
god), wind as Vayudeva (wind god) and Akasha (ether) 
as Sabda Brahman (primordial sound). The five ele- 
ments relate to five senses of perceptions in man and 
their attributes are sight, taste, touch, smell and hear- 
ing. The true meaning of the worship of the elements is 
that man should not only make proper use of these 
elements, but should also sanctify his senses of sight, 
taste, touch, smell and hearing. But neither the students 
are making any effort to understand the divine nature 
of these five elements nor are the teachers making 
them aware of this truth. The students are interested in 
acquiring merely bookish knowledge and not in 
understanding the sanctity of these elements. True 
education is that which confers virtues, good intellect, 
devotion, duty and discipline. The teachers are also 
interested in imparting only bookish knowl-edge to the 
students and not the spiritual aspect of education. 


Convert Your Knowledge Into Skill 


Today, all the five elements are polluted and, 
consequently, man is mired in insecurity. Mere 
acquisition of degrees should not be the objective of 
students. They should make proper use of the five 
elements. This is the true value-oriented education the 
world needs today. Values are for education, education 
is for life, life is for love, love is for man, man is for 
spirituality, spirituality is for the world and the world 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 ye 


is for peace. So, one should travel from values to 
peace. Today the students are acquiring education with 
selfishness and self-interest in mind. They are craving 
for money. Money comes and goes but morality comes 
and grows. The students should strive hard to cultivate 
morality. They should convert their knowledge into 
skill and bring about balance in their lives. But modern 
students are actually killing their knowledge, 1.e., they 
are putting it to misuse. Consequently, they have 
completely lost their mental power and their inner 
reality is also eclipsed. 


Modern education cannot be called education 
in its true sense. What is the use of intelligence if one 
lacks power of discrimination? And of what avail is 
knowledge if it is not converted into skill? True 
education is that which develops in you love for your 
fellow-beings and motivates you to serve the com- 
munity. Modern system of education has undergone 
many changes but no change has brought about any 
worthwhile results. First of all, the mind of man should 
be transformed. Then the entire world will be trans- 
formed because the mind forms the basis of the entire 
world Mano Moolam Idam Jagat. 


Maintain Ecological Balance 


Today the students do not know how to convert 
their knowledge into skill. Where does the mistake lie? 
Does it lie with the parents or the teachers or the 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 236 


leaders? It is the mistake of everybody. The students 
are pure and tenderhearted. It is the responsibility of 
the parents to teach them the importance of human 
values like truth, righteousness and love. But the 
parents are not making any effort to teach the children 
to speak the truth. In fact, some parents misguide their 
children in this regard. For example, if the father does 
not want to attend a particular telephone call, he tells 
his son to utter a lie, saying his father is not available. 
In this manner, children are taught to speak untruth. As 
a result, they lead a life of untruth after they grow up. 
Under any circumstances, one should not utter a lie. 
The students should learn to practise this maxim: Help 
ever, Hurt never. Those who adhere to this dictum will 
certainly progress 1n life. 


Today boys and girls acquire education with an 
eye on the external world. They do not realize that all 
that is seen in the external world is transient. One can 
develop inner vision in life only when one makes 
proper use of one’s knowledge. Humanness has 
declined because man lacks balance in life. If human 
values are to be fostered , man should convert his 
knowledge into skill and maintain proper balance in 
life. Today the world is losing its ecological balance, 
as man, out of utter selfishness, is robbing the mother 
Earth of her resources like coal, petroleum, iron, etc. 
As a result, we find earthquakes, floods and such other 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 237 


devastating natural calamities. Human life will find 
fulfilment only when ecological balance is maintained. 


Balance in human life and balance in nature, 
both are equally important. Today even marine life is 
in danger due to so-called advancement in science. 
Advancement in science is welcome but it should not 
lead to ecological imbalance. The people and the world 
at large should be benefited from science. But today 
everyone is interested in selfish gains. No one seems to 
care for society. 


The Foremost Duty Of The Students 


The food that we eat, the water that we drink, 
the air that we breathe are all polluted. In fact, all five 
elements which are of utmost importance for man, are 
polluted. It is the foremost duty of the students to 
cleanse the world of pollution. Keep your body and 
mind clean. Cleanliness is godliness. Purify your 
actions and feelings. Speak sweetly and softly to 
everybody. The culture of Bharat teaches Sathyam 
Vada, Dharmam Chara (speak the truth and adhere to 
righteousness). Love everybody because God is pres- 
ent in all. The Vedas teach, Easwara Sarva Bhutanam 
(God dwells in all beings). God has another name 
Viswa. It means that the entire universe is His form. 


One does not find unity among students as they 
lack the virtue of love. You should consider love as 
your very life. I often tell My students “when the 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 238 


electric current of truth flows through the wire of 
righteousness and enters the bulb of peace, you get the 
light of love. In order to cultivate love, you should 
adhere to the values of Sathya and dharma. Sathyam 
Bruyath, Priyam Bruyath, Na Bruyath Sathyam 
apriyam (speak the truth, speak it in a pleasant way 
and do not speak the truth that is unpleasant). Sathyam 
Bruyath is the moral value, Privam Bruyath is the 
social value and Na Bruyath Sathyamapriyam is the 
spiritual value. But modern man is not interested in 
spirituality. 


Who Is A True Human Being? 


Today the rich and the educated are neglecting 
spirituality. They consider money as the be-all and 
end-all of life. Money can never give peace and bliss. 
Devotion is most essential. The country is facing 
hardships because people lack devotion to God. They 
do not think of God who is manifest in the form of five 
elements. We know water is essential for life. But 
values like truth and righteousness are as essential for 
man as water. Who is a human being? Is he merely the 
body? No. One with purity, love and devotion alone is 
a true human being. Today people are in mad pursuit 
of money. No doubt, money is essential but it should 
be within limits. Once you have love for God, money 
will follow you of its own accord. People are ready to 
sacrifice even their lives for the sake of money but do 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 239 


not spend even a minute in the contemplation of God. 
They do not undertake even a single sacred activity 
during the day in the 24 hours given to them by God. 
Each one has to enquire whether he is making proper 
use of time. People waste a lot of time in vain gossip 
and in watching television, etc. What is it that you get 
out of these activities? You just waste time. Time is 
God. Time wasted is life wasted. 


One may be wealthy but wealth is useless if 
one lacks character. After death, are you able to carry 
your bank balance with you? No. It will remain in the 
bank only. You cannot carry even a fistful of sand with 
you. So, character is most essential, not money. True 
education is that which removes the pollution of the 
mind and develops character. It is not enough if the 
students get good marks; they should take care that 
they do not get bad remarks. Only then will their marks 
have value. 


The Essence Of True Education 


Embodiments of Love! 


Everyone should foster divine qualities, be he a 
student or an elder. Without these virtues, life is mean- 
ingless. For all your needs, do not depend on others, 
depend on God. In fact, you are not human, you are 
God as God is present in all beings. You will remain a 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 240 


human being so long as you think so. Have the firm 
conviction that you are God. Follow dharma and share 
your love with all. This is the essence of true 
education. 


Can you call all those who know 

how to read and write educated? 
Can one be called educated 

merely by acquiring degrees? 
Can you call it education 

which does not confer virtues? 
If education is just for a living, 
Don’t we find birds and 

beasts carrying on their lives?” 


(Telugu Poem) 


The goal of education is not merely reading and 
writing, which constitute worldly education. It is to 
attain purity and divinity. Worldly education is 
transient. Knowledge of the Self alone is eternal. It 
can be acquired only through devotion and love for 
God. Man is born to set an ideal to the rest of the 
world, not to amass wealth. Money makes many 
wrongs. Make your mind sacred. Where are all those 
kings of yore who amassed riches and conquered 
kingdoms? What is the use of such a life? One should 
lead a life that makes one immortal. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 241 


A foolish person boasts of high education and 
intelligence, 

Yet does not know himself. 

What is the use of all the education he has 
acquired, 

If man cannot give up his evil qualities? 

All the worldly education will lead him 
only to vain argumentation, not total 
wisdom. 

It cannot lead him to immortality. 

So, man should acquire that knowledge 
which will make him immortal. 


(Telugu Poem) 


That is true education. It will protect you 
wherever you are. This education will earn you the 
friendship of all, even if you do not have money and 
you are in a foreign land. 


Cultivate Human Values Through Self Effort 


Never give up human values under any circum- 
stances. Only then can you set an ideal to the world. 
Human values cannot be acquired from textbooks nor 
can the teachers bestow them on you. They are with 
you right from your birth. You have to cultivate them 
through self-effort. Lead a truthful life. The whole 
creation has emerged from truth, is sustained in truth 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 242 


and ultimately merges into truth. Is there any place 
where truth does not exist? In order to lead a peaceful 
life, one should always adhere to truth and 
righteousness. No doubt, the path of dharma is beset 
with difficulties. In the beginning, you may have to 
face many problems, but you should take them in your 
stride and proceed on the path of truth. Purity, patience 
and perseverance are very essential for man. But man 
is becoming a patient as he lacks patience. Each one 
has to question himself or herself whether he or she 
has these virtues. It is not enough if you proclaim that 
you are pure; let others say it. 


True Education Fosters Purity And Unity 


Embodiments of Love! 


Do not have excessive desires. It is said, “Less 
luggage more comfort make travel a pleasure.” Your 
desires are the luggage in the journey of your life. You 
will have peace of mind only when you reduce your 
desires. Swami is the best ideal in this regard. I don’t 
have any desires; I don’t want anything. As you are 
aware, we have a very big hospital at Puttaparthi and 
there are many educational institutions. They are 
functioning smoothly because they have been started 
with love and noble intentions. 


My only desire is that all people should live 
like ideal human beings. After the bhajans, you chant 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 243 


the prayer Loka Samasta Sukhino Bhavantu (may the 
entire world be happy!). It is not enough if some are 
happy and some are not. All should be happy. That is 
possible only when human values are practised. There 
are many who give lectures on human values. He alone 
is a true human being who puts them into practice. 
Elders should sow the seeds of human values in the 
tender hearts of the children. They will grow into 
gigantic trees and give shelter to many in future. It is 
said, “Start early, drive slowly, reach safely.” Human 
values should be taught to the children right from their 
early years. So, some schools have to be started for this 
purpose. If you start fostering values from Primary 
School level, the children then will grow to become 
ideal leaders of the nation. Parents and teachers should 
strive hard to inculcate ideals in children. If the parents 
at home, teachers in school and companions in the 
neighbourhood foster values in children, then there is 
nothing greater than this. 


Love Is Most Essential For Mankind 


It is said, “Tell me your company, I shall tell 
you what you are.” As is your company, so shall you 
become. So, run away from bad company; join good 
company. Undertake good activities day in and day 
out. Even the wicked will get transformed on seeing 
your good conduct. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 244 


Love is most essential for mankind. To 
whichever country or race you belong, however rich or 
poor you are, you must adhere to truth and 
righteousness. Use your tongue to speak the truth only. 
With the hands given by God perform acts of charity. 
With the ears capable of hearing, hear only pure words. 
This is the purity of the limbs of man. In the same way, 
you must maintain the purity of the five elements. 


It is solely for this purpose that Jumsai has 
done a lot of work. This task of fostering human values 
cannot be accomplished by a single person. All have to 
join together. Will a single thread make cloth? When 
threads are interwoven, cloth is produced. All worth- 
while causes can be achieved only by the cooperation 
of several people. This handkerchief is strong only 
because many threads have been interwoven closely. If 
you remove the threads one by one, they will break 
easily. So, unity is essential for our movement to 
advance. Jumsai has great hopes for the growth of this 
movement. In the coming three or four days many new 
ideas will emerge in the conference. The faltering of a 
few must be compensated by others and all must move 
forward together. Unity, goodness and good action 
must be practised. If these are practised well, you can 
grow faster and increase in number. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 245 


Human Values Can Not Be Acquired From Books 


It is not enough if you start an institution. The 
students must be brought up in the right way. Speak 
gently. Never show anger towards the children. You 
cannot always oblige but you can speak always oblig- 
ingly. Talk to the children softly and sweetly. Interac- 
tion between the teachers should also be pleasant. Then 
the children will be encouraged by their example. 


Every little thing should be taught to the 
children to the best of your ability. Only then the 
children will learn with enthusiasm. Mathematics, 
Physics or Chemistry can be learnt from books or by 
experiments in the laboratory. But human values 
cannot be learnt that way. It is not something that can 
be acquired from books. It cannot be taught by a 
teacher by mere oral instruction. It is like training in 
physical exercise. Drill can be taught only by demon- 
stration. The drill master demonstrates the actions and 
helps the learners to follow the steps. The children 
imitate their elders. 


Therefore, you should teach the children the 
values of Sathya, dharma, Santhi and Prema by first 
practising the values yourself. Then the children will 
progress in the right direction. The whole country will 
grow. Not only this country, all countries of the world 
will be transformed. There are very few who teach 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 246 


these things today. Fewer still try to prove them. Those 
who practise are rare. That is why the world is in such 
a bad state now. 


Swami Wants Quality And Not Quantity 
Embodiments of Love! 


Many of you may be wealthy. Many of you are 
scholars. Your greatness will not be judged merely by 
your possessions. To what extent you are spending 
your wealth in a good way, to what extent you are 
using your learning to good purpose, to what extent 
you are using your intellect for the good of the 
community, that is what counts with Bhagawan. 
Swami wants quality and not quantity. One 
teaspoonful of cow’s milk is useful. Of what use are 
barrels of donkey’s milk? What you have not put into 
practice is of no use. Practise and demonstrate. Then 
you become truly rich, a true scholar. Wealth, 
scholarship, intelligence—all become worthwhile only 
when used in the right way. 


Money may come and money may go. Things 
like money are mere passing clouds. But love comes 
and grows. You have to realize this in all sincerity and 
earnestness. Then you become truly human. If you 
have love, all will be drawn closer to you. If you are 
devoid of love, none will come near you. A small 
example. Bhagawan is the embodiment of Love. That 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 247 


is why there is such a large gathering here. No 
invitations have been sent to you. My Love has 
attracted all of you here. So, you should also expand 
your love. With love you can achieve anything. 


You have three or four days more in this 
conference. Put together your queries and doubts. 
Analyse them and arrive at appropriate solutions. You 
have to make this conference an ideal for other such 
gatherings. Many people go to seminars and con- 
ferences. Harldly any understanding results. This is not 
such a conference. The outcome of the conference 
should appeal to your feelings and intellect. That is a 
proper conference. All should be united. Develop love 
and share love. Speak the truth. Practise righteous 
conduct. Lead a sacred life. That is true living. Then 
your life will become meaningful. 


Internalise Human Values And Redeem Your Life 


Embodiments of Love! 


Many of you have come from far off places, 
spending a lot of money. After making so much effort 
and spending so much money, you must take back with 
you what will really sanctify your life. All of you have 
assembled here. Share your love with others and 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 248 


receive their love in return. Understand the meaning of 
Sathya, dharma, Santhi and Prema. Fully internalize 
these values. Truth does not mean merely to repeat 
faithfully what you have seen. Truth is eternal; it does 
not change in all the three periods of time (past, 
present and future). You must speak the truth and 
practise righteousness. What is dharma? Dharayati Iti 
Dharmah (that which sustains you is dharma). Dharma 
is the true nature of man. Fire is that which burns. If it 
does not burn, it is mere coal. Only when dharma is 
well-established in a person, his humanness manifests. 
The principle of love must shine prominently in you. 


In the coming few days, if you have any doubt, 
ask without hesitation. Bhagawan is ready to clear all 
your doubts. Make full use of Bhagawan’s proximity. 
Ask and be satisfied. You are Mine and I am yours. I 
and you are one. We are not different from each other. 
Many say ‘thank You,’ ‘thank You’ to Bhagawan. It is 
a meaningless cliché. You thank only the third person. 
Bhagawan is not a third person. He is the second 
person. You do not thank the second person. If your 
mother serves you good food, do you say ‘thank you’ 
to her? No, no, it is her duty. To love you all is the 
duty of Bhagawan. Don’t ever say ‘thank You’ to 
Bhagawan. It is your right to ask. It is your right and 
Bhagawan’s responsibility. When right and responsi- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 249 


bility are balanced, bliss results. 


International Conference on Strengthening Value 
Education, 25-09-2000, Prasanthi Nilayam. 


When the Lord does not approach the 
devotee, the fault lies in the heart of the 
devotee; it is not pure enough. Purify the 
heart by being good and kind to all. Do not 
attempt to find fault with others. Look upon 
all with love, with respect, with faith in 
their sincerity. I would ask you to treat your 
servants kindly. Do not entertain hatred or 
contempt in your heart; show your resent- 
ment, if you must, through words, not 
action. 

Repent for the errors that you commit and 
decide never to repeat them; pray for 
strength to carry out your resolution. 


—Baba 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 250 


The ancient sages proclaimed two 
eternal verities: “Sathyam Vada; 
Dharmam Chara” (Speak the Truth; 
Adhere to Righteousness). These 
were regarded as the two eyes of 
man. Today man has lost these eyes 


and is helpless. 


—Baba 


16 


Educare Is Human Values 


True education is that which fosters pure 
feelings. 

To have virtues is the true meaning of 
learning. 

Only when man cultivates the feeling of love, 
can there be equality. 

Good conduct is the hallmark of a true human 
being. 

(Telugu Poem) 


JHUM Sai made a mention of education and 
human values. You have to understand the true 
meaning of these two words, education and human 
values. Education has two aspects: The first is related 
to external and worldly education, which is nothing but 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 22 


acquiring bookish knowledge. In the modern world, we 
find many, well-versed and highly qualified in this 
aspect. The second aspect known as ‘Educare,’ is 
related to human values. The word ‘Educare’ means to 
bring out that which is within. Human values, namely, 
Sathya, Dharma, Santhi, Prema and Ahimsa (Truth, 
Righteousness, Peace, Love and Non-violence) are 
hidden in every human being. One cannot acquire them 
from outside; they have to be elicited from within. But 
as man has forgotten his innate human values, he is 
unable to manifest them. ‘Educare’ means to bring out 
human values. ‘To bring out’ means to translate them 
into action. 


Our Ancient Sages Had The Vision Of Truth 


The Vedas call the life principle in man as 
‘Sathyam’ (Truth). Without this power of Truth, man 
cannot exist. Our ancients could have the vision of 
Truth by proper investigation and experimentation. 
Truth is the direct manifestation of God for every 
human being. Our ancient sages and seers understood 
this Truth, had the vision of Truth and realized that it is 
present uniformly in every being. Truth is one and the 
same in all and That is God. 


Man is endowed with Pancha Pranas (five life- 
breaths), namely, praana, apaana, vyaana, udaana and 
samaana. These are the divine powers latent in man. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 253 


The human values, namely, Sathya, Dharma, Santhi, 
Prema and Ahimsa are nothing but the manifestations 
of these five life breaths. But man is wasting his 
human birth, as he is unable to recognise these subtle 
principles. When truth is put into practice, it becomes 
righteousness. Truth is expressed in words, while 
righteousness is expressed in action. On this basis, the 
Vedas taught, Sathyam Vada, Dharmam Chara 
(speakTruth, practise righteousness). Hence righteous- 
ness is based on truth. Without truth, there is no 
righteousness. That is why the Vedas say, Sathy- 
aannasthi Paro Dharmaha (there is no dharma higher 
than adherence to Truth). Without the foundation of 
truth, the mansion of righteousness cannot be built. 
Sathyaacharana (practice of truth) is true dharma. This 
dharma is uniform for all human beings. Peace is the 
reflection of dharma. Man prays for peace and per- 
forms various spiritual practices aspiring for peace. 
But so long as he has desires, he can never attain 
peace, though he may undertake sacred rituals like 
yagnas and yagas. Mind is the basis for desires. So, 
one has to control the mind in order to attain peace. 
When the mind is controlled, it remains silent. Such a 
state of thoughtlessness is true peace. 


The Nine Qualities Of Love 


The fourth human value is love. It has 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 254 


originated from the principle of atma. Love is the 
manifestation of Truth. It is pure, steady, effulgent, 
attributeless, formless, ancient, eternal, immortal and 
nectarous. These are the nine qualities of Love. Love 
hates none, unites all. Ekatma Darshanam Prema 
(experience of non-dualism is love). Ahimsa shines as 
the undercurrent of the remaining four values, namely, 
truth, righteousness, love and peace. That which leads 
to violence cannot be truth, righteousness, love or 
peace. These five values are verily the five life-breaths 
of man. One who considers human values as his life- 
breaths alone is a true human being. These five values 
are the fundamental powers of human life. Forgetting 
these fundamental powers, man relies more on worldy 
power. Our ancients realized that these five values 
were meant for the peace and prosperity of the world. 
Without understanding the significance of these values, 
one cannot understand humanness at all. 


In Treta Yuga, Lord Rama incarnated in order 
to foster truth and righteousness. He spent 14 years in 
exile to uphold the promise given to his father. He 
dedicated His life for the establishment of dharma. In 
those days, there were only a few wicked people. 
Rama annihilated them to uphold truth and righteous- 
ness. In the Dwapara Yuga, Lord Krishna incarnated to 
foster peace and love. He protected all those who 
sought refuge in Him and developed love in them. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 255 


Thus, the Rama Avatar fostered Sathya and dharma 
and the Krishna Avatar fostered Santhi and Prema. But 
in this Age of Kali, God has given necessary strength 
to every human being to foster all five values. It is the 
command of God that man should uphold the human 
values and safeguard the world. This is the inner signi- 
ficance of propagating the human values. Man need 
not wait for God to foster these values. He is en-dowed 
with the strength to do the same. These five values are 
your properties. It is your responsibility to protect 
them. Do not expect others to safeguard your property. 


Manifestation Of Latent Human Values Is 
‘Educare’ 


In those days, God incarnated and destroyed 
demons, as there were only a few of them. But today, 
we find demonic nature in everyone. One has to 
cultivate purity to subdue demonic qualities. But purity 
cannot be attained without unity. Unity leads to purity, 
which in turn leads to divinity. But today, there is no 
unity, no purity, no divinity. We find only enmity and 
community, which are nothing but man’s own creation. 
Once you install divinity in your heart, there will be no 
place for enmity because heart is a single chair, not a 
musical chair or a double sofa. In order to install div- 
inity in the heart, you have to practise human values. 
Manifestation of latent human values is known as 
‘Educare.’ If a question is put, what is education? 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 256 


People say, it is the acquisition of knowledge. But it is 
not merely acquisition of knowledge; it must be in 
action. What is the end of education? Character is the 
end of education. What is the essence of education? 
Concentration is the essence of education. What is the 
aim of education? The aim of education is not only 
cultivating human qualities, but attaining divinity. 
Education is meant for life, not for a living. If 
education is meant for a living, don’t we find birds and 
beasts, having no education whatsoever, doing the 
same? So, education should be for life. First of all, one 
should understand this truth. 


‘Educare’ Confers Immortality 


The word ‘Educare’ has a sacred inner 
meaning. That which is manifested by ‘Educare’ 
cannot be seen by the eyes, cannot be heard by the ears 
and cannot be felt by the mind. But all that education 
confers can be seen, heard and felt. Education fosters 
desires and leads to rebirth, whereas ‘Educare’ confers 
immortality. There will be no rebirth. The innate 
divine qualities like truth, righteousness peace, 
patience, forbearance and love cannot be seen by the 
naked eye and they lead to no birth. Modern education 
is giving rise to desires, which form the basis for 
rebirth. You need to develop detachment to control 
desires. Attachment leads to bondage and restlessness. 
The innate values alone can control the desires. Inner 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 257 


voice leads to detachment. You have to enquire into 
the difference between attachment and detachment. To 
attain detachment, you must obtain release from 
worldly bondage. Here is a small example. When you 
insert the key into the lock and turn it to the right, the 
lock opens; you turn it to left, it gets locked. The heart 
is the lock, the mind is the key. You get attachment, 
when your mind is turned towards the world. When it 
is turned towards God, you attain liberation. It is the 
same lock and the same key that are responsible for 
bondage and liberation. The mere change in the 
direction causes a change in the consequence, namely, 
bondage or liberation. Liberation is not some specific 
location—an air-conditioned paradise. It is a state of 
supreme peace. Where do you get the supreme peace? 
It is to be obtained in the realm of a pure heart. It is 
steady, sacred and utterly selfless. To enjoy supreme 
peace, you should achieve a supreme state. Unity, 
purity and Divinity, when these three principles are 
unified, it takes you to supreme state. Take, for 
instance, Rama and Lakshmana. You know what kind 
of brothers they were? Lakshmana was totally loyal 
and followed the commands of his elder brother and 
thereby attained the supreme state. What is the condi- 
tion of the Ramas and Lakshmanas today? Instead of 
attaining supreme state through unity, they go to 
Supreme Court to settle property disputes. De-sires 
take you to Supreme Court. When there are no desires, 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 258 


no quarrels, there will be no Supreme Court. You will 
be in the constant state of supreme peace. 


Conscience, Conscious And Consciousness 


What is our need today? It is not merely educa- 
tion. Education is mere bookish knowledge. There are 
four kinds of knowledge. The first is bookish knowl- 
edge, 1.e., superficial knowledge. The second is general 
knowledge, the third is discriminatory knowledge, the 
fourth is practical knowledge. You have to arrive at the 
level of practical knowledge. But frequently, people 
fall into error even in discriminatory knowledge. There 
is individual discrimination and fundamental discrim- 
ination. Individual discrimination is based on selfish 
gains. It is not right. Fundemental discrimination is 
based on the well-being of all people. The marks that 
students get in the examination are not true marks. 
True marks arise from the heart. Your conscience 
should assert repeatedly and firmly what you are doing 
is right. 

There are three terms to be discussed here. 


“Conscience” is one, the other is “conscious” and third 
is “consciousness.” 


(1) This consciousness is the all-encompassing 
Divinity. From this all-pervasive consciousness, 
conscience enters the body. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 259 


(2) The atmic principle in your body is 
conscience. 


(3) Conscious is the awareness related to the 
body and the senses. 


Children play with balloons. These balloons 
keep blowing to larger and larger size until they burst 
and the air in side merges with the air outside. So long 
as the air is in the balloon, it is conscience. When it 
exceeds the limit of the wall of the balloon and merges 
with the air outside, it becomes consciousness. These 
days people are merely in the body conscious state. 
The body is like a balloon, a water bubble. The mind is 
a mad monkey. Don’t follow the body or the mind. 
Follow the dictates of the conscience. Today people 
are attached more to the body and less to the atmic 
principle. Absence of self-confidence is the main cause 
for all types of weakness. People depend on their 
wealth, possessions and power, but do not depend on 
the Self. 


Self-realisation Through Self-confidence 
Embodiments of Love! 


Self-confidence is very essential. This is the 
foundation on which you must raise the walls of self- 
sacrifice. This mansion determines your life, 1.e., self- 
realisation. You have to therefore lay, first of all, the 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 260 


foundation of self-confidence and build the mansion of 
self-satisfaction and self-sacrifice. Then you ultimately 
attain self-realisation. For self-realisation, self- 
confidence is most important. But people do not 
possess such steady self-confidence. What is the 
reason? Their mind is lost in worldly desires, dirty 
desires and useless desires. How long can the worldly 
things last? They come and go like passing clouds. 
Today students are trained in such education which 
fosters desires. Along with this education, you must 
foster human values. Human values are not something 
that you need to acquire anew. They are born with you 
and are innate in you. As they are hidden within, you 
are unaware of them. Just as valuable ornaments are 
hidden in iron safe, within man’s body lie the valuable 
jewels of human values. You must protect these 
properly. They are covered by the doors of the heart. 
You must earn the key of love for it. When the safe 
vault of the heart is opened by the key of love, the 
valuable qualities of human values emerge. 


Love Is God, Live In Love 


Students, Teachers, Patrons of education and Admini- 
strators! 


The point you have to notice is that all have to 
acquire this key of love that opens the doors of the 
heart. It is love that is the very form of purity. Love is 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 261 


God, live in love. This door of heart cannot be opened 
with any other key. To get this key of love, you have 
to have unity. Hate none. You should be averse to 
none. Place love in your heart. Share it freely with 
others. Realise that truth is the human life principle. 
From Truth emanates righteousness. The first child of 
righteousness is peace. The second child is love - so 
they say. But the greatest of all is love. Once you 
acquire this power of love, all other powers follow. 
Everything arises out of truth. 


From Truth emanates all creation. 

In truth everything dissolves. 

There is no place where truth does not 
permeate, 
the unsullied primordial truth 


(Telugu Poem) 


Truth is the origin, sustainer and annihilator. 
Take Truth as the basis and practise Dharma. Only 
then Peace and Love will emanate from within. 


Values Are Obtained From A Sacred Heart 
Embodiments of Love! 


These divine principles do not come to you 
from somewhere else. As Jhum Sai said the other day, 
we do not get human values from an air-conditioned 
room in a five-star hotel. Five-star or ten-star or a 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 262 


thousand-star—from nowhere do we get these values. 
These values are obtained from a sacred heart. Here 
you find pure, sacred and divine environment. Only in 
such a place can the human values blossom. Human 
values are not available in the market or in palaces or 
in hotels. These hotels provide comforts only to the 
body. Your body may be in an air-conditioned room 
but the mind will get heated if there are no sacred 
feelings. In order to develop sacred feelings, you 
should be in sacred places. That is why it is said, good 
company confers detachment. Detachment leads to 
desirelessness, desirelessness confers steadiness. One 
who attains steadiness is verily liberated. Develop 
friendship with good company. Then alone can you 
attain peace and your heart will be purified. Today we 
find pollution everywhere. Only in the Divine 
proximity, will you find absolute purity. First of all, 
man has to purify his heart. Purity is Divinity. Where 
there is divinity, there can be no enmity. Where there 
is no enmity, there you find supreme peace. Outside 
there is no peace, we find only pieces. Where is peace? 
You are the embodiment of peace. So, search within. 
Know yourself. Then you will know everything. This 
is the teaching of Vedanta. Instead of questioning 
others, “who are you?” question yourself, “who am 
1?” Then you will realize the truth. When I say, this is 
my handkerchief, the handkerchief is separate from 
me. Similarly, when you say, this is my body, my 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 263 


mind, my buddhi, etc.,you are separate from all these. 
Then, who are you? You are the embodiment of Peace. 
You are the embodiment of Truth. You are the 
embodiment of Love. You are the embodiment of 
Righteousness. You are the embodiment of Non- 
violence. You are everything and everything is within 
you. Develop this broad-mindedness. Have expansion 
of love, not contraction of love. Unity can be achieved 
only through expansion of love. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Develop love, give up hatred, reduce desires. 
Cultivate the spirit of sacrifice. The Vedas say: Na 
karmana Na Prajaya Dhanena Thyagenaikena Amru- 
tathwamanasuhu (immortality can be attained only 
through sacrifice; neither action nor progeny nor 
wealth can confer it). Happiness can be attained only 
through sacrifice. After having partaken of food if you 
do not excrete the waste material, your stomach will 
get upset. Once you breathe in air, if you do not 
breathe out, your lungs will get damaged. Likewise, 
sacrifice the wealth you have earned, for the welfare of 
others. The modern education system lays emphasis on 
wealth, strength and friendship. Then what about 
character? Character is three-fourths of life. So, you 
have to develop character. Without character what for 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 264 


is wealth, strength and friendship? They come and go 
like passing clouds. 


There are lots of things to be learnt. There are 
various ways to foster human values. I shall bring My 
discourse to a close as I don’t want to cause any strain 
to you now. We shall discuss many more things later. 


26-09-2000, Prasanthi Nilayam. 


Teaching and learning have both 
become mechanical routines. They 
have lost the freshness and joy which 
vitality alone can give. The value of 
the teaching process lies in raising 
the level of consciousness of the 
learner, in heightening the sense of 
wonder and awe and in emphasising 
the unity of one with all. The destiny 
of a country is decided by the ideals 
implanted by the teachers in the 
minds of boys and girls entrusted to 
their care. 


— Baba 


17 


The Source And Centre Of Values 


Trees teach the lesson of sacrifice in the sense that 
they not only bear fruits while they are alive, 
but also give away their body to be used 


as firewood once the life goes out of them. 
Amongst teachers, a tree is the greatest. 


(Telugu Poem) 


EVERY house is a centre of human values. It is 
from the house that the human values originate, 
blossom and foster the sacred culture. The person 
presiding over the house is known as Grihastha 
(householder). Since ancient times, Indians have 
attached great significance to the stage of a house- 
holder among the four, namely, brahmacharya, griha- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 266 


stha, vanaprastha and sanyasa (celibate, householder, 
recluse and renunciant). 


When a student takes to wrong path, he ruins 
himself, whereas if a teacher takes to wrong ways, he 
will be ruining the lives of hundreds of students. Hence 
a teacher, on whom lies the responsibility of moulding 
the careers of students, must cultivate virtues and lead 
an ideal life. Today, there is certainly no dearth of 
teachers, endowed with the spirit of sacrifice and lead- 
ing ideal lives. But there are some teachers who have 
become slaves to vices like drinking and smoking. 
Naturally, the students emulate them and ruin their 
lives. If the country is to progress, teachers should 
mould the students as ideal citizens. The whole world 
will prosper, when students tread along the right path. 
Hence it is essential on the part of a teacher, whom the 
students are bound to emulate, to cultivate virtues. 


The Teacher Must Have A Pure Heart And Virtues 


A teacher can be compared to a water tank and 
students to taps connected to it. As is the water in the 
tank, so is the water that comes from the taps. 
Therefore, the teacher must have a pure heart and 
virtues like adherence to truth, good conduct, duty, 
devotion and discipline, so that he can impart the same 
to the students. He or she alone is a teacher in the true 
sense, who imparts these virtues to the students. He or 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 267 


she alone is a student in the true sense, who cultivates 
these sacred qualities. If the teachers are ideal, the 
system of education too would be ideal. If the teacher 
does not possess moral, ethical and spiritual values, the 
entire system of education will go astray. Today we 
find some instances wherein the husband and wife part 
ways with each other due to some differences of 
opinion though they may be highly educated and 
occupying positions of authority. The reason is that 
they are not educated in the true sense but merely have 
acquired bookish knowledge. Mere bookish knowledge 
is no knowledge at all. Students should learn true 
knowledge, which bestows divine energy; they should 
not be satisfied with mere bookish knowledge, which 
becomes ‘allergy.’ This divine energy fosters harmony, 
coordination and integration and makes the students 
ideal citizens. 


Haste Makes Waste, Waste Makes Worry 


In this world, only two things exist. One is 
energy; the other, matter. Einstein said, energy could 
be converted into matter and vice versa. This energy is 
all-powerful. By acquiring this energy, students can 
bring about transformation in this world. To acquire 
this energy, students should not go by mere bookish 
knowledge. Practical knowledge should be coupled 
with discrimination knowledge. Before undertaking 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 268 


any task, take time and discriminate whether it is good 
or bad, right or wrong. But the modern students act in 
haste. Consequently, the sacred qualities in them are 
subdued. Haste makes waste, waste makes worry. So, 
do not be in a hurry. What will be the fate of the house 
if the wife and husband take hasty decisions due to 
differences of opinion? The aged parents will be 
neglected or shifted to some home for the aged. The 
children will be admitted in boarding schools without 
adequate care being taken about their welfare and 
progress. As the husband and wife part ways with each 
other, there will be none to look after the children. 
Consequently, the children join bad company, take to 
bad habits and ruin themselves. So, first of all, human 
values should be fostered in every house. Only then 
will each individual of the house make all round 
progress and lead an ideal life. Everyone should 
recognise the basic truth that house is the centre of 
human values. The modern people, more so in the case 
of those highly educated and occupying positions of 
authority, do not care much about their respective 
homes. They consider their homes as inns or hotels and 
come and go as and when they like. It is not proper on 
the part of the students and the educated to conduct 
themselves in this manner. Every householder should 
pledge to maintain sanctity in the house and set an 
ideal. Today in the name of modernity, the house- 
holders are leading a chaotic life entertaining low and 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 269 


mean feelings. You may live in the modern age but 
your feelings should be based on ancient and eternal 
values. Every householder and every housewife should 
make efforts to uphold human values. 


A Teacher Should Have Steady Mind 


A teacher is like a guidepost. He or she should 
guide the students in the proper direction. If the 
guidepost itself is loose, how can it point to the right 
direction? So, a teacher should have a steady mind. 
Only then can he guide the students along the right 
path. He should impart to the students, the human 
values of sathya, dhrama, santhi, prema and ahimsa. 
Many are confused as to what is the foremost value 
among these five. Love is of paramount importance 
among the human values. It is in us right from the time 
of our birth. Love and respect your parents, relatives, 
friends and your fellow-beings. When you do not 
respect others, how can you expect others to respect 
you? Give respect and take respect. It is not one-way 
traffic. There are a very few who would impart such 
sacred teachings to the students. Not only the teachers 
but also the parents should monitor the behaviour and 
activities of their children. Some students hide novels 
among textbooks and read them. The parents should 
take note of this and take necessary action. Parents 
have every right to punish their children if they take to 
wrong ways. The children should show gratitude to 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 270 


their parents as they owe their food, blood, head and 
dhuddu (money) to their parents. Due to the impact of 
Kali Age, such sense of gratitude is missing among 
students. The Vedas declare, Mathrudevo Bhava, 
Pithrudevo Bhava, Acharyadevo Bhava and Athitidevo 
Bhava (revere mother, father, teacher and guest as 
God). These teachings are highly sacred. Today people 
are ready to believe all that they see on television and 
internet but do not repose their faith in the Vedic 
declarations. Internet is like a waste paper basket. 
Follow the ‘innernet,’ not the internet. Today the 
students are developing unsacred vision, thus polluting 
their minds. As is the seed, so is the sapling. As is the 
food, so is the belch. Likewise, as is the action, so is 
the result. So, you should think good, speak good, hear 
good, do good and experience good results. 


See no evil, see what is good; 
Hear no evil, hear what is good; 
Talk no evil, talk what is good; 
Think no evil, think what is good; 
Do no evil, do what is good; 

This is the way to God. 


Teachers should impart such sacred teachings 
to the students. They should inculcate the spirit of 
selfless love in them. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 271 


One Should Not Entertain Excessive Desires 


Love everybody without expecting anything in 
return. One should not entertain excessive desires. Na 
Sreyo Niyamam Vina (no benefit accrues without 
adherence to proper discipline). Everything should be 
within certain limits. Our body is the best example for 
this. If the body temperature crosses the limit of 98.4 
degrees Fahrenheit, fever sets in. 120/80 is the perfect 
blood pressure, crossing which the body will be 
subjected to ill-health. Even the eyes can see light only 
up to a particular level of intensity. The retina of the 
eye will get burnt if you try to see excessive light. 
Thus, God has set certain limits to everything in His 
creation. So, man should keep a check over his desires. 
Otherwise, he will be put to danger. Only when man 
leads a regulated life, can he enjoy health and hap- 
piness. 


Understanding And Adjustment Are Very Essential 


Each limb of the body has a specific role to 
perform. While accomplishing a bigger task, all limbs 
coordinate and work in unison. When the eyes spot a 
fruit on the top of a tree, the legs will walk towards the 
tree; the hand picks up a stone and pelts at the fruit. 
When the fruit drops down, the fingers pick it up and 
put it in the mouth where it is masticated by the teeth 
and sent to the stomach. Thus we see that all limbs of 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 212 


the body have to work in a coordinated manner to 
perform even a small deed. With such unity prevailing 
in the house, anything can be achieved. 


Understanding and adjustment between each 
other are very essential for the smooth functioning of 
any family. For example, when there is proper 
understanding between wife and husband, the wife will 
not mind even when the husband returns home very 
late from office. In fact, she will be anxiously waiting 
for him thinking that he may be busy in the office or is 
held up in a traffic jam. But if there is no proper 
understanding between the two, even if there is a delay 
of just five minutes, there will be a fight between them. 
Adjusting will become easy only when there is proper 
understanding. Whether it is among students, teachers 
or members of a family, understanding is very essen- 
tial. When a teacher goes on leave, another teacher can 
engage his class. Such understanding and adjustment 
among teachers will help students to a great extent. 
Help ever, hurt never. This is the teaching of the an- 
cient culture of Bharat—Paropakaraya Punyaya Papa- 
ya Parapeedanam (one attains merit by serving others 
and commits sin by hurting them). 


The Story Of Abraham Lincoln 


You might have seen the play on Abraham 
Lincoln staged last night. He was born in a poor 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 215 


family. His father was a carpenter and his mother used 
to stitch old clothes and earn some money. What they 
would earn was barely enough to make both ends 
meet. Lincoln used to go to the neighbouring village 
along with other children for studies. Most of the 
children would wear costly dresses as they belonged to 
well-to-do families. They used to make fun of Lincoln, 
as he had only old and ragged clothes to wear. He was 
eight years old at that time. 


One day, he hugged his mother and cried 
saying that he wanted a new dress, so that he could 
mix freely with other children. The mother consoled 
him saying, it was not possible for them to buy new 
clothes with their meagre resources. She told, “son, 
self-confidence is the highest wealth. So, develop self- 
confidence. Don’t compare yourself with others.” After 
sometime, his father passed away. Lincoln started a 
new business, which began to flourish. But some of his 
so-called friends put obstacles in his path out of 
jealousy. Consequently, Lincoln suffered heavy loss in 
the business and sold whatever was left with him to 
repay the debts. He left the village and reached 
California. As advised by his mother, he developed 
self-confidence, strove hard day and night and acquired 
good education. Pleased with his noble qualities, his 
friends urged him to contest the parliamentary elec- 
tions, expressing their solidarity. With their support he 
won the elections. In those days, racial discrimination 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 274 


was prevalent in America. He advocated that one 
should not give scope for differences based on colour 
of the skin as the blood flowing in everybody was the 
same. Since he had immense self-confidence, he 
ultimately rose to the level of the President of Amer- 
ica. Self-confidence is very essential for everybody. 
One can accomplish any task through self-confidence. 
This was the lesson Lincoln taught to the world. 


Truth Is God, Love Is God, Live In Love 


Self-confidence and devotion to Godhead must 
be cultivated. Teachers should be respected. You must 
do your best to make your parents happy; in fact you 
should worship them. Only when you tread this sacred 
path can you attain the highest state of wealth. What is 
wealth? Who is the richest man in the world? The one 
who has contentment is the richest. Who is the 
poorest? The one who is full of unfulfilled desires is 
the poorest. Wealth or poverty is related to your de- 
sires. All worldly praise and blame pertain to the body 
only, not to the spirit. The body is impermanent. It is 
like a water bubble. The mind is a mad monkey. Don’t 
follow either. Follow your conscience. 


Lincoln was one replete with such self-con- 
fidence. We feel that some countries are not amenable 
to accept these values. What is the reason? When the 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 215 


principles are properly explained, everyone will accept 
them. Parrot like repetition of the words “Human 
Values” will not result in understanding. When the 
inner significance is explained, everyone will accept 
them. Tell them—Truth is God, Love is God, live in 
love. When explained thus, everyone will accept. Will 
anybody say ‘no,’ to speak truth? Everyone has to 
accept the validity of these assertions. When you 
explain in detail the inner significance, humanity will 
accept it without reservation. 


No matter whether it is India, America, Japan 
or Germany or Christian or Muslim; Truth is only one 
for all. Truth is one, Truth is God. You should attain 
this sacred state. This fact has to be accepted by any 
nation. We in India say 2+2=4. Whether Pakistan or 
anywhere else, this will be the same. Is there any one 
in Pakistan who will say 2+2=3? Will the Chinese say 
2+2=1? All will say 2+2=4. This is fundamental truth. 
It is a pure truth. It is beyond time and place. It is in 
the same way that eternal values of Truth, Peace, 
Righteousness, Love and Non-violence are permanent 
and eternal. People come to Me and say, “Swami, I 
want peace.” Where is that peace? They don’t know. I 
tell them, “You are the embodiment of peace. There is 
no peace outside you, outside there are only pieces!” 
When this is explained, they realize the truth and 
actually attain peace. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 276 


Wherever You Go, Do Not Give Up Truth 


When you express and explain thus properly, 
anybody from anywhere will agree. Human values are 
those, which are common to all people at all places, 
races and creeds. The very name is human values. If a 
human being will not accept human values, who else 
will? What sort of person is he who will say ‘no’ to 
this truth? There are valuable ideals within us. You 
have to develop them more. Wherever you go, you 
should not give up truth. Sometimes it may not be safe 
to speak the truth. Even then you should not speak lie. 
You must find clever ways to get out of such critical 
situations, without actually speaking a lie. These 
human values, you must adhere to with intelligence, 
self-confidence and the grace of God, and you will not 
go wrong. In any place, any time, or any circumstance 
one should adhere to this. You must see that your love 
is steady and constant. That is the state of constant- 
awareness. That is wisdom. This is not mere textual 
knowledge. You need to possess that truth which gives 
constant understanding. The Vedas call this state 
Prajnanam Brahma (constant-integrated-awareness). 
Everyone must seek this. No one will disagree with 
this. 


A Weak Person Will Achieve Nothing 


It is a self-created fear, whether others will 
agree with us. Don’t fear! Then you will be on the 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 2h 


right course. There was a great scientist who said, 
“never fear, follow me.” Beset with fear, you can 
achieve nothing. When you are on the path of truth, 
you need fear nothing. With fear, you will be helpless, 
paralysed. If anybody says anything to the contrary, 
you can say ‘no,’ that is my way. One says he believes 
in God. Another believes there is no God. For the one 
who believes in God, He is and for the atheist He is 
not. If he says that he does not believe in God, you 
reply him, “You may not have your God, but I have 
mine right here in my heart.” You must have that 
courage of conviction. Other peoples’ opposition 
should not make you weak. A weak person will 
achieve nothing. If the entire world rises and says ‘no’, 
to the existence of God, you should still be able to 
assert ‘no’. He is there right inside your heart. With 
such strong faith, you will be able to propagate your 
faith. That self-confidence is the source of your 
strength. Lacking this strength you become weak, so 
weak to hardly merit the name of a human being. The 
members of the Organisation are full of enthusiasm. 
They sincerely want the propagation of human values 
throughout the world. Keep expressing your beliefs 
with conviction and let those who agree accept them 
and those who do not, go their way. Human values 
have come out from inside the human beings and not 
from anywhere outside. They come out of the 
heart—that is what the term ‘Educare’ means. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 278 


‘Educare’ means ‘elicit,’ 1.e., bring out from within. 
These should be manifested and realized. Such 
knowledge does not come out of books. Bookish 
knowledge of the first day becomes knowledge on the 
second day and allergy on the third day. Practical 
knowledge, internal knowledge, never becomes an 
allergy. It becomes energy. What we need is energy 
and not allergy. 


Do Not Try To Manipulate Others 


If human values are not there, humanity will be 
destroyed. Our life itself is human value. The 
organizers have been trying hard for the spread of 
human values in education. Please extend all your co- 
operation. Without encouragement they become weak. 
There are people from many countries assembled here. 
You will return. What is it that you are taking back 
with you? Carry with you at least one or two human 
values. If you go to the market, wander through it all 
and return empty-handed, is it a great thing? Having 
come to Prasanthi Nilayam, take back something 
valuable with you. There is Bliss here, enjoy it, take it 
with you and make others happy, make the whole 
world happy. Never be selfish. Share what you know 
with all you come in contact. Cooperate with every- 
body. Instead of cooperating, people merely operate, 
try to manipulate. Do not try to manipulate others. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 279 


Only co-operate. You can achieve your objectives. 


There are some questions I would like to 
answer. 


Q1. Swami, please enlighten us how to maintain 
balance of the five elements by the practice 
of human values in a practical way. What is 
the practical procedure? 


In human values we have the term EHV. In 
these three letters I have already enlightened you on 
what is education. Consider it as 3 HV, 1.e., Heart, 
Head and Hand. The harmony between these three is 
3HV. We say Proper study of mankind is Man. Head, 
heart and hands should co-operate and function in 
harmony. There is no human value greater than this. 
This can be taught easily. It is like teaching physical 
drill. Do not try to mystify the expression EHV and 
indulge in elaborate propaganda. Thought, word and 
deed must be the same. If this is not, these human 
values will disappear. Hence this harmony, this unity is 
essential. Lincoln is the best example for this. He 
thought of what he said; adhered to what he professed; 
and, finally, achieved what he believed. Hence this 
threefold unity is essential; otherwise humanity is lost. 
Manas Anyath, Vachas Anyath, Karmani Anyath Du- 
ratmanam, (for wicked persons thought, word and 
deed differ). Manasyekam, Vachasyekam, Karmanye- 
kam, Mahatmanam. (for the righteous, mind, word and 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 280 


deed are the same) Hence, you must propagate this 
easy way. EHV is education in human values. All these 
are important. The thought, word and deed must be the 
same. Without this one ceases to be human. This is 
how you have to propagate. 


Q2. Swami, you have said skill the education. 
How does one skill the education? 


Education must be made into skill. (We have 
already explained that education is external while 
human values are internal; hence the blunt-edged 
education must be sharpened by the internal honing by 
human values). The imbalance caused by the external 
education is balanced by the skill of human values and 
thus the imbalance is corrected and balance restored. 
By skill Bhagawan means Naipunya Shakti (the keen- 
ness of the mind). 


Education is the physical method. When skill 
and knowledge are joined, the scale becomes balanced. 
While walking you need balance. Life needs balance. 
Therefore education should also be balanced. This 
maintenance of balance is what we mean when we say 
skill. This is Naipunya Shakti, 1.e., investigate, enquire 
and understand. A simple example: Scientists have 
understood the internal process of the sun, have studied 
and evolved many machines and devices from these 
processes. Understanding the solar process, they even 
manufactured bombs with similar reactions. How 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 281 


destructive are these bombs? They consider it a great 
achievement. No. The knowledge should have balance. 
This is what Bhagawan calls ‘skill.’ 


All your research should result in the welfare of 
humanity. Then only the beam of the balance is 
straight. If the research is lopsided concentrating on 
destruction only, it is imbalanced. We should consider 
pleasure and pain with equanimity. The results of 
research should maintain balance between benign and 
harmful effects. If only the destructive potentials of 
research are developed, there will be total imbalance. 
We should try to bring back some balance in all these 
new technologies, a balance between the harmful and 
benign consequences. Generation of electricity by 
various means, if employed for irrigation or village 
lighting, how beneficial is it! We are not exercising our 
mind properly on these matters. Hence, we suffer from 
imbalance. Electricity is beneficial in many ways; 
lighting, heating, cooling etc. But, if we say to 
electricity “you are such a fine friend of humanity’ and 
go and touch a live wire, you will be burnt. Every 
development should be employed within limits, and 
given due respect. So, as I have explained, when edu- 
cation is united with skill, the balance is restored. 
When there is imbalance, you look outwards and your 
inner vision is lost. Insight is vital. When there is bal- 
ance, this inner vision is restored. Therefore, develop 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 282 


an inner vision that creates the balance. The key words 
are education, skill and insight. 


Even for meditation, skill is necessary. If you 
sit still in a quiet corner allowing your mind to wander 
all over, your meditation is worthless. If you cannot 
concentrate, you cannot meditate. Thus, for the inner 
processes, skill is necessary. Concentration has to be 
cultivated. Wisdom is the goal of concentration. Wis- 
dom is achieved by the dedication of the fruits of 
action; by sacrifice, the ultimate is achieved. Hence, 
abhyasa, concentration, should be practised with 
effort. Constant practice therefore is the method.. 


Q3. Swami, the mass media like radio, video and 
internet are having more and more effect...... 


I have already told you about internet, radio, 
video, etc. We have seen so many people who have 
been exposed to these media. But, what is their effect? 
All transient, passing clouds that come and go. It is an 
utter waste of time. It is all business-oriented. That is 
not our aim. Do not hanker after internet; turn to the 
innernet. Concentrate on inner vision. Sanctify your 
inner faculties. Then only can you unify and get access 
to human values. You must keep attempting toward 
unification; unity is the aim. When you achieve unity 
how much is your strength magnified? Look at this 
piece of cloth. It is not cloth, but a conglomeration of 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 283 


threads. The threads are a modification of cotton. 
Without cotton there is no thread. Without thread, 
there is no textile. The interwoven threads produce 
such a strong piece of cloth. When separated the 
threads are weak and can be snapped with a finger. 
Their great strength is unity. Human values, when 
internalized, become a sacred force and manifest as 
ideals. 


Q4. Are devotion and spirituality necessary for a 
teacher? 


Of course, without doubt. A teacher without 
devotion is worthless. Let him have faith in his chosen 
faith. Without devotion, he is no teacher. Devotion is 
necessary. He is in charge of several students. He has 
to set an ideal for all of them. For this, Divine grace is 
also necessary. All that you study is only material 
(inert). You have to convert it into energy. That is 
divine power. If one does not have this faith he is no 
teacher. A teacher has to be an ideal for several 
students. How can he be a model? Like a physical 
instructor who instructs by doing, he has to teach by 
being. Devotion has also to be taught by practice. Then 
it will be imprinted in the minds of the students. 


QS. Swami, increasingly the emphasis on educa- 
tion and academic achievement is gaining 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 284 


importance. Please advise us as to how to 
bring ‘spirituality’ back into the main 
stream of education? 


Yes, ‘spirituality’ is very necessary in edu- 
cation. This spirituality has to arise from confidence. 
You must have confidence. If there is no faith you can 
achieve nothing. Where there is confidence there is 
Love. Where there is Love, there is Peace. Where there 
is Peace, there is Truth. Where there is Truth there is 
Bliss. Where there is Bliss there is God. In fact, 
without faith you can have no faith even in your 
mother. There should be confidence. Once you have 
confidence that a person is your mother, you love her. 


Confidence leads to love. Love takes you to 
peace. Peace produces truth and as soon as truth 
manifests, you achieve bliss. This Bliss is the very 
God-head itself. So, confidence is a necessary 
characteristic. It is this loss of confidence that is the 
cause of lack of spirituality in the world. Therefore this 
confidence 1s necessary. 


29-09-2000, Prasanthi Nilayam 


18 


Impact Of Mother’s Thoughts On 
Children 


Embodiments of Love! 


In this world, wife, children and other relations 
are not permanent; they come and go. 

Truth alone is permanent. 

Worldly power, high status and even kingdoms 
are transitory; the only eternal reality is truth. 
The path of truth bestows all 

prosperity and auspiciousness. 

There is no greater opulence than truth in this 
world. 


(Telugu Poem) 
THIS day of 19" November is celebrated as 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 286 


Ladies’ Day in order to delve into the sacred qualities 
of women and disseminate them. Women are the 
repositories of truth and culture. Though the earth is 
one, the plants vary depending upon the seeds sown. 
The womb of the mother symbolizes the mother earth. 
As is the seed of thought sown in it, so is the fruit that 
it yields. You cannot expect mangoes by sowing a 
neem seed. So, the mother should foster good thoughts, 
good words and good deeds. Only then can she beget 
virtuous children. Today we find many children having 
bad qualities and wicked conduct. The reason for this 
can be attributed to the bad thoughts of their mothers. 


Some Noble And Virtuous Mothers 


Aryamba was born in Kerala. She was a 
paragon of virtues. She spent all her time in the 
contemplation of God and in undertaking noble deeds. 
As a result, Sankaracharya was born to her. San- 
karacharya could become Jagadguru (world teacher) 
because of his mother’s virtuous thoughts. 


Noble souls like Vivekananda and Rama- 
krishna Paramahamsa could attain exalted positions in 
their lives only due to the sacred feelings of their 
mothers. 


Putlibai, the mother of Mahatma Gandhi, spent 
her life in the contemplation of God. She used to 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 287 


observe a vow wherein she would not partake of food 
unless she heard the singing of cuckoo. One day it so 
happened that the song of cuckoo was not heard. 
Gandhi, who was a small boy then, could not bear to 
see his mother fasting for a long time. He went behind 
the house and mimicked the singing of cuckoo. 
Putlibai felt very sad as she knew that her son was 
uttering a lie. She cried, “O God! What sin have I 
committed that I gave birth to a son who speaks 
untruth?” Realising that he had caused immense grief 
to his mother by uttering a lie, Gandhi took a vow that 
he would never indulge in falsehood thenceforth. So, it 
is imperative that the mother gives training in moral 
values to her children right from their childhood. She 
should not overlook the mistakes of her children. She 
should punish her children whenever they stray away 
from the right path and reward them for their good 
deeds. It is because of the feelings of the mother that 
the children become good or bad. 


Gandhi’s mother was a strict disciplinarian and 
pure-hearted. As the saying goes, “Yatha Raja, Thatha 
Praja” (as the king, so the subjects), she had a maid- 
servant named Rambha, who used to look after the 
children with love and care. One day, Gandhi came 
running to her and told that he was haunted by fear. 
Rambha told him, “My dear one, where is the need to 
fear when all-protecting Ramachandra is with us 
always. Recite the Name of Rama whenever you are 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 288 


fear-stricken.” From then onwards, Gandhi chanted the 
Name of Rama till his last breath. Can we find such 
noble-hearted women today? It is because of such wo- 
men that the children take to the path of righteousness. 


Story Of A Noble Son And A Noble Mother 


Here is a small example. After the war for the 
liberation of Rangoon, a mother and her son somehow 
managed to reach Chennai, having lost their near and 
dear ones. They had no shelter over their head nor any 
food to eat. The mother would go begging for alms 
from house to house, give most of it to her son and 
partake of whatever little was left. When she would not 
get enough, she would give the entire food to her son 
and herself would go without food. She was put to 
many difficulties, but she bore everything for the sake 
of the well being of her son. Consequently, she became 
weak day by day. One day the son, unable to see her 
suffering, told her, “Mother, it is not proper on your 
part to feed me and starve yourself. From today, you 
take rest and I will fetch food for both of us.” But the 
mother said she could not bear the sight of her son 
begging for alms. However, on a certain day, the 
mother was too weak even to walk. So, the son went to 
beg food. He stood in front of the house of an officer 
and cried,” O sir, I am hungry, I am hungry.” The 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 289 


officer, who was relaxing in an easy chair in the 
verandah, brought food on a leaf and told him to sit 
and partake of it. But the boy said that he would take it 
home. The officer said, “I don’t think you are really 
hungry, otherwise why should you take it home.” 
When the officer was uttering these harsh words, the 
boy felt giddy and fell down. He was trying to say 
something, but could not say it loudly as he was very 
weak. The officer went close to the boy and tried to 
hear what he was saying.” Sir, I would like to give it to 
my mother first, only then I will eat. First, to my 
mother, to my mother...,” and he breathed his last. 


Can we find such noble sons today? We cannot 
find such mothers and sons today. It is not merely the 
effect of Kali age, but also the result of modern 
education system. Today’s education is meant only for 
earning a living. The educated do not think of the 
welfare of society and the country at large. 


Great Merit Lies In Fulfilling Your Mother’s 
Wishes 


You all know the story of Ishwarchandra 
Vidyasagar. He was living with his mother in a village 
near Kolkata. They were very poor. She used to feed 
her son with whatever she could earn everyday and did 
not care much about herself. Her son’s well being was 
uppermost in her mind. She wanted him to lead a 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 290 


peaceful and sacred life. Being a hard working student, 
Vidyasagar used to study under street lights. He 
completed his postgraduation and took up a job. 
Initially, his salary was very less, just enough for his 
mother and himself. Gradually, he attained good 
position. Once a fair was held in the village. 
Vidyasagar’s mother went to the fair wearing an old 
sari as she had no other good sari to wear. Seeing this, 
Vidyasagar felt very sad. That very evening, he bought 
a good sari for her. Once during the course of their 
conversation, Vidyasagar asked his mother if she had 
any desires. She said, “Son, the people of our village 
are facing hardship due to lack of drinking water. I feel 
pained to see them trekking long distances to fetch 
water. I will be happy if you can get a well dug in our 
village.” Vidyasagar immediately got a well dug and 
fulfilled his mother’s desire. Her joy knew no bounds. 
She said, “Son, water sustains life. You have quenched 
the thirst of the villagers. I am extremely happy that I 
have given birth to a noble son like you.” 


On some other day, Vidyasagar asked his 
mother if she had any more desires. She said, “Son, the 
children of our village are going to the neighbouring 
village to attend school. I am pained to see children 
walking such a long distance everyday. So, please 
construct a small school in our village”. Accordingly, 
Vidyasagar established a school in the village, giving 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 291 


immense joy to his mother. She said, “Son, you have 
set an ideal not merely to our village but to the entire 
nation. Your life is sanctified.” 


After a few days, one evening, when 
Vidyasagar returned home from office, he found his 
mother in a pensive mood. On being asked for the 
reason, she said, “Son you have provided water to the 
village and also established a school for children. But, 
it is the lack of medical facilities in our village that is 
troubling my mind. Please build a small hospital here.” 
As per her wish, he constructed a small hospital which 
had one doctor and one nurse. His mother was 
overjoyed at this. The reason for My telling you all this 
is to emphasise that the feelings of mothers are noble. 
Each one has to resolve to fulfil the sacred disires of 
his mother. One should never act in such a way as to 
cause pain to one’s mother. 


Sacred Desires Of Swami’s Mother 


Like the mother of Ishwarchandra Vidyasagar, 
Swami’s mother had also some sacred desires. One 
day, while I was having My food upstairs, Griham 
Ammayi (mother of Swami’s physical body) came to 
Me. I asked, “Amma, what is the reason for your com- 
ing here?” She said, “You finish your food first, then I 
will tell You.” After I finished My food, she said, 
“Swami, ours 1s a very small village. Here people are 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 292 


put to a lot of suffering due to the absence of medical 
facilities. They have to run to Bukkapatnam even for a 
small problem.” Then I assured her that I would build a 
hospital in the village. As promised, I got a small 
hospital built immediately. 


On some other day, she again came upstairs 
and said, “Swami please don’t think otherwise, I have 
one more desire”. I asked her not to have too many 
desires. She said, “Swami, You are fulfilling the 
desires of thousands of people who are coming to You. 
Why can’t You fulfil my one desire?” Then I said, 
“Tell Me your desire”. She said, “Swami, the wells of 
our village have dried up. Please get a well dug in our 
village.” As per her wish, I got a well dug in our 
Mandir itself. All the people of the village used to take 
water from this well. She said she was extremely 
happy but added that she had one more desire. She 
said, “Swami, the children of our village are going to 
Bukkapatnam for their studies. Poor children, they 
don’t have the strength even to walk such a long 
distance. Please construct a school here”. I fulfilled her 
that desire also. She felt very happy and said that she 
had no more desires left. Just as a small seed becomes 
a huge tree, the small school I established then has 
become a big university now. At that time, I con- 
structed a small hospital. But now here is a big Super 
Speciality Hospital. The small well that I got dug here 
in the village has assumed gigantic proportions of a 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 293 


water project for the entire district. If the feelings of 
the mother are sacred, so too will be the feelings of the 
children. 


Chaitanya Mahaprabhu And His Noble Mother 


If the thoughts are sacred, they will certainly 
fructify. One need not think that one does not have 
enough money or resources. If you resolve to do 
something good, you are bound to succeed. The power 
of noble thoughts will give you the necessary strength. 
Once Chaitanya Mahaprabhu went to a temple along 
with his mother Sachi Devi. He prayed, “O Lord, You 
are the master of the world. You are the master of the 
body, life and soul. You can grant any wish that I ask 
for. But I don’t have any worldly desires. I do have one 
desire. You are the embodiment of love. Love is our 
life. So, please grant me the strength to love You. I 
don’t want anything else.” Chaitanya Mahaprabhu 
developed such noble thoughts because of the noble 
feelings of his mother Sachi Devi. She always taught 
him that all the needs of a person were automatically 
taken care of once he became the recipient of God’s 
grace. 


Chaitanya used to go round the streets singing 
the glory of Krishna. Good and bad, auspiciousness 
and inauspiciousness co-exist. Where there is light, 
there is bound to be its shadow. Likewise, good people 
are bound to face difficulties. But those difficulties will 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 294 


enhance the goodness in them. 


Pleasure and pain, good and bad co-exist, 
None can separate them. 

You cannot find pleasure or pain, 

Good or bad to the exclusion of the other. 


Pleasure results when difficulties fructify. 
(Telugu Poem) 


Once when Chaitanya was singing the glory of 
Krishna in the streets, some evil-minded people 
snatched away the cymbals from his hands. But he was 
least perturbed. He continued to sing the glory of 
Krishna with firm faith and devotion. Seeing Chai- 
tanya, the children would get inspired and they too 
would join him in singing the divine name. Chaintanya 
used to make children sit around him and impart sacred 
teachings to them. Chaitanya became a noble soul 
because of the noble feelings of his mother. So, the 
mother should have pure thoughts and good conduct. 
Only then will she be blessed with ideal children. 


Service To Villagers Is Dear To Swami 


Since time immemorial, Bharat has been punya 
bhumi (the land of merit), yoga bhumi (the land of 
spirituality) and thyaga bhumi (the land of sacrifice). 
The greater the sacrifice you do, the greater will be the 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 295 


tejas (effulgence) around you. I am giving you a small 
example. 


I always have tejas around Me. But some 
people who came during the last fifteen days said, 
“Swami, Your fejas is ever increasing.” 


Right from the beginning, welfare of the 
villagers has been dear to Me. But as I got involved 
with education, health and water projects, I could not 
pay much attention to this work. A month ago, while I 
was sitting in a chair, I happened to see a small piece 
of paper. When I picked it up, I found the photographs 
of dead bodies of a mother and her son. The mother 
could not bear the sight of her son suffering from 
hunger. Neither could she go out for alms as it was 
raining heavily. Seeing no possibility of stopping of 
the rain, she felt very dejected, mixed rat poison in 
water, gave it to her son and drank herself. As a result, 
both of them died. This incident took place last month 
only. This was published in a newspaper. Some 
newspapers usually ignore good news and publish such 
bad news items only. They are always in search of bad 
news. Their hands do not write and their intellects do 
not function when it comes to publishing good news. 
This is the effect of the sins accumulated over their 
past lives. I felt very sad that such an incident took 
place in this sacred land of Bharat which is known as 
Annapoorna (goddess of food). Immediately, I stopped 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 296 


all other activities and started village service 
programme. Food and clothes were distributed in 
various villages giving encouragement and happiness 
to people. 


“My Bliss Is Ever Increasing Day After Day” 


Our students are like gold. They worked hard 
right from morning till night with enthusiasm. They 
went to each and every house in the villages and 
distributed food. I felt very happy. If anybody does any 
noble act of sacrifice, I am prepared to do anything for 
him. The more one sacrifices, the greater will be one’s 
tejas. Though I eat very little, My tejas is ever 
increasing. Everyday after the morning bhajan, I take a 
little ragi sankati (gruel made of a coarse grain) and 
chutney or curry made of leaves. 


This is what I used to take earlier and it is the 
same now also. There has been no change in it. I eat a 
little food, yet I have tremendous tejas. The tejas 
comes not because of food but because of the spirit of 
sacrifice. One gets a lot of strength when one involves 
oneself in social welfare activities. When I walk slowly 
among the devotees, some people wonder if I have 
pain in My legs. Neither I have pain in My legs nor I 
get any disease. I walk slowly among the devotees 
only to give them darshan for a longer duration of 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 297 


time. I have no pain whatsoever nor any disability. I 
am always blissful. My bliss is ever increasing day 
after day. Consider service to humanity as your very 
life breath. Then you too will have divine effulgence. 


Make God’s Name As Your Pulse Beat 


God is not separate from you. Donot be under 
the impression that God is present only in temples. 
Deho Devalaya Prokto Jeevo Deva Sanathana (body is 
the temple and the indweller is God). So, you do not 
need to go in search of God elsewhere. Turn your vi- 
sion inward and you will find God. He is the embodi- 
ment of bliss. You are getting drowned in illusion on 
account of excessive attachment to the body. Get rid of 
body attachment and develop attachment towards God. 
Then you will become God yourself. God and man are 
not separate from each other. God is everybody. This 
temple of body is able to move around because God is 
within. It is said, Sathyam Jnanam Anantham Brahma 
(Brahman is truth, wisdom and eternity). One has to 
tread the path of truth in order to understand the 
principle of Brahman. To know the principle of Brah- 
man you need not go here and there. Have total faith 
that the body is the temple of God. Then you will get 
infinite bliss and tremendous strength. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 298 


Consider every work as God’s work. Some 
people may wonder how going to office can be God’s 
work. That is also God’s work because God is all- 
pervasive. Sarvata Pani-padam Tat Sarvathokshi 
Siromukham, Sarvata Sruthimalloke Sarvamavruthya 
Thishthati (with hands, feet, eyes, head, mouth and 
ears pervading everything, He permeates the entire 
universe). You may undertake any action but do it as 
an offering to God. Since ancient times, Bharatiyas 
fostered such noble feelings. That is why Bharat at- 
tained the exalted position of the teacher to the rest of 
the world. 


Some Noble Women Of Bharat 


This land of Bharat has given birth 
to many noble women like 

Savitri, who brought her dead husband 
back ‘to life; 

Chandramati, who extinguished wild fire 
with the power of truth; 

Sita, who proved her chastity by coming out 
of blazing fire unscathed and 

Damayanthi, who reduced an evil-minded 
hunter to ashes with the power of 
her chastity. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 299 


It was because of such women of character 
that Bharat attained the reputation of 
being 

The land of plenty, prosperity and 
opulence, and 

Became the teacher of all the nations of the 
world. 


(Telugu Poem) 


There are many scholars, intellectuals and edu- 
cated people in this country. But all their learning and 
intelligence is proving futile because they are 
immersed in selfishness and self-interest. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Foster love, speak the truth. Do not waste time 
in acquiring merely bookish knowledge. One cannot be 
called educated in the true sense just because one 
acquires degrees. True education is that which confers 
good intellect and noble qualities like adherence to 
truth, duty, devotion and discipline. You have to sanc- 
tify your life with good thoughts, good words and good 
deeds. Only then will the ancient culture of Bharat be 
revived. 


Chant the Name of God incessantly. It should 
be like your pulse beat. Body becomes lifeless if there 
is no pulse beat. Likewise, you will become a living 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 300 


corpse if you do not chant Divine Name. Consider 
whatever happens as good for you. When you foster 
such good thoughts, they will naturally turn into good 
actions, which will set an ideal to others. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Today people are prepared to undergo many 
difficulties in pursuit of S7i (wealth). But Chaitanya 
Mahaprabhu considered Hari (Lord Vishnu) as his only 
wealth. He gave up Svi and contemplated on Hari. That 
is why I often sing, Hari Nama Bina Anand Nahin (one 
cannot have bliss without chanting the Divine Name). 
So, chant the Divine Name, take to the service of 
society. Do not make distinctions between your people 
and other people. Consider everybody as a member of 
the universal divine family. Experience bliss by cul- 
tivating the spirit of unity. Do not entertain any dif- 
ferences whatsoever. Treat each body as a temple and 
offer your salutations. Have the firm conviction that 
God is present in all. When you cultivate such noble 
thoughts, God will certainly become manifest in you. 


19-11-2000, Prasanthi Nilayam 


19 


God Incarnates To Serve Mankind 


Embodiments of Love! 


Just as the birds have two wings 
which help them to fly, 

Love and service are the two wings which 
enable man to reach his goal of life quickly. 


(Telugu Poem) 


MAN is born to render selfless service and not 
to indulge in selfishness. Selfless service alone can 
achieve unity of mankind. Only through unity can 
humanity attain divinity. Hence service is very 
essential to understand this unity in humanity. People 
are under the impression that service means merely to 
help the poor, the weak and the forlorn. It is a big 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 302 


mistake to think that you are rendering service to 
others. In fact, you are serving yourself because the 
same principle of the atma, the same principle of love 
is present in all. All men are essentially one. The 
differences lie only in their feelings. So, man should 
change his feelings and try to recognise the truth that 
the same divinity is immanent in all. Only then can 
there be transformation in man. 


Selfless Service Kills Ego 


The hands do the work, the tongue performs 
the task of talking and the head enquires. All these 
limbs of the body may be different from each other but 
the divine power that exists in them is one and the 
same. Likewise, the same divinity exists in all beings. 
Once you understand this truth, the service you render 
will become divine. One should not become egoistic 
thinking that one is doing great service. Actually, 
service is meant to kill ego. You cannot call it service 
if it is rendered with ego. First of all, ego has to be 
subdued. Body attachment is the root cause of ego. 
Ego will vanish once the body attachment is given up. 
The spirit of oneness will develop once the ego is 
annihilated. 


Just as hands, eyes, nose, mouth, etc., are the 
limbs of the body, likewise all human beings are the 
limbs of society. Society is the limb of Nature and 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 303 


Nature is the limb of God. Seeing this vast Nature, one 
should not think that it is different from God. One 
should understand the fundamental truth that divinity 
pervades the entire creation. Bulbs, their colours and 
wattage may vary, but the current in all of them is one 
and the same. Likewise, names and forms of indiv- 
iduals may be different but the principle of the atma 
that exists in all of them is one and the same. The ser- 
vice you render will become meaningful only when 
you understand this truth. You should not think that 
you are different from the one whom you are serving. 
This kind of dualistic feeling gives rise to evil qualities 
like hatred, jealousy, etc. In fact, all evil qualities like 
desire, anger, greed, etc., are of man’s own making. 
They arise from the head, whereas noble qualities like 
love, compassion forbearance, originate from the heart. 
Head sees unity as diversity, whereas heart proves uni- 
ty in diversity. Hence, head symbolizes pravritti (out- 
ward path) and heart stands for nivritti (inward path).’ 


Never think that society cannot progress if you 
do not render service. Society does not depend on you. 
If not you, someone else will do the needful. God 
governs everything. In the first instance, try to under- 
stand the meaning of the word “service”. It is possible 
to understand this once you understand who you are. 
You are a manava (human being). Manava does not 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 304 


mean the physical form alone. It is synonymous with 
the principle of the atma. Human being is the 
manifestation of the five elements. The ancient sages 
had total control over the five elements and thus could 
enjoy peace and security. Man will shine forth as 
atmaswarupa (embodiment of the atma) once he 
becomes the master of the five elements. 


Levels Of The Mind 


There are different levels of the mind, namely, 
Super Mind, Higher Mind, Hlumination Mind and 
Over Mind. Man will reach the stage of totality only 
when he attains the level of Over Mind. 


Super Mind is related to body consciousness. 
The source of body consciousness is the principle of 
the atma that pervades the entire body. Body con- 
sciousness becomes thought consciousness when one 
reaches the level of Higher Mind. Body consciousness 
is limited to physical level, whereas thought conscious- 
ness has no such limits and can travel up to any 
distance. That is why thought consciousness is termed 
as Higher Mind. Higher Mind transcends the five 
elements. To reach this transcendental state, one has to 
begin with Super Mind. Higher Mind however does 
not signify the highest state. [lumination Mind is, in 
fact, beyond Higher Mind. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 305 


The Power Of Illumination Mind 


There is current in the human body from top to 
toe. The body itself is a big generator. Illumination 
Mind, which is related to the current in the body, is 
very powerful. When one attains this level, one will 
have current even in one’s nails and hair. A worldly 
person will not feel any pain when his nails are 
clipped, but after attaining the level of illumination 
Mind, one will get a shock when one tries to clip the 
nails. Modern youth may attribute this to non- 
availability of nail cutters in those days. But one need 
not have a nail cutter to clip one’s nails. One nail can 
cut the other. But the person at the level of 
Illumination Mind will feel the shock when his nails 
are clipped. The thoughts, words and deeds of one with 
Illumination Mind are suffused with divinity. That 
gives rise to a very powerful ‘three phase’ current in 
the body. Such people will have current even in their 
hair. You can feel the shock when you touch their hair. 
Even in an ordinary individual, there is electric current 
in the body. 


The electricity present within spreads in the 
entire body because of the pumping of the heart. The 
doctors say that the lungs purify the blood with oxygen 
and send it to the heart. But actually, the life-force 
present in the lungs becomes current through vibration. 
This current can travel a long distance. Each time the 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 306 


heart pumps, the blood travels a distance of 12,000 
miles in the body. How can we say this? When we join 
all the blood vessels in the body, both small and big 
(arteries, veins, capillaries, etc.), they cover a length of 
12,000 miles. Just as a generator can illumine a bulb 
connected to it even at a distance of 100 miles, like- 
wise the current originating from the sacred feelings in 
the heart can travel up to any distance. This is the 
power of Illumination Mind. 


God’s Creation Is The Most Mysterious 


At the level of Illumination Mind, one’s mind 
undergoes a great change and becomes the subtle 
force. This subtle force has three powers—prana 
shakti, mano shakti and vijnana shakti. No scientist, 
doctor or engineer can understand this. You can give 
rest to any limb of the body but not to the heart. The 
heart continues to function even in your sleep. Which 
doctor or scientist can understand this? The eye looks 
so small but there are 13 lakh light rays in it. Who has 
made it? All this is God’s creation. God’s creation is 
the most mysterious, sacred and wonderful. All that is 
seen outside is nothing but the reflection, reaction and 
resound of the inner being. You go to a temple in order 
to have the vision of God. But when you stand in front 
of the idol, you close your eyes and pray. The inner 
meaning of this is that one has to see God not with the 
physical eyes, but with the eyes of wisdom. You will 
get the eyes of wisdom only when you turn your vision 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 307 


inward. That is the reason people meditate with their 
eyes closed and visualize God within. The whole world 
is just the reflection, reaction and resound. You desire 
for the reflection forgetting the reality. 


The gross body is made up of food. The mind, 
the intellect, the chitta and the ahamkara constitute the 
subtle body. It is the subtle body that experiences pain 
and pleasure. The Illumination Mind comprises the 
causal body. It transcends worldly thoughts and 
feelings. There is no trace of desire, anger, greed, ego, 
pride and jealousy in it. The level of [I}umination Mind 
is reached only when all the worldly thoughts are 
subdued. In order to control worldly thoughts, one has 
to reach the level of Super Mind. Super Mind is 
nothing but superior mind, that which transcends the 
ordinary mind. The fundamental basis to attain Super 
Mind is to cultivate super love, 1.e., love without any 
desire. That is why I often tell you, love is God, live in 
love. Start the day with love, spend the day with love, 
fill the day with love and end the day with love. This is 
the way to God. When you wake up in the morning, do 
not think of your mundane activities. Wake up with the 
feelings of pure love. But today, man does not have 
such feelings of pure love. The reason for this, as I told 
you yesterday, is that the parents themselves have no 
sacred feelings. If the parents wake up in the morning 
abusing each other, the children go a step further and 
fight with each other as soon as they wake up. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 308 


Man Should Fill His Mind With Love For God 


At the time of birth, man has no desires. But as 
he grows up, he acquires many desires which lead to 
bondage. Man should fill his mind with love for God. 
He should forget all his worrries and contemplate on 
Him. This is possible only through practice. Reading, 
writing, walking, talking, all these are learnt only 
through practice. Likewise, even in the path of 
spirituality, practice is very essential. Start practising 
love. That is the correct spiritual practice. Share your 
love with more and more people. You will experience 
oneness. Once you start sharing your love with 
everybody, then the whole world will become one 
family. After expanding your love in this manner, 
control your external thoughts and turn inward. Then 
you will attain the state of Illumination Mind where 
there are absolutely no thoughts and no action. Even 
the iron is melted by the power of electric current. 
Likewise, the duality of good and bad is annihilated by 
the Illumination Mind. In spiritual parlance, this is 
called samadhi state. samadhi means sama+dhi (equal- 
mindedness). The Hlumination Mind unifies good and 
bad and develops the spirit of oneness. What is it that 
you have to do in order to attain this state? Serve all 
with love. Consider service to man as service to God. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 309 


When it comes to rendering service, do not 
observe any differences. Do not consider that you are 
rich and the other man is poor. Who is the richest man 
in the world? The one who has contentment is the 
richest man in the world. Who is the poorest man? The 
one who has many desires is the poorest man. Cut 
short your desires. It is said, “Less luggage more 
comfort make travel a pleasure.” You can have a 
comfortable journey of life only when you reduce the 
luggage of your desires. The lesser the desires, the 
greater will be the will power. The body has death but 
not the mind. The mind is responsible for everything. 
So, fill your mind with pure and selfless thoughts. 
Then you will attain the state of Illumination Mind. 
Gradually, you will cross [lumination Mind and attain 
Over Mind. In Vedantic parlance, this is known as the 
state of amanaska (non-existence of mind). Once the 
mind is withdrawn, only the principle of the atma, 1.e., 
the Superconsciousness exists. 


Develop Purity Through Service 


Man has the capacity to attain any exalted 
position. Any task can be accomplished through 
practice. A small ant can travel hundereds of miles if 
it decides to do so. But even an eagle, endowed with 
strong wings, cannot move an inch without effort. 
Love and service are like two wings for man. He can 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 310 


attain any exalted position with the help of these two 
wings. The lives of many noble souls bear testimony to 
this fact. 


Divinity Is Present In Every Cell Of The Human 
Body 


Today man finds it difficult to sit quietly and 
steadily even for a few minutes. But our ancients could 
keep their body steady in one posture for any number 
of days. People think that the body is able to move 
because of the circulation of blood and the functioning 
of nerves. But when one reaches the state of Illu- 
mination Mind, blood circulation stops. You may think 
that the body becomes lifeless without blood circu- 
lation, but super blood starts circulating and makes the 
body function. When super blood starts circulating in 
the body, it becomes superior in nature. 


In this connection, the Upanishads declare: 
“Raso Vai Saha” (God pervades the body in the form 
of essence). Then all that one sees, does and 
experiences becomes divine. Just as sugar is present in 
every drop of syrup, Supreme Power (Divinity) is 
present in every cell of the human body. But today, 
man considers himself to be weak. He alone can 
experience bliss who understands the truth that 
everything is within. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 311 


All that man learns from books is nothing but 
the reflection, reaction and resound of the inner being. 
Man’s speech is decided by the feelings of the inner 
being. Speech is resound and heart is the real sound. 
This real sound leads to resound. In the path of 
spirituality, there are many such subtle secrets. 
Without understanding these secrets, man undertakes 
various spiritual practices and wastes his time. You 
need not undertake any spiritual practice once you 
understand the fundamental truth. 


Neither by penance nor by pilgrimage nor 
by study of scriptures nor by Japa can 
one cross the ocean of life. 


One can achieve it only by serving the pious. 
(Sanskrit Sloka) 


When you serve others, your power will also 
increase. The power of attraction is present in 
everybody. The purer you become, the greater will be 
your power of attraction and so, you will absorb more 
power. All the powers that are present in the earth are 
latent in man. Man, in fact, is the reserviour of all 
powers—electrical, magnetic and laser. Thus, man is 
very powerful. Then why should he consider himself 
weak? 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 312 


For Everything Service Is Important 


Some people come to Me and complain that 
they are unable to control their mind. How can you 
control your mind ? You can control your mind only 
through love and not merely by sitting in meditation. 
When you develop love, there will be no scope for evil 
qualities like anger and hatred. You will be able to love 
even your enemies. You will not consider anybody as 
your enemy; you will see oneness in all. That is 
blissful life. Bliss sheath is the last of five sheaths 
present in man, namely, annamaya_ kosha (food 
sheath), pranamaya kosha (life sheath), manomaya 
kosha (mind sheath), vijnanamaya kosha (wisdom 
sheath) and anandamaya kosha (bliss sheath). Today 
man is able to travel only upto mind sheath. Thereafter, 
he does not have the ticket nor does he have the chariot 
to reach bliss sheath. People are under the mistaken 
notion that vijnanamaya kosha is related to science. 
But, in fact, it has nothing to do with science. There is 
a gulf of difference between wisdom and science. 
Science is related to the power of the mind and 
machine, whereas wisdom originates from the power 
of the atma. For everything service is important. 


Duty Relates To Duality Whereas Service To 
Oneness 


When the Pandavas were making arrangements 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 313 


to perform Rajasuya Yajna, Lord Krishna approached 
Dharmaraja and asked if everything was ready. 
Dharmaraja replied that all arrangements were over 
and he had allotted various duties to others. Then 
Krishna requested for an opportunity to render some 
service. He used the word service and not duty because 
duty relates to duality, whereas service to oneness. 
Dharmaraja said, “Swami, what service can I assign to 
You? Instead give us an opportunity to serve You”. 
Krishna said, “I don’t require others’ service. I serve 
everybody”. God assumes human form to serve and 
sustain humanity. I am your servant, not the master. 
Understand this truth. I come to you to give darshan, 
wherever you are seated. I never say that you should 
come to Me. It is said, God always stands at the 
entrance of your puja room ready to give whatever you 
ask for. God is always ready to grant the wishes of His 
devotees. God is always with you, in you, around you. 
God renders service to man, so that he may serve his 
fellow-beings. Dharmaraja asked Krishna as to what 
service He would like to do. Krishna said, He would 
remove the plantain leaves after everyone finishes 
partaking of food in them. By this act of His, Krishna 
demonstrated the ideal of service to mankind. 


Human body may be compared to a tender 
plantain leaf. The five senses of man are like the 
delicious items served on the leaf. One should offer the 
food to God before partaking of it. But man in his 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 314 


foolishness is offering the ‘delicious items’ to the 
demons of desire, anger, greed, pride and jealousy. 
After the demons consume the ‘delicious items’ and 
spoil the leaf, the leftover is offered to God! First and 
foremost, these ‘delicious items’ should be offered to 
God who is present within in the form of Vaishvanara. 
You offer food to God by chanting the sloka: 

Brahmarpanam Brahma Havir 

Brahmagnou Brahmanahutam 

Brahmaiva Thena Ganthavyam 

Brahma Karma Samadhina. 


Immediately God replies from within: 


Aham Vaishvanaro Bhutva 
Praninam Dehamastrita 
Pranapana Samayukta 
Pachamyannam Chaturvidham. 


God is present in everybody in the form of 
Vaishvanara. So, whomsoever you serve, consider that 
you are serving God. 


Experience Unity In Totality 


Love has no form; it has only name. Gold by 
itself has no form. But people mould it in the shape of 
a ring or a chain, thereby giving it a form. Likewise, 
many forms are attributed to the formless Divinity. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 315 


Divinity is pure, immortal, attributeless, formless, 
ancient and eternal. But people worship a form for 
their own satisfaction. That is why God incarnates. He 
is the creator, sustainer and destroyer. But you think 
different gods exist for creation, sustenance and 
destruction. They are all like ministers of God. 
Everything is under His control. So, when you offer 
something to God, it amounts to offering to all gods. 


Easwara Sarva Bhutanam (God is present in 
all beings). Formless God can be visualized in the form 
of all beings. He is the Reality and all the forms are 
His reflections. He is one, but you see many reflec- 
ions. You may find the projection of earthquakes, 
floods and volcano eruptions on the cinema screen but 
the screen is unaffected by all this. You may find a 
river on the screen but the screen does not get wet. 
Likewise, all the multiplicity appears only to the 
external vision; the Illumination Mind sees only one- 
ness. That oneness is the Divine Power. It is present in 
one and all. You search for God at various places as 
you are unable to understand this truth. To know this 
truth, love all. Then you can visualize unity in diver- 
sity. Lord Krishna declared, Mamaivamsho Jeevaloke 
Jeevabhuta Sanathana (the eternal atma in all beings is 
a part of My Being). Do not get deluded by the 
differences in physical form. Treat everyone alike. 
Con-sider all that you see as your own reflection. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 316 


When you cultivate this feeling of oneness, 
you will attain the level of IIlumination Mind. When 
you are at the level of Super Mind, you think that you 
are different from others. This is dualism. It is said, “A 
man with dual mind is half blind.” Gradually, go up to 
the Higher Mind where you understand your true na- 
ture. Then you reach Hlumination Mind. Once you 
experience this unity to totality, you attain Over Mind. 
That is your goal. That is everything for you. All the 
spiritual practices are meant to attain this goal. 
Practices that are done with the physical body cannot 
improve the state of the mind. What is essential is the 
purity of the mind. 


Speaking Softly Is Also Service 


Remember Swami’s words whenever you 
participate in service activities. Some rich people feel 
that they are unable to serve the community and 
participate in service activities. Service does not mean 
helping with hands alone. Talk softly and sweetly. 
Speak good words. That is also a form of service. Give 
food and money to the needy and work for their 
welfare. That is also a form of service. Cleaning the 
streets or serving the patients is not the only means of 
service. But those who get the opportunity can cer- 
tainly do it as per their capacity. 


The other day, Anantapur College girls came to 
Me and said, “Swami, boys are going to each and 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 317 


every house in the villages distributing food packets. 
Once we finish packing the food, we have no other 
work. Please give us some work.” I told them to go to 
the villages, clean the temples and whitewash them. 
Body itself is the temple of God. When you white 
wash the temples outside, think that you are painting 
the temple of body with love. That is true service. 
Never use harsh words. You cannot always oblige, but 
you can speak always obligingly. Bodily wounds can 
be cured by the use of medicines. But the wounds 
inflicted by the tongue can never be healed. That is 
why I repeatedly tell you to cultivate love and talk with 
love. I never use harsh words even when I appear to be 
angry. I always speak lovingly. You too will become 
divine when you cultivate such Divine Love. 


Cultivate good thoughts. Good thoughts lead 
to good actions. Good actions lead to sathsanga (good 
company). Cultivate love. Everything is based on love 
and love alone. Man is born in love, is sustained in 
love and ultimately merges in love. Love is the basis of 
human life. But you are forgetting such true love and 
are getting carried away by the worldly and physical 
love, which is not love in the true sense. 


Inauguration of the 7th World Conference of 
Sri Sathya Sai Seva Organisations, 
20-11-2000. Prasanthi Nilayam 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 318 


The dhobi beats the clothes on the hard 
stone and draws over it the hot iron to 
straighten the folds. So, you too, will 
have to pass through a terrain of 
travail in order to become fit to 
approach God. See Me as resident in 
everyone. Give them all the help you 
can, all the service they need. Do not 
withhold the sweet word, the supporting 
hand, the assuring smile, the 
comforting company, the _ consoling 


conversation. 


—Baba 


20 


Education For Supreme Bliss 


Embodiments of Divine Love, Students-Boys and Girls! 
Patrons of Education and Educational Administrators! 


True education is that which teaches us 
The way to achieve world peace 
By removing narrow-mindedness 
And inculcating unity, fraternity and 
equality. 
(Telugu Poem) 


TODAY what the world needs is neither wealth 
nor any materialistic advancement. It needs students 
who are ideal and who work for the welfare of society. 
The field of education today is plagued by problems 
which confuse everybody. We rarely find students 
working for the welfare of society and strengthening 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 320 


its moral fabric. Today students struggle to acquire 
power, position and wealth. They do not put in any 
effort to inculcate virtues in themselves. It is a mistake 
to think that service is for someone else. In fact, it is 
service to oneself and to God. Sarvata Pani-Padam Tat 
Sarvathokshi Siromukham, Sarvata Sruthimalloke Sar- 
vamavruthya Thishthati (with hands, feet, head, mouth 
and ears pervading everything, God permeates the 
entire universe). 


Recognise The Truth Of Your Divinity 


There is one power that pervades both 
microcosm and macrocosm. That power is the Cosmic 
Divine. The divine consciousness present in you is the 
same as that present in all. The whole world is filled 
with this divine consciousness. People who realize this 
eternal truth will not tread the wrong path. Forms are 
many but the divine power is one. Therefore, man 
should endeavour to recognise his innate divinity. 
Today there are millions of scholars and intellectuals. 
Have they done anything good for society? They 
promote only their selfishness and self-interest. Rarely 
do we find such people working for the welfare of the 
country. Only when selfishness is removed completely 
from the nature of men will there be purity in the 
country. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 321 


The body, mind and intellect alone do not make 
a man. They are the vestures put on by man. The body 
is inert. The mind is negative. Man considers himself 
to be a combination of the inert body and negative 
mind. But man is eternal and changeless. ‘Man’ lives 
eternally at all times and in all states of existence. 
Whatever you hear, talk, think and act is the reflection 
of the inner being. You may consider yourself to be 
highly educated. It is merely the reflection of the inner 
divine. The studies you undertake are merely 
reflection, reaction and resound and cannot be 
considered as true education. All these shall diminish 
in their value in course of time. Humanness is 
permanent and has no birth or death. This body is 
bound to change but the ‘man’ never dies. You take 
man to be the embodied being who is subject to birth 
and death. The permanent man lies in humanness and 
is imperishable. The other name of man is ‘Nara’ (one 
who does not perish). The atma does not change. 


Why then do you fear death when you are the 
embodiment of the Self? You are the eternal truth. 
Being the embodiment of truth and eternity, why do 
you go after these changing and temporary things? 
Today’s education can confer only worldly comforts. 
Besides secular education, one should acquire the 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 322 


knowledge of the atma. You can experience the divine 
power, which is all-pervasive. This is called the Cos- 
mic Divine. Many scientists have experimented a lot to 
discover this power. But what is the outcome? They 
tend to discover what is transient and worldly. You 
should try to recognise the oneness of the divine power 
that pervades the entire universe. Once you recognise 
this truth, you will never be subjected to worries. 


The power that pervades the whole universe is 
also in your little finger. You doubt this fact, go by the 
name and form and enfeeble yourself. Once you 
transcend the name and form and realize the divine 
energy, you get enormous strength. 


Divine Energy Is The Basis Of Life 
Embodiments of Love! 


Love is the basis of life in this world. 
There is nothing which you cannot accomplish 
with love. 


It is the power of love that makes the 
earth revolve without the support of 
any axle. 
It is the power of love that holds the stars 
in their positions without falling down. 
It is the power of love that withholds the 


oceans from submerging the earth. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 323 


It is the power of love that makes the 
wind blow over the seven worlds. 

This sacred love is eternal, most amazing 
and indivisible. 

That love is the life-breath of man. 


(Telugu poem) 


Without love, mankind cannot exist. Human- 
ness is not based on the form alone. In fact, we can 
consider all beings to be divine. But man is carried 
away by the differences in form. When you realize the 
oneness of all these forms, you can enjoy eternal bliss. 
Therefore, it is important to start practising this prin- 
ciple of unity in your lives. 


What is the use of all your learning 
when it does not help you to change 
your destiny? 

When bad thoughts enter your mind, 

All your education and intelligence 
become futile and meaningless. 


(Telugu Poem) 


No Difference Between Manava And Madhava 


Therefore, you should never entertain bad 
thoughts. You should recognise the purity present in 
humanity. Fire burns everything. Cosmic Divine is like 
fire. It is present everywhere and incinerates all evil to 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 324 


ashes. Mind makes the man. But man can be trans- 
formed into the divine. Thus, there is no difference 
between manava (man) and madhava (divinity). The 
power latent in you is the same as in God. Because of 
his physical form, man appears to be different. Never 
be carried away by these forms. Put your faith in the 
divine power. The manas (mind), the buddhi (intel- 
lect), the chitta (limited human consciousness) and the 
antahkarana (inner instrument) appear to be different. 
But the energy that activates them all is one. All are 
nothing but consciousness. Because of his narrow 
vision, man is unable to perceive these verities. 


Men Are Many, But The Consciousness Is One 
Embodiments of Love! 


Never hate anyone, because the principle of 
love is immanent in all. Divine energy too is present in 
all. Never criticize or denigrate anyone. Love all. That 
itself is divine consciousness which transforms into 
divine power. Therefore, never give scope to bad 
thoughts. With pure conviction declare that you are the 
Cosmic Divine present in all. Many people take re- 
course to many spiritual practices without under- 
standing their own innate divinity. 


Neither by penance nor by pilgrimage 
nor by study of scriptures nor by Japa 
can one cross the ocean of life. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 325 


One can achieve it only by serving the 
pious 
(Sanskrit Verse) 


So, enter the path of service. Divinity is the 
same in all. There is no duality in the universe. The 
Vedas proclaim: “Ekam Sath Viprah bahudha va- 
danti.” (truth is one, but scholars refer to it by many 
names). Though the bulbs are many, the current is one. 
Dresses may be many but the cloth is one. Men are 
many, but the consciousness is one. This is universal 
consciousness or the Cosmic Divine. Universal con- 
sciousness gets limited to individual consciousness by 
man’s attachment to the physical form. Consciousness 
is one, but man is cultivating differences on the basis 
of forms. 

Jewels are many, but gold is one; 

Cows are many, but milk is one; 

Beings are many, but the breath is one; 

Castes are many, humanity is one; 


(Telugu Poem) 


Science has also to recognise this oneness of 
universal consciousness. There is only unity in this 
universe. Man sees plurality on the basis of names and 
forms. Once he transcends names and forms, he can 
experience unity. Since he has been experiencing dual- 
ity on the basis of names and forms, he sees plurality 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 326 


and gets deluded. There should be no scope for doubt, 
hatred or anger. Realise that everything is love. 
Imbibing in yourself this principle of love, you should 
serve others with the feeling that you are serving God 
Himself. Lead your life inspired by such sacred ideals. 


Transcend The Mind To Attain Equanimity 


There is an inner being in man which is his 
subtle body. Body consciousness is related to the gross 
body; it can overshadow the inner subtle body which 
comprises the mind, the intellect, the chitta and the 
antahkarana. One has to transcend this body con- 
sciousness and rise to the level of Higher Conscious- 
ness which is also termed as Over Mind. This Higher 
Consciousness experiences everything but is not 
attached to anything. As long as the mind exists, it is 
not possible to enter the realms of Higher Con- 
sciousness. 


Itis said, “Mano Moolam Idam Jagat’ (the 
mind 1s the basis for the universe). The mind pervades 
the entire universe. It sees names and forms and the 
duality of the material world. If you go beyond the 
material life, you can experience what is called ‘vibra- 
tion life.’ This higher state is also termed as Super 
Mind. In this state of Super Mind, you experience 
equanimity. The state of equanimity is true Vedanta. 
There can be no happiness without equanimity. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 327 


The Vedas declare: 


Saha Navavathu Saha Nau Bhunakthu 

Saha Veeryam Karavavahai 

Tejaswi Navadheethamasthu 

Ma Vidvisavahai” 

(May the Lord protect and nourish us! May we 
grow in intelligence and valour working 
together! May we live in friendship without 
hatred!) 


The primary teaching of the Vedas is culti- 
vation of unity. The Vedas teach the principle of 
oneness. But there is no unity in the world today. 


Students! 


Today is the day of Convocation when you all 
receive degrees. These degrees are also some kind of 
titles. Of what use are such titles if you have to beg in 
order to live? Your education is not for this. Secular 
knowledge is for earning your livelihood. It is through 
spiritual knowledge that you attain the supreme bliss. 
But as long as you live at the level of the mind, you 
have to pursue secular studies. The moment you 
transcend the mind, this education can be overlooked. 
Man ascends to the Divine by transcending his mind. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 328 


One should cultivate the Cosmic Mind. 
Westerners refer to it as the Cosmic Power. They have 
come upon this truth now, while the Bharatiyas have 
known it for centuries. But having known the truth, 
they have not been able to put it into practice. Man has 
become zero in practice. Only through practice can you 
realize the atma. 


Divine Energy Pervades Everything 


Everything is governed by the Divine Will. 
Whatever happens in this world is only the Divine 
Drama. He who understands this is truly a man of 
wisdom. The atma is the true nature of man.What is 
the atma? What is chaitanya? They are all aspects of 
energy, which has no form. While the current is with- 
out any form, a bulb, a fan or an electric stove has a 
definite form. In each appliance, it does have a differ- 
ent function. If you say, “Oh current, how helpful you 
have been to me!” and touch it, you get a shock. 
Current has that energy and hence it is a form of the 
Cosmic Divine. 


This is also illustrated in the story of Bhasma- 
sura who could reduce anything to ashes through the 
power he had acquired from the Divine by penance. 
This inner energy expresses itself in the form of 
knowl-edge. Knowledge has to be transformed into 
skill to achieve balance in life. But people today are 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 329 


killing this knowledge thereby losing their balance. By 
losing balance in their lives, they acquire only outward 
vision and do not cultivate inner vision or insight. 
When your outlook is projected outwards, your mind 
starts wavering. You should maintain balance in life. It 
is possible only when you transform your knowedlege 
into skill. For this, you should get rid of all bad feel- 
ings and shun body attachment. All the suffering in the 
world is due to body attachment. You should cultivate 
attachment to the atma. Many people may feel why 
Bhagawan teaches all these to the youngsters. Actual- 
ly, it is very important to everyone—be it a youngster, 
middle-aged man or an old one. 


Start Early, Drive Slowly And Reach Safely 


Man wastes his childhood in fun and 
frolic. 

In youth, his life is wasted by indulging 
in sensual _ pleasures. 

In middle age, man submerges himself in 
materalistic pursuits and struggles all 
the time to earn wealth. 

In old age, he laments over the lack of 
this or that and does not think of God. 

Without any interest in the path of 
devotion, 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 330 


He is bogged down in the cycle of cause 
and effect and thus ruins his life. 


(Telugu Poem) 


Start early, drive slowly and reach safely. Start 
making efforts even when you are still young. What 
will you gain if you waste all your energy in your 
youth and then start thinking about God in old age? 


Everything Is Reflection, Reaction And Resound 
Students! Boys and Girls! 


Realise that the cosmic energy present in 
everyone is the same. Everything is Universal Cosmic 
Power. This is referred to as Divine Cosmic Power. 
This Divine Cosmic Power is present within ourselves 
and we need not seek it outside. In this world, all the 
energy that we see, all the energy that we study and all 
the energy that we hear of, is within us. Anything that 
you do not have within yourselves does not exist 
anywhere else. Everything is reflection, reaction and 
resound. Every human is divine. When you realize this 
truth, all your troubles and worries vanish. When body 
attachment increases, worries also increase. On this 
basis it is said—‘Less luggage, more comfort, make 
travel a pleasure’. Vedanta refers to this as ‘renun- 
ciation’. Renunciation does not mean giving up home 
and hearth and going to forest. It means experiencing 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 331 


the unity of all beings. You imagine all the differences. 
They do not exist really. All that you study is borrowed 
knowledge. All this education is required in the 
material world. You should acquire it only as much as 
is necessary. 


Can you call a person educated just because he 
knows how to read and write? Are you an educated 
person just because you have acquired a college 
degree? No. Can education without good feelings and 
good mind be called ‘true education?’ If education is 
merely for a living, then are not the animals and birds 
living? Education is for life, it is not for a living. 
Without realizing this truth, men put themselves in 
many snares for the sake of eking out a livelihood. 


Secular Education And Spiritual Knowledge 
Embodiments of Love! 


Having been born as human, we should 
recognise the divine energy within us. We should 
experience this divine energy. Today what we have to 
share and spread is bliss and not misery. Human life is 
highly sacred. Secular education is also important. You 
should try to acquire it with certain limits. Otherwise, 
why should we establish colleges and educational 
institutions? 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 332 


Secular knowledge is essential for your welfare 
in this world. But for the welfare hereafter, the knowl- 
edge of Brahman is essential. Secular education is 
merely for the body and not for life. It cannot help you 
to understand the nature of the atma. There is no great- 
er education than the one which helps you to under- 
stand the nature of the atma. 


Why can’t you recognise your own truth 
instead of knowing so much about others? You enquire 
of others ‘who are you?’ Instead of that, you should 
enquire ‘who am I?’ Of what use is knowing about 
others when you do not know who you are? When you 
know yourself, you will easily understand others. The 
same principle is immanent in you and others. It is the 
all-pervading universal consciousness. You should 
recognise this divine energy. Then you will not have 
any suffering or misery. Bhagawan states this from His 
own experience. My life is My message. I am always 
blissful. I have no worries. People greet me ‘Happy 
Birthday.’ Greet others who are not happy. Worries 
come and go. They are like passing clouds. Why then 
do you fear? Body is bound to perish one day or the 
other. It is like a water bubble. Mind is like a mad 
monkey. Why do you follow it? Follow the con- 
science, which is eternal. That is the goal of your life. 
Everyone in this world seeks happiness. This bliss is 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 333 


within you. Human body is made up of five sheaths. 
Annamaya kosha (food sheath) relates to the physical 
body. The subtle body comprises pranamaya kosha 
(life sheath), manomaya kosha (mind sheath) and 
vijnanamaya kosha (wisdom sheath). Anandamaya 
kosha (The ultimate sheath of bliss) is one’s goal of 
life. The vijnanamaya kosha should not be confused 
with science. 


When Ego Enters, Love Vanishes 


The body undergoes changes in four stages: 
childhood, youth, middleage and old age. But you 
remain unchanged. You introduce yourself as ‘I’ when 
enquired by others in all the stages of your life. This ‘IT’ 
is a single letter. You attach many decorations to it. 
Cross the ‘I,’ i.e., feeling of body consciousness or 
ego. The Christian Cross is a symbol for the elim- 
ination of ego. When the feeling of ‘I’ is eliminated, 
the ego vanishes and you become God. You should 
understand and experience the real nature of ‘I’. 


Your life is full of love. Anything may change 
but love does not change. Being born and brought up 
in love, we are full of love. Cut your ego and cultivate 
love. When ego enters, love vanishes. Do not give any 
scope for ego to enter. When you recognise the purity 
of love, you will get rid of your faults. Everything is 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 334 


based on pure and selfless love. In fact, love is divine. 
But you ignore this divinity. This is the biggest 
mistake. 


Human body will perish one day or the other. 
Don’t go by the body. It is only an instrument. The 
strength that lies in the body is yours. When you 
recognise this power, you will become divine. “Master 
the mind and be a mastermind.” Do not become a 
slave, but become the master. 


Students have to pursue secular education as it 
helps them to earn their livelihood. You also have to 
fulfil the hopes and aspirations of your parents and 
make them happy. 


Along with secular education, spiritual 
education is also necessary. This type of education 
confers happiness and peace on you. Develop sacred 
and good feelings and live a noble life. Make your 
parents happy. Never trouble them. It is they who 
gave you life and brought you up. If possible, try to 
explain to your parents the noble and good things you 
have learnt here. The Vedas say, “Mathru Devo Bhava, 
Pithru Devo Bhava...” So, consider your parents as 
God. With good conduct and behaviour earn a good 
name in this world. 


There Is Only One Reality That Exists 
The knowledge acquired by you should make 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 335 


you recognise your inner being. Secular education is 
like a passing cloud. It comes and goes. The reality 
which is within is eternal principle. Hold on to it and 
strengthen your faith. You have already acquired good 
and high education. On this Convocation day, my only 
advice to you is to put it into practice. Share with 
others what you have learnt and derive happiness 
therefrom. The Union Minister, Dr. Murali Manohar 
Joshi, is a highly educated and knowledgeable person. 
He has told you many good things. How far have you 
understood them? If you are able to understand even 
one principle mentioned by him, it will transform your 
life. A single matchstick is enough to burn any 
quantity of matter. 


There is only one reality that exists. If you 
realize this, you can achieve anything. It is only the 
body attachment that obstructs your vision. In a house 
you have different rooms like drawing room, dining 
room, bathroom, kitchen, etc. Each room is separated 
from the other by a wall existing between them. If you 
remove these walls, you will find only one big hall. 
Similarly, when you remove the walls of body con- 
sciousness, you will develop a broad mind. 


Education Should Be Free 


You have studied in this institute for many 
years. When you go out, teach others what you have 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 336 


learnt here and be a role model. Lead an exemplary life 
and be happy. Your happiness is My happiness. I do 
not expect anything other than this from you. 


The Minister has said that there is only one 
way to keep the students on the right path. I too agree 
with him. That is purity. It alone guides you in the 
right way. Our students are not paying any tuition fee, 
laboratory fee or examination fee. They come here 
empty-handed and go out with immense wealth of 
education. They learn here humility, discipline and 
faith. Education should confer humility. In other 
institutions, many students do not possess this quality 
of humility. Those students pay fees. So, the teachers 
and authorities are not able to question the students and 
correct them. Since the authorities are collecting 
money for providing education, they are afraid of 
taking any disciplinary action against the students. 
Educational institutions, which are supposed to be 
Saraswati Mandirs (centres of learning) have turned 
into Lakshmi Mandirs (centres of money). Money is 
able to purchase even degrees. Admission, attendance 
and, it is said, even promotion to a higher class is 
possible on payment of money. 


In My opinion, Government should provide 
free education to all students. It is spending crores or 
rupees on many programmes. Collection of fees from 
students cannot add to Government revenue much. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 337 


Provide free education to the children and they will be 
good. Education which is purchased can lead only to 
agitation. Unable to secure jobs with purchased 
degrees, some students even put an end to their lives. 
The Government is responsible for this. Only free 
education will develop good relationship between the 
people and the Government. 


Our Students Are Like Pure Unalloyed Gold 


We at Prasanthi Nilayam do not collect even a 
paisa from any student in our institutes. Not only do 
we provide free education, scholarships are also given 
to our students as an encouragement and reward. Our 
students develop an unwavering mind and make their 
parents happy. They lead a happy life. They are pure at 
heart. They do not possess any evil feelings. Leaving 
aside a negligible minority, they are like pure 
unalloyed gold. They do not like to leave the Institute 
and Swami even after they finish their education. 


But some students have to leave the Institute 
after finishing their education. Parents wish to live 
with their children. So, they have to obey them and 
fulfil their wishes also. Many of our students, even 
after completing M.Sc. or MBA, again apply for Ph.D. 
Their intention is to stay with Swami for a few more 
years. They desire for all these degrees only to be with 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 338 


Swami. On the other hand, those students who 
purchase education (in other places) long to leave their 
institutes and go in search of jobs as soon as they 
receive a degree. Our students are not like that. Along 
with degrees, they also possess good character. They 
conduct themselves in a befitting way. 


Convocation, Prasanthi Nilayam, 22-11-2000 


Silence is the only language of the 
realised. Practice moderation in speech. 
That will help you in many ways. It will 
develop Prema, for most  misunder- 
standings and factions arise out of 
carelessly spoken words. When the foot 
slips, the wound it causes in the heart of 
another will fester for life. The tongue is 
liable to four big errors; uttering false- 
hood, scandalising, finding fault with 
others, and excessive speech. All these 
have to be avoided if there is to be Santhi 
for the individual as well as for society. 


—Baba 


21 


Love Is My Only Wealth 


Embodiments of Love! 


THERE are many persons who analyse and 
investigate into the nature of divinity, but very few 
understand it in its true spirit. Those who perceive it 
are truly fortunate ones. In fact, it is not possible to 
comprehend divinity in its fullness. However, the man 
who realizes the same atmic principle in others as he 
experiences it in himself can understand divinity, 
irrespective of the fact whether he is a householder or a 
renunciant. In such a person, divinity is firmly estab- 
lished. He becomes divinity itself. 


A millionaire can eat food only and not gold. 
This is the principle of equality of mankind. God is in 
everybody. Divinity is immanent in equal measure in 
everything—good or bad, righteous or unrighteous, 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 340 


sacred or unsacred. Since ancient times, sages have 
been trying to investigate this mystery. The Vedic sage 
declared: Vedahametam Aditya varnam Tamasa Para- 
stat (I know the Cosmic Being who shines with the 
effulgence of a billion suns and who is beyond dark- 
ness). In modern times, scholars investigate into the 
nature of divinity according to their own perceptions 
and propound manifold theories. 


Divinity Permeates The Entire Universe 


The universe is subject to three processes: 
creation, sustenance and destruction or dissolution. 
None can deny this truth; scientists also cannot negate 
it. This is a universal truth perceived by everybody. 
That which is born is sustained and is eventually 
destroyed. This is the direct proof of divinity. When 
you enquire into these three fundamental facts, the 
existence of divinity becomes evident. In daily life 
also, this divinity is experienced. For example, you 
have seen the dancing lions from Malaysia (a Malay- 
sian troupe presented their traditional lion dance before 
Swami’s Discourse in Hill View Stadium on 23 Nov- 
ember 2000). However, these are not real lions. But on 
seeing them, you can surmise that there exist real crea- 
tures called lions. In a similar manner, almost every 
object of daily life points towards divinity. The sweet- 
ness in the sugarcane or the hot taste of chillies, the 
sour taste in tamarind or the bitter taste of neem, all 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 341 


these are indicators of divinity. The stars in the sky, the 
brightness of the sun, the coolness of the moon and the 
rise and fall of sea waves are also pointers towards the 
divine principle. Though all these do not directly show 
you God per se, they produce positive evidence of the 
existence of the divine principle. 


In society, there are different functionaries like 
a minister for education, a collector for revenue and the 
police for law and order, etc., and above all of them is 
the Prime Minister. In the same way, in the universe, 
there is Brahma for creation, Vishnu for protection and 
Shiva for dissolution. But, for all these functions, the 
supreme head is divinity. The Muslims call this 
principle, Allah. Every religious denomination has its 
own name for divinity. The Bharatiyas and Westerners 
have a common term in English, God. In this word, G 
stands for generation, i.e., creation, O for organization, 
1.,e sustenance and D for dissolution. Thus in this word 
God, all these three aspects, namely, creation, 
sustenance and dissolution are implied. Taking such 
evidence, people have been propagating the principle 
of divinity. Stated or unstated, truth is truth. God 
exists. Where is He? He is omnipresent. He is in all 
forms. The divinity present in humanity is self-evident. 
The very fact that lakhs of you have come here today is 
the evidence of your love for God. Love is the proof of 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 342 


divinity. You have filled your hearts with love for 
Bhagawan. There is no greater bliss than this. 


Experience Your Inner Reality 


Embodiments of Love! 


Any task undertaken with self-confidence is 
absolutely essential for every person. If you expect 
others to respect and love you, you should first respect 
and love them. Without respecting or loving others, 
you cannot expect any reciprocal feeling from them. In 
the same way, if you love God, God loves you. Life 
consists of reaction, resound and reflection. You get 
back exactly what you do to others. 


What message can I give you for the day? As I 
see you, My heart overflows with love. When I see so 
many of you expressing your love for Me, there is no 
limit to My joy. I have not sent out invitations to any 
of you. My love has drawn you here. Your love for 
God and God’s love for you is the true message. What 
can one say as a message? I give and you receive, and 
you give and I receive. This exchange is the true 
relationship between man and God. Be happy and 
blissful. Increase your spiritual dimensions. Live with 
the firm conviction that there is one Divinity resident 
in all. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 343 


Why does a Government set up law enforcing 
agencies like the police and military? It is solely for 
the sake of protecting the country. The police punishes 
the guilty. If there is no lawbreaker, there is no need 
for police at all. In the same manner, your bad actions 
attract punishment and your good actions, reward. This 
is the theory of karma. But one blames God, if one is 
punished. This is a big mistake. Ensure that there is no 
trace of evil within you. Then you need not worrry 
about any punishment. The very persons designated for 
punishing you will come and protect you. 


“Have Faith In Yourself” 


I have said that man is the embodiment of the 
atma. I have also told you that the atma is 
imperishable. This eternal entity indicates your 
eternity. Creation, sustenance, and dissolution are all 
ordained by God. He manifests in all the elements. 
With this firm conviction, wherever you go, to 
whatever country you travel, you will attain success. 
Spiritual precept insists, “Have faith in yourself.” That 
is, first of all, know yourself. Everybody asks the 
question, “Who are you?” There is none to ask, “Who 
am I?” When the question, “Who are you?” is asked, a 
reply that you are so and so or you are from such and 
such place or you are doing such and such job is not 
the proper answer. “I am the atma,” is the only right 
answer. The body and the mind are impermanent. To 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 344 


imagine that you are any of these is a serious mistake. 
Get rid of the feeling that you are the body and the 
mind and recognise the atma, which alone gives power 
to both the body and the mind to function. Everyone is 
a manifestation of the atma. This manifestation has 
expanded all over. This all-pervading atmic principle is 
the cosmic principle. You should attempt to recognise 
this Cosmic Power. You may feel that this is very 
difficult, but it is extremely simple. Your body 
attachment is what makes it appear difficult. Sarva 
Bhuta Namaskaram Kesavam Pratigachchati (salu- 
tations to all beings ultimately reach God) because 
God is present in everyone. In the Bhagavadgita, lord 
Krishna says, Mamaivamsho Jeevaloke Jeevabhuta 
Sanathana (the eternal atma in all beings is a part of 
My Being). 


Unity In Creation; Duality Is In Perception 


If the bird enters a hall of mirrors, it sees many 
reflections of its own form. It imagines that there are a 
multitude of birds and they are its competitors. So, it 
keeps dashing against the mirrors and the mirrors are 
broken into pieces. Now, it sees as many birds as there 
are pieces of mirrors. When the mirrors are all shat- 
tered to tiny bits, no image is visible and the bird flies 
away. This is a state of ignorance. On the contrary, 
when a man of wisdom enters the room, he recognises 
that these are all his own images and feels happy. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 345 


In the same manner, the one who sees himself 
in all other persons and looks on them as his own 
images is a true human being. The manifest principle 
that is visible in the external world is the same as that 
which exists in an individual. Names, forms and 
abilities are cognized as separate, but these are mere 
reflections. The truth is that I and you are one. 
Divinity is right inside you and is not separate. Nor is 
it specially located in a temple or a mosque or any 
other place of worship. What you try to see in a 
mosque or a temple is inside you. All sadhana is 
undertaken to experience this inner reality. 


Every man is prone to birth and death. The 
period between birth and death is man’s life-span. The 
individual grows and wears away but his inner spirit 
does not undergo any change. It is only the body which 
undergoes changes. A child grows up to become an 
adult and a grandfather. Descriptions are different, but 
the individual is the same. In the same manner, God 
has many names and forms but divinity is only one. 
Ekam Sath Viprah Bahudha Vadanti (truth is one but 
scholars refer to it by many names). Realising this 
truth, you should respect and love all and give joy to 
all. Then you become God yourself. Once you 
recognise the fact that the divinity in all is the same, 
there will be no sense of duality. You may think that it 
is very difficult but is extremely simple. Your inability 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 346 


to recognise this truth is due to the fault of your vision 
and not the fault of creation. Without correcting your 
faulty vision, you blame the creation. There are no 
flaws in creation. There is unity in creation; duality is 
in your perception. 


Self-confidence Is The Key To Success In Life 


With self-confidence, any task can be 
performed successfully; a small example. Abraham 
Lincoln was born in an extremely poor family in 
America. His father was a carpenter. His mother Nancy 
worked hard to educate him. When Lincoln went to 
school, other children made fun of him for his dress 
and poverty. Lincoln could not bear this and told his 
mother, “Mother, I am subjected to a lot of ridicule by 
fellow-students. Please get me a good dress.” Taking 
him close, his mother said, “Son, you must see our 
condition first. We are not well-to-do. Feeding all of us 
itself is a problem. In this condition, how can you 
expect fancy clothes? Act according to your condition. 
Sooner or later, you will reach the level of your 
deservedness. Don’t be deterred by other people’s 
taunts. Live with self-confidence. Self-confidence is 
the source of all success.” Thus, she encouraged him. 
From that moment, Lincoln became a person of great 
self-confidence and pursued his studies and activities 
with honest effort. He was never upset over anything. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 347 


Self-confidence was his armour. Devoid of material 
wealth and comforts, he was endowed with plenty of 
self-confidence. 


The Difficult Days Of Young Lincoln 


His mother passed away after sometime. But 
her words of wisdom were firmly entrenched in his 
heart. His father married again. It is quite common 
amongst Westerners. His stepmother was also quite 
affectionate towards Lincoln and encouraged him to 
persevere on the path shown by his mother. Life was 
difficult for him throughout. He wanted to have some 
employment. However, he thought that self-reliance 
was better than serving others and started a business of 
his own. He conducted his business in the most upright 
manner. But his difficulties went on increasing and his 
debts accumulated. Lincoln carried on with the 
strength of his mother’s advice regardless of all 
difficulties. He had a severe setback in his business. 
Ultimately, he had to sell everything. He worked hard 
to clear all his debts. 


There is no disease like being debtor, 
There is no charity greater than feeding 
the hungry, 


There is no grater god than parents, 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 348 


There is no greater Dharma than 
compassion, 

There is no greater gain than the 
company of the good, 

There is no enemy greater than anger, 

There is no wealth greater than good reputa- 
tion, 

Bad reputation is death itself. 

There is no ornament better than the 
chanting of God’s name. 


(Telegu Poem) 


Lincoln strictly lived in this manner. Seeing his 
upright character, some of his friends felt that he could 
very easily be elected to the state legislature. They 
advised him to stand for election and promised their 
help. Lincoln stood for election and won with a 
thumping majority. By his honesty and hard work, he 
rose to become the President of the United States of 
America. At the moment of his success, he recollected 
his mother’s words. He fully realized the importance of 
self-confidence. 


The slaves were treated in a very harsh manner 
by the Whites in those days. Abraham Lincoln wanted 
to ameliorate their condition and secure equal rights 
for them. He was of the firm conviction that all human 
beings were equal and any differences on the basis of 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 349 


colour or race were improper. He tirelessly worked for 
the cause of the slaves. Eventually, he succeeded in the 
abolition of slavery in the United States. He is still held 
in high esteem for this noble work. 


Do Not Attach Any Importance To Any Criticism 


In the world, there is a constant strife between 
good and evil. There are many people who are jealous 
of others and subject them to slander. But one should 
not attach any importance to such criticism. Praise and 
abuse are common to mankind. In Bharat also several 
famous people faced similar difficulties but they 
overcame these with fortitude. If you live in truth and 
love, you will not come to harm. The body is bound to 
fall some time or the other. Merely to safeguard it, one 
should not take to bad ways. Body is perishable while 
truth is eternal. Hence, strive for truth. There is nothing 
greater than truth. 


The creation emerges from Truth and it 
merges into Truth, 

Is there a place where truth does not 
exist? 

This alone is Absolute Truth. 


(Telegu Poem) 
The Four Kinds Of People Who Oppose God 


There are some, who turn away from the path 
of goodness and start opposing God when their desires 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 350 


are not fulfilled. But the mistake lies with them and not 
with God. There are four kinds of people who oppose 
God. 


The first type of people are atheists, who 
profess that there is no God. In the second category 
come those people who speak against God out of 
jealousy because others are better off than them. The 
third, those who lament at the high reputation and fame 
of others which they are unable to achieve themselves. 
The fourth type are those who are disillusioned when 
their desires are not fulfilled. They resort to improper 
and mean ways to attain their ends. They ask, “Swami, 
I am starting a school or a society and I need so much 
money.” I tell them the truth, “Son, this is a different 
country from yours. The currency of this country 
cannot be carried in your country. If you resort to 
illegal methods and cheat the Government, I shall 
never permit such a practice.” Under such 
circumstances, they go back to their places and make 
all kinds of false allegations against Me. Whatever 
others may say, I will never deviate from the path of 
Truth. Do not pay any attention to praise or slander. 
Divinity is based on faith. Faith is something which 
cannot be bestowed on you. Everyone has his own 
faith. 


There are a few who say that God does not 
exist. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 351 


For those who refuse to believe, there is no 
God. 

For those with faith, there is God. 

‘Yes’ and ‘No’ belong to others; 

For Bhagawan, it is always ‘yes, yes, yes.’ 


(Telugu Poem) 


Welfare Of Humanity Is Bhagawan’s Primary 
Concern 


Each individual’s conscience is his own 
witness. Do not waste your energy on negative 
criticism. You should never abandon your faith and 
your self-confidence. Some people become jealous at 
the growth and prosperity of others. Jealousy is a 
dangerous pest. If a pest enters the root of a tree full of 
leaves, fruits and flowers, the entire tree dies quickly. 
The pest is not visible to the eye and works insidiously. 


A jealous person conceals his jealousy and 
harms others like a pest. These are evil ways. How- 
ever, in My view, there are no evil persons. All evil 
behaviour changes sooner or later. My truth is one. All 
belong to Me and I belong to all. My only wealth is 
love. I embrace all with love. Even people who come 
to Me with hatred in their hearts are dear to Me. I do 
not search for your faults. I go by the principle of love. 
All should take note of My equanimity and follow this 
principle of unity. Purity follows unity and from 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 352 


purity, divinity is attained. To attain divinity, you have 
to cultivate purity and for purity you should live in 
harmony with all. Only then will you get positive 
results. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Today marks the 75" year of the Advent of this 
body. Age does not concern Me. Welfare of humanity 
is My only concern. More particularly, I am concerned 
about the welfare of the distressed and the poor. My 
primary objective of life is to remove the difficulties of 
the helpless. Irrespective of any comments, adverse or 
otherwise, My resolve is the same. You should also 
make a resolution on these lines. 


Having grasped what ought to be grasped, 
Do not let go of the grip till you succeed. 
Having desired what ought to be desired, 
Hold on till your desire is fulfilled. 
Having asked what ought to be asked, 
Hold on till you obtain what you had 
asked for. 
Having thought what ought to be thought, 
Hold on till you succeed. 
Either God should yield to your prayer 
or you should ask wholeheartedly with 
intensity. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 353 


This is the path a true devotee should 
pursue. 


(Telugu Poem) 


True Qualities Of A Good Individual 


Have perseverance until your resolve is 
fulfilled. This is the vow of a bhakta (devotee). This is 
what can be called as true tapas. Tapas does not mean 
going to the forest or standing upside down and doing 
some meditation or the other. Keep your word, adhere 
to truth, show gratitude where due and stay firm in 
your self-confidence. These are the true qualities of a 
good individual. If you adhere to these tenets, you will 
overcome with ease any obstacle that may come your 
way. Hold on to your self-confidence and self-respect 
and be ready for any sacrifice. As I have already 
reiterated, the atma in everyone is the same. Therefore, 
do not be swayed by such considerations as somebody 
being small and somebody being great, etc. Self- 
confidence is not related to age. Quantity may vary 
between individuals, but quality is the same. 


Unity Safeguards Independence 


Embodiments of Love! 


If Bharat is to progress in the proper direction, 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 354 


there should be complete unity amongst all its people. 
Our great leaders made great sacrifices and secured 
freedom for us. While we have attained Independence, 
we have not achieved unity. What is the use of 
freedom without unity? It is due to lack of unity that 
people of this country are reduced to a sorry state of 
affairs. There is hatred everywhere. There are ten 
factions in one party. People of one house go in four 
different directions. If this kind of disunity persists, 
how can freedom be safeguarded? People are not going 
on the right path. You have to adopt the path of 
complete unity, so that every Bharatiya must be able to 
say proudly: “This is my beloved country, this is my 
mother tongue and my religion.” You should also 
uphold the reputation and traditions of your family. 


People today have lost faith. A man without 
faith is verily blind. If you do not have faith in others, 
at least have faith in yourself. Develop faith in yourself 
and faith in God. This is the secret of greatness. Only 
then will you be able to experience divinity. God does 
not have a separate form. ‘I,’ the atma, is God. You 
must have this kind of faith. Only then can you 
accomplish spiritual growth. 


Bharat is a sacred land. Such sacredness is 
hardly found anywhere else in the world. That is why 
many avatars have taken birth in this land: Bharat is 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 355 


like a mother of all other nations. Rama said, “Janani 
Janma Bhumishcha Swargadapi Gareeyasi”’ (mother 
and motherland are greater than even paradise). You 
must recognise this truth. There are many who chant 
the Name of Rama, but is there anyone who actually 
practises the virtues represented by Rama? People are 
heroes in chanting but zeros in practice. 


The Vedas have given four Mahavakyas: 
Tattwam Asi (That thou art), Prajnanam Brahma 
(constant integrated awareness is Brahman), Aham 
Brahmasmi (1 am Brahman) and Ayam Atma Brahma 
(this Atma is Brahman). You are constantly chanting 
these words but are not putting them into practice. 
Mere chanting without action is pure exhibitionism. 
While saying all are Brahman, you hate others. This is 
sheer hypocrisy. If you have aversion to any 
individual, quietly keep away from him. Do not hate 
him; try to develop love for him. Do not criticize or 
hate anybody. This is My message today. This is the 
course to be adopted by you. I love everybody. I have 
no dislike for anybody. All are My devotees, friends 
and children. For Me, all are one. This universe is a big 
book. Antaratma (conscience) is your Guru. God is 
your friend. Time is also the very form of God. 
Therefore, do not waste time. Time wasted is life 
wasted. To make your time pure is true sadhana. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 356 


My Love Is The Purest 


Embodiments of Love! 


The love in you and the love in Me are one and 
the same. But your love is contaminated by desires for 
material things. I have no desire for any material 
wealth. My love is the purest. The love immanent in 
you turns negative because of the contamination of 
desires. There is no negative quality in Me, it is 
entirely positive. So, combine the negative ‘I’ in you 
with the positive in Me and attain unity. With this 
understanding, you will be able to experience indes- 
cribable bliss. What sort of bliss? That 1s Brahm- 
ananda. When you experience this Brahmananda, you 
become one with Brahman. In this state, there is no 
need for any sadhana on your part. All the sadhanas 
that you do are for your mental satisfaction. Consider 
all as one and love all. That is the true sadhana. Ek 
Prabhu Ke Anek Nam (God has many names but He is 
One). While performing the Sahasranama Archana 
(chanting 1000 names of God), you repeat the various 
names, Keshava, Madhava, Narayana, Govinda, but it 
is to the same form that you make your offerings. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 357 


Transform Negative Thoughts Into Positive Ones 


While doing Anga Puja, you place the flower 
on your eye and then offer the flower to the deity in 
front with the Mantra, “Nethra Pushpam Samar- 
payami” (I offer the flower of my eye). Symbolically, 
you are offering a flower in place of the eye. You say 
eye, but offer a flower. This amounts to cheating God 
Himself. What is the point of offering to God what has 
been provided by God Himself? You should pray, “O 
God, everything is Yours, this whole body is Yours, all 
the limbs and organs are Yours. I am Yours and You 
are mine.” When this kind of identity is established, 
there is no further need for any external form of 
worship. But, for those who have not yet reached this 
exalted state, these various physical forms of sadhana 
such as japa, tapa and dhyana are suitable. All these 
require constant practice. Gradually remove all nega- 
tive thoughts and inculcate positive thoughts. Trans- 
form negative thoughts into positive ones. 


If anybody abuses you, take no note, for the 
abuser is abusing only the body and not your Self. If 
somebody calls you a bad man, do you become a bad 
man by the mere calling? If, in fact, you have 
something bad in you, try to destroy it. There are a 
large number of people in this Ka/i Yuga who abuse 
God because their wishes are not fulfilled. This is a 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 358 


universal habit common to all countries. You should 
not succumb to such mean and unholy feelings. 
Thyagaraja, for example, says that God will reveal 
Himself to you only to the extent and manner in which 
you approach Him. Whichever way you think of Him, 
God assumes the same form. If your feelings are good, 
you will get good results. 


Embodiments of Love! 


I have no desire to have such elaborate Birth- 
day celebrations, not in the least. I go through all these 
because it pleases My devotees. I am not particularly 
enamoured of anything. The happiness of the devotees 
is My happiness. Dedicate your life to divine love. 


Love is the very form of Brahman. 
Try to merge love in love. 
If you have steady love, you will achieve 
the ultimate merger which is true 
non-duality. 
(Telugu Poem) 


All That Happens Is For Your Good 


Hatred, jealousy and ostentation have become 
widespread these days. Get rid of all these and adopt 
the path of love. Whether your desires are fulfilled or 
not, think that all that happens is for your good. When 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 359 


you encounter difficulties, always think that better 
days are ahead. Good and bad always go together. 
Therefore, take both of them with the same attitude. 
The Gita says, “Sukhadukhe Samekruthwa Labha- 
labhau Jayajayau”’ (treat happiness and sorrow, loss 
and gain, victory and defeat with complete equani- 
mity). Pleasure is an interval between two pains. 
Reduce your worldly desires. Develop desire for God. 
Inculcate love for God and thereby increase your 
happiness. If desires increase, your suffering also 
increases, and happiness too decreases proportionately. 


Bhagawan Wants Only Your Love 


You cannot attain God by your wealth. He is to 
be attained only through devotion. Sathyabhama in her 
pride hoped to possess Krishna all for herself by her 
wealth. She wanted to weigh Him against the huge 
amount of gold she possessed. But she failed. Narada 
made her realize her folly by showing that a single leaf 
of Tulasi (basil) offered by Rukmini with real devotion 
exceeded all the wealth of Sathyabhama. Sathyabhama 
symbolises desire while Rukmini represents devotion. 
Krishna says that He is pleased with the offering of a 
leaf, a flower, a fruit or water. Do not take this literal- 
ly. The body is the leaf; the flower, the flower of your 
heart; your mind, the fruit; and the tears of joy, the 
water, which 1s the acceptable offering to God. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 360 


Embodiments of Love! 


You will have everything in life if you have 
love in you. Do not hate anybody. This should be the 
main ideal of your life. This is My message for you. 
Love is My only wealth. All these magnificent edifices 
are not Mine; they all belong to the devotees. The only 
property I own is unbounded love for all of you. I am 
ready to sacrifice even my very body for the sake of 
my devotees. You live happily and spend your life in a 
state of bliss. I want only your love. Your love makes 
me happy. My love is your greatest wealth and good 
fortune. This is My greatest gift for you. Take good 
care of this precious gift. This is My blessing to you on 
this day. May you all have steady devotion, and sacred, 
long, happy life! May you have all this! May all your 
difficulties be removed! May you experience unalloyed 
bliss! 


Birthday, 23-11-2000, Prasanthi Nilayam 


22 


Righteous Practice - The True Sadhana 


Goodness, humanness, morality and one's 
own culture should be made evident by 
practice. 

The one who who practises them is the 
true Sadhaka. 

This is the truth which Bhagawan is 
emphasizing 


(Telugu Poem) 


THE world is replete with sacred qualities. 
Time is of prime importance. The heart is tender, the 
mind is sweet like nectar. Living in such a brilliant 
country with multifold virtues, you fail to recognize 
these. People living in families do not realize that such 
a soft heart and sweet mind are readily available to 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 362 


them. The family is like a pair of spectacles in front of 
your eyes. While it may appear to be an obstacle in 
front of the eyes, the glasses actually help to improve 
one's vision. You should not be deterred by every 
obstacle or hardship that confronts you. These are only 
aids to your sadhana and not impediments. Sadhakas 
should hold this truth firmly in mind. As is the fire, so 
is the smoke (cloud). As is the cloud, so is the rain. As 
is the rain, so is the crop. As is the crop, so is the food. 
One can interpret that the tasty food actually emanates 
from the heat of the heart. The clouds form in con- 
formity with your own feelings of the heart. Rains are 
dependent on the clouds. You perform actions in 
accordance with the thoughts in your minds. The fruits 
correspond to the actions performed. A small example: 
If you take a small stone and drop into a well, waves 
form and spread out to cover almost the entire surface 
of water. They expand so far as to become invisible to 
your sight. In the same way, a small thought in your 
mind like the stone dropped in the well produces 
disturbances pervading the whole mind and from there 
pervades the whole body. The entire body is affected 
by the nature of the thought. Your eyes seek such 
sights as prompted by the thought. Your hands perform 
acts of a similar nature under the influence of the 
thought waves. Similarly, your legs are affected and 
you go to such places as are prompted by the thought 
in your mind. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 363 


It Is Important To Cultivate Sacred Thoughts 


Therefore, you should cultivate pure and sacred 
thoughts in your mind. When the pure thoughts enter 
the heart from the mind, they spread to all the limbs 
and make the entire body pure. On the other hand, if 
your thoughts are impure, your whole body is similarly 
affected adversely with impurity. If everyone in a 
country has pure thoughts, the entire nation becomes 
sacred. Therefore, it is important to cultivate sacred 
thoughts. Humanity is rendered humane if good 
thoughts are in all hearts. Similarly, human life 
becomes sweet. In these days mankind is filled with 
impure thoughts both in mind and heart. What is the 
cause for this pervasive impurity? It is bad thought 
that is the source of evil. While exercising your mind, 
always enquire first whether the thought is right or 
wrong, it is pure or impure. 


Cultivate A Tender Heart 


It is said that the heart is tender, the mind is 
sweet and the time is sacred. Under these circum- 
stances wherefrom does the defect arise? It is 
necessary to ensure that your mind 1s filled with sacred 
and pure, soft and sweet thoughts. Even the great 
sadhakas should first of all cultivate a tender heart. 
This human life, which is God's gift, should not be 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 364 


wasted. God has His own plans for which He has given 
life to all of you. God intends that each individual 
should be an ideal for the rest of humanity. You should 
try to recognize this ideal. These ideals are pure and 
sacred. The importance of the human heart lies in the 
presence of such purity and sanctity. When impure 
thoughts enter, our hearts become impure and our 
actions become perverted. Do not all your thoughts and 
desires pervade your entire body? Is it proper to say 
one thing and act differently? 


There are no separate sources for speech and 
thought. There is only one single source for the flow 
of fluids to all parts of the body, which is the heart. 
When you fill your heart with love, your speech and 
your actions become pure and sacred. The five indriyas 
are like so many taps fed from the central tank. If the 
central tank is filled with the water of pure thought, 
how can any impure thought or action arise? When the 
heart is filled with pure love, the tongue will not utter 
impure words, the eyes will not see any obscene sights 
and the ears will avoid hearing profane sounds. 
Everyone should enquire into how he is wasting his 
valuable life. You should cultivate good thoughts. If 
by chance an evil thought has entered your heart, 
empty it out, clean it with the water of sacred thoughts 
and fill it up with pure thoughts. In fact, it is not 
possible for evil thoughts to enter your heart because 
your heart is the very temple of divinity. That is why 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 365 


we say, God is Hridayavasi (resident of the heart). In 
everyman, the reflection of divinity is present in the 
heart. The Gita says, Mamaivaamsho Jeevaloke 
Jeevabhutha Sanathanaha (in the created world all are 
sparks of My Being. Born as such divine entities, why 
should you allow evil thoughts to enter your mind? 


Tongue Is The Most Important Organ 


Your very speech should be soft. Not only soft 
and sweet but also truthful. What is the use of uttering 
blatant lies softly? Tongue is perhaps the most im- 
portant limb of the human body. Not only is it capable 
of tasting sweetness, it exudes sweetness in chanting 
the nectarous names, Govinda, Madhava, Domodara. 
The divine names of God have been gifted to you. The 
full potentialities of the tongue are achieved while 
chanting the sweet names of the Lord. It is also pos- 
sible to visualize the divine form. There is no part of 
the body which is more important than the tongue. 
Since the entire creation emanates from and is sus- 
tained by Truth, the organ for speech has to constantly 
adhere to truth. 


The water bubble which arises in the water 
exists in it for a short time and then dissolves in the 
same water; Nara is the bubble and Narayana, the 
water. Such an existence arising from divine purity 
existing in it, persisting in it and finally dissolving in 
the same mass of water, how can anything evil enter it? 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 366 


All water bubbles arise from the water, but it is a 
mistake to consider that the bubbles are distinct from 
the water. Recognize the close relationship between the 
water bubble and the source of water. None is 
enquiring into this fact of nature. Just as the water 
bubble that emanates from water eventually merges in 
it, man who emanated from divinity (Narayana) should 
eventually merge in divinity itself. Just as the water 
bubble shares many properties with its source, that is 
water, man emanating from divinity shares the 
qualities of divinity in him. One may ask wherefrom 
do these evil thoughts arise? They arise out of the 
physical, external and worldly life. Therefore, one 
should avoid at all cost the negative aspects of 
Prakriti. 


Beings Are Many But Breath Is One 


Our Srinivasan (Member, Central Trust) has 
reported that delegates from 165 countries have come 
for this conference. Countries are many but the earth is 
one. The quantity of the number of countries is of little 
importance. Jewels are many but gold is one. Stars are 
many but sky is one. Beings are many but breath is 
one. Only when you recognize this unity amongst 
diverse objects and phenomena, can you realize 
divinity. Be it Allah or Jesus or Zoroaster or any other 
name, it all points to only one divinity. You should not 
criticize other people’s religious beliefs. Each has its 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 367 


own method and the consequent realization of bliss is 
according to his or her understanding. First of all, you 
get rid of all evil qualities and desires. This is what the 
Vedas proclaimed in the following words : Na Prajaya 
Dhanena Thyagenaike Amrutathwamanasuhu (immor- 
tality is attained not by wealth, progeny or position, it 
is attainable only by self-sacrifice). These days one 
finds only an increasing load of desires with people but 
no inclination towards self-sacrifice. People forget the 
interests of their country and increase their personal 
wants. They ignore unity and enjoy multi-plicity. 
Consider your motherland as your very body. One 
should rise to such a broadminded approach. 


Of course, there are people who involve 
themselves in sacrifice of part of their wealth, but in all 
such actions, there is an element of selfishness. True 
sacrifice is that which is made towards divinity. This 
vast Hall has been constructed and the people 
responsible for that have sacrified substantially. It is 
because of their sacrifice that such a pure and sacred 
place is available for such a vast assembly of devotees. 
The assembly in this Hall represents people of diverse 
countries, diverse religious beliefs and diverse 
languages. One should sacrifice one’s wealth towards 
such righteous activities. Your act of sacrifice should 
not result in evil consequences. Ensure that your 
sacrifice is always in the righteous path. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 368 


God Is A Lover Of Music 


You know a music college has been 
constructed. This is also useful for the entire world. 
God is a lover of music and He is charmed by it. It is 
for the encouragement of such divine music only, have 
we established this musical institution. Just imagine, 
some individual living in some foreign country has 
come forward to construct this institution in Prasanthi 
Nilityam. How fortunate is he! Do not misunderstand 
that Swami is indulging in boasting or self-aggran- 
dizement. Elsewhere, you find an element of self- 
interest in all acts of charity all over the world; but in 
the Sai Institutions, there is no trace of self-interest. In 
such sacred activities, you may help to any extent. 
Swami is not soliciting any such help from you. 
Swami is capable of transforming the entire universe if 
He so desires. But why Swami is doing all this is to 
give an opportunity to all of you for making your lives 
meaningful. There are many wealthy people in the 
world, not all of them get this thought or idea for 
sacrifice. Theirs is a misfortune accumulated over 
several births. What is the use of any amount of 
wealth, if one cannot carry with him even a fistful of 
earth! Accumulating wealth with diligence and 
depositing it all in banks and even accumulating black 
money, none feels impelled to sacrifice his wealth for 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 369 


sacred purposes. Hidden wealth is no better than dirt. 
There is no need for such wealth. The heart should be 
pure and sacred. For this, your sacrifice should be to 
God. 


Reduce Your Desire For Wealth 


If you go to a shop and buy a handkerchief, you 
pay ten rupees. In the same manner, only when you 
surrender some of your belongings to God, it is 
possible for you to gain love or grace or peace. God 
does not demand anything from you but you have to 
perform your own duties. From the omniscient, omni- 
present, omnipotent God, if you give a little, you will 
receive manifold benefits back. There is no need to 
give any material things; it is enough if you sur-render 
your pure, unsullied love. Reduce your desire for 
wealth. 


Even a millionaire cannot digest gold as 
food, 

If you are beset with misfortune, 
even a Stick will turn into a snake, 

If you are blessed with good fortune, 
even dirt turns into gold, 

A scholar may degrade into an animal, 


and a dullard can become a great sage, 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 370 


It is possible that the goddess of 
misfortune may develop an attraction 
toward a rich man. 
If you are not ordained by destiny, 
you will not get even naya paisa. 
No, no my friend, keep your desires within 
bounds, 
Join the company of Sai and cultivate a 
healthy mind. 
(Telugu Poem) 


If Your Desires Are More, Sacrifice More 


Discharge your duties with proper attention. 
To the extent possible, help others. Once there was an 
elderly lady, probably on a pilgrimage, travelling by 
train. As the train was passing over the river Krishna, 
she threw a few coins into the river. Another well-to- 
do person in the compartment commented. “What 
fools these Hindus are, they waste their money by 
throwing it into the river!” The lady addressed the 
person, “My son, I am not the fool, but you are. Just 
imagine how much money you are wasting on tobacco, 
stimulants and other drinks. I have merely sacrificed 
two paise for pleasing God. Do you consider my small 
sacrifice for pleasing God as foolishness? Remember, 
rivers are the very life-sustaining features. The pure 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 371 


water of these sacred rivers cleanses us, quenches our 
thirst and makes us pure. Imagine, if mere water can 
confer so many benefits, what benefits God cannot 
confer. Since you do not have this faith, you do not 
make any offerings to God.” 


The mindset of the Kali Yuga is to give a little 
and expect in return big rewards like buying a tiny 
brinjal and asking for a pumpkin free of cost. If your 
desires are more, you should sacrifice more. We see 
several beggars outside. Do not give any money to 
beggars. They may misuse the money given by you 
for bad purposes. You should first ask, “Friend, what 
is it you need? If they are hungry, feed them. You 
should only give what is necessary. Excessive gener- 
osity leads to danger. Athi Sarvathra Varjayeth (al- 
ways avoid extravagance). You need air to breathe but 
excessive intake of air will lead to all kinds of com- 
plications. When you are thirsty, you must drink 
water, may be a glassful. Is it possible for you to drink 
up the waters of the entire Ganga? Therefore, do not 
indulge in excess nor should you waste. Consume the 
absolute minimum of whatever is required. Holding 
your breath without exhaling for too long will ruin 
your lungs. If the digested food is not excreted, the 
stomach is spoiled. 


Thyaga Is Yoga And Yoga Is Bhoga 


While you earn, you must also sacrifice a part 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 312 


of it. There is a lot of joy in sacrifice. If anyone is 
accumulating wealth without any sacrifice, sooner or 
later, he will be involved in great danger. Thyaga is 
yoga and yoga is Bhoga. Such a yoga 1s true enjoy- 
ment. All people connected with Sathya Sai movement 
should sacrifice to the maximum extent possible. Do 
not misuse any money in your care. If you come across 
someone in trouble, find out the cause and then help 
him to the extent necessary. For the homeless, you can 
build small houses. For those without an earning even 
to feed themselves, try to provide them with some 
means of earning money. 


Once Jesus and Peter were going in a boat. 
When they reached the shore, a man approached them 
saying that he was hungry. Peter gave him a couple of 
fish. Then Jesus said, “Peter, why are you giving fish 
to the needy? If you give him a net, he will be able to 
catch fish for himself. Truly, it is not practical for you 
to provide him with fish or for his daily sustenance.” 
Instead of merely satisfying a man’s hunger for one 
day, try to find him a job with which he can earn for 
his livelihood. Due to the influence of Kali Age people 
expect rewards without any effort. 


The Entire Universe Is Pervaded By Peace 


I am telling you what actually happened in 
Prasanthi Nilayam. Sometime back, Swami provided a 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 373 


refuge for the physically disabled. Swami was 
arranging for their food needs daily. A few ladies 
among them started asking for betel leaves and nuts. 
Swami granted this requirement also. But these people 
were not satisfied with mere sustenance. They were 
inclined to go to the market and beg and earn money. 
From the great to the indigent, all are after money. 
Money comes and goes, morality comes and grows. 
These are all well-known facts to all our members. 
Knowing this, do not run after money. 


There are many who come and tell Swami that 
they want peace of mind. Should God give you peace? 
The entire universe is pervaded by peace. You are 
yourself the embodiment of peace. Only, you are not 
aware of it. Indulging in evil ways, increasing your 
desires, the peace within is shattered to pieces. God 
has already provided for all human wants. Wherever 
you see, you find only good things. But man does not 
turn his attention to the good things of life. Evil things 
attract him and he trusts only the evil. You are all 
witness. You have all assembled in hundreds of 
thousands here and arrangements for feeding you all 
free have been made. How delicious was the food! 
Swami also partakes of the same food that is given to 
all of you. The food is not only tasty, but is also pure. 
The cooks prepare the dishes with great enthusiasm. 
However, some do not relish this diet and go to five- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 374 


star hotels and pay shamelessly a hundred rupees for 
food, not worth even a rupee. You should uproot such 
egoism and ostentation from your being. Take only 
that much as is necessary to satisfy your hunger. 


Humanity Should Strive Towards Divinity 


One might say that the poor people are in 
reality the richest. As their needs are limited, the 
satisfaction and the peace they enjoy is not enjoyed 
even by the wealthiest. In fact, peace is satisfaction. 
Dissatisfaction results in mental distress. So, reduce 
your requirements and utilise your surplus resources 
for righteous purposes. Do you save money solely for 
the purpose of sending your children and grandchildren 
to foreign countries? After they grow up, God only 
knows whether they will go to America or some other 
world. If foreign education is in their destiny, they are 
bound to get it. With this kind of excessive desires, 
man loses his humanness and becomes almost an 
animal. Humanity should strive towards divinity, not 
towards animal nature. Why I am saying all these 
things at such length is to emphasise that if you put 
into practice whatever has been told to you now, your 
life will become fruitful and meaningful. Here is 
another important thing to note. Suppose you have 
some urgent work, say, for example, in Delhi or in 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 375 


Mumbai, you can travel by flight. Why should you 
spend so much money for travelling in aeroplane, 
when you have no urgent work? Instead you can travel 
by train and save a lot of money which can be used for 
some constructive purpose. You may say plane 
journey is safer than train journey. But don’t you hear 
about plane crashes these days? If the end is destined, 
you are bound to meet it any way. If you reduce your 
expenditure, you will lead a peaceful life. 


Don’t waste money. Misuse of money is evil. 
Don’t waste food, Food is God. Many people get food 
served on the plate in excess and ultimately waste so 
much of it. It is said, Annam Brahma (food is 
Brahma). What is the use of worshipping Brahma if 
you waste food which is the very form of Brahma? 
Similarly, time is God. God is extolled as Kaalaaya 
Namaha, Kaala Kaalaaya Namaha (God is time, God 
is the master of time). So, don’t waste time. Time 
wasted is life wasted. Don’t waste your energy by 
reading vulgar stories and seeing obscene pictures, by 
watching television and movies. You can certainly see 
all that is good. A lot of energy is wasted because of 
bad thoughts, bad vision, bad hearing and bad speech. 
Talk to the extent necessary. One who indulges in 
excessive talk is a fool. Many who participate in 
congregations keep chatting unnecessarily with people 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 376 


by their side. They do not realize that unnecessary talk 
leads to waste of energy and puts one to disrepute. 
God is known as Sabda Brahman, meaning God is in 
the form of sound. Do not misuse it. Today people are 
interested in seeing obscene pictures. What is the 
benefit they get out of it? Nothing at all. So, do not 
see evil. 


Bhagawan Loves All 


People go all the way to temples to see the 
deity, but when they stand in front of the deity, they 
close their eyes and pray. Such being the case, why 
should one go to temples at all? When you go to 
temples, you should keep your eyes open and enjoy the 
beautiful form of the deity. Even in our bhajans, 
Swami finds many of our boys closing their eyes and 
singing. They are not blind like Suradas! One should 
see the divine form and install it in one’s own heart. 
Only then can one grow in devotion. Swami is 
explaining to you even these minor details so that you 
may understand them better and put them into practice. 
Some of these things you may not be aware of. Swami 
considers it His duty to enlighten you. Rest assured 
that you will attain divinity if you translate these 
teachings into practice. Swami often tells you, My life 
is My Message. Follow Me. Swami loves all. Love is 
highly sacred. When you develop love, it will 
gradually get transformed into wisdom. It is because 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 377 


of love that Swami has been bestowing sacredness and 
divinity on the people, all these years. Today you have 
gathered here in large numbers. Has Swami sent any 
invitation to you? No. It is Swami’s love that has 
attracted you here. Love is the greatest attraction. You 
have come here to experience the bliss that you are not 
able to get in your house, town, village, state or 
country. Install the divine principle in your heart that 
bestows this bliss on you. 


The Nature Of Sai Is Love And Love Alone 


Munde, Munde Mathir Bhinnah (heads vary, so 
do the feelings). Each one has his own likes and 
dislikes. What appears good to some people may 
appear bad to some others. Good and bad are the 
feelings of your mind. Sai has nothing to do with 
them. The nature of Sai is love and love alone. You 
belch what you eat. Likewise, you are responsible for 
all your bad thoughts. Swami has absolutely no bad 
thoughts. His word is pure, His actions are pure, His 
heart is pure, He is purity personified. During all these 
75 years, never has He asked anybody for any favour. 
Yet so many social welfare schemes are being under- 
taken. 


How is all this being accomplished? Does 
Swami earn anything? He does not own property worth 
even a naya paisa. But He has got plenty of property, 
which you are not aware of. All of you are Swami’s 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 378 


property. None else has got this property. All worldly 
property has a certain limit. But love has no limit. It is 
the unlimited property. Love alone is responsible for 
attracting all of you here. All those who have 
participated in this conference should recapitulate what 
has been said here and should try to practise at least a 
little of what has been said here. Loka Samastha 
Sukhino Bhavantu (May all the worlds be happy). 
Pray for the welfare of the entire world, not yourself 
and your family alone. Without the society, how can 
you and your family exist? 


Treat Pleasure And Pain, Success Or Failure Alike 


Before the close of this discourse, let Swami 
tell you a small story. Once there lived a king and 
queen who looked after the people very well. One day 
as the queen was applying oil on the king’s head, she 
shed drops of tears. Taking note of this in the mirror 
opposite to him, the king asked her as to why she was 
weeping? On his insistence, she replied, “O king, I 
found a few grey hairs on your head. This is the first 
message that God sends to man that his end is 
approaching. The second message is that the vision 
gets blurred. The third is that the teeth start falling and 
the last is that there would be wrinkles on the body. 
Today you have got the first message. That is why I 
am grief-stricken.” The king was one of wisdom. 
Immediately, he set out to the forest and did penance. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 379 


Lord Narayana appeared before him. The king prayed, 
“O Lord, your sannidhi (proximity) is my pennidhi 
(wealth). Please shower Your grace on me. I want 
everybody to live in equality in my country. There 
should not be any difference such as rich or poor. Let 
there be no dearth of food, clothing and shelter for my 
people.” Lord Narayana replied, “O king, no doubt, 
your desire is very noble. But it is not possible to 
make everybody equal. In this creation, multiplicity is 
very essential.” 


The King insisted that his desire be fulfilled. 
Lord Narayana ultimately relented to the king’s 
request. On his return, the king noticed that his king- 
dom had undergone a great change. Wherever he saw, 
he found palatial buildings. People were travelling 
only by cars and aeroplanes. He did not find anybody 
walking on the roads. When he reached his own 
palace, he found the road opposite to the palace was 
very dirty. He did not find any watchman or a sweeper. 
Then he immediately called the queen and asked her to 
send word for a sweeper. She replied that the sweeper, 
the barber, the dhobi and the cook were not reporting 
to duty as they became wealthy overnight and did not 
feel the need to work any more. 


Then the king realized that it was a mistake on 
his part to have asked for such a boon from Narayana 
that all should be equal. The queen also felt that it was 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 380 


not possible to live in this world without the dualities 
of rich and poor, good and bad. She too went to the 
forest and did penance. When Lord Narayana 
appeared before her, she asked, “What is the boon that 
you gave my husband?” Narayana replied that the king 
wanted all his people should live in affluence like him. 
Then the queen said, “O lord, what is the use if people 
under such a noble king are bad? Kindly transform all 
the people into noble ones. Let the king as well as his 
people live for 100 years.” Lord Narayana, pleased 
with her broadmindedness, said, “You too will live 
happily for 100 years.” The queen returned to the 
kingdom and told the king about what had happened. 
But still the problem continued as the barbers, dhobis 
and cooks were not available. The king again went to 
the forest and prayed to Narayana. “O Lord, what I 
had desired from you was utterly wrong. I am paying 
the price for not paying heed to Your advice. Please 
restore the kingdom to its original position.” Narayana 
said, “So shall it be.” 


The king realized that happiness lay in union 
with God, not in material comforts. When the king 
entered his kingdom, everything appeared normal. The 
sweepers, barbers and all others belonging to the 
different strata of society were discharging their duties 
as usual. Thus, you see that whatever God does is 
sacred and for your own good. It is not proper on your 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 381 


part to remember God only in times of misery. Sukha 
Dukhe Same Kruthwa Labha Labhau Jaya Jayau (treat 
pleasure and pain, success or failure alike) Under any 
circumstances, your love for God should not waver. 
Your faith should be steady. 


Students and Delegates! 


Experience bliss by practising at least one or 
two of what you have heard here and share the bliss 
with others. Pray for the welfare of the entire world. 
Sathya Sai Organisation is meant to emancipate the 
world. Being members of such an organisation, you 
should take part in activities that will uplift the society. 
Mere lip-service will not serve the purpose. Put into 
practice all that you have learnt in this conference. 
World peace cannot be achieved through prayers and 
rituals. It can be attained only when your behaviour is 
good. Practise before you preach. That is true devo- 
tion, that is true service. Revive the ancient culture of 
Bharat and transform it into land of divinity. Only then 
will your lives be sanctified. 


Valedictory Discourse of 7" World Conference of 
Sri Sathya Sai Seva Organisations, 


24-11-2000, Prasanthi Nilayam. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 382 


Be pure in words and deeds, and keep 
impure thoughts away. I am every one 
of you, and so I become aware of your 
slightest wave of thought. When the 
clothes become dirty, you have to give 
them to the wash. When your mind is 
soiled, you have to be born again, for 
the cleansing operations. The dhobi 
beats the cloth on the hard stone, and 
draws over it the hot iron, to straighten 
the folds. So too, you will have to pass 
through a train of travail in order to 
become fit to approach God. See Me as 
resident in every one; give them all the 
help you can, all the service they need; 
do not withhold a sweet word, a sup- 
porting hand, an assuring smile, com- 
forting company and consoling conver- 


sation. 


—Baba 


23 


Overcome Jealousy With Love 


Forbearance is the real beauty 
in this sacred land of Bharat. 

The nectarous feeling in this country 
is the feeling towards one’s mother. 

Character is valued far higher than the 
very life itself. 

People have forgotten the basic principles 
of this great culture and are imitating 
Western culture today. 

The Bharatiyas are not aware of the greatness 
of their own cultural heritage just as a 
mighty elephant is not aware of 
its own strength. 


(Telugu Poem) 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 384 


Embodiments of Love - Boys and Girls! 


SINCE ancient times, this land has been the 
birthplace of sages, seers and saints who propagated 
the sacred culture of Bharat to the rest of the world and 
earned name and fame; but such noble souls are 
forgotten today. You should recognize the basic truth 
that Bharat relies on its spiritual wealth and nothing 
else. Just think for yourself the plight of present day 
Bharat, which once upon a time spread the light of 
divinity to the rest of the world. In this sacred land, 
many men of nobility and virtue had to face hardships 
and criticism, yet they remained firm in their resolve to 
set an ideal to humanity. 


Jesus Was The Victim Of Jealousy Of The Wicked 


Today you have to remind yourselves of the 
ideals Jesus stood for. From time to time, many noble 
souls, endowed with immense spiritual power, have 
taken birth to propagate sacred teachings to the world. 
They struggled hard to make the world a good place to 
live in. But without understanding their noble inten- 
tions, foolish people tried to ridicule and persecute 
them. Right from his birth, Jesus had to face many 
trials and tribulations. When the name and fame of 
noble souls spread far and wide, many people become 
jealous. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 385 


The history of Bharat is replete with many 
examples that bear testimony to this truth. Asuya 
(jealousy) has three sons, namely., kama, krodha and 
dwesha (desire, anger and hatred). The divine Trinity 
of Brahma, Vishnu and Maheshwara are the sons of 
Anasuya. The evil forces of desire, anger and hatred 
put the people to a lot of trouble. Jesus was also put to 
suffering in every possible way, though he strove tire- 
lessly for the peace and welfare of society. He was the 
epitome of compassion and the refuge of the poor, 
needy and forlorn. But many people tried to create 
troubles for Jesus as they did not like his sacred teach- 
ings and activities. Their hatred for Jesus in-creased 
day by day. Even the priests turned against Jesus as 
they became jealous of his growing popularity. But the 
fishermen held Jesus in high esteem. They started 
following his teachings and became his followers. As 
he became more and more popular, many people, out 
of jealousy, raised obstacles in his path and even tried 
to kill him. Jesus had twelve disciples. Judas was one 
of them. But he betrayed Jesus. At that time, there was 
only one Judas, but today there are many such ‘Judas- 
es.’ Today the world is engulfed in unrest because of 
the rise in the number of treacherous people like Judas. 
They are mean-minded and are easily tempted by 
money. Judas betrayed just for a few pieces of silver. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 386 


Even two thousand years ago, money was the primary 
temptation of man. Because of their greed for money, 
people resorted to evil and unjust ways, destroyed truth 
and indulged in false propaganda. This was the case 
then, and it is the same even today. No one needs to be 
afraid of such false allegations. Why should one be 
afraid of the mistake that one has not committed? In 
the past, many evil-minded people were jealous of the 
divine personalities who attained worldwide fame 
through the teachings of truth and righteousness. Even 
today there is no dearth of such wicked people. 


Bhagawan’s Resolve To Serve Humanity Is 
Unshakable 


Today many people are jealous of Sai as His 
name and fame are spreading far and wide. Neither 
they undertake any good activity themselves nor do 
they tolerate someone else doing good. The Rayala- 
seema region suffered from scarcity of drinking water 
right from the time of British rule. There were many 
leaders and wealthy people, but none of them took up 
the task of providing drinking water to lakhs of people 
of Rayalaseema. 


Today the cost of heart surgery runs into lakhs 
of rupees. Again, it is Sai Baba who has established 
Super Speciality hospitals, where most expensive heart 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 387 


surgeries are done totally free of cost. The field of 
education is corrupted by money to such an extent that 
one has to pay Rs.20,000 as donation to admit a child 
to a primary school. But Sai Baba is providing free 
education right from kindergarten to post graduation. 
No other individual or government for that matter has 
been able to provide free education or free medical 
care to the people. 


Sai’s Heart Is Pure 


Some people are so mean-minded that they do 
not want to understand and appreciate the sanctity 
associated with the activities. Have any of them been 
able to accomplish even one-thousandth part of what 
Sai baba is doing? No, no, no! It is only Sathya Sai 
Baba who has undertaken such noble tasks without a 
trace of selfishness. Sai’s heart is pure, His feelings 
are sacred, and He is totally selfless. Sathya Sai Baba 
stands for three P’s namely, Purity, Patience and 
Perseverance. There is no trace of selfishness in Sai 
Baba from top to toe. He is rendering totally selfless 
service. Why are those with a modicum of intelligence 
unable to recognize this truth? Why are they indulging 
in false propaganda? They are doing so due to their 
greed for money. Not merely that. Money is the basis 
of conversion of people from one religion to another. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 388 


Even those who wear ochre robes become jealous of 
the prosperity of each other and indulge in false 
propaganda. 


One does not become a saint or develop 
devotion just by donning ochre robes. 

One does not become free from sins 
merely by holding the Gita in one’s hands. 


(Telugu Poem) 


What to talk about the Peethadhipathis (heads 
of big religious establishments), even some of the so- 
called Sadhus are indulging in this wicked activity. 
We should not criticize anybody. But I am forced to 
tell you all this, as it has now become the demand of 
the situation. Do not be afraid of any false publicity. 


Sai’s Resolve Will Never Change 


Another Super Speciality Hospital has been 
built in Bangalore at a cost of Rs.300 crores. In this 
vast land of Bharat, do you find any politician in power 
associating himself with such noble causes? On the 
other hand, rather shamelessly, they go on talking ill of 
others. People who try to obstruct sacred activities are 
not human beings to all. They are verily demons. 
Even if the whole world were to be filled with such 
demons, Sai’s resolve will never change. Some people 
out of their mean-mindedness are trying to tarnish the 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 389 


image of Sai Baba. I am not after name and fame. So, 
I do not lose anything by their false allegations. My 
glory will go on increasing day by day. It will never 
diminish even a bit if they were to publicise their false 
allegations in the whole world in bold letters. Some 
devotees seem to be perturbed over these false state- 
ments. They are not true devotees at all. Having known 
the mighty power of Sai, why should they be afraid of 
the ‘cawing of crows’? One should not get carried 
away by all that is written on walls, said in political 
meetings or the vulgar tales carried by the print media. 


Let us firmly resolve to propagate the prin- 
ciples of truth, righteousness and love. Sathya Sai 
Baba has no trace of selfishness in Him. I am spending 
crores of rupees to alleviate the sufferings of the poor 
and the downtrodden. My resolve is to feed the hungry 
and impart education to poor children. There are many 
millionaires in this world who are so mean and narrow- 
minded that they set their dogs on the beggars who 
come to beg alms at their doorstep. It is shameful to 
consider them as human beings. 


These persons are unable to do even one 
thousandth part of what Sathya Sai Baba is doing for 
society, but shamelessly indulge in false allegations. 
Instead it would be better for them to follow Sathya 
Sai Baba and set an ideal to the rest of the world. I 
have no desires or ambitions. There is no trace of 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 390 


jealousy in Me. I am love personified. Love is My 
very life. Wisdom is the fruit that I grant. These two 
form the basis of My life. 


Recall The Fate Of Those Who Opposed Divinity 


People who indulge in false allegations are 
bound to come to woe. Those who investigate such 
false publicity too will meet their doom. Money 
should be utilized to undertake righteous actions, not 
for evil purposes. Serve your fellowmen with all love 
and compassion. Put them on the right path and make 
them happy. I am not afraid of any false propaganda 
that people may do. Why should I be afraid when I 
follow the path of truth, righteousness and love? Let 
people say what they want; I am not perturbed. 


Today I am explaining to you in detail the 
principle of love that I stand for. During the time of 
every avatar, wicked people did play their tricks. 
During the time of Krishna, there were evil-minded 
people like Kamsa, Sisupala and Dantavakra, who tried 
their best to harm him. When Rama incarnated for the 
establishment of dharma, he too had to face stiff 
opposition from evil forces. He was exiled to forest 
for 14 years where he had to undergo a lot of suffering. 
Even his consort was separated from him. Ultimately, 
what happened to all those who tried to create trouble 
for the divine personalities? Those who accuse them 
and put them to suffering commit the worst sin. If one 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 391 


cannot undertake meritorious deeds, it would be better 
one keeps quiet instead of indulging in such sinful 
deeds. 


There are some people who claim to be 
devotees and take to evil ways. They feel that their 
physical appearance will earn them respect. Not at all. 
It is one’s sacredness that makes one a good person. 
So, one should lead a life of truth and righteousness. 
The principle of love is the same in one and all. All 
should stand united by the bond of love. Then the 
entire world will become one family. We can never 
attain happiness if we contract and fragment love and 
develop hatred. 


I lead a life suffused with love from dawn to 
dusk. I am providing high quality free education to 
thousands of students. Not merely free education; I am 
showing them by My example the way to lead an ideal 
life. When these students go out, some people try to 
pollute their minds with wicked feelings. Whatever 
others may say, our students are like gold. The very 
dust of the feet of our students will prevent wickedness 
in others. The alumni, both boys and girls of our 
institutions are leading sacred and exemplary lives. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 392 


Betrayal Of God Is The Worst Sin 


The Messengers of Sathya Sai, Association of 
alumni of Anantapur College, are undertaking various 
service activities in many countries. They are 
encouraging their husbands also to take to the path of 
service. Our old students are working in various 
countries like Switzerland, America, Japan, China, 
Russia, etc. Some foreigners are trying to bribe them, 
asking them to fabricate stories against Sathya Sai 
Baba. In Switzerland, when one of our girl students 
was approached by someone asking her to concoct 
stories against Sai Baba, she got so enraged that she 
immediately took out her shoe to teach a lesson to that 
person. She asked him, “Is this what your religion 
teaches? Is this the ideal that your religion propagates? 
Fie on you! Get out!” But there are some traitors like 
Judas, who are being bribed to level false charges 
against Sai Baba. 


Ultimately, what happened to Judas? He felt 
miserable for having betrayed Jesus for monetary 
gains. He shed tears of repentance. He hit himself, 
saying, “Fie on me! I am a traitor. I betrayed my own 
Master and God.” Betrayal of God is the worst of all 
sins. Such betrayal can never be atoned for in any 
number of births. So, never try to betray God. Love all. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 393 


Pleasure Is An Interval Between Two Pains 


Salute even those who criticize you because 
divinity is present in all. Do not spoil your mind by 
harbouring the feelings of anger, etc. Pray to God with 
love. All noble souls and incarnations in the past had 
also to put up with criticism. You may ask why at all 
such criticism should arise? Criticism, in fact, adds to 
their glory. Pleasure is an interval between two pains. 
Shadow follows light. One should not be afraid of 
shadow. There is light even in shadow. Light and 
shadow cannot exist separately. There is a principle of 
unity between them. So, do not react to any criticism 
levelled against Swami or any other elder for that 
matter. Just brush it aside, saying, you have nothing to 
do with it. If someone points out mistakes in you, you 
can certainly rectify them. But if someone levels false 
charges against you, you don’t need to be worried over 
it. Be happy. If the criticism is made in a loud voice, 
it goes into the thin air. If it is made within one self, it 
goes to oneself only such being the case, why should 
you be perturbed? Let anyone say anything; remain 
calm. Consider whatever happens as good for you. 
With such equal-mindedness, carry on your good 
work. 


There Is Nothing That Sai Cannot Accomplish 


In future, you are going to witness many more 
glorious events. There is nothing that Sathya Sai Baba 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 394 


cannot accomplish. In fact, people would be struck 
with awe and wonder by His deeds. But His only aim 
is to make everybody happy. Loka Samastha Sukhino 
Bhavanthu (may the entire world be happy!). Those 
who aspire for the well-being of others will never be 
put to difficulties. No obstacles can ever shake them. 
A small example. Once Buddha encountered the dem- 
on of jealousy, which said, “Buddha, I am going to 
devour you.” Buddha smiled and said sweetly, “O 
demon of jealousy, I love you too.” On listening to the 
loving words of Buddha, the demon immediately 
turned into a dove that symbolized love and peace and 
flew away. 


One becomes a devotee in the true sense only 
when one cultivates patience and conquers the evils of 
anger, hatred and jealousy with love. “Don’t be elated 
by praise or depressed by blame. It is not proper on 
your part to love only those who praise you and hate 
those who criticize you. Criticism will only help you 
to progress. So, do not harbour hatred towards those 
who criticize you. Accept everything good that comes 
your way. Ignore all that is bad. People may praise or 
criticize, but none can shake Sai. Sai lives in truth. 
None has been able to shake truth at any point of time. 
Lead your lives with such strong conviction. Increase 
your faith in God day by day. As faith increases, all 
the wickedness will perish. Do not give up the 
spiritual practices that you have been doing all along. 
Since Jesus bore all the difficulties with fortitude, he is 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 395 


being adored and worshipped to this day. 


Once a young discipline asked Jesus, “O 
Master, when I am faced with some problems, how am 
I to solve them? Jesus replied, “O simpleton, do not 
seek solutions to your problems. Love God, who is 
installed in your heart. Love even those that hate you 
because God is present in them also. How can you 
ever have suffering when you love all? Your heart will 
be filled with bliss when you love everybody.” Similar 
was the answer which Lord Krishna gave to Arjuna 
when he asked him, “Swami, is there anybody who is 
very dear to you?” Krishna replied, “O simpleton, I 
have neither friend nor foe. I am present in every 
heart. I reside even in the hearts of those who criticise 
Me. One who sees God in all and loves them is very 
dear to Me. One is intimately related to Me not by 
birth, but by one’s intense love for Me. Having been 
with Me for so long, it is rather surprising that you 
have not understood this basic truth. O Arjuna, you 
have made Me sit in your chariot, but not in the chariot 
of your heart.” 


A Wavering Mind Becomes Unsacred 


One should install God in one’s heart. In fact, 
you don’t need to install Him; He is already there. It is 
enough if you know the truth that God is present in 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 396 


your heart. Once you recognise this truth, you will 
become God yourself. 


What you have to propagate to the world is 
love alone. Nothing exists other than love in this 
world. Love is God. Love is life and love is 
everything. So, cultivate love more and more. Let 
your mind not waver under any circumstances. A 
wavering mind becomes unsacred. That is why once 
Thyagaraja sang, “O mind, do not waver and do not 
get deluded.” Consider love as your very life. Love 
alone makes one’s life sacred. One is a true human 
being only if one has love in him. Love is man; man is 
love. Man is God and God is love. It is love that 
unifies all. So, develop love. Tread the path of truth 
and righteousness and lead a peaceful life. There are 
no greater powers, no greater ideals and no greater 
supports than these human values of Sathya, Dharma, 
Santhi and Prema. These four values are the life- 
supporting principles. Adhere to these four values and 
sanctify your life. 


Do Not Be Afraid To Follow Truth 


Embodiments of Love! Be fearless. Do not be 
afraid even if a thunderbolt were to land on your head. 
Death comes only once and not twice. It is bound to 
come one day or the other. So do not be afraid of 
death. Be ready for anything. Do not be afraid to 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 397 


follow truth. Fill your life with love. Only then will 
your life be sanctified. No spiritual practice like japa 
and dhyana can redeem your life if you do not adhere 
to truth and love. Let anything happen; hold on to 
these values. These values alone can give happiness 
and prosperity to the entire world. Develop love more 
and more. Do not pay heed to the criticism of others; 
because you are not committing any mistake. What 
mistake can there be if one loves God? Having 
unflinching love for God till your last breath. Do not 
entertain conflicts or doubts. 


Everyone has to face the consequences of his 
actions. None can predict when and how, but you are 
bound to face them. However, when you constantly 
think of God, you will never be put to suffering. He 
will always be with you, in you, around you, safe- 
guarding you. You may worship God by any name — 
Jesus, Rama, Krishna, etc. But remember that God is 
one, goal is one, truth is one and love is one. Love is 
God. Enshrine this unity principle in your heart and 
have firm faith in 1t. Then God will certainly take care 
of you wherever you are-in a forest, in the sky, in a 
city, in a village, on a mountain top or in the middle of 
deep sea. No one has the right to deny your God. Due 
to the impact of Kali Age, people are taking to evil 
ways in pursuit of money. They even go to the extent 
of killing others for the sake of money. For them 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 398 


money is everything. One should not struggle to earn 
money. Rather, one should strive to earn the wealth of 
love. When you have the wealth of love in your 
possession, you will never suffer. 


Sacred Bond Of Love Between Swami And His 
Students 


Embodiments of Love! 


I hope I am not causing you badha (trouble) by 
speaking for a long time. In fact, | am giving you a 
great bodha (illumination) and not Badha. People who 
are feeling discouraged should be given the tonic of 
courage, so that they do not entertain any weakness 
whatsoever. 


The Messengers of Sathya Sai are rendering 
yeoman’s service to society. Sometimes, they even 
forego their food while participating in service activi- 
ties. But that is not a good practice as it can spoil their 
health. They wanted to make their contribution for the 
Super Speciality Hospital that has been constructed at 
Bangalore. Being ladies, they felt sad that it was not 
possible for them to take up any manual service activ- 
ity at the construction site like carrying bricks, etc. 
They collected 75 lakh rupees from their own small 
savings and sent the amount to Sri Sathya Sai Central 
Trust without informing Me. Moreover, there are many 
old boys of our college. Though they are working 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 399 


outside, they belong to Swami. Some of them wait 
here for months together without even taking food 
properly. They have also saved some money to 
contribute for the hospital. They have sent 45 lakh 
rupees to the Central Trust for this purpose. 


It Is My Goodness That Attracts All The Help 


We don’t want your money. We want your 
love. We want your welfare, progress and happiness. 
Wherever you are, lead ideal lives. Some people are 
under the impression that some big people are 
contributing crores and crores of rupees for this 
hospital. We are not asking them. They are not giving 
us either. I am happy with even a small contribution 
offered with love. Many people offered Jesus precious 
gifts; he did not accept any of them. But when an old 
lady offered him a small coin, he accepted happily and 
kept it with him till his last breath as the offering was 
made with love. Similarly, what I want is love, not 
money. Like this, many more hospitals will be coming 
up in future. I do not ask anybody for any help. It is 
Sathya Sankalpa (Will of Truth); what I am doing is 
good. If one undertakes any good work, it is bound to 
fructify. It is My goodness that attracts all the help. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 400 


Students! Boys and Girls! 


Take back the money that you have given. Not 
only now, I never wanted money at any time in My 
life. Your love, progress and well-being is what I 
want. I will be pleased if you lead ideal lives with 
good conduct. Earn a good name that Sathya Sai 
students are well- behaved. Money comes and goes, 
morality comes and grows. Develop your morality and 
character. Be courageous. Share your love with others. 
Outsiders are not aware of the love and devotion that 
the students and devotees have for Me. They do not 
even care for their health when it comes to serving Me. 
But I don’t want such service. You should eat well. 
Do not put yourself to trouble. Do not put the body to 
any harm as God is its indweller (jeeva is deva). Make 
yourself happy and then serve the community. You 
have been going to various villages and serving the 
poor. There is no greater service. This wealth of ser- 
vice 1s much greater than crores of rupees. Go to each 
and every village, serve the poor and feed the hungry. 


A New Scheme To Help The Poor And Needy 


As I mentioned to you recently, I came across a 
news item in a small piece of paper, which I happened 
to find one day. There was a poor mother who did not 
have the wherewithal to feed her son. Her Husband 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 401 


was no more. Everyday she used to beg for alms in 
order to feed her son. Some time back, there were 
heavy rains continuously for many days. Conse- 
quently, she could not go out for begging. One morn- 
ing her son started crying, “Mother, I am hungry. Give 
me something to eat.” In such a situation, what could 
she give him? She felt helpless and shed tears. She 
thought within herself, “Son, God has not given me the 
strength to feed you.” In that moment of helplessness, 
she somehow managed to get poison, mixed it in wa- 
ter, gave it to her son and drank it herself. Both of 
them died. I felt sad that in this land of Bharat, which 
is known as Annapoorna (goddess of food), some 
people are unable to feed their own children. 


From that day onwards, I have taken up a firm 
resolve. Children should be fed properly and given 
proper education. So, I have made a scheme of fixed 
deposits of one lakh rupees for each family of such 
helpless mothers and their children. They will get an 
interest of more than one thousand rupees per month 
to fulfil their needs. But there may be some cheats who 
will try to exploit their innocence. They may mislead 
to invest those one lakh rupees in a business for their 
own selfish ends. That is why the bank mana-ger 
would be given strict instructions in this regard to give 
only the interest to the parent concerned every month. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 402 


It is not possible to provide education to the 
children if they are living in a different village. We 
wanted to keep them nearby and asked the government 
to allot a suitable piece of land. But they have not 
given this to us and I have stopped asking them. We 
have got our own orchard. I have decided to use that 
piece of land to construct houses for these poor fami- 
lies. I thought that instead of utilizing the land for 
growing fruit trees, it would be better to utilise it for 
the sake of poor children. We are going to construct 
houses with two rooms, a kitchen and a bathroom for 
every mother and her children. They can live lifelong 
in these houses and look after their needs with the 
interest they get from the bank. I will take the respon- 
sibility of providing education to these children. We 
have many students, both boys and girls, who can 
teach them and train them. 


I Want My Students To Render Service To The 
Poor 


Our boys and girls are ready to render any 
service. I do not want to praise My own students, but 
you cannot find students like them anywhere else. 
They are highly virtuous. I want My students to render 
service to the poor and needy and alleviate their 
suffering. Students, you do not need to pay heed to 
what others say. Take a firm resolve to serve society 
and sanctify your life. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 403 


Shortly, I am going to Puttaparthi. Very soon 
the students’ Sports Meet is going to be held. The 
students need to be encouraged. The construction of 
houses for the poor has also to be started. Then, by 19" 
I will be back here at Brindavan for the inauguration of 
the Super Speciality Hospital, which is going to benefit 
the entire State of Karnataka. All the heart patients in 
the State of Karnataka should be cured of their ailment. 
Everyday 30 to 40 operations will take place. For this 
purpose, 30 surgeons will be employed by paying them 
high salaries. There will be 8 to 10 operation theaters. 
At least 25 to 30 heart surgeries should take place 
everyday. No patient should suffer from heart failure. 
That is My strong determination. I don’t want to make 
any distinction between States. All States are Mine. 
All belong to Me and I belong to you all. Do not 
entertain any doubt or weakness. I am ready to give 
whatever you require. Be courageous. Why fear when I 
am here? 


Young Minds Are Being Spoiled By TV 
Boys and Girls! 


Follow the commands of your parents and 
make them happy. Get married if they want you to, 
and lead a life of an ideal householder. I bless you all 
and bring My Discourse to a close. 


After a short while from now, the Messengers 
of Sathya Sai are going to present a drama. It is an 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 404 


ideal drama unlike the dramas that you see on 
television. Today TV has become very common. 
Young minds are being spoiled by watching the TV. 
There is no harm if good programmes are shown, but 
the government is encouraging programmes which are 
not good for children. We do not want such a 
government. We want a government, which will make 
the people tread the path of truth and righteousness. 
God-ment is the real government. There are people 
who are working for their selfish ends. Do not follow 
them. Selfishness has become their way of life. Let it 
not become your way of life. Do not join politics. Take 
to the path of service. Go to each and every village. 
Serve everybody. The best way to love God is to love 
all and serve all. Learn this art of service. Chala 
Santosham (Very happy). 


Christmas, 25-12-2000, Brindavan 


