SATHYA SAI SPEAKS 
VOLUME 32 (part 2) 


Discourses of 
BHAGAWAN SRI SATHYA SAI BABA 
Delivered from July 1999 to December 1999 


PRASANTHI NILAYAM 


SRI SATHYA SAI BOOKS & PUBLICATIONS TRUST 
Prasanthi Nilayam - 515 134 
Anantapur District, Andhra Pradesh, India 
Grams: BOOK TRUST STD: 08555 ISD: 91-8555 
Phone: 87375. FAX 87236 


© Sri Sathya Sai Books & Publications Trust 
Prasanthi Nilayam (India) 


All Rights Reserved 


The copyright and the rights of translation in any language 
are reserved by the Publisher. No part, para, passage, text or 
photograph or art work of this book should be reproduced, 
transmitted or utilised, in original language or by translation, in 
any form, or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photo- 
copying, recording or by any information, storage or retrieval 
system, except with and prior permission, in writing from the 
Convener, Sri Sathya Sai Books & Publications Trust, Prasan- 
thi Nilayam, (Andhra Pradesh) India, except for brief passages 
quoted in book review. This book can be exported from India 
only by Sri Sathya Sai Books and Publications Trust, Prasanthi 
Nilayam (India). 


International Standard Book No_81 - 7208 - 287 —8 
81 - 7208 - 118 - 9 (set) 


First Edition: August 2001 
Published by 


The Convener, 

Sri Sathya Sai Books & Publications Trust 
Prasanthi Nilayam, India, Pin code 515 134 
Phone: 87375 Fax: 87236 

STD: 08555 ISD: 91 - 8555 


Publisher’s Note 


Sathya Sai Speaks series is, according to the late Prof. N. 
Kasturi, the original translator and compiler, “‘a fragrant bou- 
quet of flowers that never fade or falter.” These discourses 
were delivered by Swami out of profound compassion toward 
seekers of Truth during the last few decades. The discourses 
delivered after 1982 are printed for the first time, which have 
not been published in book form so far. Volume XVI, covering 
the year 1983, is the first in the new series. Further new vol- 
umes are being added, one volume for each year, covering dis- 
courses delivered from 1984. 

The retention of Sanskrit words on page after page, without 
their English equivalents in most cases, was causing confusion 
to readers, especially foreigners, who were not familiar with 
Sanskrit. An attempt has been made to aid easy reading by re- 
placing Sanskrit words with English equivalents wherever they 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 2 


do not affect Baba’s original expression. Sanskrit words have 
been retained wherever it was felt necessary to preserve the 
essence of the original expression of Baba and where the Eng- 
lish equivalents may not do full justice to the text in the par- 
ticular context. However, in all such places, the English 
equivalents have been given along with the Sanskrit words. 
Some very commonly understood Sanskrit words or such 
words that are repeated too often are retained without English 
meanings to retain the original flavour of Baba’s discourses. 

A glossary has been added in all the editions to provide 
comprehensive and detailed explanations of the more impor- 
tant Sanskrit words for the benefit of lay readers who may be 
interested in Vedic religion and philosophy. It is hoped that this 
will be of great help to devotees to understand more clearly the 
topics of Baba’s discourses covering a wide spectrum of Vedic 
philosophy. 

The volumes of Baba’s discourses are being brought out in 
a larger format, Demy Octavo size, so that they can be com- 
panion books with other publications in private libraries. Com- 
puterised typesetting using a larger size type, a more readable 
type face, and better line spacing have been adopted for more 
comfortable reading of books, especially by elder readers. 
Very long paragraphs have been split into shorter paragraphs 
and suitable subheadings have been added in almost every 
page, to relieve the monotony of the eye and to make reading a 
pleasure. 

Paper quality, improved binding, with new designs and foil 
printing, have been adopted for these volumes for better pres- 
ervation and durable shelf life of these volumes. 

It is hoped that the revised and enlarged volumes of the 
Sathya Sai Speaks Series up to Volume XV and fresh ones 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 3 


from Volume XVI onward will be of great benefit to earnest 
seekers in spiritual realm. 

Since we found this volume to be too heavy, we have di- 
vided it into two parts, the first part containing discourses de- 
livered from 1 January 199 to 30 June 1999 and the second 
part containing discourses delivered from 1 July 1999 to 31 
December 1999. 


Convener 

Sri Sathya Sai Books and Publications Trust 
Prasanthi Nilayam (India) 

August 2001 


Contents 


SOO a DO ee 


_-= © 


SS SS Se 
NMP WN 


Heart is the source of true education 
Power of Love 

Recognise the principle of ‘T’ 
Develop intense devotion 

Truth emerges from wisdom 
Install padukas in your heart 
Follow divine commands 
Cultivate discipline and love 
Human values and service 

Let life be fruitful and meaningful 
Devotion —the supreme yajna 
Youth should transform the world 
Importance of mother’s grace 
Seek God within 

True education liberates 
Complete surrender confers bliss 
Divine love is true religion 


Human Values and Education 


Sadayam Hridayarn Yasya Bhasitham Sathya Bhu- 
shitham Kayah Parahithe Yasya Kalisthasya Karo- 
thikim 

(Sanskrit verse) 
What can the evil effects of Kali age do to a man 
whose heart is filled with compassion, whose 
every utterance is truth, and whose body is dedi- 
cated for the service of others? 


Embodiments of love! Man should fill his heart with com- 
passion, always speak the truth and dedicate his body for the 
welfare of society. The thoughts, words, and deeds of man 
should always be sacred. The heart unpolluted by desire and 
anger, the tongue not tainted by untruth, and the body unblem- 
ished by the acts of violence —these are the true human val- 
ues. It is because of the lack of these human values that the 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 2 


country is facing hardships today. Bharat (India) has been the 
treasure house of spirituality since ancient times, but, today, it 
has lost both sathya (truth) and dharma (righteousness) and is 
enmeshed in unrighteous falsehood and injustice. It is therefore 
incumbent upon students to dedicate themselves to the task of 
restoring the pristine glory of Bharat. Just as the parents are 
worried and sad if their children lag behind in studies, so also 
Mother India feels aggrieved on seeing her children lacking 
moral and ethical values. You have to remember that all those 
whom you revere as ideal citizens and noble souls were once 
students themselves. Never forget that students of today are the 
future citizens and leaders of this country. 


Take to righteous actions from an early age 


The value of an individual depends on their culture. The 
real meaning of the word culture lies in giving up bad thoughts 
and bad actions and cultivating sacred thoughts and performing 
noble deeds. The country is not a mere piece of land; it is an 
assemblage of citizens. For the country to progress, the citizens 
have to cultivate moral, ethical, and spiritual values. It is not 
possible for the citizens and the leaders to cultivate these val- 
ues unless they practice them right from childhood. Life be- 
comes meaningless if one does not take to righteous actions 
from an early age. 

Modern students are not able to refine their lives. So, the 
parents and the teachers should play an active role in shaping 
the lives of the students. First and foremost, they have to en- 
quire as to how the students can get rid of their evil tendencies. 
Just as a boulder becomes worthy of adoration and respect 
when it is carved into a beautiful idol by a sculptor, so also the 
students will become ideal citizens if they are brought up in the 
right environment. The teachers and parents are responsible for 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 3 


the good and bad in students. But, unfortunately, they have not 
understood their role in shaping the lives of the students. 


Spiritual education is for life 


No doubt, teachers teach the students in the class. But, 
what is vidya? It is derived from the root word vid, meaning, 
‘to know’. Vidya is termed as education in English. The term 
education has its origin in the Latin word educare, which 
means ‘to elicit. Educare has two aspects, the worldly and the 
spiritual. Worldly education imparts knowledge pertaining to 
the physical world. Spiritual education is essential, without 
which human life has little value. 

But, in the modern education system, spirituality finds no 
place. Only worldly education is given prominence. Just as two 
wings are essential for a bird to soar high in the sky, and two 
wheels for a cart to move; so also two types of education are 
needed for man to attain the goal of life. Spiritual education is 
for life, whereas worldly education is for a living. 

Only when man is equipped with these two aspects of edu- 
cation can he be deserving of respect and adoration in society. 
Possession of these two aspects of education will bring not 
only respect and adulation but also self-satisfaction. 

Worldly education, which relates to the head, is ephemeral. 
Reading, writing, eking out a livelihood, and attaining name 
and fame —all these result from worldly education. Worldly 
education makes man great, whereas the spiritual education 
makes man good. Spiritual education relates to the heart, 
which is the origin of sacred qualities like compassion, truth, 
forbearance and love. 

Today parents expect their children to go in for higher 
studies, amass wealth, and become great, but very few want 
their children to be good. Goodness is long lasting, whereas 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 4 


greatness is temporary. Goodness forms the basis for spiritual 
life. 

There are crores and crores of people who have become 
great by amassing wealth, but what is their contribution to the 
welfare of society? Absolutely nil. Therefore, strive to be 
good, not great. 


Man should become a composer, not a computer 


Modern students are going to various countries for material 
education without realizing the fact that the heart, the source of 
true education is within. True education is that which makes 
man ideal. Parents are the first teachers. They should show 
their children the way to goodness. Man cannot become good 
merely by being highly educated. Worldly education confers 
only artha (wealth) and swartha (selfishness). Such education 
is responsible for the downfall of man. 

Worldly education is information oriented, while spiritual 
education is transformation oriented. The information-oriented 
education makes man a computer, whereas the transformation- 
oriented education makes man a composer. Man should be- 
come a composer, not a computer. Who made the computer? 
The composer made the computer. Man should therefore un- 
derstand the meaning of real education. 

Today, the moral, ethical, and spiritual values are on the 
decline. Modern students have no trace of these values in them. 
They have no respect for their parents and society. In that case 
how can they expect to be respected by their children? 

Our ancient culture exhorts: Mathru Devo bhava, pithru 
Devo bhava, and acharya Devo bhava (revere your mother, 
father, and teacher as God). Respect and be respected. Practice 
before you preach. A composer is one who practices what he 
preaches. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 5 


In the Mahabharata, there is a story of a king named 
Dushyantha. Having been born and brought up in a palace, he 
was inclined toward worldly and material pursuits. On the 
other hand, his son Bharata, who was born and brought up in 
Kanvashram (the hermitage of the sage Kanva) was a reposi- 
tory of moral, spiritual, and ethical values. Ashram education 
inculcates all noble values in man. 

Bharata became a paragon of all virtues because he re- 
ceived ideal education right from his childhood. This enabled 
him to lead a life of peace and security. That is why it is said, 
start early, drive slowly, and reach safely. 

Dushyantha had worldly and material wealth. He was a 
mighty emperor. What was the use of all that he possessed 
when he could not achieve spiritual growth? This clearly dem- 
onstrates the difference between urban education and ashram 
education. 


Values are our life principles 


The five human values of sathya, dharma, santhi, prema, 
and ahimsa (truth, right action, peace, love, and nonviolence) 
can be compared to the five life principles of man, viz., prana, 
apana, vyana, udana, and saman. A true human being is one 
who practices the five human values. Today man does not 
speak truth, lest it bring him harm, and does not practice 
dharma because he does not know what it really means. 

Under any circumstances should you give up human val- 
ues. Losing any of the five human values amounts to commit- 
ting suicide. 

If you do not speak the truth, you lose one of your life 
principles. Truth is your Atma. So, till your last breath, uphold 
truth. The culture of Bharat (India) teaches, Sathyam vada 
dharmam chara (Speak truth and follow righteousness). These 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 6 


values are the same for one and all. 

People all over the world are praying for peace. How can 
peace be attained? It is only through the practice of sathya and 
dharma (truth and right action). Today, man is leading a life 
bereft of sathya and dharma, resulting in lack of peace (san- 
thi), which in turn has lead to the, absence of prema (love). 

How can ahimsa (nonviolence) exist in the absence of 
these four values? Violence is rampant everywhere be it home, 
bazaar, or factory. Man, bereft of these five principles, has be- 
come a living corpse. 

Life has to be infused into man today, for which faith in 
God is very essential. Where there is faith there is love. Where 
there is love there is peace. Where there is peace there is truth. 
Where there is truth there is God. Where there is God there is 
bliss. Human life has to begin with faith and end with bliss. 


Ancient acharyas and modern teachers 


Today, even the parents and the children, the husband and 
the wife lack faith in each other. The love they exhibit is only 
artificial. Under such circumstances how can love prevail? One 
should have deep faith in order to experience true love. What- 
ever you do, do it wholeheartedly. Fill your heart with compas- 
sion. When the heart is filled with love, all actions will be suf- 
fused with love. 

Jumsai, in his talk, referred to EHV as 3HV. The first H 
stands for Heart, the second for Head, and the third for Hand. 
The harmony of heart, head, and hand symbolizes true human 
life. Manasyekam vachasyekam karmanyekam mahatmanam 
(he is a noble soul whose thoughts, words, and deeds are in 
perfect harmony). Manasyanyath, vachasyanyath, karmanyan- 
yath duratmanam (he is a wicked one whose thoughts, words, 
and deeds are at variance). 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 7 


The very name of hridaya (heart) —hri + daya— indicates 
compassion (daya). So, the heart should be filled with compas- 
sion. When there is love in the heart all that you utter will be 
truth. Love in speech is truth. Love in action is dharma. Love 
in thought is peace. Love in understanding is ahimsa (non- 
violence). So, love is the underlying principle of truth, right- 
eousness, peace, and non-violence. 

In olden days the teachers were called acharyas, meaning 
those who practice what they preach. Today teachers cannot be 
called acharyas because they do not practice what they preach. 
The modern teachers are experts in giving platform speeches, 
whereas the acharyas of ancient times were proficient in prac- 
tical science. 


Education should be free 


How can the students heed the advice of the teachers if the 
teachers themselves do not practice what they preach? If the 
cow is grazing in the field, can we expect the calf to remain a 
mere witness? The calf naturally follows the cow. The rela- 
tionship between the teacher and the student should be like that 
of cow and calf. It means the teachers should treat the students 
as their own children. But, today, one does not find such rela- 
tionship between the teacher and the student. Both the teachers 
and students have become money-minded. As a result the stu- 
dents do not respect the teachers and the teachers do not have 
love for the students. 

In many educational institutions seats are allotted to those 
who can pay large sums of money. This quota system has 
brought about all-round degeneration. Since the government is 
also encouraging this trend, the educational system has become 
totally bereft of values. To stop this unholy trend, education 
should be offered free of cost. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 8 


Everyone has an equal right on education. Education is the 
gift of God. No one has the right to sell it. Education should 
lead to elevation, not agitation. But, today, we find agitation 
everywhere. 


The real “donation” 


Today, money can buy admission, attendance, marks, and 
even degrees for that matter. The medical seats are readily of- 
fered to candidates who pay a sum of twenty to thirty lakhs. In 
order to earn the money spent by them to secure the medical 
seat, the doctors charge exorbitant fees from the patients. The 
same is the case with engineering, too. Even for admission in 
first standard, some institutions are charging twenty to twenty 
five thousand rupees. 

Modern education has made man a beggar. One should be 
a bigger not a beggar. I am not saying this out of sense of 
pride, but Sathya Sai Institute is the only institution offering 
free education. Jumsai said that more and more institutions 
should be established. It is a matter of pleasure, but care has to 
be taken to see that education is offered totally free of cost. 
Only then can we shape the students into ideal citizens. Teach- 
ers should share all their knowledge with the students whole- 
heartedly. They must practice before they preach. This is what 
I expect from the teachers. 

The education that is acquired by paying large amounts as 
donation is no education at all. Only people having black 
money will resort to such illegal means to acquire degrees. 

“Do (for the) nation” —that is the real donation. Make use 
of your education for the welfare of society and the nation. 
Share your knowledge with others. It is not necessary that you 
should become a teacher to do so. There may be a few poor 
students in your locality. Conduct special classes for them in 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 9 


the evening. 

Today people fight for money and property right from 
dawn to dusk. They take to corrupt ways to earn even a single 
rupee. One should not live just for the sake of money. It is 
better to die rather than to lead a life just for the sake of 
money. If you have money in excess, help others; provide free 
education and free medical care to the poor. 


Sathya Sai School in Zambia 


In Zambia, there is a devotee by the name Victor Kanu. He 
is here right now. He has established a Sathya Sai School in 
Zambia. Many poor children are studying there. Both he and 
his wife are teaching the children with all love and care. (At 
this juncture Bhagavan asked Mr. Victor Kanu, sitting nearby, 
as to how many children are studying in their school. Mr. Kanu 
said 520 children were studying there.) They are imparting 
Swami’s teachings and human values to all the children. It is 
going to become a college very soon. 

There are many affluent people in the world. But they do 
not have the spirit of sacrifice to help such sacred institutions. 
Some of them do contribute something, but they do it for name 
and fame. They expect their names to appear in letters of gold. 
Sathya Sai institutions are not for name and fame. 

I would like to narrate a small incident in this regard. At a 
particular place, when I was about to give discourse, one per- 
son switched off the fan. I asked him, “Why did you switch off 
the fan? We need it now. It is very hot here.” That person re- 
plied saying it was he who donated the fan, and his name was 
written on the blades of the fan; unless it was switched off his 
name would not be visible. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 10 


Education leads to immortality 


The culture of Bharat declares “Na karmana na prajaya 
dhanena thyagenaikena Amrutatthwamanasu (immortality can 
be attained only through sacrifice; neither wealth nor progeny 
nor good deeds can confer it).” All the activities and rituals 
you undertake must be for the welfare of society. You must 
inspire children to work for the progress of the country. It is 
only sacrifice that confers immortality. Participate in every 
good work according to your capacity. Select a few deserving 
students and give them free education. 

Education is not for worldly progress. It is to set an ideal, 
experience happiness, and share it with others. All the elders, 
the educationists, the rich, and the students should come to- 
gether and strive for progress in the field of education. Just as a 
thread binds flowers of different hues to make a garland, like- 
wise the feelings of love and sacrifice should bring you all to- 
gether. The flowers may fade away, but the thread remains 
changeless. A bud changes to become a flower. Similarly, with 
the passage of time, the child becomes man, man becomes fa- 
ther, and father becomes grandfather. But the feeling of love is 
changeless. It is true and eternal. 

Man should never lose any of the five values. Leaving the 
values amounts to committing suicide. But man today is no 
better than animals. The spirit of sacrifice that is found even in 
animals is not visible in man today. The cow partakes of grass 
and yields milk. But man partakes of sacred milk and indulges 
in wicked deeds. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 11 


What is the use of all the education he has acquired 
if he cannot give up his evil qualities? 

All the worldly education will only lead man to 
vain argumentation, but not total wisdom. 

It cannot help you to escape from the clutches of 
death. 

So, acquire that knowledge which will make you 
immortal. 

[Telugu Poem] 


The education should enable us to cultivate sacred quali- 
ties. Worldly education is negative, and spiritual education is 
positive. What is the use of having a bulb without electric cur- 
rent? Secular knowledge is like the bulb; spiritual knowledge, 
like the current. Both are essential for the progress of man and 
the world at large. 

Make proper use of the knowledge you have acquired. Par- 
ents should take active interest in the education of their chil- 
dren. Never desire that your son should become a great person, 
instead pray that he become a good person, like Bharata. That 
is true human life. 


The good and the great 


If one goes through the sacred texts of the Ramayana, the 
Bhagavata, and the Mahabharata, one understands the evil 
effects of kama (desire), krodha (anger), and lobha (greed). In 
the Ramayana, Rama symbolized goodness, whereas Ravana, 
greatness. Though Rama and Ravana were equally proficient 
in all forms of knowledge, Ravana could not make proper use 
of his knowledge because he had no control over his senses. 
On the other hand, Rama exercised control over his senses and 
sacrificed everything for the sake of truth. The Ramayana is 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 12 


known as Ramacharitra (the story of Rama) and the story of 
Ravana is known as Kamacharitra (the story of desire). 

The Bhagavata speaks of the consequences one has to face 
if one becomes a victim of anger. Hiranyaksha and Hiranya- 
kasipu were air-powerful, but ultimately perished because of 
their anger toward God. Hiranyakasipu was a great, scientist. 
Today man has traveled only up to the moon, but Hiranya- 
kasipu could even reach the stars. But his anger ruined him. 

In the Mahabharata, Duryodhana and Dussasana symbol- 
ize greed, which is a negative power. On the other hand, the 
Pandavas stand for the positive power. They adhered to dhar- 
ma under all circumstances. Similarly, in the Bhagavata, Hi- 
ranyakasipu symbolises negative power and Prahlada, positive 
power. Thus, wherever you see, you find positive and negative, 
good and bad co-exist. Accept the good and give up the bad 
and earn a good name. Then, you are not merely great, you are 
also good. 


The method and the means 


Teachers! You have participated in this conference for the 
past three days. All of you have noble ideas, but you have to 
think of a proper way to implement them. Attach more impor- 
tance to values than money and see that students make all- 
round progress. 

Students! I want you to become ideal leaders. Make use of 
your education to serve the poor. Conduct free tuition classes 
for the poor children and share your books with them. Only 
then will the feeling of brotherhood of man and fatherhood of 
God develop. 

As I have told you earlier, educare has two aspects: one is 
pravritti (outward) and the other, which comes from the heart, 
is nivritti (inward). God is the Hridayavasi (indweller). So, all 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 13 


that originates from the heart is essentially divine. Therefore, 
let all your thoughts, words, and deeds originate from your 
heart. Do good, be good, and see good. This is the way to God. 
Accept both pleasure and pain as gifts of God. 

In order to get cured of malaria, one has to swallow a bitter 
mixture. Likewise, one has to face hardships in order to attain 
happiness. That is why it is said that a pleasure is an interval 
between two pains. Light has no value if there is no darkness. 
Likewise, pleasure has no value without pain. 


Consider every good work as God’s work 


Students! To the extent possible, serve society. Of course, 
you need to take up jobs and earn your livelihood. But do not 
be avaricious. Be satisfied with what you get. Alexander con- 
quered many kingdoms and seized a lot of wealth. When his 
end approached, he realised that he could not take even a sin- 
gle penny with him. He requested his minister to keep his two 
hands raised above the head during the final journey so that the 
people would understand that even the mighty emperor Alex- 
ander had to leave the world empty-handed. 

Likewise, everyone has to leave this world empty-handed. 
Even a millionaire has to partake of only food; he cannot eat 
gold. So, be satisfied with the basic necessities of food, cloth- 
ing and shelter. 

Do your jobs properly and undertake service activities in 
your leisure time. Develop faith in God. If you do not have 
faith in God, you will not have fear of sin. Then you will be- 
come a demon. So, fear of sin and love for God is very essen- 
tial. If you have these two, you will be successful in all your 
endeavors. Consider every good work as God's work. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 14 


Work for your Motherland and serve the poor 


Embodiments of Love! Stop hankering after foreign lands 
after you complete your studies. Serve your Motherland. Lord 
Rama said, Janani janmabhoomischa swargadapi gareeyasi 
(mother and motherland are greater than heaven). So, work for 
your Motherland and serve the poor. 

The best way to love God is to love all and serve all, but 
serve only when it is necessary. You are born to experience 
love. Your life is full of love. But you are not able to under- 
stand this Principle of Love. There is nothing greater than love 
in this world. Love is God, God is Love. So live in love. 


26 July 1999 

(Valedictory Function of 

First Sri Sathya Sai Seminar on Values) 
Sai Kulwant Hall, Prasanthi Nilayam 


Whatever you do, do it as an offering to God. Do 
not make a distinction between “my work” and 
“God’s work”. When you make a division, you 
give rise to enmity, because of differences. When 
there is enmity, there is no room for divinity, pu- 
rity, and unity. 

— Baba 


Power of Love 


A deep enquiry will reveal that 
Nothing equals Love in this world 
Be it charity, sacred rituals, penance, 
Wisdom, purity, or adherence to truth 
And Sanathana Dharma. 
[Telugu Poem] 


Embodiments of Love! The main aim of human life is to 
acquire the knowledge of the Self. This is the true Purushartha 
(goal of life). Human life will find fulfillment if this goal is 
attained. 

The ability to distinguish between that which is permanent 
and that which is transitory, the ability to control the internal 
and external senses, yearning for liberation and the path of in- 
quiry —all these four (the four auspicious qualities) depend on 
devotion. The word bhakti (devotion) (derived from the root 
word bhaj) means pure, unsullied and selfless love toward 
God. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 16 


In this world, no other virtue is greater than love. Love is 
truth, love is righteousness, and love is wealth. This world 
originated from love, is sustained by love, and ultimately 
merges in love. Every atom has its origin in love. 

There are innumerable powers such as atomic power, mag- 
netic power, etc., in this world, but the power of love surpasses 
them all. Life bereft of faith and love is meaningless and use- 
less. For man in this world, love is life and love is everything. 
It is from love that the five elements (pancha bhutas) have 
emerged. It is love that shines brilliantly in every individual. 
But man, not being able to comprehend the significance of 
love attributes physical relationship to it. The love of a mother 
toward her child is vatsalya (affection). The love that exists 
between wife and husband is moha (infatuation). The love that 
exists among friends and relations is anuraga (attachment). 
The love toward material objects is ichcha (desire). Love di- 
rected toward God in totality is known as bhakti (devotion). 


Never underestimate the power of love 


It is only love that encompasses and permeates the entire 
world. None can exist without love even for a moment, be it 
human beings or animals or birds or insects. This love is the 
very form of God. But today, man is misusing this sacred love 
by diverting it toward the ephemeral world. Never underesti- 
mate the power of love. Our ancient Rishis, leading a life of 
solitude in dense forests, could live in harmony even with wild 
animals only because of the power of their love. 

There is nothing that love cannot achieve in this world. It 
can even melt the hardest of rocks. When the principle of love 
in every human being is unified, it becomes cosmic love 
(viswa prema). Do you want to quench your thirst for love? 
Yearn for His grace and worship Him. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 17 


In order to experience bliss, develop love more and more. 
The more you develop love, the more you will experience 
bliss. Bliss (Ananda) cannot be attained without love. In fact, it 
is love that takes the form of bliss. 


Chant the divine name always 


Hiranyakasipu made every attempt to wean Prahlada away 
from the Godward path. But never did Prahlada give up 
chanting the divine name of Narayana. One day, Hiranya- 
kasipu, on being prompted by Narada, called Prahlada and 
asked him, “Son, what is that you have learnt so far?” 

In reply, Prahlada sang a verse in praise of Narayana: 


Narayana Param Brahma, 
Narayana Param Prema, 
Narayana Param Thapa 
Saryam Narayana Sama. 


He said, “Father, I have learnt that Narayana is the Su- 
preme Lord. He is the embodiment of love. Repetition of His 
name is the greatest penance, and everything is Narayana 
only.” 

Like Prahlada, you too chant the divine name always. 
Saints like Jayadeva, Gauranga, Thukaram, and Ramakrishna 
Paramahamsa prayed to the Lord fervently and yearned for His 
love. Cry for the Lord, just as Sakkubai and Meera did, unable 
to bear the pangs of separation. They could have His vision 
and earn His grace only due to such intense yearning. But, due 
to the impact of Kali age, people want to attain divine grace 
without making any effort whatsoever. Wickedness, misery, 
and violence are on the rise because love for God is waning. 
Transform all your wicked qualities like jealousy and anger 
into love. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 18 


God presides over every activity 


God is the creator of this world. He is the presiding deity of 
action (Karmadhyaksha). You cannot have a table unless there 
is a carpenter to make it. You cannot construct a house unless 
there is a builder. Likewise, for everything there is a creator. 
All that you see, mobile and immobile, is the creation of God. 
That is the reason, He is extolled as Karmadhyaksha. He pre- 
sides over every activity. 

Today, spiritual aspirants undertake various types of sad- 
hana (spiritual exercise) such as meditation, penance, yoga, 
and chanting Vedic hymns. Love should be the undercurrent of 
all these spiritual exercises or else it will be a sheer waste of 
time. No benefit accrues from chanting mantras if they are not 
coupled with the feeling of love. The Vedas declare: Na kar- 
mana na prajaya dhanena thyagenaikena amritatmanasuhu 
(neither wealth nor progeny nor good deeds can confer im- 
mortality; it can be attained only through sacrifice). Immortal- 
ity is nothing but love. Love is nectarine, it is infinite and all 
bliss. 

Today people are not making any effort to understand this 
principle of love. It is only the power of love that can nullify a 
curse or a sin. It is only love that can remove all the bitter 
feelings and enhance the sweetness of life. 

Every human being is expected to be a friend and well 
wisher of the world. But such feeling of friendship and love is 
lacking in man today. Just as a honeybee sucks nectar from a 
flower, so also man should be able to draw the water of happi- 
ness even from the well of misery. That is the true quality of 
love. 

Pleasure is an interval between two pains. Pleasure and 
pain co-exist in God's creation itself. Take for instance how 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 19 


God has made the human body. The bright and beautiful face 
has pitch dark hair above it. But, in fact, that adds to the beauty 
of the face. Likewise, pleasure has value only when pain is as- 
sociated with it. Good and bad co-exist in everything. But to- 
day, man is not attracted by good, he sees only bad in every- 
thing. 


Incredible speed of Love 


Every action is under the control of God. Earth revolves 
around itself at the rate of 18.5 miles per second. It takes one 
year for the earth to revolve around the sun. Light travels at an 
incredible speed of 1,86,284 miles per second. It takes 22,000 
crores of years for the light to go around the universe. 

According to the Vishnu Sahasranama sthotra, the entire 
universe is the very form of Vishnu (Viswam Vishnuswaru- 
pam). Even if man were to travel at the speed of light, it will 
take 22,000 crore years to circumambulate Lord Vishnu. Who 
can live for such a long period of time? Due to the evil effects 
of Kali Age, man is not able to live even for hundred years, let 
alone 22000 crore years! 

But it is possible to go around the Viswa Swarupa (God in 
the form of universe) in one second. It is love that makes it 
possible. The speed of love is such that it can go around the 
universe in one second. The speed of light may be estimated, 
but not the speed of love. 

But man has put barriers around such transcendental and 
infinite love and is using it for trivial purposes. That is why the 
world has become chaotic today. People may attribute various 
reasons for the lack of peace and security. But the main reason 
is that man is not able to develop love within. He is not making 
any effort to realize the presence of the infinite, immortal, and 
nectarine love within. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 20 


Let your thoughts, words, and deeds be suffused with love. 
Let your life be filled with love. Nothing else is required to 
have the vision of the Divine (Sakshatkara). Love is God, live 
in love. 


Divine grace is true wealth 


Today, love finds no place in the human heart, since it has 
become a den of desires. Where there is love, there is peace. 
Where there is peace, there is truth. Where there is truth, there 
is God. So develop faith in God. 

Yesterday someone asked Me how to develop faith. I re- 
plied that faith is way of life. It is but natural to a man. The 
feeling of J am itself signifies faith. / am means I exist. Am 
(existence) itself denotes faith. Without faith in your existence, 
you cannot live even for a moment in the world. 

Truth, sacrifice, and righteousness constitute humanness. 
Truth is neethi (morality), Dharma is reethi (code of conduct), 
and sacrifice is khyathi (reputation). The combination of all 
these is manava jathi (human race). One cannot be called a 
human being on the basis of form. One has to adhere to truth, 
uphold dharma, and develop the spirit of sacrifice to deserve 
the title of human being. 


Visualize the unity among all beings and conduct 
yourself with compassion in your heart. 

With intense yearning, contemplate on God at least 
once a day. 

Only then can you have the vision of God. 

God does exist, but He cannot be seen by the naked 
eye. 

He can be seen only when you get rid of worldly 
delusions. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 21 


What is the state of man today? 

He is overjoyed when he has wealth and grief- 
stricken when he loses it. 

He indulges in pomp and show and loses every- 
thing in the process. 

He conceives of dubious ways and means. 

Just as earth revolves around the sun, he revolves 
around money. 

[Telugu Poem] 


Divine grace is the true wealth. Acquire that and you 
would have acquired everything. Character is important, not 
wealth. But man is wasting his life hankering after wealth. No 
doubt money is necessary, but it should be within certain lim- 
its. Spend your time in serving others. Love your fellowmen. 
Surrender yourself to God. Nothing surpasses divine love. The 
entire world is permeated with love. 

The Vedas declare: Anther bahischa tat sarvamvyapya Na- 
rayana sthitha (That all-pervasive God is present within and 
without). All names and forms are His. Names and forms may 
vary, but the Atma is the same in all. Recognize the unity of all 
beings. That will result in universal love. The world is a man- 
sion. All belong to the caste of humanity. Unity should prevail 
in such a mansion. 


Let the mind shine like full moon 
Embodiments of Love! Today is Guru Purnima. What is its 
significance? 


Guru Brahma Gurur-Vishnu 
Gurur-Devo Maheswara 

Guru Sakshath Param Brahma 
Thasmai Sri Gurave Namah. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 22 


The Trinity of Brahma, Vishnu, and Maheswara are within 
us. That is why I often say you are not one but three. This is 
the meaning of the three words Bhur, Bhuvah, Suvah in the 
Gayathri mantra. Bhur means bhuloka (earth). The earth is 
made up of matter. Therefore, the human body, which is also 
made up of matter, is called bhuloka. This can also be referred 
to as materialisation. 

Bhuvaha means life force.(prana) It is this life force that 
makes the body move. It is known as vibration. 

Suvaha means wisdom. This is known as radiation. The 
Vedas declare: Prajnanam Brahma. This Prajnana is nothing 
but radiation. Human being is a combination of materialisation, 
vibration, and radiation. You don't need to search for God out- 
side. Turn your vision inward. There you will find God. 

Today is full moon day. The Vedas say: “Chandrama Ma- 
naso Jatha Chaksho Suryo Ajayatha Mukha dindrascha Ag- 
nishcha (the moon was born out of the mind, the sun out of the 
eyes, and the fire and Indra out of the mouth of the Supreme 
Purusha).” Moon is the presiding deity of the mind. That day 
is Purnima, in the true sense of the term, when the mind is 
filled with pure love. Let your mind shine brilliantly like the 
moon on a full moon day. This is possible only when you fill 
your mind with love. 


Currency for the Divine Bank 


Embodiments of Love! Today, we find people depositing 
their money in banks. Likewise, deposit the power of your 
senses, your mind, and the wisdom in the bank of God. They 
will never diminish; they will continue to grow forever and 
will be returned to you in times of need. Sustain and safeguard 
sacred love. Never give vent to hatred. Consider whatever 
happens as good for you. You might have seen in newspapers 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 2S 


that the Indian army had a confrontation at the border. But 
whatever has happened is good for India in the sense that the 
Chinese, the Americans, and the Russians have become more 
friendly with India and India has earned a good reputation in 
the international community. It is the peace-loving nature of 
India that has made this possible. Peace is the real virtue of 
India. 


Only divine love and grace can protect the union 


Once, when I went to Bombay, the then head of the Bhara- 
tiya Vidya Bhavan, Sri K.M. Munshi, convened a conference 
of intellectuals. He asked Me to address them. One person 
from the audience asked Me, “Swami, America and Russia are 
manufacturing more and more weapons. But India is lagging 
far behind in this respect. Should not India also manufacture 
weapons?” I told him, “Dear one, what Bharat (India) needs 
today is not arms and ammunition. It needs to uphold Dharma. 
Dharmo rakshathi rakshithaha (if you protect dharma, dharma 
will protect you in return). We should not waste money in 
manufacturing weapons. 

Some countries are spending a lot of money on defense 
and, as a result, the people of those countries are suffering for 
want of proper food. Only divine love and grace and not weap- 
ons can protect a nation. You might have read in the Mahab- 
harata that Bhima, Arjuna, Nakula, and Sahadeva implicitly 
obeyed the command of Dharmaja, the embodiment of 
dharma. Likewise, India, America, and Russia can be com- 
pared to Dharmaja, Arjuna and Bhima respectively. Just as 
Arjuna and Bhima obeyed Dharmaja, so also America and 
Russia will follow India provided India upholds dharma. What 
India needs to possess is Sathyasthra and Dharmasthra, the 
weapons of truth and righteousness. Both are inherent in the 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 24 


principle of love. Just as a gigantic tree emerges out of a small 
seed, the entire universe originated from love. 


Music college in Prasanthi Nilayam 


Embodiments of Love! In this world, you can achieve eve- 
rything with love. I am the best example for this. Love is My 
greatest property. I love everybody and do not desire anything 
except love. The power of love can transform earth into sky 
and sky into earth. There is nothing in this world that cannot be 
achieved by love. 

Here is a small example. Many students are coming here 
for studies. But modern education is not doing any good to the 
world. All the subjects like physics, botany, and chemistry will 
help only to eke out a livelihood. But none of them can attract 
the human heart as music does. 

Even God is attracted by music. Once, Narada asked Vish- 
nu, “Swami, You have various branch offices like Vaikunta, 
Kailasa, and Swarga. But I want to know the address of Your 
head office so that I can contact You without delay.” 

Vishnu said, “Madbhakthaa yathra gayanthi tathra this- 
taami Narada (you will find Me installed wherever My devo- 
tees sing My glory).” That is why God is extolled as Ga- 
napriya and Ganalola (lover of music). It is music that melts 
human heart and literally moves everyone. 

So, music should be started in our colleges. I wanted to 
start a music college here. But I did not tell anybody about this. 
I usually do not tell what My plans are. Whatever I Will cer- 
tainly happens. 

Last week a devotee named Puri from Indonesia came here 
and prayed to Me to start a music college here for which, he 
said, he would donate 10 crore rupees. The modern music is 
essential. But along with that, street plays, Harikathas (singing 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 25 


the stories of God) have to be encouraged. Music plays a vital 
role in fostering Indian culture. 

The construction of this college will commence in the next 
month i.e. Sravana. The current month is Ashada, in which, 
according to the elders, a new project is not undertaken. That is 
the reason I postponed the commencement of construction to 
next month. 


Super specialty hospital in Bangalore 


Last month when I was in Bangalore, one day, the Chief 
Minister of Karnataka came to Me and said, “Swami, You 
have constructed a Super Specialty Hospital in Prasanthi 
Nilayam, which is of immense benefit to the poor. But diseases 
are common for both the rich and the poor, urban and rural. It 
will be of great help to the people of Bangalore city if You 
would be kind enough to establish another Super Specialty 
Hospital here.” I just smiled and did not say anything. 

The very next week, the Chief Minister, the Finance Min- 
ister, the Revenue Minister, and many other dignitaries came 
here with the documents concerning the registration of 70 
acres of land. This plot is situated adjacent to the Information 
and Technology Park. They are supplying water and electric- 
ity. If you are prepared to undertake noble tasks, the whole 
world will support you. 

An American devotee named Sinclair has come forward to 
donate money for this hospital. Previously he had donated for 
the Super Specialty Hospital in Prasanthi Nilayam also. I have 
not told about this project to anyone else, otherwise there 
would have been a shower of gold. 

There are many men of sacrifice in this world. But I do not 
like to ask anyone. One should never doubt whether the good 
task undertaken will find fruition or not. Many more things are 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 26 


going to happen in the future. 
Education of Love 


Fill your hearts with love. There is no wealth, no dharma, 
no meditation greater than love. I expect all of you to live in 
unity like brothers and sisters. If you become embodiments of 
love, you will become divine. Brahmavid Brahmaiva Bhavati 
(the knower of Brahman verily becomes Brahman). 

Students are the long-journey passengers, traveling in this 
train of society. All the elders are bound to get down soon. So, 
it is the paramount duty of students to develop sacred love. The 
main education offered in our institute is love alone. Do not 
love God for the sake of worldly desires. Love Him with 
spiritual outlook. Gopikas prayed to Krishna, 


Let us listen to the melody of Your divine music 
so that the seeds of love to germinate 
in the field of our heart, which has become 
barren due to the absence of love. 
Let there be rain of love in our hearts, and 
let the river of love flow incessantly through it. 
[Telugu Verse] 


I am giving you all free education and free medical care, in 
return you have to give Me only one thing, and that is love. 
Develop love. That is all I want from you. I want you to take a 
vow that you will lead a life suffused with love from today 
onward. With this, I bring my discourse to a close. 


28 July 1999 
Prasanthi Nilayam 


Recognise the principle of ‘I’ 


Embodiments of Love! Where the mind is active, all the 
three worlds exist there. Where there is no mind, nothing exists 
there. Mind is the main cause of man’s suffering and misery. 
In order to control the mind, man has to keep his desires under 
check. 


The trees demonstrate the sacred principle of 
equality by providing shelter to everyone 

Regardless of caste, creed, religion, nationality. 

The mighty mountains withstand the cold, rains, 
and the severe heat, thereby teaching man 

Not to be unduly attached to the body. 

The birds are satisfied with what they get to eat 
each day. 

They do not store food. 

Thus they teach the sacred lesson that 
one should not be worried about the future. 

Death conveys the message that body is temporary 
and the feeling of I and mine is but an illusion. 

Nature is the only school that confers on man 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 28 


true wisdom, and 
God is the only Sadguru. 
[Telugu Poem] 


Embodiments of Love! Nature sets an ideal to the entire 
humanity to imbibe the spirit of sacrifice and lead a spiritual 
life. Anithyam Asukham Lokam Imam Prapya Bhajasva Maam 
(the world is temporary and full of misery, so contemplate on 
God). Under these circumstances, why is man not able to culti- 
vate the spirit of sacrifice? In spite of his knowing the truth 
that the body is temporary, he is still bound by desires. Since 
there is no end to desires, man is subjected to endless misery. 
In order to get rid of his misery, man should follow the ideals 
of Nature. Nature is the best preacher. It exhorts man to culti- 
vate love, compassion and spirit of sacrifice. 

Since ancient times, in this sacred land of Bharat, many 
sages, seers, and also the kings propagated the spirit of sacri- 
fice and the principle of spirituality, showing to mankind the 
way to peace and security. Bali was one such king who propa- 
gated the spirit of sacrifice through his own example, by un- 
dertaking many sacred rituals like yajnas and yagas. He even 
discarded the advice of his guru, Sukracharya, who tried to dis- 
suade him from keeping his promise to Vamana. He told his 
guru that there was no greater sin than going back on one’s 
own promise and that he would abide by his word to Vamana, 
come what may. 


Let intellect control the mind 


Bharat, which has given birth to such noble kings and has 
been the land of sacrifice, spirituality, and peace, has now be- 
come a place of injustice, untruth, and restlessness. One should 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 29 


never get carried away by this body, which is bound to perish 
one day or the other. Only the principle of the Atma is true and 
eternal. One should lead one’s life keeping this eternal Atmic 
principle in view. and not the fleeting materialistic pleasures of 
the world. 

Nature is endowed with two aspects. One is related to the 
worldly view and the other to the spiritual view. All that you 
see, hear, and think is related to the physical world. The un- 
manifest principle of the Atma is the basis for this manifest 
Nature. 

Here is a mansion. You can see its grandeur and beauty, 
but not its foundation. The body can be compared to a mansion 
and the mind to its foundation. Just as the mansion is based on 
its foundation, likewise the body is based on the mind. If the 
mind is steady, so too is the body, and vice versa. Having at- 
tained human birth, it is necessary to understand the nature of 
the body, the mind, the intellect, and the senses in order to 
make proper use of them. 


Mind exists even after death 


Before driving a car, one should know where the brake, 
clutch, accelerator, etc. are located and how to operate them 
properly. Our body is a car, the mind is the steering, eyes are 
the headlights, heart is the engine, stomach is the petrol tank, 
and the four objectives of human life, namely, dharma, artha, 
kama, moksha, are the four wheels. The tyres, which are out- 
side, are under control of the steering, which is inside. Like- 
wise, mind is the steering that controls the direction of the 
journey of human life. So, one should make every effort to un- 
derstand the nature of the mind. Mind exists even after death. 
Purity of man depends upon the purity of his mind. If the mind 
is polluted, it pollutes all his life. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 30 


Though the mind of modern man is highly polluted with 
negative thoughts, he aspires to live in peace and happiness. 
But how can he expect positive results without giving up 
negative thoughts? The peace and happiness that he experi- 
ences in the world are only temporary. In fact, real happiness is 
not in the world outside; it is within. Mind is the cause for eve- 
rything, good and bad, happiness and misery. 

The Vedas declare: Manah eva manushyanam karanam 
bandhamokshayo (mind is responsible for both bondage and 
liberation of man). If man follows the dictates of the mind, he 
becomes worse than an animal and ultimately ruins his life. 
His life will be sanctified only when he follows the dictates of 
buddhi (intellect). He who goes by the vagaries of the mind 
can never be steady in life. How can he then attain permanent 
happiness? 


Truth originates from the hridaya 


So, first and foremost, man should make his mind steady 
and sacred. Before undertaking any activity, he should dis- 
criminate whether it is good or bad, right or wrong. But man is 
using his power of discrimination (viveka) only to suit his 
selfish ends, which is individual discrimination. What is 
needed today is fundamental discrimination, that which is 
based on the sacred principles like truth, love, and righteous- 
ness. 

Truth is God, love is God. So, live in love. Truth is one and 
the same for all countries in all periods of time. Truth origi- 
nates from the hridaya (heart). The mind can be controlled 
once you have total faith in truth and follow it implicitly. 

The primary effort of man should be to control the mind. 
This is not possible unless desires are put under check. But, 
today, man is filled with excessive desires. No doubt one can 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 31 


have desires, but they should be within limits. Today, even the 
sanyasins (renunciants) do not have control over their desires, 
let alone common men. When their ashrams grow, their de- 
sires also grow more and more. Why should one have un- 
limited desires? Adi Sankara declared: “Ma kuru dhana jana 
yauvana garvam, harathi nimeshath kalah sarvam (Do not be 
proud of wealth, progeny, or youth; the tide of time may de- 
stroy them all in an instant).” Youth and wealth are like pass- 
ing clouds. 


Keep control over mind in times of difficulties 


One should keep one’s mind under control and act accord- 
ing to the situation. You have just heard a singer singing Thya- 
garaja’s composition, “Samayaaniki Thagu Maatalaadene.” 
Thyagaraja was one who understood the truth and had love for 
God. But, one cannot keep control over one’s mind in times of 
great difficulties. It is because of this weakness that one even 
starts blaming God for one’s own troubles. Thyagaraja was no 
exception to this. When he was unable to withstand suffering 
in the face of difficulties in life, he put the blame on Rama, 
saying, “O Rama, my bhakti (devotion) toward You is very 
strong, but You do not have the shakti (power) to protect me.” 
Then he enquired deeply within and repented for his indiscreet 
statement. He sang, 


O Rama if You lacked power, 

Would a mere monkey jump across the mighty ocean? 

Would Mother Lakshmi, the Goddess of Wealth, 
become Your consort? 

Would Lakshman worship You? 

Would the intelligent Bharata serve You? 

How can I, with my limited mind, 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 32 


Understand the greatness and grandeur 
of Your divine power?” 
[Telugu Poem] 


One has to have a broad mind in order to understand the in- 
finite Divinity. Today, man has become so narrow-minded that 
he has given up asayalu (ideals) and is leading his life only to 
fulfil his asalu (desires). Lead a life full of sacred feelings. 
Give up worldly feelings. Have total faith in God. You can ac- 
complish anything with faith. 


Only one with the mind is manava 


Sathya (truth), dharma (righteousness), and thyaga (sacri- 
fice) constitute humanness. Sathya is neethi (morality), dhar- 
ma is reethi (code of conduct), and thyaga is khyathi (reputa- 
tion). The combination of all these three is manava jathi (hu- 
man race). But all these are missing in modern man. So, we 
find only akara manava (human in form) but not achara 
manava (human in practice). Today man is restless due to the 
vagaries of the mind. But the mind is essential for man. Only 
the one with the mind is manava (man). Bereft of the mind, he 
is not man. Therefore, man should conduct himself fully aware 
of the divinity within. Unfortunately, many do not believe in 
the existence of God. Where is God? He is all-pervasive. 


Sarvata Pani Padam Tath 
Sarvathokshi Siromukham 
Saravata Srutimalloke 

Sarvamavruthya Thisthati. 


With hands, feet, eyes, mouth, head, ears pervad- 
ing everything, He permeates the entire universe. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 33 


Embodiments of Love! More than physical prowess, man 
needs power of the mind. Man should have control over his 
emotions and keep them under check in times of distress. 


Life is a challenge, meet it. 
Life is a game, play it. 

Life is a dream, realise it. 
Life is love, enjoy it. 


Man bereft of love is lifeless. Love, love, love. Love is 
everything. Live in love. Love lives by giving and forgiving; 
self lives by getting and forgetting. 


Experiencing Oneness is true wisdom 


The present population of the world is approximately 600 
crores. But the principle of ‘I’ is one and the same in everyone. 
Each refers to them as ‘I’. How can one know these 600 crore 
people? Once you recognise the principle of ‘I’, you would 
have recognised all. Here, you find many bulbs glowing; the 
same current flows through all of them. Similarly, the principle 
of ‘I is the same in all. Instead of questioning, “Who are 
you?” question yourself, ‘Who am I?” Know yourself first, 
then you will know all. 

What is the cause of conflicts and restlessness in this 
world? Lack of recognition of principle of oneness is mainly 
responsible. If someone were to criticise you, do not get agi- 
tated. Remember that the same Afmic principle is present in 
both of you. The one who accuses and the one who is accused 
are not two different entities. There will be no scope for agita- 
tion if you understand this truth. Peace and serenity will reign 
supreme in the world once this principle of oneness is recog- 
nised. Likewise, God and devotee are not separate from each 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 34 


other. Worshipper and worshipped are one and the same. The 
devotee worshipping God actually means worshipping himself. 
Ekatma Sarvabhuthantaratma (the same Atma is present in 
everyone). This principle of oneness is Brahma. Viewing this 
oneness as many is bhrama or bhranthi (illusion). This bhrama 
is responsible for the restlessness in the world. True spiritual 
practice lies in cultivating the spirit of oneness. There is no 
greater sadhana than this. Whatever sadhana one undertakes, 
one should do it with love. Then, there will be no scope for 
anger and jealousy. 

In order to understand the Vedic dicta, Easwara Sarvabhu- 
thanam (God dwells in all beings), Sarvam Khalvidam Brahma 
(all this is verily Brahman), one should inculcate noble quail- 
ties. Na karmana na prajaya dhanena thyagenaikena amruta- 
thwamanasu (neither wealth nor progeny nor good deeds can 
confer immortality; it can be attained only through sacrifice). 
People respect you as long as you occupy exalted positions in 
society. But nobody follows you when you lose your position 
and power. The Vedas address human beings as Amrutasya 
Puthra. Live up to that title. You are amrutasya puthra (sons 
of immortality), not anrutasya puthra (sons of falsehood). 


Understand the truth that you are God 


There is chinmaya (awareness) in mrinmaya (physical 
body). That awareness is true wisdom. The Vedas refer to this 
as Prajnanam Brahma (constant integrated awareness). This 
constant integrated awareness makes the body, mind, and in- 
tellect function. All four Mahavakyas, namely, Prajnanam 
Brahma, Ayamatma Brahma, Aham Brahmasmi, and Tattwam- 
asi, speak of this constant integrated awareness. Understand 
the truth that you are God. You may think that you are separate 
from Swami. But in fact, I and you are not separate. ‘I am 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 25 


yours, you are Mine,’ ‘You and I are one.’ Understand this 
truth and act accordingly. “Abheda darshanam jnanam (expe- 
rience of oneness is true wisdom).” There is only one without a 
second. If you go on adding the number | to itself, the value 
increases. On the other hand, even if crores of ‘I’s are added to 
‘T’, it still remains ‘I’. That ‘I’ is Divinity. Once you under- 
stand this truth, you will realise that all are embodiments of 
Divinity. The essence of Vedanta is contained in these four 
Mahavakyas. 


Vision of God through Love 


You have all come from Kerala. You might have heard the 
arguments of many atheists that they do not believe in the ex- 
istence of God, since He is not seen. Where can you find any- 
thing without form? One cannot deny the existence of air just 
because it is not seen. Likewise, one cannot deny the existence 
of God. God exists, but you cannot see Him. All names and 
forms are His. Once you develop this faith, you will develop 
love for God. 

Gopikas could not bear the pangs of separation from 
Krishna when He left for Mathura. On deep enquiry, they re- 
alised that there was no separation between Krishna and them 
since He is present everywhere at all times. The one that went 
to Mathura was not ‘Krishna’ but his body. Realising this truth 
they sang this song, “O Krishna, can we ever understand You? 
You are smallest among the small and mightiest among the 
mighty. You are present in all the 84 lakh species.” None can 
decide that God is here and not there. He is everywhere. Only 
through love can one have the vision of God. One can see 
one’s own reflection in the mirror only when a particular 
chemical is coated on the other side. Likewise, coat the chemi- 
cal of love on your hridaya (heart) in order to have the vision 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 36 


of God. Fill your heart with love; then there will be no place 
for evil qualities like jealousy, anger, and hatred. Wax melts 
when it comes into contact with heat. The heart also melts like 
wax when the rays of love fall on it. 

The story of Prahlada is direct proof of this. He constantly 
chanted the name of Narayana with all love even in the face of 
innumerable hardships. He was pushed from the mountain top 
and thrown into the sea. Attempts were made to get him tram- 
pled upon by huge elephants and bitten by poisonous snakes. 
But not even once did he give up chanting Narayana. Love of 
Prahlada melted the heart of the Lord, and He came to His res- 
cue in times of need. True devotion lies in being in a state of 
equanimity in both pleasure and pain. Prahlada stands testi- 
mony to this. He had neither grief nor fear in the face of sever- 
est sufferings. He had total faith that God was within him. 

There can be no room for grief or fear wherever God’s 
name is chanted, since God Himself manifests there. Sukha- 
dukhe samekruthwa labhalabhau jayajayau (one should re- 
main equal-minded in happiness and sorrow, gain and loss, 
victory and defeat). Such equanimity can be attained only 
through love. 

Embodiments of Love! All are embodiments of love. Love 
is the fundamental force. When once you develop love within, 
you will never hate anybody. Today, hatred is on the rise eve- 
rywhere. Ego is the root cause for hatred. Give up ego and you 
can have the vision of Atma. All this can be accomplished only 
through love. You should lead your life with love. There is no 
greater devotion than this. 


25 August 1999 
Prasanthi Nilayam 


Develop intense devotion 


Where the six noble qualities of uthsaha (enthusiasm), 
sahasa (determination), dhairya (courage), 
buddhi (intelligence), shakti (energy), and 
parakrama (valour) are evident, 
God’ s protection and grace prevail there. 
[Sanskrit verse] 


Embodiments of Love! Lord Krishna has said that karma 
(action) is responsible for man’ s birth as well as death. Man is 
bound by action in his daily life. Right from birth to death, 
man spends his time in performing some activity or the other. 
The path of action (karma marga) 1s very dear to God. In fact, 
He is the very embodiment of action and He is present in every 
activity. 


It is Karma (action) that is responsible for birth, 
sustenance, and death of every being in this world. 
Karma is God for all beings. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 38 


It is the cause of both pleasure and pain. 
[Telugu Poem] 


Action is the cause for everything 


While karma (action) is responsible for pleasure, pain, 
birth, death, etc., kala (time) is also very essential for every 
karma. Without these two, man cannot live even for a moment. 
However, action is the cause for everything. What was the 
cause for King Harishchandra to become the caretaker of the 
cremation ground, for the separation of King Nala and his 
spouse Damayanti, and for the imprisonment and suffering of 
Sant Ramadas? It was the karma alone. 

As is the karma, so is the consequence thereof. These two 
are inseparable and interrelated. Time acts as a link between 
these two. A day is one unit of time. Seven days make a week, 
fifteen days a fortnight, thirty days a month, and twelve 
months a year. Time is moreover divided into three periods: 
past, present, and future. Multifarious activities take place in 
these three periods of time. 

What is time? What is space? Here are two flowers. The 
distance between these two flowers is space. They were buds 
yesterday; they blossomed today and will fade away tomorrow. 
A bud cannot become a flower instantly, and the flower does 
not fade immediately. The change takes place gradually. That 
which is the root cause for this change is time. 

You all know that the second-hand in a clock rotates con- 
tinuously, making the sound ‘tick, tick, tick... You might 
wonder whether it takes rest at all. Yes, it does. The time gap 
between two consecutive ticks is its period of rest. 

This world is a combination of kala (time), karma (action) 
and karana (cause). Every action has a reaction. When your 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 39 


finger gets cut with a knife, blood oozes out immediately. 
Here, the reaction is instantaneous. There is no time gap what- 
soever. On the other hand, the food we eat takes at least two 
hours to be digested. Take the case of a seed. A seed sown to- 
day takes three to four days to sprout. Here the time gap be- 
tween action and reaction is slightly more as compared to the 
previous instances. On the other extreme, we have a case 
where it takes years for a sapling to grow into a gigantic tree 
and yield fruit. 


The consequence of one’s actions are inevitable 


Thus, the time gap between action and reaction may vary 
depending on the nature of action. But, know for sure that none 
can escape the consequences of their actions. It is impossible 
to say when, how, and where one will face the consequences of 
one’s actions. 

Why should one pray, meditate, contemplate on God or 
engage in good actions when one is anyway bound to face the 
consequences of one’s actions? You may not be able to see the 
transformation that comes within you by your good actions and 
prayer. You may not even be able to visualise it with your 
mind. Yet, this transformation in you is sure to attract God’s 
grace. The benefits derived from prayer or good actions may 
not be visible to the naked eye. Yet the benefits do accrue in 
the form of God’s grace. 

Take the example of a bottle of pills. You may note the 
date of expiration date mentioned on the bottle as the year 
1994. You may also find the bottle and its contents intact even 
in the year 1999. But this does not mean that the pills will be 
effective if used today. The pills may be there, but they lose 
their power after the date of expiry. Likewise, the conse- 
quences of one’s actions are inevitable, be they good or bad, 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 40 


but divine grace will let their effects lapse. 
One has to face the consequences of one’s actions 


Once the demon Dundubhi challenged King Vali for a 
duel. Vali killed Dundubhi and, in a fit of rage, threw his bat- 
tered and bruised body at a distance. It so happened that the 
bleeding body landed on the Rishyamuka Mountain, splashing 
blood on sage Mathanga, who was deeply engaged in medita- 
tion there. Enraged, Mathanga cursed Vali thus: “Whoever is 
responsible for this reprehensible act will have his head splin- 
tered into pieces if he were to set his foot on this mountain.” 

That is why Sugriva, Hanuman and others chose to live on 
Rishyamuka Mountain when they were banished from the 
kingdom of Vali. They were certain that Vali would not dare to 
come there. 

Who was responsible for all this? It was Vali himself. He 
could have stopped with the killing of Dundubhi. Instead, he 
flung the body away, driven by his anger, ego, and hatred. 
These three evil qualities were responsible for his ruin. 

Ekapada was a great and diligent teacher. But he was a 
hard taskmaster, too. He would not permit his students to relax 
at any point of time. His wife was in the family way. The babe 
in the womb of his wife questioned his father, “Father, how is 
it that you go on teaching the students without giving them any 
break for rest?” 

To this Ekapada replied, “Students should never be given 
free time, for an idle mind is a devil’s workshop. It leads to 
many perversions.” 

Furious at the impudence of his son, Ekapada cursed him, 
“You have the audacity to question my acts! May you be born 
as Ashtavakra (one with eight bends in the body).” Ashtavakra 
had to blame himself for this unfortunate situation because he 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 4] 


questioned the propriety of the acts of his father without under- 
standing the reasons behind them. 


How to earn divine grace 


King Shanthanu, father of Bhishma, wanted to marry Sath- 
yavathi, daughter of Dasaraja. In order to fulfil the desire of his 
father, Bhishma approached Dasaraja and requested him to 
give Sathyavathi in marriage to his father. Dasaraja agreed on 
the condition that only the one born to Sathyavathi would be 
made the crown prince. Consequently, Bhishma took a vow 
that he would remain unmarried. He earned Divine grace by 
his devotion to his father. 

Vinatha and Kadru were the two wives of sage Kashyap. 
While playing a game, they entered into a competition. The 
terms of the competition were that the loser and her son would 
serve the winner and her son for the rest of their lives. Kadru 
emerged victorious. As per the terms of the competition, Vi- 
natha and her son served Kadru and her son. 

One day, Kadru told Vinatha, “You are like my sister. I 
will make you free if you procure the amritha bhanda (vessel 
of nectar) from heaven.” Unable to bear the sufferings of his 
mother, Garuda undertook this stupendous task and brought 
amritha bhanda from heaven, thus freeing himself and his 
mother from bondage. Pleased with the devotion of Garuda, 
Lord Vishnu showered His grace on him by making him His 
vehicle. 

What was the reason behind Garuda becoming the vehicle 
of Lord Vishnu? It was sathsankalpa (noble resolve) that 
earned him proximity to the Divine. 

For every happening in this world, kala, karma, and karana 
(time, action, and cause) are essential. God acts after taking 
into consideration the three factors of kala, karma, and karana. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 42 


Such noble truths have been expounded in the ancient scrip- 
tures of Bharat. But alas! Modern students are not making any 
effort to understand them, let alone practice them. 


Absolute faith is essential for God to manifest 


Today we are celebrating the birthday of Lord Krishna. 
You attach importance to His body, but not to His teachings. 
You will be celebrating Krishna’ s birthday in true spirit only 
when you put His teachings into practice. 

Mysterious are the ways of the Divine. It is difficult to 
comprehend how the Divine grace works. There are innumer- 
able instances of God coming to the rescue of His devotees in 
times of need. Sant Kabir was a weaver by profession. One day 
he fell seriously ill and was unable to attend to his duties. The 
all-merciful Lord, in the form of Kabir, wove yarn and thus 
came to his rescue. 

Similarly, God came in the form of a potter and helped 
Gora Kumbhar by making pots Himself, when he was in dis- 
tress. 

Sakkubai, an ardent devotee of Lord Panduranga, continu- 
ously chanted the Lord’s name. One day, she could not per- 
form her daily chores since she was running high temperature. 
Even under these circumstances, her husband and mother-in- 
law would not allow her to take rest. At this juncture, Lord 
Panduranga assumed the form of Sakkubai and performed all 
her duties. 

It is indeed difficult to understand how, when, and where 
God would come to the rescue of His devotees. Absolute faith 
is essential for God to manifest. 

Dasaratha had to send Rama to forest for fourteen years as 
a consequence of his promise to Kaikeyi. Though unused to 
any form of hardship, Sita had to endure the difficulties of for- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 43 


est life. But Lakshmana had no obligation to go through such 
an ordeal. Because of his intense devotion to Rama, he also 
followed Him like a shadow. He brought fruits, flowers, and 
tubers from the forest to serve Rama and Sita, and himself 
fasted. Every moment of his life, he spent in the service of 
Rama. He put both his body and mind in the service and wor- 
ship of Rama as a sagunopasaka. 

Bharata asked Rama to return to Ayodhya, but His efforts 
did not succeed since Rama refused to return. So, Bharata rec- 
onciled himself to returning, but stayed outside Ayodhya in 
Nandigrama. His body was in Nandigrama, but his mind was 
with Rama. Lakshmana worshipped Rama with body and 
mind, whereas Bharata’s worship was purely mental since his 
mind was united with Rama. Since Bharata’s worship was 
purely mental, he was a Nirgunopasaka. 


Direct and indirect perception 


In science, there are two modes of perception, direct and 
indirect (pratyaksha and paroksha). That which is directly per- 
ceived (conscious) is pratyaksha, while that which is indirectly 
perceived (subconscious) is paroksha. This difference between 
direct and indirect perception is similar to the relation between 
hypnosis and hypnotism. 

What is hypnotism? A hypnotist has the ability to enter the 
consciousness of the object irrespective of distance or time. He 
can experience Divinity both with body and mind. The one 
who undergoes the experience with mind alone without the 
body is the hypnotised. 

Lakshmana was well versed in this knowledge. The names 
of Rama and Lakshmana are inseparable. This happens natu- 
rally with no special effort as we always say Rama- 
Lakshmana. One hardly ever hears the combination Bharata- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 44 


Rama. Though Bharata’ s mind was one with Rama, his body 
was separated from Him by time and distance. 

Hypnosis and hypnotism are not modern terms. These are 
found in the Vedas. Since people do not know these facts, they 
find new terms or new words for these concepts. Hypnotism is 
referred to in the sastras (scriptures) as ateendriya shakti 
(power beyond the senses). It means that one having this 
power can converse with one who is in deep sleep. Even the 
dead will come and converse with one having such power. Not 
only this, one can enter the mind of another sitting in front of 
him. 

One with such powers can perceive a far away object. 
Hence, the term ateendriya. It is not the object of the senses, 
since it is beyond them. Our ancients possessed such powers. 
These powers are obtained by karma only. Therefore, all our 
actions should be pure and sacred. For this, purity of mind, 
heart, and thoughts is absolutely necessary. Only a person with 
pure body, mind, and intellect can be called a true human be- 
ing. 


Do not expect returns for your acts of service 


There should be complete harmony in thoughts, words, and 
deeds of man. That is what we mean when we say, “The proper 
study of mankind is man.” Axioms like “Work is Worship,” 
and “Duty is God,” are not of modern origin. These were the 
teachings of our ancient seers, though they used different terms 
for these. 

Consider all activities as an offering to God and all work as 
God’s work. Just as two wings are essential for a bird to soar 
high in the sky, and two wheels for a bicycle to move, prema 
(love) and seva (service) are essential for man to reach his 
destination. No benefit accrues from rendering service devoid 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 45 


of love. Do not expect any returns for your acts of service. The 
satisfaction that you derive from rendering service is itself a 
reward. 


Be like Lakshmana 


Today, many people are undertaking rural development 
activities. They come and tell Me, “Swami, we are doing 
grama seva (service to villagers).” For whose sake are you 
rendering service? Is it for My sake? No. You are serving for 
yourself. As long as you have the feeling that you are serving 
others, you are an egotistic person. It is not service in the true 
sense of the term, as long as there is the sense of ego in you. 

You think that you are worshipping Me. It is a great mis- 
take to think so. When the same Atma is present in everyone, 
who is the worshipper and who is worshipped? In the path of 
spirituality, it is a mistake to think, “I am your devotee, You 
are my guru.” True wisdom lies in realising that you and I are 
one. 

Krishna said to Arjuna: “Arjuna, you call yourself My 
devotee. When once you have surrendered to Me, then there is 
no difference between you and Me. So, there is no separate 
identity of devotee and God.” “Ekatma darshanam jnanam 
(visualising the one Spirit in all is true wisdom).” 

Likewise, if someone were to criticise, you do not get dis- 
turbed. Remember that the same Atmic principle is present in 
both. There will be no room for misunderstanding if you real- 
ise this truth. Seeing unity in multiplicity is the principle of 
Brahma and viewing unity as diversity is bhrama (delusion). 
This delusion is the root cause for your suffering. 

Embodiments of Love! First develop faith in yourself. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 46 


Where there is faith, there is love. 
Where there is love, there is peace. 
Where there is peace, there is truth. 
Where there is truth, there is God. 
Where there is God, there is bliss. 


True devotion lies in having faith and attaining bliss. If you 
have no faith, how can you have bliss? Many devotees ask Me, 
“Swami, I want happiness.” Where is this happiness? Can you 
buy it in the market? Will any company supply you bliss? No. 
It is very much in you. You are not able to experience it since 
you do not have faith in yourself. 

You do not have love for God. Love is within you, but you 
are diverting it toward the world, not toward God. Worldly 
love is like passing clouds. Develop the love that is unwaver- 
ing. It neither comes nor goes, it is in you always. Have un- 
flinching faith in its existence. 

Question yourself, “Do I exist?” You get the reply, “Yes, I 
do exist.” That is the true faith. Here is a flower, here is a 
handkerchief, here is a tumbler. The word ‘is’ denotes true 
faith. Have faith in your existence, “I am.” That is true faith. 

You do not need to enquire into the nature of God or to 
search for Him. Have total faith in Him. What is the use of 
living in Prasanthi Nilayam if your mind is constantly going 
around the market? Like Lakshmana, whose body and mind 
were both engaged in the service of Rama. Bharata was physi- 
cally away from Rama; yet, his mind was always with Him. 
Consequently, Bharata resembled Rama in all respects. You 
might have seen in photographs of Rama’s coronation that 
Rama and Bharata have the same blue complexion. Bharata’s 
mind was totally centred on Rama. Because of such intense 
concentration, both became one. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 47 


Similar was the case of Lakshmana, who not only served 
Rama physically but also contemplated on Him day in and day 
out. Rama’s love for Lakshmana was so intense that when 
Lakshmana fainted on the battlefield, Rama lamented, “O 
Lakshmana, I cannot live without you. I may get another 
mother like Kausalya, a wife like Sita, but not a brother like 
you.” 

How can God lament! It was only a divine play enacted by 
Rama to show to the world the nobility and the greatness of 
Lakshmana. Such sacred love is like a powerful magnet. Such 
selfless, unattached love transcends action, space, time, cause, 
and effect. 

People ask Me, “Swami, temples are built for Hanuman 
and Rama. Why has no one built a temple for Lakshmana?” I 
ask them, “You simpleton, is there a temple for Rama where 
Lakshmana is not there?” If you realise this fact, such a doubt 
will never arise. 


Of what value is part-time devotion? 


At the time of Krishnavatara, there were two sisters, Radha 
and Radhika. Radhika was a sagunopasaka and Radha, a nir- 
gunopasaka. Radha constantly chanted the name of Krishna, 
while Radhika was engrossed in the physical form of Krishna. 
She was extremely sad because Krishna had gone away to 
Mathura. She gave up food and drink and said, “Krishna, in my 
heart I have been keeping Your lotus form fresh with my tears. 
Now even my tears have gone dry. How can I now preserve 
Your form in my heart? My heart, which is Your gift, [ am 
now returning to You. What else is there that I can offer at 
Your feet? Accept my salutations and myself.” She surren- 
dered herself to Krishna. 

Radha saw this. She had thought that nirgunopasana was 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 48 


superior to sagunopasana, but after seeing the total surrender 
of Radhika, she realised the greatness of sagunopasana. After 
this, she constantly meditated on the name and form of 
Krishna. 

You must have heard this song of Tulsidas: “Nava Kanja 
Lochana Kanja Mukha Kara Kanja Pada.” In this song, the 
hands feet, face, eyes, etc., of the Lord are all compared to the 
lotus flower. He prays for that lotus to stay in his heart forever. 
Both Radha and Radhika prayed to Krishna to dwell perma- 
nently in their heart. 

Such intense devotion is rare these days. Today, people 
merely say, “Krishna, Krishna,” as they go round or pass by a 
temple. Of what value is such part-time devotion? They are 
bhaktas (devotees) merely for name’s sake. 

You must strive to earn the great wealth of God’ s love. 
Only then will you enjoy the experience of unity. Sarvata 
Panipadam Tath Sarvathokshi Siromukham, Sarvata Sruthi- 
malloke Sarvamavruthya Tisthati (with hands, feet, eyes, head, 
mouth and ears pervading everything, God permeates the en- 
tire universe). 

Ramadas also had this experience of God’s omnipresence. 
Thaneesha put him in jail, but he never gave up the name of 
Rama. “0 Rama! When all is Your form, how can I be separate 
from You?” 


Renounce trishna (desires), attain Krishna 


Devotees today have some form of divinity in their mind, 
but they perform rituals in a mechanical way without any con- 
sistency. All your charity and worship are of no significance to 
the Lord. Show your charity and wealth to the income tax de- 
partment. God needs only your love. There is no tax on love. 
You may face any number of difficulties or hindrances. The 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 49 


Lord Himself may subject you to test. You should not waver 
because of these. All is for your good only. Do not grieve over 
any loss or exult over gain. Equal-mindedness in loss and gain 
is true sadhana. 

Some sit in dhyana (meditation), but their minds are in the 
market or in the hair dressing shop. Is this dhyana or japa? The 
mind should be immersed in Krishna. Instead it is filled with 
trishna (desires). What is needed is Krishna, not trishna. 
Krishna will fulfil all your trishnas. 

Dear Devotees! Mere chanting of the Lord’s name is not 
enough. Offer your love to God. Love is not your property. In 
fact, it is the property of God. Surrender to God what is His. 
What is the use of a long life without this offering? You have 
no right to offer your love to anyone other than God. When 
you offer all your love to God, He will look after all your 
needs. 

There is nothing that He cannot do in this world. In city or 
in hamlet, in forest or in sky, on the high peak or in the deep 
ocean, God is everywhere. He pervades space and time. All 
beings are His forms. Realise this truth, transform it into prac- 
tice, and enjoy the bliss. This is true devotion. Human life at- 
tains true meaning only then. 

Embodiments of Love! These days, wherever we go there is 
unrest, ego, and conflicts. You should develop love and share 
it with all relatives, friends, and even enemies. Then, every- 
thing will be enveloped in love. Therefore, live in love. 


3 September 1999 
Sai Kulwant Hall, Prasanthi Nilayam 


Truth emerges from Wisdom 


Jiva is Siva and Siva is Jiva; one who sees the 
Identity between the two is the realised one. 
[Sanskrit sloka] 


He who has understood the truth that Siva (God) and the 
Jiva (individual) are one and the same is the true Brahmajnani 
(one who has known the Brahman). Siva and Jiva are not dif- 
ferent from each other, since the same divine Atmic principle is 
present in both. One who has realised this truth is a true human 
being. The objective of human life is to understand this truth. 

One cannot be called a human being by his physical form 
alone. Human life is the noblest. Man must think how to lead 
his life in a befitting way. Man is called manava, meaning not 
new. But man has another name, Partha, which means Prithvi 
Puthra (son of Mother Earth). All the powers that are present 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 51 


in the earth are present in man also. None can visualise the 
powers that are latent in the earth. One can understand the 
presence of these powers by deep enquiry and investigation. 
These powers are infinite, unfathomable, and unrevealed. Man, 
since he is born of the earth, naturally has all these powers. 


Perverted intellect ruins man 


It is stated in the Mahabharata that the Pandavas spent 
twelve years in aranyavasa (exile) and one year in ajnathavasa 
(incognito), i.e. living amidst people without revealing their 
identity. 

Likewise, though there are infinite powers in man, they are 
not revealed. These are known as ateeta shaktis (transcenden- 
tal powers). These are psychic in nature and have been termed 
so by scientists. Man is thus a repository of enormous energy 
of various kinds, viz. light energy, electric energy, radiation 
energy, and above all energy of the Self (Atmic Shakti). But for 
this energy, man cannot eat, drink, move, laugh, or do anything 
for that matter. Man, though blessed with such powers, is for- 
getting the latent divinity and is leading the life of an animal. 
The reason for this is the perversion of buddhi (intellect). Our 
ancient epics like the Ramayana, the Mahabharata, and the 
Bhagavata give many instances to illustrate this. 

Krishna went to Hastinapur as an emissary to bring about a 
compromise between the Kauravas and the Pandavas. Duryo- 
dhana, due to the perversion of his buddhi, did not pay heed to 
Krishna’s counsel. Though he knew what dharma was, he did 
not put it into practice. What happened to him ultimately? He 
ruined himself. 

Similar was the case with Ravana. Though he was one of 
great penance and wisdom, he did not pay heed to the good 
counsel of his wife, Mandodari, and the teachings of Narada 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 52 


and other saints and sages. Ultimately, he too ruined his life. 

The same can be said of Hiranyakasipu. He was a great 
scientist. Modern scientists could reach only the moon, but Hi- 
ranyakasipu could go even beyond the sun and the stars. Such 
a great scientist did not adhere to dharma and ultimately met 
his doom. 

Vali, on being questioned by the sages as to why he ban- 
ished his own brother, Sugriva, from the kingdom, gave a con- 
cocted version of the truth, magnifying Sugriva’s mistake and 
concealing his own. Again, the reason was perversion of his 
buddhi. 

In the Mahabharata, Amba put the entire blame of her pre- 
dicament on Bhishma, ignoring her own folly, and developed 
hatred toward him. Similarly, Viswamitra developed enmity 
with Vasishta for no fault of the latter. 


Modern society is not able to protect dharma 


Great scientists also could not comprehend the reality and 
understand the difference between truth and untruth due to lack 
of the power of discrimination. Today, modern man considers 
truth as untruth, dharma as adharma, and vice versa. Since an- 
cient times, Bharat (India) has given utmost priority to sathya 
(truth), dharma (righteousness), and nyaya (justice). In spite of 
knowing what is truth and righteousness, modern man is not 
adhering to them due to the perversion of his buddhi (intellect). 
Modern society is not able to protect dharma and control in- 
justice. 

Not merely that, man is forgetting the truth and distorting 
the meaning of dharma itself. He gives various contradictory 
definitions of sathya and dharma. Does the fault lie with 
sathya and dharma? No. The mistake lies in the manner in 
which the buddhi is utilised. That is why we pray to God to 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 53 


illumine our intellect, as stated in the Gayathri Mantra. 
Sincere prayer earns divine grace 


Ganapathi is the embodiment of buddhi (intellect) and 
jnana (wisdom). Truth emerges out of wisdom and ultimately 
leads to ananda (bliss). This is the teaching of Ganapathi. 
Where there is no truth, there can be no bliss. “Trikala 
badhyam sathyam (Truth is changeless in the three periods of 
time).” Dharma is also changeless in the three periods of time. 

The injunction of the Vedas is: Sathyam vada, dharmam 
chara (speak the truth and follow dharma). But nobody pays 
heed to this dictum. Today, people misinterpret Truth as that 
which is expressed, seen, heard, and experienced by the senses. 
Similarly, dharma is also misinterpreted. This is in fact 
prakrita sathya and prakrita dharma (worldly truth and 
worldly dharma). This is related to the outward path 
(pravritti). The inward path (nivritti) is related to the funda- 
mental truth and righteousness (sathya and dharma). But today 
no one seems to be taking cognisance of this, let alone prac- 
ticing it. Vedokhilo dharma moolam. (The Veda is verily the 
basis of dharma). 

God is the embodiment of sathya and dharma. So, what- 
ever God says is sathya and whatever He does is dharma. 

It is the primary duty of man to obey the command of the 
Lord. Disobeying the divine command amounts to transgress- 
ing the fundamental principles of sathya and dharma. 

Truth is God. Today the world is in disarray because the 
principles of sathya and dharma are not scrupulously followed. 
Man feels proud of his medha shakti (intelligence). Greatness 
does not lie in merely possessing intelligence. It has to be con- 
verted into skill. Only then will there be balance in human life. 

Man can acquire wisdom only when he converts his intelli- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 54 


gence into skill. But due to the effect of Kali Age, man, instead 
of converting intelligence into skill, kills it. As a result, his 
buddhi (intellect) is perverted and there is imbalance in his life. 


One should never disobey God’s command 


Under any circumstances, one should never disobey God’s 
command. The consequences will be disastrous if one were to 
disobey the divine command. 


Is it possible, oh man, to escape 
the consequences of your actions? 
You may be a great scholar, worship the 
family deity or even go to the forest and 
Undertake severe penance; 
yet you are bound to face the 
Consequences of your actions. 
Whether you dip the container in a small lake 
or a mighty ocean, the amount of water 
Collected depends on the size of the container; 
you cannot expect more. 
Likewise, you get what you deserve. 
You may don ochre robes and 
turn the rosary innumerable times; 
Yet, you are bound to face the 
consequences of your actions. 
But, if you are the recipient of divine grace, 
you can overcome the effects of any karma. 
[Telugu Song] 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 55 


Sunlight enables man to perform various actions. Yet, the 
sun remains unaffected by what man does. It is just a witness. 
Likewise, God is the eternal witness. He is unaffected by what 
happens around. Clouds, which owe their existence to the sun, 
cover the sun itself. But that does not in any way diminish the 
brilliance of the sun. Similarly, God does not stand to lose 
anything if man, who owes his existence to God, derides Him. 
Man will certainly reap the consequences of his actions; God is 
not affected by them. 

Just as the clouds originate from the sun, likewise, manas 
(mind), buddhi (intellect) and chitta (subconscious mind) are 
formed out of the Atma. Mind is responsible for all suffering, 
and even rebirth. So, mind has to be diverted toward God in 
order to escape from the cycle of birth and death. 


One can rewrite one’s destiny with divine grace 


One can overcome the evil effects of one’s actions by fo- 
cusing one’s mind on God. Mountains of sin will vanish like 
mist by God’s grace. For every action, there is bound to be a 
reaction. But divine grace can provide an escape from the con- 
sequences of one’s karma. 

In fact, one can rewrite one’s own destiny if one gets di- 
vine grace, as was the case with Markandeya. He was given 
only sixteen years of life span. But he was unaware of this un- 
til the night before he turned sixteen. That night, he found his 
parents full of sorrow. On asking, he was told that his end had 
approached, and that was the cause of their sorrow. He went to 
the temple of Easwara, hugged the Sivalinga, and prayed in- 
tensely. At the appointed hour, Yama (God of Death) cast his 
noose around the neck of young Markandeya. Since he was 
hugging the Linga, the noose fell around the Linga also. Eas- 
wara manifested and remonstrated Yama, “How dare you cast 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 56 


the noose around Me?” He cursed Yama to death. Pleased with 
the devotion of Markandeya, He blessed him with the boon of 
immortality. This only drives home the point that through sin- 
cere prayer, you can earn divine grace, which helps you to at- 
tain everything. God is not separate from you. He is present in 
your body. Body is the temple of God. 


Universe is divine creation 


Newton wanted to know whether the creation had emerged 
on its own or whether an unseen force was governing it. He 
conducted extensive research for several years to know the 
truth. Ultimately, he gave up all the scientific experimentation 
and turned inward. Within a span of nine days, he realised that 
there a ‘divine hand’ was responsible for the entire creation, its 
sustenance, and its annihilation. Other scientists like Einstein, 
Schrédinger, etc., came to the same conclusion. 

Many eminent modern scientists are also trying to find out 
the truth about the divine creative principle of the universe. 
They are not aware of the magnetic power and the electric 
power that are present in the human body, which is verily a 
small generator. The jataragni (digestive fire) is the source of 
heat energy in the body. Before partaking of food, you chant 
the sloka (verse): 


Brahmarpanam Brahma Havir 
Brahmagnou Brahmana Hutham 
Brahmaiva Thena Ganthavyam 
Brahmakarma Samadhina. 


Immediately, you get the reply from within: 


Aham Vaishvanaro Bhoothva 
Praninam Dehamasritha 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 a7 


Pranapana Samayukta 
Pachamyannam Chathurvidham. 


God, who is present in you in the form of Vaishvanara, di- 
gests the four types of food that you eat. Jataragni, like a gen- 
erator, is responsible for the electric power in the body. Human 
body is a conglomeration of different powers —heat, light, 
sound, electricity, etc. Unfortunately, such divine powers of 
body are wasted in pursuit of worldly comforts and luxuries. 

Do not crave luxuries but bear with patience whatever 
comes your way, because whatever happens in life is good for 
you. Never be disheartened when faced with difficulties or suf- 
ferings in life. Have firm faith in the power of the Atma. One 
who recognises the power of the Atma will not suffer. 


Never be away from God’s love 


The panacea for all suffering is chanting God’s name. Have 
the firm conviction that you are God. Never be under the mis- 
taken notion that God is the master and you are His slave. You 
do not have a master; you are the master. Master the mind and 
be a mastermind. Never forget God’ s name. Never be away 
from God’s love. Never leave truth and never forget dharma. 
With one-pointed concentration contemplate on God, nothing 
else matters in this world. 

Many are under the illusion that they have achieved some- 
thing great in life by amassing wealth, but they do not realise 
that they have to go empty handed when they leave this world. 
Do not get carried away by this illusion (bhranthi). Do not 
waste your life in this illusion. You should understand the dif- 
ference between Brahma (God) and bhrama (illusion). 

The principle of unity in diversity is Brahma, and viewing 
multiplicity in unity is bhrama. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 58 


Nations are many, but earth is one; 
Stars are many, but sky is one; 
Jewels are many, but gold is one; 
Cows are many, but milk is one. 


Controlling the mind is true sadhana 


This is how you should visualise unity in diversity. Try to 
understand the significance of the names Ganapathi, Vinayaka, 
and Vigneshwara. You are Ganapathi yourself. This morning, 
you all heard Susheela sing a song, “Adugaduguna gudi undhi 
(there is temple at each and every step).” Our body itself is a 
temple of God. “Deho devalaya proktho jeevo Deva sanathana 
(body is the temple and the indweller is God).” The jeevana- 
Jyothi (light of life) that is present in the body is Paramajyoti 
(the Supreme Light) itself. This light is not subject to change 
and cannot be extinguished. 

The body is bound to perish one day or the other. The body 
may die, but not the mind. Such a mind has to be controlled. 
That is the true sadhana (spiritual exercise). You will not have 
any troubles if you offer your mind to God. Mind is very 
fickle. It is not steady even for a minute. So, it should be ever 
engaged in work. Only then can it be brought under control. 

What work should you assign to the mind? Let the mind be 
a watchman at the gate of your nostrils. Let it observe what is 
going in and what is coming out. So is inhaled and Ham is ex- 
haled. So symbolises that which is good (Divinity) and Ham 
stands for that which is bad (ego). Then the mind will under- 
stand that the Divinity has to be taken in and ego has to be 
given up. Mind is like a mad monkey. Unless it is kept busy, it 
will go according to its whims and fancies. The only way to 
keep a monkey busy is to make it go up and down a pole re- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 59 


peatedly. Likewise, the mind also has to be kept busy by con- 
templating on Soham Mantra. 

Who is Ganapathi? He is the Adhipathi (master) of all ga- 
nas —five senses, five elements, and five life sheaths. The hu- 
man body consists of five koshas (sheaths): annamaya kosha 
(food sheath), pranamaya kosha (life sheath), manomaya ko- 
sha (mind sheath), vijnanamaya kosha (wisdom sheath), and 
anandamaya kosha (bliss sheath). Man progresses only up to 
manomaya kosha. He is unable to go up to the sheaths of wis- 
dom and bliss. Since Ganapathi is the master of all five koshas, 
one has to take refuge in Him in order to reach the state of 
bliss. 


Shun bad company; seek good company 


The elephant is known for its intelligence. Ganapathi is de- 
picted as having an elephant’s head since He is very intelli- 
gent. Ganapathi is also known as Vinayaka, meaning one 
without a nayaka (master). He is the master of siddhi (spiritual 
attainments) and buddhi (intellect). So, one has to pray to Vi- 
nayaka in order to acquire siddhi and buddhi. You have to 
make proper use of your intelligence in order to earn the grace 
of Vinayaka. 

Shun bad company. Seek good company. Only then will 
your life be redeemed. Very often, I remind the students that 
by joining bad company, you become slaves. You should be 
masters, not slaves. You all know what happened to Kaikeyi 
on listening to the words of Manthara. No one loved Rama 
more than Kaikeyi. But when her intelligence was clouded, she 
believed the words of the wicked Manthara. To one with per- 
verted intellect, truth appears as untruth and vice versa. Due to 
the effect of bad company, the mind gets polluted. So, right 
from the tender age, “Tyaja durjana samsargam, bhaja sadhu 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 60 


samagamam, kuru punyamahoratram, smara nithyamanith- 
yatham” (run away from bad company, join good company, 
undertake righteous actions day and night, and enquire into 
that which is permanent and that which is ephemeral). One 
should not develop unnecessary contacts. Your interaction with 
others should be limited to basic courtesies like, “Hello, how 
are you?” 


Never disobey the command of God 


Embodiments of Love! You are under the false impression 
that today is the birthday of Vinayaka. He had neither birth nor 
death. He has neither beginning nor end. He is the eternal wit- 
ness. 

This life is temporary. You should suffuse it with spiritual- 
ity. All the festivals of Bharat have deep inner meaning. They 
are highly sacred. Festivals are not just meant for preparing 
delicious items and consuming them. They are meant to re- 
mind us of Divinity. On festival days you decorate your houses 
with buntings and green leaves, and you also wear new clothes, 
discarding the old ones. Likewise you should give up your old 
rotten habits and cultivate new and sacred ideas. You should 
step into a new life with sacred qualities. 

Never disobey the command of God. If you do so, you will 
ruin yourself, like Ravana and Hiranyakasipu. They developed 
hatred toward God and ultimately met their doom. Never doubt 
the existence of God. He is everywhere. Ek Prabhu Ke Anek 
Nam (one God has many names). Never forget Him. Contem- 
plate on Him incessantly. That is the main objective of human 
life. 

What do you have to offer to Vinayaka on this day of Vi- 
nayaka Chaturthi? Today people spend a lot of money in of- 
fering various fruits and preparations to God. All these offer- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 61 


ings are made only as a ritual. Ultimately, people themselves 
consume them! No benefit accrues from making these offer- 
ings. Patram, pushpam, phalam, toyam—these are the four 
things that you should offer to God. Here patram (leaf) means 
body. This body may wither away at any moment. So, never 
develop attachment towards the body; instead offer it to God. 
Pushpam (flower) means hridaya (heart), the flower that will 
never fade. Mind can be compared to phalam (fruit), and to- 
yam stands for tears of joy. 

All these should be offered to God. This is the offering that 
God expects. I hope that you will put into practice what has 
been said and sanctify your lives. I bless you all and bring My 
Discourse to a close. 


13 September 1999 
Sai Kulwant Hall, Prasanthi Nilayam 


Install padukas in your heart 


Anapekshah Suchir Dhakshah Udhaaseeno 
Gathavyathah 

Sarvaarambha Parichyaagee Yomath Bhaktah 
Samepriyah 


Embodiments of Love! This sloka (verse) mentions the 
qualities of a true devotee as taught by Lord Krishna in the 
Dwapara Yuga. The first quality is anapekshah (desireless- 
ness). A devotee should not have any desires. How is it possi- 
ble for man, being endowed with body, senses, mind, and in- 
tellect, to be in a state of desirelessness? He is bound to have 
some desire or other. On the one hand, there are desires per- 
taining to the senses that confer momentary joy. On the other 
hand, there is a desire that transcends the senses. Today man is 
filled with various desires. 

Then what is the way to lead a desire-free life? Lord 
Krishna has shown the way for this. He said, “Son, there is 
nothing wrong in having desires, but all of them must be 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 63 


pleasing to God.” “Sarva karma Bhagavad preetyartham (let 
alt your actions be pleasing to God).” 


Ways to attain the state of desirelessness 


You should put into practice the eternal principles based on 
Truth and dedicate all your activities to God. Lead your life 
without the feeling of ‘mine and thine’ and offer everything to 
God. Only then can you attain the state of desirelessness. To- 
day, man has both worldly desires as well as desires that lead 
to the inward path, but the number of desires that lead to the 
inward path pale in comparison to the number of worldly de- 
sires in him. 

The second quality is suchi (cleanliness). Is it bahir suchi 
(outward cleanliness) or anthar suchi (inner cleanliness)? One 
has to develop both. Physical cleanliness alone is not suffi- 
cient; inner cleanliness is essential. Bharatiyas (Indians) are 
aware of this: If sambar is prepared in an uncoated vessel, it 
gets spoilt. Likewise, if the vessel of your heart is not coated 
with love, all that you do becomes unsacred. Sanctify your 
heart by filling it with divine love. Never entertain any unsa- 
cred or wicked feelings. 

The third quality of a true devotee is determination. You 
should be a dhaksha (one of determination) in order to attain 
divine grace. Once you have taken refuge in God, never lose 
faith, come what may. Do not get disheartened by trials and 
tribulations that come your way. Be equal-minded in times of 
both pleasure and pain. That is true determination. 

The fourth quality is udaaseenatha (total detachment). You 
should lead a life of total detachment without entertaining the 
feeling of ‘I’ and ‘mine’. 

The fifth quality is gathavyathaha. A true devotee is one 
who lives in the present without brooding over the past and 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 64 


worrying about the future. Past is past, forget the past. Do not 
worry about the future for the future is uncertain. So live in the 
present, it is not ordinary present. It is omnipresent. The past 
can be compared to a tree; similarly, the future. The present is 
the seed. This seed is a result of the past and the basis for the 
future. Therefore, one should live in the present with firm de- 
termination. Only then will success be ensured. It is only a 
waste of time brooding over the past since it cannot be re- 
trieved no remedial action can be initiated. Likewise, there is 
no point in worrying about the future since it is not in your 
control. So live in the present and discharge your duties with 
determination. 

The sixth quality is sarvaarambha_ parithyaagee. One 
should give up all desires and ego. Ego leads to attachment, 
hatred, jealousy, aggrandizement, and other vices. It is ego that 
is responsible for the downfall of man. One with ego cannot 
accomplish even a small task. An egotistic person is not re- 
spected even by his near and dear ones. Ego is the worst of all 
the enemies of man. Develop humility in order to get rid of 
ego. No amount of spiritual practices will help a man of ego in 
attaining tranquility and bliss. 

One who possesses the above mentioned qualities is a true 
devotee. Only such a person is near and dear to the Lord 
(Yomath bhaktah samepriyaha). You should cultivate these 
qualities to be a deserving recipient of God's love, 


Live up to the name ‘“‘manava”’ 


All your outward actions and behavior should be a true re- 
flection of the inward thoughts and feelings. When you say 
namaskaram (salutations), say so wholeheartedly. Do not give 
room for kaaram (bitter feelings) in your head. Ahamkaaram 
(ego) is full of 'Kaaram'. Ahamkaaram leads to aggrandize- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 65 


ment, pomp, and show. Some people give wide publicity to 
each and every small act of theirs, be it worship or a spiritual 
practice. God wants only achaar (practice), not prachaar 
(publicity). Strive to put into practice whatever you preach and 
propagate. According to the Upanishads, the word manava 
means one with self respect. Live up to your name. 

“Anudvegakaram vakyam, sathyam priya hitham Cha 
Yath.” He is a true man who speaks the truth in a palatable 
way. The culture of Bharat (India) says, Sathyam vada, dhar- 
mam chara (speak the truth and follow righteousness). It also 
says Sathyam Brooyath, Priyam Brooyath, Na Brooyath Sath- 
yamapriyam (Speak the truth, speak in a pleasing manner, do 
not speak the truth that is unpalatable). Man attains sanctity 
and fulfillment in life only when he puts these teachings into 
practice. 

As you think so you become. If you entertain bestial 
thoughts, you become a beast yourself. On the other hand, di- 
vine thoughts will transform you into a divine personality. On 
this basis, the Upanishads have declared “Brahmavid Brah- 
maiva Bhavathi (the one who constantly contemplates on 
Brahman becomes Brahman).” 


God is the only true friend 


Due to effect of the Kali Age, there is no trace of true love 
in man. Human heart is polluted. People, in particular the so- 
called friends, pretend to love, but in reality they do not have 
true love in their hearts. God is the only true friend. He is al- 
ways with you, in you, around you, above you, below you, 
protecting, guiding, and guarding you. But alas! You are dis- 
tancing yourself from your true friend and reposing faith in so- 
called friends, who may turn into foes at any point of time. 
This is bhrama (delusion). What is the difference between 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 66 


bhrama and Brahma? Viewing multiplicity in unity is bhrama 
and the unity in multiplicity is Brahma. One should visualize 
unity in multiplicity. The Vedas say, 


Sahanaavavathu sahanau bhunakthu 
Sahaveeryam karavaavahai 
Thejasvinaavadheethamasthu maavidhvishaavahai 


What does it mean? Let us grow together, move together; 
let us grow in intelligence, living together; let us live in har- 
mony without any conflict. Vedokhilo dharmamoolam, the 
Veda is the basis for all dharma. Man is misusing his time and 
energy, disregarding the eternal teachings of the Vedas. 


Practice is important, not publicity 


Embodiments of love |! You may acquire worldly comforts 
and conveniences and earn worldly name and fame. But that is 
not all in all. All these are passing clouds. Do not get carried 
away by them. Follow the teachings of the Vedas and attain 
Divinity. 

Practice is important, not publicity. Practice at least one of 
the innumerable teachings of the Vedas and share the bliss de- 
rived therefrom with one and all. This is your bounden duty. 
Human life is highly valuable. So, man should lead an ideal, 
noble and sacred life. “Sathyaannaasthi paro dharmaha (there 
is no other dharma greater than truth).” Build the mansion of 
your life on the foundation of truth. 

The safety of the mansion depends on the strength of the 
foundation. Never utter a lie under any circumstances. It is an 
unpardonable sin to indulge in untruth. This body is gifted by 
God. Do not fritter away this golden opportunity by misusing 
it. “Deho devaalayaproktho jeevo Deva sanathanaha (body is 
the temple and the indweller is God).” 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 67 


What is the difference between man and God? Vyashti (in- 
dividual) is man and Samashti (collective form) is God. Man 
should progress from the state of vyashti to Samashti. Only 
then can he attain Divinity. “Easavaasyamidam jagat (God 
pervades the entire universe).” “Easwara sarvabhoothanam 
(God is present in all beings).” “Ekam sath vipra bahudha- 
vadanthi (there is only one God, but the pundits call Him by 
different names).” In order to understand these Vedic dicta one 
needs to cultivate noble qualities. 


Do not degenerate to the level of animal 


It is a disgrace to lead the life of an animal, having been 
born as a human being. 


Aahaara nidhraa bhaya maithunaani 

Saamaanya metath pashubirnaraanaam. 
Jnaanam naraanaam adhikam visheshah 
Jnaanena shuunyah pashubirsamaanah." 


Food, sleep, fear and procreation are common to 
man and animals. 

Only man is endowed with wisdom; bereft of wis- 
dom man is equal to an animal. 


Animals also eat, sleep and enjoy sensual pleasures. If you 
do the same, how can you be called a human being? You are 
also an animal! The only difference lies in the number of legs, 
i.e. you are a dvipaadha pashuvu (two legged animal) and that 
is a chatushpaadha pashuvu (four legged animal). Having been 
born as human being, you should strive to become Pashupathi 
(God). Do not degenerate to the level of pashu (animal). 

Divinity stands for the principle of oneness. You are get- 
ting deluded by differences in names and forms and are wast- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 68 


ing your time not making any effort to understand the principle 
of unity. Time is God. Time wasted is life wasted. Time once 
lost cannot be recovered. So never waste even a moment. Cul- 
tivate divine thoughts, undertake noble deeds and lead a sacred 
life. Have the welfare of society, not your self-interest, upper- 
most in your mind. You may have self-interest, but it should be 
within limit. There is no one in this world who has given up 
self-interest altogether. But one should not waste one's life 
wholly in pursuit of selfishness and self-interest 


Make use of your education to serve society 


Embodiments of love! There are many students, education- 
ists, intellectuals, and scholars in this country but how many of 
them are working for the nation’s progress? Only a few! Auro- 
bindo Ghosh was working as a teacher in Calcutta. Once he 
told his students, “Children, you are very lucky to have been 
born in this sacred land. Youth is very precious. Make proper 
use of this golden age. You are born and brought up in society. 
You acquire all your knowledge and skills from society. Make 
use of your education to serve and support society. Your edu- 
cation is a mere waste if society does not benefit by it.” 


A foolish person boasts of high education 

And intelligence, yet does not know himself. 

What is the use of all the education he has acquired 
If man cannot give up his evil qualities? 

All the worldly education will only lead him 

To vain argumentation, not total wisdom. 

It cannot help him to escape 

From the clutches of death. 

So, man should acquire that knowledge 

Which will make him immortal. [Telugu Poem] 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 69 


What a shame it is if education is used solely to earn 
money without serving society. Today, people adopt corrupt 
practices and device crooked ways to earn money. Just as the 
earth revolves around the sun, man goes around money. Is this 
the purpose of human life? No. Money is not important. 
“Money comes and goes. Morality comes and grows.” So cul- 
tivate morality. Educate yourself to serve society and set an 
ideal to the rest of the world. You receive your education from 
society. In turn, dedicate it for the welfare of society. 


God accepts anything offered with pure love 
What do you have to offer God? Our ancients used to pray: 


O Lord, I offer you the heart, 
which you have gifted me. 
What else can I offer at your lotus feet? 
Please accept my prayerful salutations: 
[Telugu Poem] 


The heart that God has given you must be given back to 
Him as it is —pure and sacred. This is the offering that God 
expects. God accepts whatever you offer to Him provided you 
do it with pure love. 

In the Krishna Tulaabhara episode, Rukmini could weigh 
Krishna with a small tulasi leaf because her heart was filled 
with love. “O Lord, if it were to be true that you are pleased 
with any offering made with pure love, be it a leaf (patram), a 
flower (pushpam), a fruit (phalam) or water (toyam), may this 
tulasi leaf balance your weight.” So saying, Rukmini placed a 
tulasi leaf in the weighing pan, which balanced Krishna's 
weight. Here patram means body, pushpam means heart, pha- 
lam, is mind, and toyam is tears of joy. All these should be of- 
fered to God. This is the offering that God wants from you. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 70 


You do not need to spend money or strain yourself in order 
to make this offering. It is rather strange that you find it diffi- 
cult to make such a simple offering. You are reading many sa- 
cred texts, learning many slokas (verses) by heart, but what is 
the use? You are not able to get rid of your shoka (misery). 
The only way to overcome misery is offering yourself to God. 


Criticising others is the worst of sins 


Sage Valmiki, after having composed the epic Ramayana, 
convened a congregation of saints and sages and wanted to 
know if there was any one who would propagate the story of 
Rama to the people. The saints and sages expressed their in- 
ability to do so, since they lacked the physical strength on ac- 
count of their advanced age. 

Lava and Kusa, who were sitting at a distance and watch- 
ing the proceedings, came forward and expressed their will- 
ingness to undertake the task of spreading Rama's story far and 
wide. They took thambura in one hand, wore garlands of ru- 
draksha around their necks, smeared vibhuti on their fore- 
heads, and went to each and every street singing the glory of 
Lord Rama. They sang, “Oh people, listen to the sacred story 
of Lord Rama. Let your life be His Story.” 

But modern youth feel shy to spread the message of the 
Lord. Not merely do they feel shy to participate in bhajans and 
to even smear vibhuti on their foreheads, some of them smear 
vibhuti only at home and wipe it off as soon as they step out on 
the street. They do not feel ashamed to do things, which they 
are not supposed to. Why should any one feel ashamed to par- 
ticipate in sacred activities and chant the divine name? 

Some people feel ashamed to spread the divine glory, but 
do not hesitate to talk ill of others and ridicule them. They do 
not understand why the tongue is gifted. It is gifted to chant the 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 71 


divine name. 

Criticizing others is the worst of the sins. Never criticize 
anybody for everyone is essentially divine. You all know that 
in the present day politics each one accuses and abuses the 
other. It is nothing but the result of accrued sins from past 
lives. 

Embodiments of love! Never indulge in slander. Sanctify 
your lives by undertaking sacred activities. This is the true 
purpose of human life. Human body is gifted to serve others. 
The story of Rama is suffused with great ideals and noble val- 
ues. Yesterday the idols of Sita, Rama, Lakshmana, and Ha- 
numan were installed. Everyone should follow their ideals. 

Even Ravana acknowledged the nobility of Rama before he 
breathed his last. He gave a message to the people in his last 
moments, “Oh people, I lost my sons, brothers, my entire clan 
and kingdom as I could not control my desires. Do not become 
slaves to the senses, like me. Follow the ideal of Rama and 
sanctify your lives.” 


Ramayana is replete with inner significance 


Once, the mother of Lord Rama, Kausalya, the mother of 
Anjaneya, and the mother of Agasthya met. Kausalya ques- 
tioned them as to who they were. 

Anjaneya's mother introduced herself saying, “I am the 
mother of the one who jumped across the ocean and went to 
Lanka in search of Mother Sita.” 

Agasthya's mother said, “I am the mother of the one who 
drank the entire ocean in one gulp.” 

On hearing this Kausalya laughed and said to them, “Your 
sons could accomplish such stupendous feats only because 
they chanted the name of my son, Rama.” Exactly at that mo- 
ment Rama entered the scene and told Kausalya, “Mother, Ha- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 72 


numan and Agasthya could accomplish those feats due to their 
sincerity and devotion. Hanuman is one of peace (shaanthudu), 
virtue (gunavanthudu), and strength (balavanthudu). Agasthya 
is no less.” So if you chant the Divine name you can achieve 
anything. 

The epic Ramayana is replete with inner significance. All 
the ideals propagated by the Ramayana should be properly un- 
derstood and put into practice by one and all. Only then will 
human life find fulfillment. The name and form of Rama is 
highly sacred. Ramayathithi Ramaha, (Rama is one who 
pleases everyone). So, all should emulate Him. Rama is a syn- 
onym for Atma. Hence the term Atmarama. So in essence, all 
are the embodiments of Rama principle. 


Sarvathah Paanipaadham That 
Sarvathokshi Shiromukham 
Sarvathah Shruthimalloke 
Sarvamaavrithya Thishtthathi. 


Offer yourself to God; that is the goal of your life 


God is all-pervasive. It is a great mistake to forget the all- 
pervasive God and get immersed in mundane, ephemeral 
pleasures. You may not get this human birth again. So work 
for the redemption of your life by chanting the divine name. 
Offer yourself to God. That is the goal of your life. 

Embodiments of love! 

You all have come from different places for worshipping 
the padukas and deriving the bliss therefrom. It is indeed a 
good act. It is not sufficient if you merely worship the padu- 
kas. Concentrate on them. Without concentration what is the 
point in worshipping padukas? 

Here is a glass of water. Your thirst is quenched only when 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 fe) 


you drink water. Likewise you will be blissful only when you 
install the padukas in your heart. Share the bliss with one and 
all. 

God is the embodiment of love. So you can be a recipient 
of His grace only when you develop love for God. 


1 October 1999 
Prasanthi Nilayam 


Detachment, faith, and love —these are the pillars 
on which peace rests. Of these, faith is crucial. For 
without it, sadhana is an empty rite. Detachment 
alone can make sadhana effective, and love leads 
quickly to God. Faith feeds the agony of separation 
from God; detachment canalises it along the path 
of God; and love lights the way. God will grant 
you what you need and deserve; there is no reason 
to ask, no reason to grumble. Be content, be 
grateful whatever happens, whenever it happens. 
Nothing can happen against His Will. 

—Baba 


Follow Divine Commands 


Though the Vedas were classified so that people 
could find them easy to study and experience, yet 
they were ignored. 


Selfishness has become the motivating force for all activi- 
ties of man today. His mind is filled with all types of desires, 
and violence has become the way of life. He is wasting his life, 
not knowing its purpose. He is straying away from the path of 
dharma (right action) and prema (love). Desires of man are 
crossing all limits and are ultimately leading him to misery. 
Man is in a state of confusion because he is unable to compre- 
hend the true objective of life. 

I have been giving discourses for the past sixty years, but 
you are not making any effort to put into practice even a few of 
the teachings. Students are like gold. Their hearts are suffused 
with sacred feelings. Their behaviour should also be in accor- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 fis, 


dance with their feelings. Man will be ruined if his behaviour 
is not on the right lines. Not only students, but teachers and 
administrators are also not coming up to expectations. The 
situation is the same in the case of samithis and Organisations. 

No doubt, devotees have immense love for Swami, but the 
same love is not expressed in the form of gratitude and sad- 
hana (spiritual practice). It is rather surprising, even to Me, 
that for the past few days I did not feel like speaking at all. 
Since there was no marked change in you, I thought there was 
no point in continuing to speak to you. Hence, I decided to 
confine Myself to a few words. 

What do you expect Me to speak? I have already taught all 
that ought to be taught. There is nothing more to convey. I am 
pained to see that all My teachings have gone waste and all My 
sweet words have become tasteless to you. 

Today, ego is on the rise in devotees. They are becoming 
more and more ostentatious. They pose as great persons before 
the world, thereby setting a wrong ideal to others. The knowl- 
edge acquired and the experience gained by them are not being 
put to any good use. They are not able to recognise that their 
ego will lead them to their downfall. They are not following 
the ideals set before them by Swami and are also not grateful 
for the love and grace showered on them by Me. 


Understand profound truths of the Vedas 


Since ancient times, the Vedas have been teaching pro- 
found truths. They form the basis for a peaceful and prosper- 
ous society. The term ‘Veda’ refers to ‘wisdom’, ‘discrimina- 
tion’, and ‘being’. There are many people who chant the Vedas 
from dawn to dusk, but no one is trying to understand the util- 
ity and significance of the Vedas. What is the benefit derived 
by chanting them? Many people attend Veda classes to study 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 76 


the Vedas, but they do so only for the sake of money, name 
and fame. 

Sage Vyasa thought that it was well nigh impossible for 
man to study the infinite Vedas within his limited life-span. 
Therefore, he classified the Vedas into four broad categories: 
Rig Veda, Yajur Veda, Sama Veda, and Atharvana Veda. Yajur 
Veda was further divided into Krishna Yajur Veda and Shukla 
Yajur Veda. The vastness of the subject of the Vedas is con- 
veyed by their several other names, such as Sruti, Trayee, 
Chandas, Swadhyaya, Nigama, Agama, etc. 

Each name is pregnant with a deep inner significance. Each 
Veda consists of three parts: Mantras, Brahmanas, and Upani- 
shads, including Aranyakas. The Mantras are the hymns in 
praise of gods. The Brahmanas deal with the performance of 
sacrifices—yajnas and the yagas. Aranyakas consist of the 
Mantras chanted and practiced by the Vanaprasthas in the for- 
est. 


No one is giving due importance to the Vedas 


Though the Vedas were classified so that people could find 
them easy to study and experience, they were ignored. Unfor- 
tunately, no one is giving due importance to the Vedas, which 
are very sacred and are replete with profound truths. As a re- 
sult, Indian culture is on the decline. 

People from other countries understand the value of the 
Vedas better than the Indians. The Japanese and the Germans 
studied the Atharvana Veda deeply with the result that they 
could excel in the manufacture of arms and ammunition. But, 
unfortunately, the Bharatiyas (Indians) are not trying to com- 
prehend the greatness and the grandeur of the Vedas. They are 
ruining their lives in the pursuit of materialistic desires. They 
undertake even spiritual practices only to fulfil their worldly 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 ad 


ambitions. They can nourish this sacred culture only when they 
develop steady faith in Divinity. They are taking to pravritti 
marga (outward path) and forgetting the nivritti marga (inward 
path). 


Wrong concept of education 


Modern man wants everything to be done in a trice without 
any hard work on his part. He is not prepared to put in any ef- 
fort or bear any hardship. Today, people are not prepared to 
accept truth; they are carried away by untruth. This is similar 
to the situation wherein people refuse to take milk delivered at 
their doorstep but are prepared to traverse long distances to 
consume illicit liquor. 

What is the meaning of education? Education is meant to 
know oneself, not to amass wealth. In spite of his education, a 
mean-minded person cannot give up his wicked qualities. 
Modern education leads only to argumentation but not to total 
wisdom. If the elders themselves take to the wrong path, the 
young are likely to follow in their footsteps. 

Modern man thinks he is highly educated, but in fact he is 
totally ignorant. Since he is unable to understand the signifi- 
cance of education, he is using it only to earn his living. He is 
going through various scriptures and joining various spiritual 
organisations but is not making any effort to put into practice 
even a few sacred teachings. There is no sin worse than this. It 
is all right if a mistake is committed unknowingly, but com- 
mitting a mistake deliberately amounts to great sin. Though 
man is fully aware of what is good and what is bad, he is not 
able to practice good and give up evil. This is why he is unable 
to progress in the field of spirituality. 

Since ancient times, Veda Purusha Sapthaha Jnana Yajna 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 78 


has been associated with a profound spiritual significance. 
Yajna means sacrifice. In this yajna, you have to sacrifice your 
bad thoughts, wicked feelings, and evil tendencies and culti- 
vate noble qualities. Before the commencement of the yajna, 
fire is produced by keeping one piece of wood over the other 
and churning vigorously. The piece of wood which is below 
can be compared to the mother and the above to the father. The 
resultant fire, the son, burns the parents themselves. You have 
to understand the mystery and inner significance of such con- 
cepts of the Vedas. 


First deserve, then desire 
Students! 


Many of you are feeling bad, thinking that Swami is angry 
with you and is not talking to you. I do not have even a trace of 
anger or dislike toward the students or the elders. I consider 
students as My very life. In such a case, how can I be angry 
with them? But I do not wish to talk to anybody because I do 
not want My words to be devalued. I feel it is better not to 
speak than to speak and lose the value of My words. 

There is no point in feeling bad that Swami is not talking to 
you. Make efforts to attain the deservedness, so that Swami 
would talk to you. I have taught you on innumerable occasions, 
but have you made any sincere attempt to practice even one of 
My teachings? When you do not give up evil tendencies like 
hatred, jealousy, and pomposity, how do you expect Swami to 
talk to you? Hatred is the greatest enemy of man. Ostentation 
gives rise to ego, which will in turn ruin humanness. 

Love is the common property of one and all. You can attain 
happiness and peace only when you develop love. But, today, 
love is on the decline and hatred is on the rise. We find hatred 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 79 


among the members of the same family, students of the same 
college and inmates of the same ashram. 


Slander is the worst of sins 


What is an ashram? It is a place where there is no shrama 
(hardship). But, you are making this ashram into a place of 
burden! You have no right to stay in the ashram if you do not 
obey Swami’s command and understand His love and Divinity. 

No benefit accrues to you if you merely stay here without 
putting Swami’s teachings into practice. It is better that I do 
not speak to you if you do not practise what I say. In fact, 
overseas devotees have better understanding of Swami’s love. 
They go into ecstasy if Swami talks to them even once. On the 
other hand, you do not understand the value of love and grace 
showered on you day in and day out. You merely waste your 
time by indulging in mean actions like slander and backbiting. 

Slander is the worst of sins. Do not criticise or abuse oth- 
ers. The Upanishads declare that man is highly valuable. But 
he is losing his value, respect, and honour by his wrong acts. 
Man alone is to be blamed for this. 

Here is an example. You are all worshipping Me. But, the 
Atma in Me is the same as the Atma in you. So, your worship- 
ping Me amounts to the Atma worshipping itself. If an individ- 
ual indulges in criticism, he does so because he considers him- 
self separate from others, not understanding the oneness of the 
Atma. 

The Atma does not criticise itself. If you want to be near 
and dear to Swami, develop the principle of love. All the man- 
tras you chant and the worship you do will go waste if you 
give scope to evil qualities like hatred, jealousy, pomp, and 
show. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 80 


Wisdom of Gargi 


Embodiments of Love! Love everybody just as you love 
Swami, because Swami is present in one and all. There is the 
same divinity present in all beings. Easwara sarva bhutanam 
(God is the indweller of all beings). One who realises this truth 
can achieve anything in life. 

Once, a great yajna (sacrifice) was performed by king 
Janaka. Great scholars, both men and women like Yajnaval- 
kya, Gargi and Narada, were present on this occasion. The 
king told the assembly to ask any question they wanted. Gargi 
enquired if she, being a woman, was permitted to ask ques- 
tions. Janaka was wisdom incarnate. He said, “Advaita dar- 
shanam jnanam (knowledge of non-duality is true wisdom). 
There is no difference between man and woman in the domain 
of true wisdom. Hence anyone is free to ask.” 

Then Gargi addressed Yajnavalkya, “You are preparing to 
leave with cows given to you by the king. You may do so after 
answering my questions. My first question is: what is the basis 
of all the objects in this universe?” 

All the scholars present were astonished that a woman 
could dare to put such a bold question to Yajnavalkya. “Akasa 
(sky) is the basis for all that exists,” he replied. 

She then asked, “What is that which is above the sky, per- 
vades the earth, and extends below the earth?” 

“The substance that pervades all these is akasa only,” re- 
plied Yajnavalkya. 

In this manner, the assembly of great scholars went on dis- 
cussing the ultimate source of akasa. It did not merely mean 
what was above our head. Gargi explained the uniqueness of 
the sound principle by defining akasa as Sabda Brahman. It 
was also explained that for everything in this universe akasa 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 81 


was the basis. And Surya (the sun) was the basis for akasa. 
The source of the sun was prakriti (nature). In this way, Gargi 
participated in this discussion. All were amazed at the dis- 
crimination and wisdom of Gargi. 


Worldly relationships are temporary 


People generally think that Narada loves quarrel. He got up 
and asked Gargi, “Respected lady, what is your life’s ambi- 
tion?” 

“My only desire is to attain Divinity,” she replied. 

“Tt is impossible,” replied Narada. 

“Why?” asked Gargi. 

Narada replied, “Moksha (liberation) and the attainment of 
Divinity are not ordained for unmarried women.” 

Gargi said, “The only difference is in the body and the 
mind, and not in the Atma” 

Narada said, “The moment you are married, you will attain 
moksha” 

Gargi said, “That is impossible, for I have surrendered my- 
self entirely to God already. Such being the case, do I have no 
possibility of attaining moksha?” 

As this dispute was going on, Janaka intervened and said, 
“Mother, you can get married. What are you going to lose?” 

She thought for a while and considered the contents of all 
the Upanishads and Sastras. She then said, “All right then, I 
shall have a one-day marriage.” Even Narada was perplexed as 
to what this one-day marriage meant. Gargi said, “A marriage 
is a marriage, be it for a day or a hundred years. So, I shall 
have a one-day marriage; who is ready to accept this?” 

One of the sages, named Sringi, agreed. Tadeva Lagnam, 
Sudinam Tadeva, Tarabalam Chandrabalam Tadeva, Vidya- 
balam Daivabalam Tadeva —as the mantra was being 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 82 


chanted, and the sage tied the marital knot, Gargi immediately 
broke it and promptly attained liberation. Thus, Gargi attained 
her goal without transgressing her vows or any of the Sastric 
injunctions. 

Janaka said, “Gargi, your entire life is devoted to the ful- 
fillment of the Divine Will. Then, how can moksha elude you? 
You are destined for moksha. You are indeed a great scholar. 
Today, I shall get myself crowned by your hands.” 

Gargi explained the dharma of the householder in the court 
of Janaka and said that such worldly relationships were tempo- 
rary and not permanent. 


Get rid of ego; cultivate humility 


Countless such illustrious women were born in this sacred 
land of Bharat. It is unfortunate that people born in this sacred 
land are going to such a low state. Ego and attachment are the 
cause for this state of affairs. Whatever I say is for your good 
and not for My sake. Many of you do not realise this. Arro- 
gance of one’s own level of knowledge is the main cause for 
this state of ignorance. 

Educated people should have humility. Education confers 
humility, humility confers deservedness, deserving one obtains 
wealth, and when wealth is used to practice dharma, one at- 
tains true happiness. You can thus attain the goal of your life 
here and hereafter through true education. 

Students! First get rid of your ego. Cultivate humility. Re- 
spect your elders. Speak sweet words. When you practice these 
virtues, Swami will always be with you and will always guide 
you. You do not know, but many marvelous things are going to 
happen in the near future. You will be delighted to see, hear, 
and experience these divine events. Do not miss this sacred 
opportunity that is before you. If you lose it, you will never get 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 83 


it again. Once you obtain it, you will never lose it. Keep these 
sacred thoughts in your heart, respect your parents, please your 
elders, and make your life meaningful. This is My blessing to 
you all. With this I blessing, I bring My discourse to a close. 


14 October 1999 
Sai Kulwant Hall, Prasanthi Nilayam 


God is all-pervading, and yet, we have some sci- 
entists who assert, “We have searched all outer 
space, we have looked for Him on the moon; no, 
He is nowhere to be found. He does not exist.” 
They do not know what to seek and where; still, 
they have the impudence to assert that it is not 
found. Is God an occupant of an identifiable body 
or form? Has He a habitation and dwelling that is 
traditionally His? God is all this and more; He is 
in all this and beyond. He is the inner motivator of 
the very scientist who “denies” Him! 

— Baba 


Cultivate Discipline and Love 


If money is lost, one need not be worried about it, 
for one can earn it again. 
If a friend is lost, one can have another. 
If wife is lost, one can marry again. 
If one loses one's piece of land, 
one can purchase another. 
All these can be regained, 
But if body is lost, one cannot get it back. 
[Sanskrit sloka] 


In Latin language, human body is associated with the terms 
‘sacredness’ and ‘purity’. The Upanishads proclaim that hu- 
man life is highly respectable. Man is put to grief because he 
misuses his body, not knowing its value and sacredness. You 
can understand the significance of the human body in your 
daily life only when you enquire into the mystery of God's 
creation. Human body inhales the life supporting oxygen and 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 85 


exhales the poisonous carbon dioxide. It partakes of delicious 
fruit (phala) and excretes the foul smelling fecal matter (mala). 
Likewise, man should accept that which is sacred and give up 
all that is unsacred. Due to the impact of Kali Age, he is ac- 
cepting bad and giving up good. Unable to realize his innate 
divinity, man is taking to paths that are contradictory to the 
principles of sathya and dharma (truth and right action). 


Time is the most important factor in human life 


All flowers that blossom may not get transformed into 
fruits. All fruits may not become ripe. Once a fruit is ripe, it 
falls down immediately. Similar is the case with human life 
too, but man fails to understand the temporal nature of the hu- 
man body. He feels proud of his education and achievements 
and gets deluded by the material comforts, which confer only 
mean and momentary pleasures. He puts his most valuable 
body to misuse in pursuit of worldly pleasures. 

Time is the most important factor in human life. Days, 
months, and years are respectively like second hand, minute 
hand, and hour hand of a clock. All the three hands are con- 
stantly on the move. No one knows when the appointed hour 
arrives. 

The whole world is permeated with magnetic energy. 
Green pasture attracts the cow. Flower attracts the honeybee. 
Mother attracts the child. You are unable to understand the 
magnitude of this attraction power and are taking it for 
granted. There is power of attraction between human beings, 
birds, animals, and even insects. The world cannot exist with- 
out magnetic power. 

For a long period of time, scientists were under the mis- 
taken notion that magnetic power is the same as atomic power. 
Only of late have they recognised the difference between the 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 86 


two. This magnetic power is present in the human body from 
top to toe. 

There are innumerable unseen powers present in man. 
They are known as transcendental powers (atheeta shakti). 
Scientists know that energy, which is infinite and unfathom- 
able, can be neither created nor destroyed. Since time imme- 
morial, man has been investigating the nature of this energy. 
They have come to the conclusion that the whole world is 
based on psychotronic power, which is also termed bioplasmic 
power. This is present in every cell and every vein of the hu- 
man body. Human mind cannot comprehend the nature of this 
power. 

This power is also called ajnatha S\shakti, that which is not 
known. All these powers are not visible to the naked eye. It 
was this power that enabled mother Sita to lift the mighty Siva 
Dhanush (bow of Siva) with her little finger. It was then that 
king Janaka decided to give his daughter in marriage to one 
who was equally powerful. Sage Viswamitra, who had under- 
stood the intimate relationship that exists between Divinity and 
transcendental power, took Lord Rama to Mithilapura and sol- 
emnised the marriage. 


Whatever appears as matter also becomes energy 


Very often, scientists refer to the two terms —matter and 
energy— but truly only energy exists. Whatever appears as 
matter also becomes energy in due course of time. None can 
describe the glory and grandeur of this transcendental power. 
"Yatho vacho nivarthanthe apraapya manasa saha (this energy 
is beyond the comprehension of the mind and description by 
words).” This transcends the powers of body, mind, and intel- 
lect. Who has created this power? Under whose control does 
this power lie? In whose hands does this power exist? Who can 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 87 


manifest these powers and prove their existence? 

Manifestation of these powers can bring about a divine 
transformation in the hearts of men. Swami wants that such 
changes should take place from now onward. It is impossible 
to say when, where, and how this power will manifest itself. 
Merely listening to the glory of this power may not evoke in- 
terest in you. You will understand only when you experience 
it. This is the super-human divine power. Very soon you are 
going to witness it. 


I do not trouble anyone and none can trouble Me 


You may have read the news item in a newspaper this 
morning that Swami is not speaking because of students. It is 
sheer nuisance. It was specifically mentioned, very incorrectly, 
that Bangalore students are responsible for Swami desisting 
from speaking. By publishing such a wrong news item, the im- 
age of Bangalore students has been tarnished. 

No student has ever troubled Swami in any way. In fact 
they have been pining for Swami incessantly. The relation 
between me and students is heart to heart, and prompted by 
selfless love. Such wrong information even flashed in the in- 
ternet, so much so that Goldstein, from America, being greatly 
agitated, contacted Prasanthi Nilayam to find out the Truth. He 
was very much relieved to know the truth. Do not believe in 
such false propaganda. I do not trouble anyone and none can 
trouble Me. 

All our students are good. Such good students should not 
be put to disrepute. Unknowingly, they may commit a few 
mistakes, but no one has ever troubled Swami. No one should 
come between the noble heart of Swami and the sacred minds 
of the students. Some of the elders sitting in the verandah are 
indulging in gossip. It is finding its way into the internet. Any- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 88 


one found talking in the verandah should be sent out immedi- 
ately, whosoever it may be. 

All those who give misleading information about what 
Swami tells them in the interview room should also be thrown 
out. I will never call such people for interview again. 

Only those who observe silence are good people. Silence 
fosters purity. Therefore observe silence at all times. It is a 
waste of time if you carry tales about others. What have you 
come here for? Vain gossip causes harm to many. So refrain 
from indulging in it. 


Do not become a slave to technology 


Ignorance is on the rise with the progress of science. Truly 
speaking, science has not matured. Man has become senseless. 
All the trials and tribulations faced in this world are due to the 
so-called development in science and technology. It is not 
technology but it is ‘tricknology’’. Do not become a slave to 
such technology. Uphold truth and righteousness. Cultivate 
love and experience divinity. 

Students! Do not harbor any undesirable thoughts. Do not 
get perturbed by such misinformation campaigns. Swami is 
always with you. He has been showering His love and grace on 
you. You too have immense love for Swami. Attain Swami 
through love. You cannot attain Swami through any other path 
but love. 

Swami has nothing to do with internet. Not only now, even 
in the future also you should not indulge in such wrong activi- 
ties. This ‘disease’ has its roots in cities and is spreading like 
wild fire into villages, polluting the village environment. Vil- 
lages are the epitome of peace and love. Do not spoil the vil- 
lage atmosphere by imitating the city culture. Bliss will prevail 
in the world only when you develop peace and love. Do not 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 89 


give scope for ill feelings and worthless talk. You can even 
reprimand the elders who indulge in mean talk. Tell them to 
behave in a manner that befits their status as elders in the soci- 
ety. They should prove themselves as elders in conduct and not 
by age. Self-respect leads to self-satisfaction, which will in 
turn leads to self-realisation. It is a shame that people who 
come here for self-realisation indulge in something contrary. 

Our relationship is only heart-to-heart and love-to-love, 
nothing else. Swami is love personified. Swami gives impor- 
tance to love and nothing else. Do not give any value to mean 
and meaningless talk. Past is past. From now onward, receive 
the divine love and divine energy emanating from Me and ex- 
perience the bliss derived therefrom. 


15 October 1999 
Prasanthi Nilayam 


Human Values and Service 


O Man, why do you go hither and thither in search 
of God, when He is present in your hridaya itself? 
Serve all and be a recipient of His love. 
There is no greater sadhana than this, 
No greater bliss than this. 
[Telugu Poem] 


Embodiments of Love! Human life is the most sacred in the 
entire creation of God. Daivam maanusha rupena (God incar- 
nates in the form of human being). Humanness is pure, unsul- 
lied, and beyond attributes. Such a sacred human life is being 
polluted with evil desires and thus birth itself is polluted. 
Janthoonam narajanma durlabham (human birth is the rarest 
and the noblest). It was God who created everything in the 
universe, right from the microcosm to macrocosm. In that case, 
why is it that He has attached utmost importance to human 
birth alone? Only man has the capacity to accomplish things 
that no other living being can. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 91 


Why has God created man? One should delve into the inner 
significance of this. Man's life will find fulfillment only when 
he understands the purpose of human birth. Human body is 
given to serve God, not to meet selfish needs. Sareera maa- 
dhyam khalu dharma sadhanam (the purpose of human body is 
to practice dharma). God has gifted human body to serve fel- 
low men, but man has forgotten his primary duty of service to 
others. 


In childhood, man is immersed in playing and frolicking, 
In youth, he succumbs to temptations of cupid. 

In middle age, he spends all his time in amassing wealth. 
In old age, instead of contemplating on God, 

He leads a life of discontentment. 

Unable to give up his bad habits, 

Not having the strength and interest 

To follow the path of devotion, 

He gets caught up in the quagmire of action and reaction 
and ultimately meets his doom. [Telugu Poem] 


This is not the way one should fritter away human life, 
which God has gifted with lots of love and hope. Under all cir- 
cumstances, one should be ready to utilize the slightest oppor- 
tunity that comes his way to serve others. Human life should 
be suffused with idealism, but today's man is leading the life of 
a beast. He does not spare a thought even for a moment to en- 
quire what the purpose of life is. 


O man, think for a while whether 

You have really attained happiness, 
Forgetting God and struggling incessantly 
From dawn to dusk to eke out a livelihood. 
[Telugu Poem] 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 92 


For whose sake are you living? Understand this and you 
will know the purpose of life. Why does God incarnate? He 
incarnates to lead man on the right path. 


Materialisation of 100-year-old gold coin 


In 1899, hundred years ago, 110 carat gold was in exis- 
tence. It was extremely pure and effulgent. Gradually it has 
lost its value and effulgence on account of its association with 
different metals like silver, copper, and brass. Likewise, man at 
the time of birth is essentially pure and sacred, but as he grows 
up, he loses his human values due to his excessive desires and 
association with kith and kin. Such is the sacredness of human 
birth that even Gods would salute him. 

Today, human values have become extinct. Man should 
continue to be as pure as he was at the time of birth. (At this 
juncture Swami materialised a gold coin) It was minted in the 
year 1899. Exactly 100 years have passed since then. Just as 
gold has lost its purity over a period of time, man too has lost 
his human values. Excessive desires are responsible for the de- 
cline in human values. 

Having been born as a human being, you should foster hu- 
man values. This morning, the Chief Minister of Andhra Pra- 
desh met Swami. He too was of the opinion that the country is 
facing hardships due to the absence of human values. There- 
fore, he vowed that he would propagate the Sathya Sai Human 
Values in society. Each and everyone, be it a student, a devo- 
tee, or a spiritual aspirant, should practice human values and 
lead an ideal life. 

The Bhagavad Gita reveals that the universe, which can be 
compared to a gigantic tree, has its origin in the seed of divin- 
ity. Different nations are like different branches of a tree. All 
the living creatures are like fruits borne by the tree. In every 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 93 


species and every creature, there is the seed of divinity. In this 
context, Lord Krishna said, Beejam maam sarva bhutaanam (1 
am the seed in all the living beings). Nations may vary names 
and forms may be different, but the life principle remains the 
same. 

Lord Krishna declared: “Mamaivamso Jeevaloke Jeevab- 
huta Sanathanah (all are the sparks of My Divinity).” But man 
is not prepared to believe this truth. Today man believes re- 
ports of events occurring in distant lands like America and Ja- 
pan, though he does not see them, but he does not believe in 
the Vedic declaration that God comes down in human form. 
This is predominantly due to the fact that he is not treading 
along the path of truth. God will be pleased only when man 
finds fulfillment in life by practicing human values. 


You reap what you sow 


None can escape the consequences of their actions. O man, 
do not build castles in the air. It is not possible to sow a par- 
ticular type of seed and reap a different fruit. You reap what 
you sow. At the time of birth you are born with an invisible 
garland, made up of the consequences of your actions, be it 
good or bad. 

It is the duty of each and every individual to participate in 
social service activities, be it in the village or city. The epic 
Ramayana has stressed the need for service at the individual, 
family, and society levels. Do not be satisfied by merely serv- 
ing your parents. Your life will be sanctified only when you 
serve society also. When you obey the divine command and 
serve Him, not only your life but also those of your parents and 
relations will be redeemed. Before your birth, where is the 
child-parent relationship; before marriage, where is the ques- 
tion of wife and husband relationship? All the worldly rela- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 94 


tions are like passing clouds, only God is with you always. 

You will be wasting your life, if you do not dedicate your- 
selves to the service of mankind. Body is gifted to serve the 
creator and the creation. Service to man is service to God. 
Render service to society with the feeling that God is present 
in one and all. 

Your education will be in vain if it is not utilized for the 
service of the society. O man, why do you feel proud of your 
education, which is but a mere waste if you do not worship 
God and serve society? Worldly education cannot confer di- 
vine grace unless it is dedicated for the welfare of society. The 
education you have received from society must be dedicated to 
the service of society. 


Offer service and receive the love of God 


True service has twin benefits: it makes you blissful and 
gives happiness to others. What is the use of education if it 
does not confer joy on others and bliss on you? 

Service is the life breath of the Sathya Sai Organization. 
Remember the truth that you are born to serve society. Make 
no distinction whatsoever in rendering service. Serve your par- 
ents, brothers, friends, and even beggars alike. Divine grace 
will flow in abundance only when you serve with the spirit of 
humility and equality. 

Service is the easiest path to attain divine grace. Offer 
service and receive the love of God. Love and service are like 
two wings by which man can soar to higher levels of con- 
sciousness. If you have the spirit of love and service, divine 
grace will follow you like a shadow wherever you may be, be 
it in the forest or in the sky, village or city, river or mountain 
cliff. 

God has created man in His own image so that his conduct 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 95 


should be in consonance with His command. You should not 
cause harm to anyone, for God exists in all. Always speak with 
a smile on your lips. You cannot always oblige, but you can 
always speak obligingly. 


Be proud that you are born in this sacred land 
Embodiments of Love! 


Understand the pristine purity of Bharat (India). The Hi- 
malayan mountains form the boundary in the northern part. 
Hima is that which is pure; achala is that which is steady. So, 
Himachala stands for purity and steadiness. The three rivers 
Ganga, Yamuna, and Saraswathi symbolise the paths of work, 
worship, and wisdom, respectively. The sacred scriptures like 
the Bhagavad Gita and the Upanishads make the hearts of 
Bharatiyas (Indians) blossom forth with their teachings. Bha 
means light and effulgence. So Bharat is the country that radi- 
ates light to the rest of the world. 

No country is more sacred than Bharat. Words are inade- 
quate to describe the glory of Bharat and the fortune of those 
who are born in this sacred land. Having been born as Bharati- 
yas, there can be no greater misfortune than to lament that you 
are poor, weak, and helpless. You need not feel sorry if you 
have not acquired education or money. Be proud that you are 
born in this sacred land. To be called a Bharatiya is in itself a 
great qualification. The country is your mother; the culture, 
your father. You will become orphans if you forsake your 
motherland and its culture. He is a living corpse who does not 
have love for his motherland and its culture. Rama declared, 
Janani janma bhoomishcha swargadapi gareeyasi (there is no 
heaven greater than one’s own mother and motherland). 

Students! What is the use of acquiring various degrees like 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 96 


BA and MBA if you lead the life of a black sheep? You are 
Bharatiyas; that is your greatest qualification. Live up to it. 
Who is a 'Hindu'? H stands for Humility, I for Individuality, N 
for Nationality, D for Divinity and U for Unity. He is a true 
Hindu who is endowed with these five sacred qualities. It is 
rather surprising to Me that people, having been born in this 
sacred land, crave to go abroad in search of greener pastures. 
One should serve one’s own motherland. 


Do no forget the sacred Indian culture 


Once there was a Vedic scholar who was hesitant to send 
his son abroad, fearing that he might forsake Indian culture and 
take to Western culture. On the insistence of his son, he reluc- 
tantly agreed to send him abroad only on the condition that he 
would not give up the study of the Vedas. He extracted a 
promise from his son that he would continue the study of the 
Vedas and would contemplate on God always. But the son 
failed to keep up his word. Once he reached abroad, he forgot 
all the Vedas he studied and got absorbed in western culture. 
He would always lie to his father whenever called, saying that 
he was thinking of God and studying the Vedas. Four years 
passed, but he was in no mood to return home. On several oc- 
casions, the father asked him to come back, but the son did not 
pay heed. The father, as a last resort, sent a telegram that his 
mother was seriously ill. Immediately, the son rushed home 
and was received at the airport by his father, who took him to 
the temple of the Goddess en route home, to offer their obei- 
sance. The father told the son to offer salutations to the God- 
dess, but the son did not know what it meant as he had forgot- 
ten Indian culture altogether. As they entered the temple, the 
son greeted the Goddess, “Hello madam, how are you?” The 
father became furious with his son and asked him to get out. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 97 


This is how people change their lifestyle once they go abroad, 
forgetting the sacred Bharatiya culture. 

For the past 60 years, the overseas devotees have been re- 
questing Swami to come to their respective countries. On many 
occasions, they brought special planes. Even now they have 
chalked out a program for Swami to make a world tour. But I 
have no such desires. That which is not present in Bharat is not 
present anywhere else. 

What is there to see in a foreign land! Instead, try to have 
the vision of your own Self. Stop questioning others, “who are 
you?” Ask yourself, “who am I?” You will certainly get the 
right answer. 

Today many students are going abroad to amass riches. 
Even some of the parents are encouraging their children to go 
abroad. I do not say that you should not go abroad. If you want 
to see foreign lands, you can always do so. But wherever you 
are, uphold your culture. You should crave divine love, not 
money. 

Embodiments of Divine Love! Students Participate in serv- 
ice activities and give joy to your fellowmen. This is the es- 
sence of Indian culture. Keeping this sacred culture in view, 
serve your motherland. Do not give scope for mean desires. If 
you lead the sacred life of a true Bharatiya, you can redeem 
not only your life but also the lives of your kith and kin. Fill 
your heart with pure feelings and try to experience the ultimate 
bliss, Brahmananda. Tomorrow I shall teach you more about 
Brahmananda. 


16 October 1999 
Prasanthi Nilayam 


10 


Let life be fruitful and meaningful 


Brahmanandam Paramasukhadam 

Kevalam Jnanarnurthim 

Dvandvaatheetham Gaganasadrusam 
Tathwamasyaadhi Lakshyam 

Ekam Nithyam Vimalam Achalam 

Sarvadhee Saakshibhutam 

Bhaavaatheetham Trigunarahitham Sadgurum 


Embodiments of Love! 

Man should cultivate noble qualities in order to understand 
the secrets and the inner meanings of the Vedas. The terms 
used in the Vedas transcend the barriers of time and space. 

Consider the word Brahmanandam. It means eternal bliss. 
Such a word cannot be understood by comparison with the joy 
derived from materialistic pleasures (lokaananda). Brahma is 
derived from the root word brihat, meaning vastness. Brah- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 99 


manandam is that which is immutable. It is the true and infinite 
bliss. It can also be termed as Advaitananda, meaning the bliss 
that results from the experience of oneness. It can also be de- 
scribed as Nirgunaananda and Niraakaarananda (bliss that 
transcends form and attributes). 

Paramasukhadam means supreme happiness. It has noth- 
ing to do with the worldly happiness and sensual pleasures. It 
is identical with the experience of the eternal bliss. 

Kevalam means that which transcends the limitations of 
time, space, and circumstances. 

Jnanamurthim means one of wisdom. Here, jnana refers to 
experience of oneness. It transcends body, mind, and intellect. 
Advaita darshanam jnanam (experience of non-duality is true 
wisdom). How can man comprehend this incomparable wis- 
dom? The Vedas contain many such words suffused with sa- 
cred inner meaning. Only Divinity, which is attributeless, an- 
cient, eternal, ever new, pure, and unsullied, can explain the 
inner meanings of the Vedic principles. 

Dvandvaatheetham refers to that which transcends all du- 
alities such as happiness and sorrow, good and bad, merit and 
sin, etc. 

Trigunarahitham refers to that which transcends the three 
attributes: sathwa (serenity, purity), rajas (passion), and tha- 
mas (dullness, lethargy). Attributes are associated with form. 
So, the formless One has no attributes. The Vedas contain four 
Mahavaakyaas: Prajnanam Brahma (knowledge is Brahman), 
Ayamatma Brahma (This Atma is Brahman), Tath Thwam Asi 
(That Thou Art) and Aham Brahmasmi (I am Brahman). The 
attributeless principle transcends even these four declarations. 

Ekam nithyam refers to that which is eternal and without a 
second. The Vedas proclaim Ekam eva adviteeyam Brahma 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 100 


(Divinity is one without a second). Om ithyekaaksharam 
Brahma (the single syllable Om is Brahman). 

Vimalam achalam refers to that which is pure and steady. 
In this universe, the celestial bodies such as the sun, the moon, 
and the planets are constantly on the move. Modern students 
are aware of this —the cinema reel moves rapidly at the rate of 
16 films per second, but the rate at which mind moves cannot 
be estimated. Such a wavering mind cannot comprehend 

Divinity, which is steady, changeless, and attributeless, is 
the embodiment of supreme bliss and happiness. That is the 
reason the ancient sages and seers used to pray, “Salutations to 
the One who is the embodiment of supreme happiness.” The 
happiness related to the body and mind is no happiness at all. 
Inward (nivritti) happiness is true happiness. 


Only Divinity can confer the eternal bliss 


It is extremely difficult to understand the divine principle. 
Faith is very essential to experience divinity. Where there is 
faith, there is love. Where there is love, there is peace. Where 
there is peace, there is truth. Where there is truth, there is Di- 
vinity. Where there is Divinity, there is bliss. So, only Divinity 
can confer the eternal bliss. 

Worldly happiness is momentary. In this context, Adi 
Sankara said, Maa kuru dhana jana yauvana garyam, harathi 
nimeshaath kaalah sarvam (do not be proud of youth, money, 
and progeny. They are but momentary). Worldly happiness is 
delusive and is related to the five elements and five senses. It 
corresponds to the outward (pravritti) path. 

Human body is made up of five sheaths: annamaya, 
pranamaya, manomaya, vijnanamaya, and anandamaya ko- 
shas. This body is annamaya kosha (food sheath). It is the 
pranamaya kosha (life sheath) that makes the body move. Be- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 101 


yond the pranamaya kosha, there exists manomaya kosha 
(mind sheath). 

Man is able to investigate only these three sheaths; he is 
not able to comprehend vijnanamaya (wisdom sheath) and 
anandamaya koshas (bliss sheath), the reason being that man is 
bound by the senses. 


The senses cannot understand ultimate Truth 


It is said, buddhi graahyam atheendriyam, the senses can- 
not understand the ultimate Truth. However intelligent one 
may be, one cannot understand the Truth unless one treads 
along the inward path. The same body exists in all three states: 
waking, dream, and deep sleep, but what you see in one state 
cannot be seen in the other, because they correspond to the 
outward path. You have to give up the outward path and take 
to inward path to understand the Truth. 

When this body was seven years old, dreadful and conta- 
gious diseases like cholera and plague were rampant in this 
tiny hamlet of Puttaparthi. Fear-stricken, the parents would not 
allow their children to go out of the house. But the children, 
out of their love for Me, would come to Me without even tell- 
ing their parents. All those children were of the age group of 
six to eight. 

One day, nearly 12 boys gathered around Me and said in a 
anxious tone “Raju, we came to know that cholera and plague 
are rampant in our village. It seems they are dangerous and fa- 
tal. What would be our fate?” 

I told them, “The body has to perish one day or the other, 
whatever may be the precautions you take. So, do not be afraid 
of death. Contemplate on God and take care that the diseases 
do not afflict you.” 

The boys asked Me as which form of God they should 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 102 


contemplate on. They were all very innocent. In those days this 
was a very small village with a population of 106. They had no 
idea as to which form of God they should worship. 


How Swami drove away the diseases 


I told them to light a lamp, place it in the bazaar at 6 o' 
clock in the evening, and do bhajans. They did not know what 
bhajans to sing. Then I composed a few bhajans for them. I 
told them, “We need not search for God outside. He is within 
us. Let us go around the village chanting the name of Ranga, 
donning ochre robes and anklets, playing the cymbals in our 
hands, and getting rid of the evil qualities of anger and desire.” 

In those days, after 5 o'clock in the evening, no one dared 
to go beyond the Sathyamma temple, because they considered 
it to be far off from the village and believed that the area be- 
yond the temple limits was haunted. 

I infused confidence in them, saying there are no ghosts or 
devils and advised them to drive away the diseases of cholera 
and plague by chanting the name of God. We wore anklets and 
walked up to the riverbed of Chithravathi playing the cymbals 
and singing bhajans. It was the divine name that eradicated 
diseases of cholera and plague for good within a short span of 
three days. 

The parents brought the children to Me and expressed their 
gratitude for having saved them from the epidemic. They said, 
“Raju, we are indebted to You for having instilled courage and 
confidence in our children. We don’t want them to attend 
school, instead they will come to You. Kindly impart the edu- 
cation necessary for their welfare.” 

Everyday at 6 o' clock in the evening, they would assemble 
at My residence, after having their dinner, for tuition. They 
used to address Me as “tuition master”. Their parents wanted 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 103 


to offer 3 paise per month as guru dakshina, which I flatly re- 
fused. The children used to come to Me every evening to learn 
numeric tables and alphabets. Taking this as a pretext, I used to 
impart value-oriented education also. I used to advice them to 
keep away from bad company and not to indulge in criticism 
and slander. Cultivate good habits and good qualities. Respect 
your parents and obey their commands. Since then, there was 
marked improvement in their behavior and outlook. 


Swami’s skills in composing bhajans 


On moonlit nights, we used to go to the Chithravathi River 
at 6 o’clock in the evening and return only at 11 in the night. 
Few elders also would accompany us. They used to pass time 
by playing games like kabaddi, but the children were not inter- 
ested in joining them. In spite of My repeated entreaties, they 
would not participate in any of these pastimes. They were 
more interested in bhajans and being around Me. They would 
request Me to lead bhajans. Thus we used to spend our time in 
Chithravathi singing bhajans. 

The children used to plead with Me to compose new bha- 
jans and tunes. They used to extol My composing capabilities. 
I used to ask them to express their desires, if any, but not 
praise Me. 

One day a pharmacist by name Kotte Subbanna came to 
Puttaparthi from Kamalapuram. He had heard a great deal 
about My composing capabilities and had come to request Me 
to write a song that would serve as an advertisement for his 
new medicine. He came to Subbamma and enquired about Me. 
She told him, “I know Raju very well. He is the only good boy 
in the entire village. He is one of good character, behavior and 
conduct. Not merely that, He imparts good teachings to oth- 


” 


ers. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 104 


One day, Subbamma invited Kotte Subbanna for lunch. 
During the lunch, he expressed doubts regarding My compos- 
ing skills. He said it was difficult for him to believe that a tiny 
tot like Me could write good poetry that would sell his new 
medicine in the market. Consequently, I sent him away saying, 
better that he goes to some person whose composing skills he 
had faith in. 

I had immense love for the children. Keshanna, Ranganna, 
Subbanna, and Ramanna were among the children whom I 
used to take to the riverbed every evening. Words are inade- 
quate to describe their innocence, purity and love for Me. A 
seven year-old boy used to request Me to lie down for a while 
keeping My head on his lap saying, I looked very tired and 
needed some rest. Seeing this other children also wanted to 
have the privilege of keeping My head on their laps. 

Then they thought of a plan so that all would get an equal 
chance. It was decided that each boy would take turns to keep 
My head on his lap for a count of one to fifty. They missed no 
opportunity to serve Me and I used to satisfy all of them. 


Swami writes a poem for advertising medicine 


One day, Kotte Subbanna came to Me again and said, 
“Raju, all these children are ready to obey your command. 
They all sing well and have sweet voice. Please write a few 
songs to advertise my new medicine and ask these children to 
go around the village singing them. I am prepared to pay re- 
muneration for this.” 

I told him, “I do not like this business of give and take. 
These children also do not approve of this. Anyway tell Me 
exactly what your medicine is. I will compose a song accord- 
ingly.” 

He explained that the name of the medicine was Bala 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 105 


Bhaskara and that it could cure many types of ailments. I com- 
posed a beautiful song in Telugu on the efficacy of the medi- 
cine: 


O children, come here, a new medicine, 

Bala Bhaskara, has arrived in the market. 

It is a wonderful remedy for various ailments like 
Stomach ache, indigestion, malnutrition, 

and swelling of legs and hands. 

It is available in the shop of Kotte Subbanna. 

It is a very good tonic 

prepared by Pandit Sri Gopalacharya. 


Kotte Subbanna was very much pleased with the poem and 
got it written in big sheets of paper for advertisement. As his 
luck would have it, I was taken to Kamalapuram for studying 
5th and 6th classes. Kotte Subbanna made maximum use of 
My stay in Kamalapuram for the advertisement of his medi- 
cines. 


Anjenya stops Swami’s pradakshina of the temple 


Right from early days I have been a source of inspiration 
for the young children. I would exhort them to desist from 
hurting others and discharge their duties sincerely. During the 
month of Magha, I used to take the children to the temple of 
Anjaneya at 4 o'clock in the morning. Some of the children 
were so young that they would not get up at that early hour. 
So, I would carry them to the nearby pond, give them a bath, 
and take them to the temple. I would sit at the temple, while 
the children would do pradakshina (circumambulation). 

One day they insisted that I too should join them in cir- 
cumambulating the temple. I finally yielded to their pressure 
and started circumambulating the temple. Believe it or not, 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 106 


Anjaneya himself came and stopped Me from going round the 
temple saying, “O Lord! It is I who should circumambulate 
you. You should not do this.” But the children mistook An- 
janeya for an ordinary monkey. I told them that Anjaneya him- 
self came and would not allow Me to circumambulate the tem- 
ple. 

After this incident, there was a great transformation in the 
hearts of the children. They went around the village telling 
people what they witnessed at the Anjaneya temple. This news 
reached Karnam Subbamma also. 

Next day, she invited Me to her house saying, “Raju, today 
I have prepared dosas, you should come and partake of them.” 
In those days food items like idli and dosas were considered to 
be rich man’s food. I told Subbamma that it is not My nature to 
eat alone leaving so many other children. Then Subbama pre- 
pared dosas for all the children. 


The need for sathwic food 


The villagers had lot of reverence for Me. It is because of 
Sathya Sai Baba that the people of Puttaparthi started thinking 
of God for the first time in their lives. It gradually spread to the 
other villages, too. I used to exhort the villagers to refrain from 
partaking of non-vegetarian food, consuming liquor, and 
smoking. I used to stress on the need for sathwic food. 

During the festival of Ekadasi, it was the practice to hold 
bullock cart races on the riverbed of Chithravathi. They used to 
whip the bullocks to make them run faster. I would tell the 
children to insist upon their fathers to stop whipping the bul- 
locks. Not only now, even in those days I taught the principle 
of nonviolence. 

Cockfights were quite common in villages those days. 
They used to tie small knives to the legs of cocks and make 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 107 


them fight with each other till one of them died. In the process, 
the other cock would get injured badly. I told them that one 
should have competition in doing good deeds, not in such cruel 
acts. 


One who always does good will never be put to disrepute 


One day the father of this body, Pedda Venkama Raju, 
chided Me for interfering in the affairs of the village. He said 
that the elders knew better and I should not cross My limits. I 
told him that I could not tolerate killing or ill-treating animals. 

Since he could not convince Me, he directed the mother of 
this body to advise Me. At the time of serving food, she would 
tell Me, “Sathya, you should not do things that would displease 
your father. If you do not listen to him, you will earn a bad 
name in the village.” 

I argued with her saying I was doing only good and was 
not bothered about what others said. I emphasized that one 
who always does good will never be put to disrepute. Kon- 
dama Raju, the grandfather of this physical body, also sup- 
ported My argument. He called the villagers and told them that 
what I was doing was good for the village. He too advised 
them to refrain from violence and gambling. He cautioned 
them that lack of unity would lead to unrest in the village. Be- 
cause of this kind of teachings, some people developed hatred 
toward Me. 

I had to go to Bukkapatnam by 7 a.m. to attend the school. 
Teachers were very affectionate toward Me. Every teacher 
would first ask as he entered the classroom, “Has Raju come?” 

Do you realize what I was like in those days? Ours was a 
poor family. Like children of these days, I did not have dozens 
of sets of dresses. I just had one pair of shirt and shorts. As 
soon as I returned from school I would take off My clothes, 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 108 


wash them and put them up to dry and wear a towel round My 
waist. This way I would make-do with one pair of dress for a 
whole year. 


Peace is My nature; love is My very nature 


When questions were put to Me at school, I would always 
answer well. Most other students were not good at answering 
questions. My fellow classmates were quite grown up —in 
fact, some of them were almost 25 years of age and most of 
them would be wearing dhotis. I was the youngest in the class. 

One day, when I answered a question well, Mahboob Khan 
asked Me to slap the other dull students. I would have to climb 
on to the desk to reach their cheeks. I used to touch them gen- 
tly on their cheeks. 

The teacher then chided Me, “Have I asked you to apply 
turmeric on their faces? I will show how!” Saying this, he gave 
a few hard slaps. 

As I was returning to Puttaparthi, some of the students 
threw Me down on the sands of the river and dragged me along 
by my legs. They tore off My shirt and threw Me into the 
slush. All through this torture I remained calm. Peace is My 
nature. Love is My very nature. Peace is the form of Swami. 
Bliss is My resolve. 

After reaching the Hanuman temple I washed My clothes 
and put them on again. Students may well imagine My state 
then. If there is a tear in My shirt, there was not even a safety 
pin available to hold the cloth together. Nor had I any money 
to buy it. I had no desire to request anyone also. I do not ask 
for anything from anybody. This resolve I have been upholding 
from that day to this day. 

I went to Sathyamma temple and took out a thorn from a 
cactus and used it as a pin to mend the tear on my shirt. If one 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 109 


remains steadfast in his true resolve, anything can be achieved. 

Once, Subbamma told Me, “Raju, you are becoming weak. 
Eat well and grow strong.” My friends would bring everything 
prepared in their house for Me. But I used to tell them, “See, in 
your houses meat or fish is cooked and eaten. Please don't 
bring anything from such houses.” 

This way, I brought down non-vegetarianism in Puttapar- 
thi. In the same manner I had prevented cruelty to animals in 
the form of cockfights and cart races and also prevented the 
gambling habit. 


We protect truth and truth protects us 


Once, some people inimical to Me set fire to the room I 
was sleeping in. Some 10 children of the age of 6-9 years were 
sleeping outside in the verandah. The miscreants had locked 
My room from outside and set fire to the roof. The children 
were shouting loudly, “Raju! Raju!” 

I peeped out through the small window smilingly and said, 
“Don't be afraid. Dharma eva hato hanti, dharmo rakshati rak- 
shitah (Righteousness, when destroyed, destroys; righteous- 
ness when protected, protects).” We protect truth and truth 
protects us. Have firm faith in this precept. 

The children closed their eyes and chanted “Raju! Raju!” 
as if it were a mantra. Since the roof was made of hay, there 
was a big conflagration. Suddenly there was a cloudburst, and 
the fire was totally put out. The downpour was just over that 
small hut and nowhere else. 

The joy of the children was indescribable. “Raju, Raju... 
What a great miracle?” They were shouting, “We cannot live 
without you.” 

I called them in and gave them some guavas and bananas. 
They asked Me, wherefrom I got these fruits. I told then, “Why 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 110 


do you bother? Eat what is given.” Whether it is a mansion or a 
wayside shelter what does it matter, it is enough if you get 
sleep. Likewise, it is enough if your stomach is full. 


Subbamma’s love for Swami 


Subbamma came to know of the episode next day. Sub- 
bamma was a great soul. Swami was her very life. She set 
afoot a detailed search to find the culprits. They were caught. 
She ordered that they should be banished from the village. The 
entire property of the village belonged to her. She was very 
wealthy. All lands belonged to her. So she ordered them to get 
out of her lands. 

Then I caught hold of her hands. I told her, “Please don't 
harm them because of Me. Knowingly or unknowingly, they 
have committed a mistake. Please forgive them. Please don't 
drive them away.” 

When she told them this, all those children came to Swami 
and carried Him over their shoulders. Subbanna, Ramanna, etc. 
were very proud people. They carried Me on their shoulders 
saying, “You must have been some great person in your earlier 
birth. Otherwise you cannot have such nobleness in you. Be- 
cause of you, gradually this village is going to attain great 
fame” 

Subbamma said, “Don't mistake Him for a small boy. His 
power is like a lightning strike, how can you understand His 
true nature?” From that day, she did not allow Me to go out of 
her house. I stayed in her house and went to school from there 
itself. She was a great lady. She was sixty years old then. She 
was always looking for Me, asking, “Is Raju there? Is Raju 
there?” She would sleep only after seeing Me safe. She was 
trying to protect Me from the wicked people in the village. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 111 


Attempt on Swami’s life by poisoning food 


One day, a brahmin lady came. She requested Subbamma 
to send Raju to her house for taking snacks in her house. Sub- 
bamma was not very happy at the proposition. She was suspi- 
cious and thought that there was some evil intention behind the 
invitation. She refused and told Me, “Raju don't go anywhere 
without my consent.” 

“Subbamma! Why do you want to thwart her desire?” 

She replied, “There is some wicked purpose behind her in- 
vitation.” 

But I persisted and said, “I must fulfil her request.” 

I went there. She had made some vadas. They were poi- 
soned. I ate them. Within five minutes My entire blood stream 
had turned blue. Subbamma came to know of this and came 
running looking for Me. When she found Me, I told her, “Don't 
worry, what they wanted, they have done. I can look after My- 
self.” I asked Subbamma to give Me a tumbler of water with 
her own hands. As soon as I took that water, the blueness van- 
ished. 

Subbamma's anger had reached its limits. She said, “Such 
women will ruin the reputation of Puttaparthi. There is no 
room for such people in this village. Only righteous and good 
natured people should live here.” 

She called the mothers of Swami's companions and told 
them, “These children are not yours. They are all mine. They 
should be with Raju all the time. They should spend every 
moment of their life with Raju.” 

Till recently they were alive. You all may know Bukkapat- 
nam Sathyanarayana, he was one of them and is still with us 
here. He was My classmate in the 6th class. All these children 
would come to Swami. It is hard to describe their unsullied af- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 112 


fection, devotion and attachment to Swami. The Kali Yuga has 
poisoned the minds of children. 

Those days, when Swami stretched Himself to sleep, there 
was competition between them to take His head on their laps. 
They would say, “Raju, since you slept on my lap, there is no 
pain or distress in my body and there is some kind of joy fill- 
ing me.” I wonder if the children of today will have the same 
sentiments. 


I ask for nothing; I only give and give 


Children's minds are now filled with unrighteous feelings. 
Yad bhavam tad bhavati (as the state of mind, so is the state of 
person). Children of those days were very pure and innocent. 
Swami resolved then to spread these qualities to the villagers 
for their own good. Mere bhajan or chanting “Rama, Govinda” 
is not great. 

Cultivate good habits. One should develop exemplary 
qualities and earn a good name. Swami is happy when students 
acquire the reputation of good character. The children’s be- 
havior should be good right from the start. That is why I say, 
“Start early, drive slowly and reach safely.” If you develop sa- 
cred habits from early age you grow into an exemplary human. 

Even today, those who were with Me are there as shining 
examples in the villages. When Swami is returning from Ban- 
galore, all along the way they offer their salutations, saying 
“Swami! Swami!” with great joy. Those who have followed 
Me by car know how these people bring pot-fulls of water and 
wash the roads. They say, “Swami, you have brought water to 
us. We have to offer it back to You only.” 

If I just ask them, “how are you?” they are transported with 
bliss. It is for this purpose of transformation that I have not ac- 
cumulated any money, not a paisa. I have no property worth 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 113 


even a paisa. My entire wealth is My students. I ask for noth- 
ing. I only give and give. There is no limit to Swami’s giving. 
The devotees must be made happy by giving something. 
Swami’s sole concern is the welfare of His devotees. No one 
needs worry about My welfare. My welfare is in My hands. 
Therefore, if one leads his life without departing from Truth 
and Righteousness, life will be fruitful and meaningful. 


17 October 1999 
Prasanthi Nilayam 


Calming the mental agitation that surges like 
waves, leveling the swirls and whirls of likes, dis- 
likes, love, hate, sorrow, joy, hope, and despair, 
santhi (peace) is earned and maintained without 
disturbance. Santhi is of the nature of the Atman. 
The Atman is imperishable. It does not die, like the 
body and mind. It is universal, it is subtle, and its 
very nature is knowledge. So, santhi also partakes 
of these characteristics. 

— Baba 


11 


Devotion — the supreme yagna 


Like a stream of water that flows down from the hills, 

Courage emerges from the heart of a person who 
trusts in God 

O man, how do you expect to attain Divinity without 
understanding and experiencing the principle of 
love, 

Which is the very form of God? 

[Telugu Poem] 


Since time immemorial, in this sacred land of Bharat (In- 
dia), people experienced bliss in following the Vedic traditions 
and performing rituals and sacrifices. In the Vedic tradition, 
four types of worship have been prescribed. They are: Sath- 
yavathi Angavathi, Anyavathi and Nidhaanavathi. 

Sathyavathi proclaims that Divinity pervades the entire 
cosmos, just as sweetness is present in every drop of syrup and 
butter in every drop of milk. The sages of yore had the vision 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 115 


of Divinity in all the beings and in all the forms. Just as the 
screen is the basis for the pictures projected on it, Divinity is 
the fundamental basis for the entire creation but is itself unno- 
ticed. The screen permeates all the pictures projected on it; 
likewise, Divinity pervades the entire creation. 


God is the embodiment of truth 


Hence the Sathyavathi mode of worship is based on the 
omnipresence of Divinity. It demonstrates unity in diversity. It 
echoes the Vedic dictum: Ekam sath viprah bahudha vadanthi 
(God is one, but scholars refer to Him by many names). 

God is the embodiment of truth. That is why the ancient 
rishis (sages) extolled him as Sathya Swarupa. Trikalaba- 
dhyam Sathyam (Truth is changeless in all the three periods of 
time). Such truth shines forth in everybody as love. When you 
fill your heart with love, you will become love personified. 

Angavathi refers to the worship of the five elements 
—earth, water, fire, air, and ether— considering them as mani- 
festations of the Divine. The earth bears the burden of mighty 
mountains, vast oceans, dense forests, villages, towns, and cit- 
ies. Likewise, the remaining four elements are also responsible 
for the sustenance of creation. The Bharatiyas (Indians) extol 
earth as Bhudevi (mother earth), water as Gangadevi (goddess 
of water), fire as Agnideva (god of fire), and air as Vayudeva 
(god of wind) and offer their salutations to them. 

Anyavathi refers to picturing the many faceted Divinity in 
various names and forms and worshipping them. For example 
Siva is described as Pinakapani (wielder of the bow Pinaka) 
and Rama is described as Kodandapani (wielder of the bow 
Kondanda). 

Nidhanavathi represents the nine paths of devotion, namely 
sravanam (listening), kirtanam (singing), vishnusmaranam 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 116 


(contemplating on the Lord), padasevanam (service to the Lo- 
tus Feet), vandanam (salutation), archanam (worship), dasyam 
(to be a servant of the Lord), sneham (friendship), and At- 
manivedanam (Self surrender). The ancient sages and seers 
attained supreme bliss by following these nine paths of devo- 
tion. 


Only through total love can one please the Divine 


Once upon a time in Italy, there lived a person by name 
Anthony. He used to earn his livelihood by making violins, but 
being a perfectionist as he was, he used to take one full year to 
make a violin. His friends chided him saying, “O mad man, 
how do you expect to eke out your livelihood if you spend a 
whole year to make one violin?” 

Anthony replied, “God is the embodiment of perfection. 
Whatever He does is absolutely perfect. He will be pleased 
only when we discharge our duty in the most perfect manner. 
All my work will be a utter waste, if God is not satisfied.” 

In this context, the Vedas declare: 


Poornamadah Poornamidam 
Poornaath Poomamudachyathe 
Poornasya Poornamaadaaya 
Poornameva Vasishyathe 


The perfect whole is the basis. All that is here is the perfect 
whole. The whole emanates from the whole. When the whole 
is separated from the whole the perfect wholeness remains per- 
fect as wholeness. 

Only through total love can one please Divinity. Perfection 
arises out of love. There is nothing greater than love. No bene- 
fit accrues from chanting various names of the Lord without 
the spring of love in the heart. It is enough even if one name is 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 117 


chanted wholeheartedly and with a feeling of love. All your 
work must be totally dedicated to God. It should be done with 
total love and pure heart. This is the essence of Sathyavathi 
mode of worship. 


God values quality, not quantity 


Anthony’s violins were very famous and highly valuable. 
The reason is that he used to make them with sacred feelings 
and total devotion. He never felt that he was wasting his time. 
He always had the feeling that he was sanctifying his time by 
doing his work perfectly and thus pleasing God. 

You should follow the ideal of Anthony. It is quality that 
God values, not quantity. You may perform narayana seva 
(feeding the poor) on a large scale, but without purity of heart, 
you cannot please God. God will be pleased even with a mor- 
sel of food offered with sacred feelings. All that you do with 
purity of heart will find fulfillment. Do your work properly and 
perfectly, no matter even if more time is spent in the process. 
But do not be in haste and do a halfhearted work. 

Since ancient times various types of yagnas (sacrifices) 
have been performed in this sacred land of Bharat. Yagno vai 
Vishnuhu (yagna is the very form of Vishnu). Some people are 
under the mistaken notion that they can please God by offering 
highly valuable items. What one has to offer God is the pure 
heart. Yad bhavam tad bhavati (as the feeling, so is the result). 
If you are aspiring for good results, offer only good feelings to 
God. There should be perfect harmony in your thought, word, 
and deed. Manasyekam vachasyekam karmanyekarn mahat- 
manam (he is a noble soul whose thought, word, and deed are 
in perfect harmony). Adveshta sarva bhootanam (Do not hate 
anybody). 

On November 24, 1926, Aurobindo broke his prolonged 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 118 


silence only to declare that God had incarnated the previous 
day. After making this significant statement, he continued with 
his vow of silence. Divinity can be recognized only by the pure 
hearted. 


God is the Veda Purusha 


Once, during the performance of a yagna (sacrifice), an in- 
dividual criticized the Vedic priests saying that they were 
wasting the valuable ghee by pouring it into the sacrificial fire. 
A Vedic scholar by name Aamnaya Vachaspathi gave a fitting 
reply thus, “You do not call it a waste if a farmer sows four 
bags of paddy in his field because after a few months he will 
reap 40 bags of rice. Similar is the case with yagna too. The 
sacred smoke arising from the sacrificial fire, fully charged 
with the divine name and the sacred Vedic mantras, purifies 
the pollution in the atmosphere. A program that is broadcast by 
the Delhi Radio Station can be heard throughout the country. 
The presence of electric waves in the atmosphere is responsi- 
ble for this. Likewise, the Vedic mantras chanted by the priests 
will spread all over.” 

The purpose of the Veda Purusha Sapthaha Yagna is to 
attain truth. God is the Veda Purusha. This yagna is performed 
for seven days. Seven is an auspicious number, for it corre- 
sponds to the number of rishis (saptha rishis), oceans (saptha 
samudras), colors (saptha varnas) and sounds (saptha swaras). 

Valmiki, before he became a great sage, was known as 
Ratnakara. He was a hunter and used to rob the wayfarers of 
their belongings. One day, he came across the saptha rishis, 
who took pity on him and wanted to light the lamp of wisdom 
in him. They urged him to give up his wicked actions. Ratna- 
kara said he could not do so, since it was the only way to feed 
his wife and children. Then the saptha rishis asked him to find 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 119 


out from his wife and children whether they were prepared to 
share the sin he committed for their sake. Ratnakara went 
home and asked his wife and children, “Are you prepared to 
share my sin just as you share my booty every day?” They re- 
plied in the negative. His wife said that he was responsible for 
the merit or sin he committed. 

This incident opened his eyes. He went back to the saptha 
rishis, fell at their feet, and prayed for guidance. They told him 
to contemplate on Lord Rama and chant His incessantly. Rat- 
nakara did accordingly, and consequently, his face shone with 
the divine effulgence of Lord Rama. Your thoughts play a vital 
role in shaping your personality. 


God’s grace will certainly alleviate your suffering 


Embodiments of Love! One who thinks of God constantly 
will never be put to hardships. You may argue that you con- 
tinue to suffer though you think of God all the time. How can 
you say that thinking of God has not helped you at all? It cer- 
tainly would have mitigated your suffering without your 
knowledge. God's grace will certainly alleviate your suffering. 
By chanting of the divine name, even mountains of sin will 
vanish like mist into thin air. Sarvada Sarvakaleshu Sarvathra 
Harichinthanam, you should think of God at all places, at all 
times, and under all circumstances with pure love and total 
faith. Your prayers will be answered only when there is sin- 
cerity in you. 

When I returned to Puttaparthi from Uravakonda, two per- 
sons, Subbaiah Shetty and Kodanda Shetty, came from Anan- 
tapur. One of them was finding it difficult to get an alliance for 
his daughter. He said, “Sathya Sai Baba, I will believe that you 
are God only if I can find a suitable alliance for my daughter 
soon. I will build chitikelameda (‘snapping mansion’) for You 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 120 


if my daughter gets married within this month.” Everyone was 
curious to know as to what that would be. 

His daughter got married within the same month. He came 
to the Old Mandir (temple) with a plate containing a coconut 
and some flowers. He said, “Swami, you fulfilled my desire. 
Now I have to keep up my word. Please permit me to build a 
chitikelameda for you.” Many others were watching with curi- 
osity. Even Subbamma came there thinking that he was going 
to give a big mansion for Swami. I very well knew what he 
was up to. He gave Aarati and asked, “Swami, will you permit 
me to build chitikelameda now?” 

In order to amuse the onlookers, “I said OK, go ahead.” 

He started snapping his fingers around Me, saying, “This is 
the first wall, this is the second wall, this is the roof,” so on 
and so forth. In the end he said, “this is God,” fell at My feet, 
and broke the coconut. Likewise, some people resort to mean 
strategies and try to cheat even God! They certainly have to 
face the consequences of their actions. 


The creation of God is most sacred and wonderful 


God neither favors nor hates anybody. Whatever one expe- 
riences is the result of one’s own actions. In this context, one 
devotee prayed to God thus, “O God, you appeared as Yama to 
Kamsa, who had developed hatred toward You. On the other 
hand, you appeared as Lord Narayana to Prahlada, who had 
immense faith in You, whereas you appeared as God of Death 
to Hiranyakasipu, who opposed you. To Vibhishana, who be- 
lieved in you, you appeared as Rama. But to Ravana, who de- 
fied you, you became Yama.” 

So, Yama and Rama are one and the same. Depending on 
the feelings, one saw Him as Rama, etc. Purandaradasa once 
said, “Who planted the tree on the mountain top and watered 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 12k 


it? Who gave the red beak to the green parrot? Who gave the 
wonderful colors to the feathers of the peacock and to the 
flowers of the entire world? Everything is God's creation.” You 
may make a bunch of plastic grapes and plastic lotuses, but 
will any honeybee go near them? No. But they swarm around 
the natural lotus created by God and suck nectar from it. The 
creation of God is most sacred and wonderful. None can com- 
prehend the mystery of God. Divine Will can accomplish any- 
thing and everything. 


Time is the cause for birth and death 


Each Vedic mantra chanted during the yagna (sacrifice) 
has a deep inner meaning associated with it. Each mantra is 
dedicated to a particular deity. Any letter with the address 
properly mentioned on it can reach the neighboring street or a 
far away place. The mantras are like the addresses of the dei- 
ties. When they are chanted with proper intonations, they will 
yield the desired results. 

Time is God. That is why God is extolled as Kalaya 
Namah, Kala Kalaya Namah, Kalatheethaya Namah... Time is 
the cause for birth and death. None can conquer time except 
those who acquire divine grace. Here is a small example. Sage 
Mrukandu had a son by name Markandeya, who was given 
only 16 years of life span, but he was unaware of this. One 
night he found his parents full of sorrow. On enquiry, they re- 
vealed that his end had approached, and that was the cause of 
their sorrow. Hearing this, he went to the temple of Easwara, 
hugged the Siva Linga, and started chanting Om Namah Sivaya 
wholeheartedly. 

At the appointed hour, Yama (God of Death) cast his noose 
around the neck of young Markandeya. Since Markandeya was 
hugging the Linga, the noose fell around the Linga also. Eas- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 122 


wara manifested there and remonstrated Yama, “How dare you 
cast the noose around Me?” He burnt Yama to ashes. Pleased 
with the devotion of Markandeya, he blessed him with the 
boon of immortality. 

In fact, it was Easwara who had stipulated 16 years of life 
span for Markandeya. But on account of Markandeya’s intense 
devotion and total surrender Easwara, had to change His Will. 
There is none greater than a true devotee in this world. 


God’s heart can be melted only through love 


Once, Lord Vishnu asked Narada which among the five 
elements was the greatest. Narada replied earth is the greatest. 

Vishnu remarked, “Three-fourth of the earth is enveloped 
with water. In such a case, which among the two is greater?” 
Narada agreed that water was great. 

Vishnu said, “But the sage Agastya drank up the ocean in a 
single gulp. So, is Agastya greater or water?” Narada replied, 
“You are right my Lord, Agastya is greater than water.” 

Vishnu asked again, “But this Agastya is a tiny star in the 
sky (akasa). Now is this star greater or the sky?” Narada re- 
plied, “It is the sky that is greater.” 

The Lord agreed and said, “Your understanding is correct. 
The sky indeed is greater. In His incarnation as Vamana, the 
Lord asked for three steps from king Bali. And in the course of 
taking the gift of three steps, Vamana assumed the form of 
Thrivikrama and covered the entire earth in one step, and the 
space from the earth to the sky in second, and there was no 
room for the third step. King Bali had to offer his head for the 
third step. So, now, is God great or the sky?” Narada replied, 
“Swami, when the mere foot of the Lord covers the entire sky, 
how much greater His full form would be? God indeed is 
greater.” 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 123 


“God, who envelops the entire cosmos, dwells in the heart 
of His bhakta (devotee). So now, is the heart of the devotee 
greater or God?” asked Vishnu. Narada replied, “Indeed, the 
devotee is greater than God.” 

God is Bhakta Paradheena, He is the servant of devotees. 
There is none superior to a devotee in this world. God’s heart 
can be melted only through love. So, develop total love. This is 
not the worldly love that exists between parents and children, 
husband and wife, friends, and relatives. Worldly love is 
tainted by selfishness, but divine love is absolutely selfless. 
Your life will be sanctified only when you attain divine love. 


Take refuge in the Lord’s Feet 


Hurry up, hurry up, listen to the 

clarion call of Sai filled with nectarine love, 
Beckoning you to come near Him and 

exhorting you to attain Divinity. 
No need to undertake yoga 

or any spiritual sadhana. 
Hurry up, hurry up, hearken to 

the loving word of Sai. 

[Telugu Song] 


God is asking you to come near, but you are drifting away 
from Him. You might have seen in Tirupati —one hand of 
Lord Venkateswara is raised in Abhaya Hastha (blessing pose) 
and the other points to His feet. What does it mean? Take ref- 
uge in the Lord’s Feet and you shall be protected. Surrender to 
Him; He will make you fearless. Others pervert the meaning 
and say, “Hey! You want to go up or fall into the pit (ad- 
hogathi).” 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 124 


Laying the foundation for the Music University 


As you are all aware, this morning Swami laid the founda- 
tion stone for the Music University. Not only music, lyrics, and 
dance, even the traditional folk arts like Hari Kathas (musical 
exposition of the epics and the Puranas) and village dramas 
will be taught here. Apart from Carnatic and Hindustani music, 
all types of music in the world will blossom here. This Univer- 
sity will be inaugurated next October. Whatever we undertake 
will be completed in a few months. You need not wait years 
for its completion. 

This University will be built spending crores of rupees, and 
it will be a synthesis of ancient and modern art forms. Many 
renowned artistes will come here. A musicologist of world- 
wide reputation, Indira Chakravarthi, will be the Vice Chan- 
cellor of this university. She has the experience of working in 
various music colleges all over the world. At present she is 
living in the city of Banaras. She will come here. 

You all know that Ravi Shankar's elder brother (Late) 
Uday Shankar was a great dancer. His wife wants to donate all 
his instruments and equipment to our Institute of fine arts. 
Some of the equipment in this lot is not to be found anywhere 
else in the world. 

The plans for the buildings are prepared. This building 
complex is going to be in the shape of several musical instru- 
ments such as the mrudangam, the tanpura, a conch in the 
middle, and a sitar. The mere sight of the building from outside 
would convey to the onlooker that it is a center of musical ex- 
cellence. Similar marvels are going to happen in Prasanthi 
Nilayam. 

Just think. Puttaparthi, a mere hamlet of a population of 
106 people, has already grown to the size of a city housing 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 125 


several lakhs of people. Not only that, just wait and see, in a 
very short while, Puttaparthi is going to be a landmark on the 
map of the world. 

As our C. Srinivas has said, the architectural features of our 
Hospital have found the pride of place in the American manual 
of architectural features for medical institutions. Let alone 
America, Puttaparthi is going to be a name to be reckoned with 
in every major developed country in the world such as Japan, 
Germany, Italy, and France. Everywhere world maps are going 
to mark Puttaparthi as an important location. The students of 
Puttaparthi should realize their good fortune. Then only their 
life will acquire its real meaning and significance. 

Students! Your holidays are commencing from tomorrow. 
You can go home to your parents and spend your time in a 
proper way and come back after acquiring your parents’ ap- 
probation. 


19 October 1999 
Prasanthi Nilayam 


Equip yourselves with a clear eye through detach- 
ment and love; sharpen your sense of discrimina- 
tion so that it has no prejudice or prediliction. 
Then, you can see God in you, around you, in all 
that you know and feel. 

— Baba 


12 


Youth should transform the world 


One who practices and propagates ideals 
such as goodness, morality, and truth 
Is a youth in the strict sense of the term. 
In fact, only such people are 
your best friends and My best friends too. 
[Poem in Telugu] 


Embodiments of Love! Goodness means good behaviour, 
good conduct, good discipline, and good character. Truth, 
righteousness, peace, love and nonviolence are verily the five 
life principles (pancha pranas) of man. 

Human life is a journey from ‘I’ to ‘We’. This journey is 
subtle and the goal is very near, but man takes many births to 
reach the destination. Why should he take such a long time, 
undergoing hardships, to attain the goal, which is so near? 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 127 


Modern youth are making every effort to know all that is hap- 
pening in the world but are not making any effort to under- 
stand the fundamental truth of human life. No benefit accrues 
from acquiring such information, which does not lead you to 
the goal of life. There are thousands of intellectuals, scholars, 
and eminent educationists in the world today. But all the 
worldly knowledge and skills will be a mere waste if one does 
not know oneself. The primary duty of man is to understand 
who he really is. 


In this world, if money is lost, 

one need not be worried about it, 

for one can earn it again. 
If a friend is lost, one can have another. 
If wife is lost, one may get married again. 
If one loses one’s piece of land, 

one can purchase another. 
All these can be acquired again. 
But the body once lost is lost forever. 

[Sanskrit sloka] 


Faith in God is very essential for man 


Man has achieved everything in life but has lost human 
values, which amounts to losing his five life principles. As a 
result, he has become a living corpse. Faith in God is very es- 
sential for man. You may question who God is and where God 
is. Truth is God. Truth is one and the same for everyone, irre- 
spective of caste, creed, religion, language, nationality and 
ideology. 

Sathyannasti paro dharma (there is no greater dharma than 
adherence to truth). This fundamental Truth is God. Likewise, 
Love is God. So, live in love. True love is related to the heart, 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 128 


not to the body. Divine Love is “heart to heart, not body to 
body”. Body is like a water bubble, mind is like a mad mon- 
key. Don’t follow the body, don’t follow the mind. Follow the 
conscience. Only then can you experience the Truth. 


Service will lean you to devotion 


Your men and women! Your life is a long journey, and your 
desires are the luggage. “Less luggage, more comfort makes 
travel a pleasure.” So, reduce your desires. 

Human birth is gifted to serve others, not just to eat, drink, 
sleep, and make merry. The best way to love God is to love all 
and serve all. Man’s foremost duty is to serve his fellowmen 
and make them happy. Your life will be redeemed only when 
you involve yourself in the service of society. The highest sad- 
hana (spiritual practise) is to transform love into service. 
Service will lead you to devotion. 

The Kerala boy who spoke earlier mentioned various dis- 
eases that affect the body. There are many instances in history 
wherein even mighty kings had to leave their mortal coil in 
spite of having access to the best medical facilities and the best 
doctors. Doctors by themselves cannot cure diseases. Divine 
grace is essential. There is no point in safeguarding your body 
if you do not uphold morality. For this, lead a life of truth and 
love. Modern youth do have love, but their love is artificial. It 
is limited up to saying “hello, hello,” and is in fact hollow 
within. So, their life has become artificial like a drama. 

Man can rise to the level of the Divine only through the 
path of service. When man is not able to understand human- 
ness, how can he understand Divinity? First, know thyself. 
Human life is noble, since it is essentially divine. In fact, man 
and God are not two different entities; they are one and the 
same. “Ekam sath viprah babudha vadanti (truth is one, but 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 129 


scholars refer to it by many names).” Your life will be re- 
deemed once you understand this truth. 

The divine power latent in man is not found in any other 
being. Since man is unable to understand his own divine na- 
ture, he is undertaking various spiritual practices such as pen- 
ance, meditation, and yoga. Spiritual practices bereft of love 
are a mere waste of time. Love is most important in life. What- 
ever you may say with love, it is bound to be true. 

Any work you undertake with love is dharma. So, in the 
first instance, develop love. Lust, greed, hatred, jealousy, an- 
ger, and pride are animal qualities. These qualities are the re- 
sult of the impurities in the food man partakes of. These are of 
man’s own making. Man is forgetting his divine nature due to 
the effect of these evil qualities. 


The words seva and prema possess infinite power 


Man should make proper use of his mathi (intellect), gathi 
(destination), stithi (situation), and sampathi (wealth). Wealth 
here does not mean worldly treasures. It refers to the power of 
the senses. This power should be utilised for service of society. 


Neither by penance nor by undertaking 

pilgrimages nor by going through sacred texts 

nor by Japa can one cross the ocean of Samsara. 

Only through service of the noble can one redeem oneself. 
[Sanskrit verse] 


The words seva and prema may be very small, consisting 
of only two syllables, but they possess infinite power. 

Embodiments of Love! Enquire and understand who you 
really are. Know yourself and you will know all. Since many 
of you are newcomers, you have to understand simple things to 
begin with. When you say, “This is my handkerchief,” it 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 130 


means the handkerchief is different from you. Similarly, when 
you say, “This is my body, my mind, and my intellect,” it 
means you are different from all these. Then the question natu- 
rally arises, “Who are you?” Enquire into this. Body, mind and 
intellect are mere instruments. Identifying yourself with these 
instruments is absurd. 

You are the master. Master the mind and be a mastermind. 
Never be a slave to your body, mind, and senses. In fact, they 
should be under your control; you should not be controlled by 
them. 

One of the speakers quoted Swami, “My life is My mes- 
sage.” She also referred to the statement, “Your life is My 
message.” You should understand the meaning of these state- 
ments clearly. Saying that your life is Swami’s message and 
indulging in wicked activities and unrighteous deeds is treach- 
erous. That constitutes “your” message, not My message. You 
can declare that your life is Swami’s message only when you 
take to the path of truth and righteousness, install peace and 
love in your heart, and uphold nonviolence. 


No one has the right to judge others 


All that you see outside is a reflection of the inner being. 
Good and bad do not exist outside; they are mere reflections of 
what is within you. No one has the right to judge others. Give 
up all that is bad in you and you will find goodness all around. 
As the colour of the glasses you put on, so is the colour of the 
world you visualise. The defect lies in your vision, not in the 
creation. 

Heart is the dwelling place of God. So, only noble feelings 
should emerge out of it. If there are any evil qualities like lust, 
greed, and anger in it, then it ceases to be a human heart. It is 
verily the heart of an animal. If your conduct is devoid of hu- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 131 


manness, then you are not a human being. Act in a manner that 
befits your human birth. When you are angry, remind yourself, 
“IT am not a dog, I am man.” When your mind wavers, tell 
yourself repeatedly, “I am not a monkey, I am man.” Patiently 
think about your real nature. 

Never act in haste. Haste makes waste. Waste makes 
worry. So, do not be in a hurry. Take time and think calmly. 
All these evil qualities can be eliminated by developing good 
thoughts and feelings. The remedy for all your mental ailments 
lies within you. 


Undertake Service with Love 


Only young men and women are capable of eradicating the 
evils prevailing in society. If we have virtuous youth, all ills of 
society can be removed. Today, the whole world is embroiled 
in wicked thoughts, wicked company, and evil acts. Excessive 
desires are the main cause for the suffering of man. Keep a 
check on your desires. 

As a student, discharge your duties diligently. Study well 
and obtain good marks. Respect your parents and serve them. 
Keep in mind the welfare of the society and nation at large. 
Earn a good name in society. 

Do not feel proud of your education. Your education is a 
mere waste if it is not utilised for the welfare of society. The 
education you have received from society must be dedicated to 
it by way of service. The essence of education does not lie in 
merely acquiring degrees, securing good jobs, and amassing 
wealth. Service is the hallmark of the educated one. Morality is 
most essential for human life. No doubt money is essential, but 
it should be under certain limits. Excessive money makes 
many wrongs. Money comes and goes, morality comes and 
grows. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 132 


Students! Young men and women! First and foremost, make 
efforts to understand your true nature. The difference between 
God and man is very subtle. As long as you do not understand 
the Truth, you remain a human being. Once you recognise it, 
you are God. 

Service is the best way to understand your innate divinity. 
Service should be for self-satisfaction, not for name and fame. 
Experience the bliss that you derive from selfless service. 
Share it with others. Before serving others, serve yourself by 
making your mind broad and pure. Get rid of the narrow feel- 
ing of ‘I’ and ‘mine’ and extend your love to one and all. Love 
is the binding force that brings together the entire world as one 
family. I wish that you develop love and live like brothers and 
sisters. 

This body has been engaged in service right from birth. 
You should also spend your life in serving others. This is My 
message. I practice whatever I preach. I love all and serve all 
and exhort you to do the same. You are not able to understand 
My love as your feelings are narrow. That is your mistake, not 
Mine. Today, conflicts are on the rise as there is no proper un- 
derstanding and adjustment among people. Adjustment will be 
possible only when there is proper understanding. 


Develop love and uphold truth 


Embodiments of Love! Only love has been constantly with 
you right from birth. It is love that remains with you all the 
time, not your relatives or friends. This love is God. Enjoy the 
bliss of love and share it with others. Absence of love is the 
root cause for all the unrest in the world. 

Develop love and uphold truth. Truth does not mean de- 
scribing what you have seen, heard or done, as it is. Truth is 
that which is changeless in all the three periods of time. The 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 133 


Vedas call this permanent truth Rutham. 

Just as you change your dress, you have to change your 
body one day or the other. That is why it is said, “Death is the 
dress of life.” Therefore, you should have no fear of death. Life 
is not permanent. It is like a passing cloud. As long as there is 
life in the body, use it for the service of others. Engage your- 
self in service till your last breath. Service to man is service to 
God. Have control over your senses, because loss of sense 
control engenders demonic qualities in man. Service without 
sense control is an exercise in futility. 


Cultivate noble thoughts 


All of you have gathered here without being extended any 
invitation. It is your love for Bhagavan and Bhagavan’s love 
for you that has brought you here. If there is love in your heart, 
you will never be put to any hardship whatsoever. Your love 
should be extended to one and all; it should not be limited to 
your family and friends alone. 

Today, we do not have ideal parents. There are no ideal 
teachers either. We do not have ideal friends and relatives too. 
How can then we find fault with the youth? First of all, the 
parents should be good. The teachers should also do their job 
of teaching in right earnest. Good company is very important. 
Tell me your company, I shall tell you what you are. As is your 
company, so you become. How can one be good if one is in the 
company of bad people always? 

Embodiments of Love! You are all virtuous and noble. 
Make every effort to enhance this goodness. Make the best use 
of your stay here. Run away from bad company and bad feel- 
ings. Cultivate noble thoughts and noble qualities. Develop the 
Atmic relationship with all, since all are your brothers and sis- 
ters. Lord Krishna said in the Bhagavad Gita, Mamaivamso 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 134 


Jeevaloke Jeevabhuta Sanathana (the eternal Atma in all be- 
ings is a part of My Being). The sun is one but it has many re- 
flections. All that you find in this world is the reflection, reac- 
tion, and resound. Do not get carried away by them. Aspire to 
attain the reality. In order to experience the reality, give up 
body attachment and try to understand the divinity within. 


Help ever, hurt never 


Divinity is latent in everyone, but you are not making any 
effort to realise it because you are deeply engrossed in worldly 
matters. You are the embodiment of pure, unsullied, true, and 
eternal Atma. Experience this reality. Discharge your duties 
keeping this truth in view. Help ever, Hurt never. This is the 
essence of the Vedas and sacred texts such as the Bible, the 
Bhagavad Gita, and the Quran. All these holy texts speak of 
the same fundamental truth. 

It is a mistake to entertain differences based on religion. 
There is only one religion, the religion of love. There is only 
one caste, the caste of humanity. There is only one language, 
the language of the heart. Travel from ‘I’ to ‘We’ through the 
path of service. I will tell you how to go about doing it in due 
course of time. 

There are millions of people in this world, but only you, 
the fortunate few, have got the golden opportunity of coming 
here. Make the best use of this opportunity and share this joy 
with everybody. Serve the whole world. Understand the truth 
that you are born to serve society. It is not government service. 
It is the service of mankind. 

Do not lead a selfish life amassing wealth. Do not be satis- 
fied by filling your own belly; understand that there are mil- 
lions in the world, who are hungry and suffering. Your life will 
be sanctified only when you help the poor, the sick, and the 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 135 


down-trodden. That is true spirituality. Spirituality is a way of 
life. It is not something separate from life. That should be your 
way of life. In order to acquire a worldly degree, you need to 
study various subjects. But in spirituality there is only one 
subject and that is love. Undertake service activities in a spirit 
of love. 

Being young, you may have a few doubts. I will clarify all 
of them. Do not give scope for hatred, jealousy, and ostenta- 
tion. Be a humble devotee and render humble service. That is 
the true human quality. 


18 November 1999 
Inauguration, Sri Sathya Sai Second World Youth Conference 
Sai Kulwant Hall, Prasanthi Nilayam 


Santhi (peace) is full of spiritual feeling and wis- 
dom that is the natural accompaniment of bliss. 
Genuine santhi is won only by control of the 
senses. Then, it can be call prasanthi. The experi- 
ence of that stage is as a stream of peace. 

— Baba 


13 


Importance of mother’s grace 


More fragrant than the sweet-smelling flowers 
like the Jasmine and the Champak, 
Softer than cheese and butter, 
More beautiful than the eye of the peacock, 
More pleasant than the moonlight 
Is the love of the mother. 
[Telugu Poem] 


Embodiments of Love! This world, with its movable and 
immovable objects, is nothing but the Cosmic Dance of Siva 
(Siva Thandava). This blissful Siva Thandava is full of awe 
and wonder and is beyond human comprehension. The duali- 
ties of night and day, pleasure and pain, birth and death are 
endless. Just as birth and death are natural, so also is the exis- 
tence of dharma and adharma (righteousness and unrighteous- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 137 


ness). When dharma is on the rise, adharma is on the decline, 
and vice versa. Men and women are responsible for the rise or 
decline of dharma and adharma. Man, unable to realise the 
divinity within, is under the delusion that divinity is different 
from him. 


Principle of Siva-Shakti 


Sumathi could even stop the sun from rising to save the life 
of her husband. Savitri could bring her dead husband back to 
life. Wherefrom did they derive their strength? It was the 
power of their devotion and chastity. When man worships Di- 
vinity with devotion and earnestness, the divine qualities 
—sathyam, sivam, sundaram (truth, goodness, beauty) mani- 
fest in him. This resplendently shining divine power is latent in 
man. When Kamsa tried to kill his own sister Devaki, her hus- 
band Vasudeva came to her rescue. It was possible because of 
his innate divine powers. You need not make any special ef- 
forts to acquire divine powers. They are immanent in you. 
They will manifest only when you contemplate on God, for- 
getting yourself. 

Man, forgetting his own divine nature, thinks that God is 
separate from him and undertakes various spiritual practices to 
attain Him. People adore Him by different names such as 
Rama, Krishna, Jesus, and Allah. But there is only one funda- 
mental power, which is the very form of Siva-Shakti. This 
principle of Siva-Shakti is all-pervasive. This world has a very 
significant name, Bhavan-Sankara. Bhavani means sraddha 
(steadfast devotion) and sankara means viswas (faith). It is to 
say that the world is based on the twin principles of sraddha 
and viswas. Bhavani and Sankara are inseparable, interde- 
pendent, and all-pervasive. So, the whole world is the form of 
ardhanareswara (androgynous). It is on this basis that the 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 138 


terms Srimati and Sri are used to address women and men, re- 
spectively. Srimati denotes Bhavani and Sri symbolises San- 
kara. 

Whatever may be the name and form you worship, you 
need to have steadfast devotion and faith. Without these two, 
you cannot achieve anything in life. Sraddhavan labhate 
jnanam (only the one with steadfast devotion attains wisdom). 
It is only through faith that one can realise the divinity within. 
Divinity in man is the combination of Bhavani and Sankara. 


God is the witness to all that you do 


The whole world is a combination of — ichcha shakti (will 
power), kriya shakti (power of action), and jnana_ shakti 
(power of wisdom). Ichcha shakti is related to the mind, kriya 
shakti to the body, and jnana shakti to the Atma. That is why it 
is said that you are not one person, but three: the one you think 
you are (physical body), the one others think you are (mental 
body), and the one you really are (principle of the Atma). You 
are essentially divine, but you are unable to understand this. 
The Vedas declare: Sarvata pani padam tat sarvothokshi si- 
romukham, sarvata srutimalloke sarvamavritya thishthati 
(with His hands, feet, eyes, head, mouth, and ears pervading 
everything, God permeates the entire universe). God is the 
witness to all that you do. You may hoodwink anybody, but 
not God because He is always in you and with you. 

Without the grace of Bhavani-Sankara, all your efforts will 
be futile. Names and forms are not important because they are 
subject to change. Body is like a water bubble, mind is like a 
mad monkey. You cannot rely on them. But there is something 
within, which is true and eternal. That is divinity. In order to 
manifest this latent divinity, you need to develop devotion, 
which in turn strengthens your faith. Tree becomes bigger and 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 139 


stronger as the roots go deeper. Likewise, faith becomes 
stronger as the devotion increases. No name and no form can 
ever help you if viswas (faith) and sraddha (steadfast devotion) 
are lacking in you. 

There is infinite divine power latent in everybody. If you 
can manifest it, you can even stop the sun from rising, as Su- 
mathi did, and you can even bring the dead back to life, as 
Savitri could do. When you manifest divine power, you be- 
come God. 


God will give you whatever you deserve 


The Atma is all-pervasive. In order to experience the Atma, 
you need to have steadfast devotion and faith. Today people 
pray, Loka samastha sukhino bhavantu (may all the people of 
the world be happy)! It is possible only when sraddha and 
viswas are fostered. 

Joys and sorrows are like passing clouds. They come and 
go. It is only the morality that comes and grows. So, develop 
morality. Do not aspire for wealth, position, and power. God 
will give you whatever you deserve. Develop love for God. 
That is the highest sadhana (spiritual practice). 

Today, people undertake various spiritual practices to at- 
tain God. But all these confer only mental satisfaction. Sage 
Narada propagated the nine paths of devotion: sravanam (lis- 
tening), kirtanam (singing), Vishnusmaranam (contemplating 
on God), Padasevanam (serving His Lotus Feet), vandanam 
(salutation), archanam (worship), dasyam (servitude), sneham 
(friendship), and Atmanivedanam (self-surrender). These prac- 
tices cannot confer everlasting joy. Have unflinching faith that 
the universe is the very form of God (Viswam Vishnuswaru- 
pam). Vishnu is the cause and the Viswam is the effect. These 
two are inseparable. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 140 


The Vedas declare: Acharam Charamevacha (though im- 
mobile, He is apparently mobile). Here is an illustration. In the 
dream state, you may visit various places and experience hap- 
piness or sorrow, but in reality your body remains steady on 
the bed—immobile. 

So, all that you see and experience in this world is but a 
dream. Only the Atma is true and eternal. The Atma is sthiram 
(permanent) and the world is charam (changing). Human life is 
the union of sthiram and charam. 

Janthunam narajanma durlabham (human birth is the rar- 
est among all beings). All beings are not fortunate to get hu- 
man birth. All human beings do not experience Divinity. Some 
people undertake spiritual practices like idol worship to attain 
Divinity. Gradually one should turn one’s vision inward and 
experience the oneness of the Atma. 


Experience the endless bliss of the Atma 


It is not all that important how much you love God; what is 
more important is how much God loves you. God is the em- 
bodiment of Sat Chit Ananda. Sat means that which is eternal. 
Chit is total awareness. When water and sugar are mixed with 
each other, you get syrup. Likewise, the combination of Sat 
and Chit results in Ananda (bliss) The Ananda that you experi- 
ence out of worldly pleasures is momentary. 

You will attain true and everlasting bliss, only when you 
turn your vision inward and experience the Atma. It has no 
form, but is full of bliss. 

Embodiments of Love! You should experience the endless 
bliss of the Atma. 


At the time of birth, man does not have 
Any garland of precious jewels around his neck, 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 141 


But definitely he has a heavy garland— 
A garland made up of the consequences of 
Past deeds, be they good or bad. 
[Telugu Poe] 


Adore the mother as God 


The Vedas declare: Mathru Devo bhava, pithru Devo 
bhava (revere the mother and father as God). Once Ashok 
Singhal, General Secretary of Vishwa Hindu Parishad, came to 
Me with the plea, “Kindly let us know the birthplace of Rama 
so that we can construct a temple there.” 

I replied, “The true birthplace of Rama is the womb of 
Kausalya.” Mother’s womb is the birthplace of one and all, be 
it a commoner or the Avatar Himself. Therefore, adore the 
mother as God. Uphold her name and respect her. 

Today is 19 November. It is celebrated as Ladies Day to 
remind you of the importance of the mother. You should con- 
duct yourself according to the wishes of your mother. Do not 
disobey her. Chaitanya, the great devotee of Lord Krishna, 
married Lakshmi on the insistence of his mother, though he 
was not in favour of marriage. But as fate would have it, Lak- 
shmi passed away soon after the marriage. 

His mother, Sachidevi, felt very sad for having got him 
married against his wishes. Chaitanya told her, “This is what 
happens when one goes against the dictates of one’s con- 
science.” So, if you feel what you are doing is correct, then try 
to convince your mother, but never hurt her feelings. 

You may be under the mistaken notion that women are 
weak in body and mind. But, in fact, they are stronger than 
men. 

In the epic Mahabharata, there is a story of a queen, Pra- 
mila, who wanted to marry Arjuna. But Arjuna was reluctant to 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 142 


marry her. Pramila sent her commander-in-chief Malayavathi 
to capture Arjuna. Malayavathi waged a fierce battle against 
Arjuna, ultimately captured him, and brought him to the pres- 
ence of Pramila. She requested him to marry her, but Arjuna 
refused to marry even if it were to cost his life. Pramila was a 
great devotee of Lord Krishna, and so was Arjuna. Both of 
them prayed fervently. 

Krishna, being the director of the cosmic drama, had his 
own master plan. He appeared there, called Pramila and Arjuna 
to his side, brought their hands together, chanted the mantras, 
and solemnised their marriage. 


God can do anything and everything 


God can do anything and everything. He can transform 
earth into sky and sky into earth. But man lacks devotion and 
faith in God. He has faith in worldly matters, not in spirituality. 
There is nothing superior to bhakti (devotion). In the word 
bhakti, the letter bha stands for lustre and luminosity, and kti 
denotes that which attracts. From bhakti, you get shakti 
(power) for the body, mind, and spirit. Through this bhakti and 
shakti, you get immersed in rakti (attachment) toward God and 
develop virakti (detachment) from the world. Then God con- 
fers on you bhukti (food) and also mukti (liberation). Thus, 
man has to travel from bhakti to mukti. 

As I told you yesterday, human life is a journey from ‘IT’ to 
‘We’. In order to go to Tirupati, Varanasi, Gaya, and Prayag, 
you may have to take great pains and travel long distances. But 
the journey from ‘I’ to ‘We’ is very short in the sense that you 
have to detach yourself from the body and develop attachment 
towards the Self. For this, mother’s grace is very essential. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 143 


God comes whenever the need arises 


When Abhimanyu was in the womb of his mother Sub- 
hadra, Arjuna used to tell her many stories. One day, Arjuna 
was explaining to her the intricacies and nuances involved in 
entering Padmavyuha (a military formation in the shape of a 
lotus). Before he could explain to her how to come out of the 
Padmavyuha, Lord Krishna, the supreme director of the cos- 
mic drama, entered the scene. God comes whenever the need 
arises and plays His role appropriately. 

Krishna asked Arjuna, “What a mistake you are com- 
mitting! It is not Subhadra, but it is the child in her womb who 
has been listening to you all the while. Where is the necessity 
for you to teach the child about Padmavyuha?” He took Arjuna 
away with him. 

Later on, in the Kurukshetra war, Abhimanyu lost his life 
in Padmavyuha, since he did not know how to come out of it. 
Why did Krishna do this? It is because Abhimanyu had to at- 
tain Veera Swarga (heaven of the heroes). In fact, when the 
Kauravas challenged Abhimanyu to enter Padmavyuha, he 
came to his mother Subhadra and sought her permission and 
blessings. Subhadra tried her best to dissuade him from going 
to the battlefield. She said, “My dear son, it is not an ordinary 
task to enter Padmavyuha and come out of it. Moreover, your 
wife is in the family way, and your uncle Krishna and father 
Arjuna are not here. So, give up the idea of going to the battle- 
field.” 

But Abhimanyu did not pay heed to her advice. He said 
“Mother, I am a kshatriya (warrior) by birth. There is no 
greater insult for a kshatriya than to shy away from the chal- 
lenge posed by the enemies. In fact, you should encourage me 
and enthuse me to fight and annihilate the enemies. It is not 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 144 


proper on your part to discourage me from going to the war.” 

Abhimanyu knew what he was doing was correct, but he 
did not understand his mother’s love. He lost his life because 
he went to the battlefield against the wishes of his mother. 


Divine Grace and human effort 


There is nothing greater than mother’s love. Mother’s 
words are always sweet. At times she may use harsh words, 
but they are meant only to correct you, not to hurt you. There 
may be a wicked son, but there can never be a wicked mother 
in this world. Ladies Day is celebrated only to make you un- 
derstand the value of mother’s love and her concern for you. 
Among the mother, the father, the teacher and God, the mother 
is given the topmost priority. 

Modern youth do not care for the mother. They think they 
are highly educated and that the mother does not know any- 
thing. It is a great mistake to think so. Never look down upon 
the mother. Even the mother should not compel her children to 
accede to her wishes. Through love and sincerity she should 
put the children on the proper path. She should aspire that her 
children be good, they need not be great. 

Rama was good, whereas Ravana was great. Rama put into 
practice whatever he had studied and thus earned a good name. 
But Ravana was immersed in ignorance, because he did not 
practice all that he had studied. As a result, he did not earn a 
good name. Man needs to have fear of sin and love for God to 
earn a good name. Since man lacks fear of sin and love for 
God, humanness is on the decline. This is the cause of restless- 
ness in the world today. 

Embodiments of Love! God is Ganalola and Ganapriya 
(one who is attracted by singing). Poems and prayers do not 
attract God as much as songs sung with devotion do. All of 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 145 


you have listened to the melodious singing of M.S. Subbulak- 
shmi. She has earned the title Gana Kokila. I have also seen 
her play the role of Meera, when she was very young. 

Many artistes have earned name and fame in dance. Uday 
Shankar was such a great dancer that one could hardly see his 
two feet on the ground while he danced. His wife, daugh- 
ter-in-law, and other disciples have come here and will be 
staging a dance programme tomorrow. 

These fine arts cannot be mastered by practice alone; Di- 
vine grace is also very essential. Negative and positive both are 
essential for the current to flow. Likewise, human effort and 
Divine grace should come together before success is achieved. 


Never give scope for anger and ego 


Students! Young men and women! God responds according 
to your feelings. So, do not entertain negative thoughts. Only a 
peacock comes out of peahen’s egg, even if it were to be 
hatched by a hen. A diamond does not lose its value or bril- 
liance even if it falls into dung. Likewise, good people will al- 
ways earn a good name wherever they are. Ego, hatred, and 
anger are the worst enemies of man. You may show a little an- 
ger to somebody in order to put him on the right path, but 
never hate anybody. Never give scope for anger and ego. 

I am showing you by My example all that I preach. Some 
people feel that Swami does not talk to them because Swami 
hates them or is angry with them. It is nothing but their imagi- 
nation and guilty conscience. I do not hate anyone. In order to 
put you on the right path, sometimes I may pretend to be angry 
with you. But in reality, [ have no anger or hatred toward any- 
body. 

Some people do grama seva (service in the villages) with 
the expectation that I should fulfil their desires. Is that enough 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 146 


to please Me? Give up all desires and cleanse your heart. Then 
I will grant you all that you require without your asking for it. 
How can you expect positive results without giving up nega- 
tive thoughts? Fill your heart with positive thoughts. Fill it 
with love. Then all your thoughts, words, and deeds will be 
suffused with love. 


All are the children of viswa matha 


Embodiments of Love! Never forget the love of your 
mother, and under all circumstances make her happy. I am 
pleased with you only when you make your mother happy. As 
Uma Bharati pointed out, make efforts to understand the one- 
ness of all. If you think that you are separate from others, then 
there will be scope for hatred. Realise that you and I are one. 
Bodies may be different, but you are bound by the same love 
principle. 

Just as your mother loves you, you should love everybody. 
All are the children of Viswa Matha (universal mother). All are 
brothers and sisters. You should not have any differences 
whatsoever. The sun is one and the same for all the worlds. 
Just as the sun is reflected in a water tank, in a river, in an 
ocean, likewise the same Divinity is reflected in the hearts of 
one and all. 

Ekam sath viprah bahudha vadanti (truth is one, but schol- 
ars refer to it by different names). It is not correct to say that 
you like only Rama or Krishna or Siva or Sai Baba. There is 
only one God, and He is omnipresent. Do not hate other relig- 
ions. A Hindu should become a better Hindu, a Christian a 
better Christian, and a Muslim a better Muslim. The one with- 
out love can be called neither Muslim nor Hindu nor Christian 
nor Sikh. In fact, he is verily a demon on this earth. Only those 
without love give scope to differences based on religion. You 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 147 


will find the unity of all religions only when you fill your heart 
with love. 

The culture of Bharat (India) has given utmost importance 
to the mother. One refers to one’s country as motherland, not 
fatherland. Lord Rama declared: “Janani janma bhoomishcha 
swargadapi gareeyasi (mother and the motherland are greater 
than even heaven).” Country is the mother and the culture is 
the father. Never forget your country and its culture. 

Since ancient times, the culture of Bharat has been propa- 
gating the message of peace and love with the prayer, Loka 
samastha sukhino bhavantu (May all the people of the world 
be happy)! You have to uphold this sacred culture. 

You may worship God in any name and form you like, but 
understand the truth that God is One and One only. 


19 November 1999 
Sai Kulwant Hall, Prasanthi Nilayam 


14 


Seek God within 


There is no teacher greater than the Conscience. 
There is no preceptor greater than time. 
The world verily is the greatest text. 
God is the only true friend. 
[Telugu Poem] 


Young men and women, future citizens of the world! The 
future of the world, good or bad, depends on your conduct. The 
country will be safe, secure, peaceful, and prosperous only 
when your conduct is good. What the world needs today is not 
affluence and material comforts but men and women of noble 
character. The country is bound to disintegrate if the behavior 
of the young men and women is not on the right lines. 

A true human being is one who adheres to sathya (truth), 
dharma (righteousness) and thyaga (sacrifice). Truth is neethi 
(morality), righteousness is reethi (procedure), and sacrifice is 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 149 


khyathi (fame). All these three constitute manava jathi (human 
race). Human race has originated from Truth. 


The entire creation has originated from Truth and 
ultimately merges in Truth. 
There is no place where truth does not exist. 
Recognize this pure and unsullied truth. 
[Telugu Poem] 


To uphold morality, adhere to truth 


It is based on this that the ancient sages and seers said 
Sathyam bruyath, priyam bruyath, na bruyath sathyamapriyam 
(Speak truth, speak pleasingly, do not speak truth that is unpal- 
atable). Sathyam bruyath refers to moral value. Manava jathi 
(human race) cannot survive without neethi (morality). 

Today the whole world is engulfed in troubles and turmoil 
on account of injustice, falsehood, and unrighteousness. Only 
young men and women are capable of restoring the declining 
human values. Only when man upholds morality can there be 
equality, fraternity, and freedom in society. 

To uphold morality, one should adhere to truth. That is 
why it is said, sathyam bruyath. This is the primary duty of 
man. The second one, priyam bruyath (speak pleasingly) refers 
to dharmic value. It is based on this that the Bhagavad Gita 
says, Anudvegakaram vakyam sathyam priya hitham cha yath 
(speak truth in a pleasing and wholesome manner. Your speech 
should not excite others impulses and emotions). 

The third one, na bruyath sathyamapriyam (do not speak 
truth that is unpalatable) refers to spiritual value. One has to 
adhere to these principles to progress on the spiritual path. 

Embodiments of Love! 

The Himachala (the Himalayan mountains) forms the 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 150 


boundary for India on the northern part. What is the inner 
meaning of Himachala? Hima means ice, which stands for pu- 
rity and peace. Achala means that which is steady. So, hi- 
machala signifies purity, peace, and steadiness. The perennial 
rivers Ganga, Yamuna, and Saraswathi symbolise the continu- 
ous blood circulation in the human body. 


Be proud to be a Bharatiya 


The great epics of this land, the Ramayana, the Mahab- 
harata, and the Bhagavata, bring out the quintessence of hu- 
man nature. One can be called a Bharatiya (Indian) in the true 
sense of the term only when one puts into practice the ideals 
that Bharat stands for. 

In the word Bharat, bha refers to bhava (feeling), ra refers 
to raga (tune), and ta connotes tala (rhythm). Bharatiyas are 
those who worship God, harmonising the three: bhava, raga, 
and tala. Bha also stands for effulgence. So, Bharatiyas are 
those who are in pursuit of divine effulgence. 

Take pride in the fact that you are a Bharatiya. There is no 
greater qualification than this. Bharat is the country that propa- 
gates spiritual knowledge to the rest of the world and wishes 
the welfare of the entire world —Loka samastha sukhino bha- 
vantu (may the whole world be happy)! 

You are all one, irrespective of the countries you belong to. 
Bulbs may vary, but the current is the same. Likewise, coun- 
tries, bodies, and feelings may vary, but the principle of Atma 
is one and the same in all. Therefore, give up all differences 
based on caste, religion, and nationality and spread the mes- 
sage of unity. Nations are many, but earth is one. Jewels are 
many, but gold is one. Stars are many, but sky is one. Cows are 
many, but milk is one. Bodies are many, but breath is one. You 
can experience bliss only when you render service keeping in 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 151 


mind the unity of all beings. 

You are born in love, brought up in love, and merge in 
love. The five elements (pancha bhutas) are the embodiment 
of selflessness. The sun sustains the creation by giving light 
and life. Trees accept poisonous carbon dioxide and give back 
life-supporting oxygen. Mother earth teaches a lesson in pa- 
tience and sacrifice. All these elements help mankind without 
any expectation of reward. There is no greater example of 
selfless love than nature. It is a shame that man, having been 
born and brought up in nature, does not imbibe the ideals dem- 
onstrated by nature and leads a life of selfishness and self- 
interest. Youth should resolve to eliminate selfishness and self- 
interest with no traces whatsoever. 


One who is not a sevaka cannot become a nayaka 


Jesus declared, “All are one my dear son, be alike to eve- 
ryone.” All are born of the same mother earth, breathe in the 
same air and drink the same water. In such a case, why should 
there be differences at all? Eschew all differences and live in 
unity. Recognize the unity in diversity and act accordingly. 

You may go to villages, serve the needy and undertake 
various rural development programs. By doing so, you are not 
doing any great service. In fact, all this is your duty. You are 
born to serve. So, spend your life in serving others. Do not 
crave power and position. 

One who is not a sevaka (humble worker) cannot become a 
nayaka (leader). In fact, a true sevaka alone is a true nayaka. 
People are under the mistaken notion that japa, tapa and 
dhyana (soft repetition of the name, penance, meditation) con- 
stitute spiritual practice. They do meditation without knowing 
what it is! They feel that they are meditating on God not 
knowing who God really is! They chant Rama, Krishna, Jesus, 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 152 


Allah, and Zoroaster as Gods and meditate on them not realiz- 
ing the fact that all are embodiments of God. They mistake 
concentration for meditation. Concentration is associated with 
the senses, whereas meditation is beyond senses. 

Meditation should not be confined to a particular time and 
place. It is a way of life. Whatever is done with the spirit of 
love is meditation. Sitting in meditation for hours together 
without expressing love for fellow beings is no meditation at 
all. True spiritual practice lies in joining hands with rest of the 
community and working for the progress of society as a whole. 


Heart bereft of love is like a barren land 


Love is God, live in love. Heart bereft of love is like a bar- 
ren land. All activities should be suffused with love. Just as it 
is impossible for a newborn babe to attend degree classes, so 
also it is not possible to attain the supreme state of love in- 
stantly. One has to gradually progress by undertaking spiritual 
practices. It is imperative to undertake these practices 
—pravritti— until one turns one's vision inward —nivritti. 
Perform all activities with a spiritual outlook. 

There is no greater spiritual practice than adhering to the 
principles of truth and love. Truth and love are synonyms for 
God. Without these two, there is no point in undertaking spiri- 
tual practices. 

Young men and women! Consider love and sacrifice as 
your very life breath. Control your senses. Sense control is es- 
sential for the success of any spiritual practice. Humanity can 
rise to Divinity through sense control. 

Anger is the quality of a dog. Monkey is known for its wa- 
vering nature. When you are angry, remind yourself, “l am not 
a dog, I am a man.” Similarly, when your mind wavers, tell 
yourself repeatedly, “I am not a monkey, I am a man.” 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 153 


Sathya, dharma, santhi, prema, and ahimsa are the true 
human values. These values are the five life principles of man 
— prana, apana, vyana, udana, and samana. Losing any one 
of these values amounts to losing life itself. Each value cannot 
exist without the other. Today man has become a living corpse 
since he has lost all these values. Develop faith in these values, 
uphold them, and experience the bliss derived therefrom. 


Where there is faith, there is love, 
Where there is love, there is peace, 
Where there is peace, there is truth, 
Where there is truth, there is God, 
Where there is God, there is bliss. 


Today, every man aspires to be blissful. For that, faith is 
essential. Bliss cannot be attained easily. Bliss is Brahman, 
which is steady, pure, eternal, and beyond dualities. Man can- 
not attain this supreme bliss without giving up the evil quali- 
ties. Heart is the altar of God. Do not pollute it with evil 
thoughts and feelings. 


Do not lead a life of selfishness 


Self effort is very essential to achieve success in any hu- 
man endeavor. Even small activities like picking up a flower or 
plucking a fruit from a tree requires the cooperation and effort 
of various limbs of the body — eyes, hands, legs, etc. Sareera 
madhyam khalu dharma sadhanam, body is gifted to undertake 
righteous actions and set an ideal to society, not for sleeping, 
eating, drinking, and making merry. God has gifted man with 
all the powers, but man is unable to realize his innate potential. 

Whenever you take up any activity, keep in mind the wel- 
fare of others too. Do not lead a life of selfishness. Think in 
terms of collective benefit, not individual benefit alone. Often, 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 154 


spiritual practices like japa and dhyana are done with a selfish 
motive. Instead, it is better to chant the Lord’s name and serve 
society. This will confer benefit on the individual and society 
at large. This constitutes real sadhana. Whomsoever you serve, 
serve with a feeling that you are serving God. 

The sight of a dead body, a sick person, an old decrepit 
person, was enough for Buddha to get transformed and attain 
Nirvana (liberation) because his heart was filled with compas- 
sion. Though you come across innumerable dead bodies, old 
persons, and sick individuals, it is a pity there is no transfor- 
mation in you whatsoever. Unfortunately, your heart has be- 
come as hard as a stone + indifferent to the sufferings of oth- 
ers. To attain Nirvana, identify yourself with others and make 
efforts to alleviate their suffering. 


Bend the body, mend the senses, end the mind 


As the Vice Chancellor mentioned in his speech: “Bend the 
body, mend the senses, end the mind.” Mind will be non- 
existent when the senses are controlled. Mind can be annihi- 
lated when noble thoughts are entertained. Today the world is 
in disarray because the thoughts of man are going astray. 


O man, enquire, what great happiness 
You have acquired by forgetting God and 
Spending all your education and energy 
Limitlessly in eking out a livelihood 
Right from dawn to dusk. 

[Telugu Poem] 


Whatever you do is God’s work. For example, the process 
of inhaling and exhaling is in itself a spiritual practice. The 
process of inhaling is associated with the sound So (that); and 
exhaling, with the sound Ham (I). Soham means ‘I am that’ 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 155 


(God). So symbolizes Divinity, and aham signifies ahamkara 
(ego). So, Soham drives home the lesson that you should take 
in only phala, that which is good, and eject mala, that which is 
filthy. 

This process of inhaling and exhaling repeats itself 21,600 
times a day. It means your inner voice is reminding you 21,600 
times a day that you are God. Unfortunately, you are not re- 
ceptive to this message. It is to understand this reality God has 
gifted you with this body. Do not limit God to your shrine. 
God is your life breath. 


Establish direct contact with God 


Just as hands, eyes, ears, nose, etc. are limbs of the body, 
likewise, human beings are limbs of society. Society is a limb 
of nature, and nature is a limb of God. Therefore, you can infer 
that there is an intimate relationship between individual and 
God. 

When inanimate objects like telephones are connected, 
should there not be a connection between human being and 
God? The former relationship is artificial in nature, whereas 
the latter is heart to heart. 

There are two types of telephone calls: one, which can be 
answered by anybody (number call), and the other, which 
needs to be answered by a specific person (Particular person - 
PP call) for whom the call is intended. Similarly, your contacts 
should be directly with God, like the personal call, and not 
with all and sundry like the number call. If you have the sin- 
cere feeling that you want God, then God Himself will come 
and talk to you. You cannot expect God to respond when you 
make a “number call”. Number call corresponds to negative 
thoughts. So, give up negative thoughts and develop positive 
feelings. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 156 


Body, mind, senses, and intellect are all negative in nature. 
Only the conscience is positive. Just as the mike is useless 
without the current, so also are the body, mind, senses, and in- 
tellect without the conscience. 

The conscience that exists in everyone is one and the same, 
just as the current that flows through different bulbs is the 
same. All are one, be alike to everyone. So, do not hate, harm, 
or criticize anybody. He is a noble one who conducts himself 
without hurting others and himself not being troubled in the 
process. True spiritual sadhana (spiritual exercise) lies in con- 
sidering every work as God’s work, not in doing japa or 
dhyana. 


You may hoodwink anyone, but not God 


God is all-pervasive. It is based on this that the Veda de- 
clares, Sarvatah Pani Padam Tat Sarvathokshi Siromukham, 
Sarvatah Srutimalloke Sarvamavritya Thishtathi (with His 
hands, feet, eyes, head, mouth, and ears pervading everything, 
God permeates the entire universe). You may hoodwink any- 
one, but not God. He is always watching you. He is the eternal 
witness. He is present in you, just as the power of vision re- 
sides in your eye. Not even a blade of grass can move without 
His Will. 

It is foolishness to get carried away by the sense of doer- 
ship. So, do not feel proud of your achievements. Develop the 
sacred feeling that God is the doer and the enjoyer too. 

Consider everything as God’s Will. Whatever happens to 
you, be it profit or loss, pain or pleasure, have the resolute faith 
that it is good for you. When a person suffering from malaria 
consults a doctor, he will be given the bitter quinine medicine. 
Unless he takes the bitter medicine, he cannot be cured of the 
fever. Likewise, have the firm conviction that difficulties and 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 157 


suffering are the ways and means by which God purifies you. 
There is a reason behind whatever God does. Without under- 
standing the principle of cause and effect, people blame God 
for their suffering. Understand the truth that you yourself are 
responsible for the pain or pleasure that befalls you. 

Do not feel sad if someone were to criticize you, because 
criticizing others amounts to criticizing oneself, since the same 
Atma exists in all. Identify yourself with the Atma, not the 
body, which is like a water bubble. If someone were to beat 
you, do not retaliate. The same principle of Atma exists in 
both. God is the one who beats and also the one who gets 
beaten. The entire creation is a mono-action play of God. So, 
do not hate anybody. Love all. 

All that I say is for your own good and to make you aware 
of Divinity. All My teachings and actions carry a profound in- 
ner meaning. Our college students have white dress as their 
uniform. What is its inner significance? White color symbol- 
izes purity. Similarly, when you see someone in ochre robes, it 
reminds you of renunciation. This is to convey the message 
that you should be pure and free from all attachments. Only 
then you can attain the Divine. 


Desires are the luggage in the journey of life 


As youngsters, you have too many desires, which cause 
physical as well as mental strain. Desires are the luggage in the 
journey of life. “Less luggage more comfort makes travel a 
pleasure.” Your destination is the abode of supreme peace, i.e. 
liberation. Why do you trouble yourself with ‘heavy luggage, 
when you are going to the abode of supreme peace? 

Be satisfied with the minimum requirement of food, cloth- 
ing and shelter. Bhikshanam deharakshartham vasathram 
sheetha nivaranam (food is meant to sustain your body and 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 158 


clothing to protect you from cold). The modern youth are fas- 
cinated by fashion dresses and cloth themselves gaudily. 
Youngsters, especially women, should not indulge in dressing 
fads. The dress you wear should be good and sober. Do not 
imitate the cinema culture. Imitation is animal nature and crea- 
tion is Divine. 


True yoga lies in unifying your love with the Divine 


Control of desires leads to sense control, which in turn 
leads to Divinity. Sage Patanjali said, “Yogaha chtta vritti ni- 
rodaha,” controlling the vagaries of the mind is yoga and al- 
lowing the senses to have their own way is roga (disease). To- 
day’s man has become a rogi (diseased one) because of lack of 
sense control. One should become a yogi, not a rogi. 

Yoga is attained not by bhoga (worldly pleasures), but by 
thyaga (sacrifice). Once you attain yoga, you will never be af- 
flicted with roga. Yoga does not mean leading the life of a re- 
cluse in a forest. Some people mistake physical exercises like 
sitting cross-legged, standing on one leg etc., for yoga. True 
yoga lies in unifying your love with the Divine. 

God does not want anything from you. He never insists on 
your doing meditation or yoga. He only wants you to fill your 
hearts with principles of love and sacrifice. If you obey His 
commands with sincerity and devotion, He will take care of all 
your needs without your asking. The lives of Sabari and the 
bird Jatayu bear ample testimony to this truth. 


O mind, do not ask for anything. 

Ask, and it shall be delayed. 

Do not ask, and it shall be granted soon. 

Did He not shower His grace on Sabari, who never 
asked? 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 159 


Did He not perform the last rites of Jatayu and 
grant him liberation, without his asking? 


So you do not need to ask God for anything. If you have 
purity of heart, He will Himself take care of you, just like a 
mother who attends to the needs of the child without its asking. 
Be like a child, and the Divine Mother will take care of you. 
That is total surrender. Leave everything to the Will of the 
Mother. Do not ask for petty things lest you should lose Her 
proximity. The one who asks for food will be directed to the 
kitchen, but the mother will feed the child herself who cannot 
ask. Only those with ego and those immersed in worldly life 
ask. But the one, who surrenders himself to the Will of the Di- 
vine Mother like a child, will lead a peaceful life. 


Whatever you do, do it as an offering to God 


You would have observed a dancer making rapid mov __ e- 
ments with her hands and legs while dancing but attention is 
always focused on the rhythm. Likewise, your mind should 
always be fixed on God while discharging your duties. 

You might have heard the story of Rani Jhansi Lakshmib- 
hai. She had a small child. When she was left with no other 
choice but to go to the battlefield, she tied the child to her 
back, took a sword, and waged a fierce battle with her enemies, 
riding on horseback. But all the while, what was uppermost in 
her mind was the well being of her child. Similarly, you must 
necessarily discharge your worldly duties, but at the same time 
your mind should always be focused on God. This is the 
meaning of the maxim, “Hands in the society, head in the for- 
est.” You do not need to undertake any specific spiritual sad- 
hana. Whatever you do, do it as an offering to God. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 160 


Do not waste food, money, time, and energy 


In order to have sacred thoughts, give up vices like con- 
sumption of non-vegetarian food, smoking, and drinking in- 
toxicants. Do not waste food, money, time, and energy. Eat as 
much as you can, but do not waste, because millions are suf- 
fering for want of food. 

You all know what a miserable condition that the people of 
Orissa are in after a severe cyclone devastated the state! In 
some places, people are scrambling even for a morsel of food. 
You may not know the value of food, but they know it very 
well. So do not waste food. Food is God. 

Similarly, do not waste money. Some students waste a lot 
of money eating in hotels, in playing cards and gambling. Mis- 
use of money is evil. Do your work yourself Do not depend on 
others. Whenever you find time, wash your clothes yourself. 
Why do you give your clothes to a washer man when you can 
wash them yourself? You have no right to waste your father’s 
money. 

Time is God. That is why God is extolled as Kalaya 
Namaha, Kala Kalaya Namaha, Kala Darpa Damanaya 
Namaha, Kalatheethaya Namaha, etc. Time wasted is life 
wasted. Do not waste time in the pursuit of worldly pleasures. 
Instead taste Divinity by chanting His name. 

Do not waste energy! Energy is God. Today, students are 
wasting a lot of energy through unsacred vision, bad thoughts, 
bad hearing, and excessive talk. Our body can be compared to 
a radio. When the radio is turned on continuously, the cells get 
discharged quickly. Likewise, if you indulge in excessive talk, 
you will be losing a lot of energy. That is why the ancient 
sages and seers used to observe silence. So, conserve energy 
by observing silence at least one day in a week. I often tell the 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 161 


students, talk less and work more. Only then the latent energy 
develops. This was the sole aim of sages and seers in under- 
taking various spiritual practices. Once the latent energy de- 
velops, your memory power as well as the power of concen- 
tration will increase. 

Some students are not able to perform well in examinations 
because they are not able to concentrate even for a moment. 
They are constantly engaged in listening to radio news, cricket 
commentary, etc. with the textbook in their hand! With such 
distractions, how can they concentrate and retain their mem- 
ory? 

In olden days education was imparted to students in the gu- 
rukulas. Students had to rely entirely on their memory power 
and concentration to acquire knowledge, since there were no 
papers, pens, pencils, etc. to jot down what the teachers would 
teach. Their learning consisted of merely listening to the teach- 
ers, yet they could acquire high education. Though the modern 
students have access to papers, pens, etc., they fail to excel in 
studies because they lack concentration and memory power. 


You are not a computer; you are a composer 


Young men and women! You become divine once you 
safeguard your physical, mental, and spiritual powers. Let your 
body be engaged in good actions, mind entertain noble 
thoughts, and intellect merge in the Divine. Body, mind, and 
intellect are merely instruments. Understand the principle that 
makes instruments function. 

The modern system of education has become computer- 
oriented. There is craze for computers everywhere. You are not 
a computer. You are a composer. After all, what does the com- 
puter do? It does whatever you program it to do. It cannot 
function on its own accord. God-gifted brain is the real com- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 162 


puter. Make proper use of it. Unfortunately, modern man de- 
pends excessively on the machine to the exclusion of the God- 
gifted brain. The situation has deteriorated to such an extent 
that people depend on calculators even for simple arithmetic 
calculations. 

You should be self-reliant. Receive help from God only, 
none else. His work is only to help others. Emulate Him. Help 
ever, hurt never. Sage Vyasa said, Paropakarah punyaya pa- 
paya parapeedanam (helping others is merit, harming others is 
sin). This is the essence of all sacred texts. 

Do not give scope for misunderstandings and quarrels 
amongst yourselves. Unity is the greatest strength. Therefore, 
work in unison. “Where there is unity, there is purity. Where 
there is purity, there is Divinity.” 

If you have purity of heart, God will certainly fulfil your 
wishes. For example, if you are in need of a pen, pray to God 
earnestly. Pen will definitely appear in your pocket. There is 
nothing that you cannot accomplish with purity of heart. It is 
impossible to understand God. When you are unable to know 
your true Self, how can you know God? The other day, Uma 
Bharati mentioned that people come here to know God. It is a 
misconception. You do not need to come here to know God. 
First try to know yourself. None can ever comprehend Me. 


Ashram education inculcates all noble values in man 


Character is of paramount importance for the spiritual 
growth of an individual. Sage Kanva established a gurukula in 
order to impart teachings to the inmates of the ashram. Sa- 
kuntala was one such inmate, who grew up under the loving 
care of sage Kanva. One day, king Dushyantha happened to 
visit Kanva’s ashram. There he met Sakuntala and married her. 
Bharata was born to the couple. Having been born and brought 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 163 


up in a palace, King Dushyantha was inclined toward worldly 
pleasures. On the other hand, his son Bharata, who was born 
and brought up in Kanva Ashram, was a repository of moral, 
spiritual, and ethical values. Ashram education inculcates all 
noble values in man. 

Bharata became a paragon of all virtues because he re- 
ceived ideal education right from his childhood. On the other 
hand, Dushyantha had worldly and material wealth. He was a 
mighty emperor. What was the use of all that he possessed 
when he lacked character? This clearly demonstrates the dif- 
ference between urban education and ashram education. Urban 
education is associated with shrama (hardship), whereas ash- 
ram education is without any shrama (a-shrama). 


Your character depends on environment around you 


There is nothing wrong in enrolling as students of colleges 
in towns, provided one keeps in mind the purpose of education. 
One should not develop unnecessary contacts and get dis- 
tracted from the designated path. Your character depends on 
the environment around you. In olden times, people felt: 


If wealth is lost, nothing is lost, 
Tf health is lost, something is lost, 
If character is lost, everything is lost 


On the contrary, modern youth feels that if wealth is lost, 
everything is lost and if character is lost, nothing is lost. 

I think I am troubling you by talking too much. I can speak 
to you for any length of time, but I never indulge in unneces- 
sary talk. Remember that you are the future torchbearers of Sri 
Sathya Sai Organizations. The elders of the organization today 
may be aged and have their own constraints. Youth have to 
take the initiative to lead the organization from the front. Each 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 164 


state organization should have its own youth leader to take up 
major responsibilities. Ensure that you keep yourself distant 
from politics. Work for the welfare and progress of society. 
That is the greatest sadhana. 


There is only one Guru, and He is God 


Let your behavior be exemplary wherever you are. As long 
as you are in Prasanthi Nilayam, you lead a disciplined life. 
Continue to do the same even after you leave the place. Be al- 
ways immersed in the Divine, not in deep wine. Only those 
who are immersed in the Divine are dear to Me and are My 
dear friends. If you want to be dear friends of Swami, conduct 
yourself in the divine manner. In such a case, you do not need 
to come here; I will come to you wherever you are. I will come 
there, wherever you stay. I am with you, in you, around you 
and behind you. I am not separate from you. I and you are one. 

Vahe Guru means there is only one guru and He is God. 
He is the goal. Do not go hither and thither from one guru to 
another. Under all circumstances, hold on to God steadfastly. 
Guru Brahma Guru Vishnu Guru Devo Maheswarah ... God 1s 
your true Guru. You can call Him by any name. 

In the word Guru, gu stands for Gunatheetha (attributeless) 
and ru for Ruparahita (formless). So Guru is formless and be- 
yond attributes. So, God is your true Guru. 

Having come here spending lot of money and energy, put 
into practice whatever you have learnt here. Once you return to 
your places, share the experiences and joy with your fellow 
youth. Only then will the purpose of attending the conference 
be served. Serve your fellow beings and sanctify your lives. 


Neither by penance nor by pilgrimages 
Nor by going through sacred texts 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 165 


Can one cross the ocean of Samsara. 
Only through service can one redeem oneself. 
[Sanskrit sloka] 


Serve, without any expectation of reward. That is nishkama 
yoga. No benefit accrues to you if you expect reward for the 
service rendered in various villages. Do not boast that you 
have served in many villages. Work silently; definitely, God 
will shower His grace on you. I am very happy that you bore 
many inconveniences here with love and patience after having 
traveled long distances. You might not have had the food of 
your choice here. Never mind, what is important is good head, 
which will lead to God. You should eat to live, not live to eat. 

Embodiments of love! Hoping that you will lead a happy 
and ideal life, I bless you all and bring My Discourse to a 
close. 


21 November 1999 
Prasanthi Nilayam 


There may be gold, silver, copper, iron filings, 
diamonds, rubies, silks, and other things of value 
spread out on a flat surface. But a magnet pays no 
attention to all the riches; it selects only the iron 
filings. It is the same with devotees. God does not 
select on the basis of wealth. He looks to the purity 
of the heart. 

— Baba 


15 


True education liberates 


One may master all forms of knowledge, 

One may vanquish one’s adversaries in debate, 

One may fight with valor and courage in the battlefield, 

One may be an emperor reigning over vast kingdoms, 

One may offer cows and gold as acts of charity, 

One may count the countless stars in the sky, 

One may tell the names of innumerable living creatures 

on the earth, 

One may be an expert in eight forms of yoga, 

One may reach even the moon; 

But can anyone control the body, mind, and senses? 

Turn the vision inward 

And achieve the supreme state of equanimity of the mind. 
[Telugu Poem] 


Embodiments of Love —students, boys, and girls! You can 
call yourself a student only when you know the significance of 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 167 


education. Education does not mean mere acquisition of book- 
ish knowledge. Many are experts in bookish knowledge. Many 
have become educational wizards and scholars. What is the 
service these intellectuals are doing to the world? Having been 
born and brought up in society, having acquired their knowl- 
edge from society, what have they done for society? What is 
the use of their scholarship and education if they do not show 
their gratitude to society? 


Education is for serving society 


Sri Aurobindo once told the students of Calcutta Univer- 
sity, “Students! Why do you acquire this knowledge? Is your 
learning only for your selfish ends? You have acquired all 
these skills expense of society. If you do not repay your debt to 
your community by using your talent for society, it is better 
you burn your books.” 

Today, science has achieved great advancement. Many sci- 
entific and technological disciplines are taught to students. Is 
this knowledge imparted by society for the benefit of society or 
for the name and fame of the students? Having become great 
intellectuals, is there any genuine transformation in them? 

Churchill once said, “Man has conquered all, but he has not 
conquered himself.” Scientific education of today teaches one 
everything about the external world, leaving out the knowledge 
of the Self. The entire effort of man is now concentrated on 
knowing everything about the external world. All this is mere 
material and physical knowledge. The learned man today 
knows all about the external world but nothing about his own 
reality. 

True relationship is that which you establish with your in- 
ner self. Everyone asks the question, “Who are you?” But no- 
body seems to be interested in putting the question to himself, 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 168 


“Who am I?” The answer to the first question is related to the 
physical aspect of your personality, while the second relates to 
the spiritual aspect 

Human excellence will blossom only when the relationship 
and balance between the physical and the spiritual aspects is 
intimately established. Physical knowledge is negative, while 
spiritual knowledge is positive. Humanness blossoms when the 
positive is blended with the negative. The purpose of education 
is to produce this happy blend of the physical and spiritual 
knowledge and help human excellence to blossom. Thus, the 
aim of education is total development of man. 

Man should be transformed to become compassionate. Of 
what use is education that does not melt the heart of the student 
to the plight of others? Modern secular education is making 
man hard-hearted. Just as you try hard to sharpen your intel- 
lect, you should broaden your heart also. If this fact is not re- 
alized, of what use is your intelligence and learning? With 
proper education, both the mind and heart should be trans- 
formed. 


Ancient education system 


In this sacred land of Bharat, great sages have been making 
many changes and modifications in the education system since 
ancient times. Before the coming of foreigners, there were very 
few educational institutions in this country. Each of them spe- 
cialized in one branch of knowledge or the other and helped 
the students to achieve excellence in that branch. 

Kasi (Benaras) University specialized in the study of 
grammar. Alankara Sastra (rhetoric) was the specialty in 
Kashmir University. Ujjaini University specialized in mathe- 
matics. Similarly, there was a small town known as Navadvipa 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 169 


where nyaya (logic) was the specialty. Amaravati, the capital 
of the kingdom of Bharata (brother of Rama), specialized, 
apart from other sciences, in ayurveda (medicine). Ayurveda 
was a Specialty in the Takshashila (Taxila) University also. 
One of the most famous universities of ancient India was 
Nalanda, which specialized in grammar, nyaya, medicine, and 
yoga sastra. Valabhi, Mithila, and Vikramasila were other 
well-known universities of ancient India. 

In all these universities, apart from the specific disciplines, 
general ethics and proper moral conduct in life were essential 
part of the curriculum. 


Learning professional skills is essential 


Sathya (truth) and dharma (righteousness) were the guid- 
ing principles for all students. Besides, vocational training for 
various trades like carpentry, pottery, blacksmithy, etc. was 
given so that the pupils may be trained for life and may be- 
come capable of earning their livelihood in a righteous way. 

What is the point in learning subjects that are not useful in 
daily life? Learning professional skills is therefore essential. 
Fine arts like music, dance, and drama were also taught in 
these universities. Amaravati University included in its cur- 
riculum all these subjects and their branches. Careful investi- 
gation indicates that there were only nine or ten such universi- 
ties in those days. 

Today, there are hundreds of universities. But what is the 
knowledge that is being imparted in all these institutions? 
What service do they render to society? What evidence is there 
that they serve the interests of society? With the growth of 
modern scientific and technological studies, the true aim of 
education, i.e. knowledge of the Self, has declined. 

Vidya is termed Education. What is the root meaning of 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 170 


Education? The word is derived from the Latin root educare. 
What does it mean? It means to bring out what is inside. What 
has to be brought out? 


Two types of knowledge 


Every form of knowledge and capacity is latent in man. He 
is endowed with all types of potentialities — physical, mental, 
spiritual, and ethical. The true aim of education is to make ex- 
plicit the innate powers of man. These are of two types. One 
relates to the knowledge of external things, and the organ that 
manifests this power is the head (brain). The organ that enables 
one to bring out the inner knowledge is the heart. The former 
relates to physical existence while the latter to higher learning 
or living in its true sense. Life will become ideal only when 
both these types of knowledge are made to manifest in har- 
mony. 

The knowledge emanating from the head, viz. reading, 
writing, etc., helps you to earn a living. All this is mere book- 
ish knowledge. From pusthaka (books), it enters the masthaka 
(head). It is only superficial knowledge, that which has gone 
into books from someone’s head and back into another’s head 
from the books (from masthaka to pusthaka and pusthaka to 
masthaka). 

Apart from this bookish knowledge, one must have general 
knowledge. Besides, one must attain knowledge of discrimina- 
tion, which helps one to discriminate between good and bad 
and right and wrong. But above all, one should attain practical 
knowledge, which comes only after getting the knowledge of 
discrimination. 

Due to his obsession with external knowledge, man today 
is immersed in self-interest and forgets his responsibilities to 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 171 


society. When you engage yourselves in the welfare of society, 
your welfare is automatically ensured. 

There are hundreds of thousand wealthy and learned per- 
sons in the world. But they are all engaged in selfish activities. 
Do you find anyone who has put the interests of society above 
self-interest? In fact, they confer prestigious awards and hon- 
ors on those persons who are engaged in selfish pursuits and 
seek their own advancement. It is apparent that they do not 
know the real meaning of education. 

Persons with numerous degrees are thought to be highly 
educated. Such proliferation of degrees is mere quantitative 
attainment. But what we need is quality. One teaspoonful of 
cow’s milk is better than barrels of donkey’s milk. 


In ancient times, each student was himself a scholar 


That is why in olden days, each university specialized in 
one area of knowledge and imparted the knowledge of the 
highest quality to its students. The university in Kasi (Benaras) 
specialized in grammar in all its manifold aspects so that the 
acquired knowledge could become useful and practical in day- 
to-day life. The Amarakosa —probably first of existing lex1- 
cons in Sanskrit— was a subject of study and even through this 
study of grammar the teachers of those days were preparing 
their students for Amaratva (immortality). In these universities, 
each student was himself a great scholar. 

Who were the teachers? Often, the resident preceptor was 
himself the faculty and indeed the Vice Chancellor. The whole 
process of education was carried out independently, without 
any interference or control by any government or other agency. 
Saraswathi, the goddess of learning, was honored and given 
complete freedom. The students received her boundless grace 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 172 


to attain high standards of excellence. 

Generally, the teachers did not take any salaries for teach- 
ing, nor did the students pay any fees. There was no fixed 
timetable for the teaching; the preceptor taught as and when he 
was So inclined, as the spirit moved him. He might wake up a 
student at night and impart knowledge. Irrespective of his own 
convenience, he would clarify the doubts of his students. 

And where were all these instructions carried on? The 
classes were held in natural environment on the banks of holy 
rivers, under shady trees, or in temple verandahs in a pure and 
sacred atmosphere. 


Wavering mind is the cause for short memory 


Today’s education requires huge edifices. An enormous 
number and variety of equipments and implements are neces- 
sary, and huge effort, physical and monetary, is required for 
these. There were no such requirements of equipments or 
grand buildings those days. Even in the famous universities 
like Ujjaini and Takshashila, there were no large buildings or 
edifices like those of today. 

There is no comparison between the teachers and students 
of those days and those of present times. Today, there are text- 
books galore and numerous ‘notes’ thereon, but there are few 
that study. In the days of yore, there was no paper or ink. 
Teaching was carried out by oral communication from the 
teacher. The students were so receptive that they absorbed all 
instructions and retained them in their memory. Words ema- 
nating from the heart of the preceptor were imprinted on the 
hearts of the students. 

Students today cannot remember what they have studied 
just an hour earlier. Why are the students of today so short of 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 173 


memory? The students today have a wavering mind, which is 
the cause of their short memory and poor retentive power. 

Education in those days included the techniques of con- 
trolling the mind. Only when the mind is under control is it 
possible to absorb and retain the subject of study. That is why 
it is said, Manah eva manushyanam karanam bandhamokshayo 
(the mind is responsible for both the bondage and liberation of 
man). 


Education should develop sacred qualities 


This eternal truth has been forgotten today. The practice of 
compassion and love is absent in daily life. Without these eter- 
nal values, of what use is your education? It is therefore neces- 
sary to include these ancient values in our modern education 
system. 

There is no harm in acquiring modern education and skills, 
but the blossoming of your heart is the fundamental education. 
A noble heart and a broad mind are your basic requirements; 
do not stray into narrow-mindedness. You should expand your 
love. If you narrow it down to yourself, then it will become 
contraction love. Instead you should have expansion love. This 
is the principle taught by our ancient culture. Forgetting this 
valuable ancient tradition of Bharat, you are engaged in ac- 
quiring physical and material education. 

What are going to achieve? You have to manifest all those 
ancient values in your life. These values are not something that 
can be acquired from outside; they are all in you. Your effort 
should be to make them manifest. 

Modern scientists have dug deep into the earth and made 
explicit several potent capacities that are resident inside the 
earth. By such indiscriminate acts, they are disturbing the bal- 
ance of the earth and exposing the world to great danger. This 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 174 


imbalance has grown to such an extent that it can threaten the 
very existence of the world. 

Today we almost worship science and technology. What is 
this science and technology that you are so proud about? All 
this knowledge is already within you. Proper enquiry and dis- 
crimination will reveal all these truths to you. 

Any student of elementary chemistry will say that water is 
formed by combining two parts of hydrogen and one part of 
oxygen. You even know how to synthesize them. But are you 
making enough effort to see that water is evenly distributed to 
all the members of the society? 

The welfare of society should be constantly in your view. 
If all your knowledge and skill is employed for purely selfish 
purposes, what is the use? 


Ignorance is very close to knowledge 


In Mumbai, some people are spending crores of rupees to 
convert sea water into potable water. Crores are being wasted 
in such futile efforts. By such methods, you may get a glass of 
drinking water at a cost of about five thousand rupees. This 
country is served by sacred rivers like the Ganga and the Ya- 
muna. What is needed is to pump up and distribute this water 
to the people who require it. This will require only a fraction of 
the cost of converting seawater into potable water. This kind of 
effort at technology is like buying peanuts for a quarter of a 
rupee and paying half a rupee to carry it to your house. Such 
learning is not knowledge. It is sheer ignorance. 

Ignorance is very close to knowledge, just as darkness is 
under a source of light. You imagine that technical knowledge 
has made rapid strides. You also believe that science has made 
great progress. But the fact is that side by side with the growth 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 175 


of physical knowledge, ignorance has also grown enormously. 
You are totally unmindful of this ignorance, and are continu- 
ally spending four times the money and effort for fulfilling 
each one of your needs. This is the reason for Bharat’s visible 
poverty. 

Along with intellectual acumen, you must have the right 
virtues. Good behavior, good intellect, commitment to truth, 
devotion, discipline, sense of duty —these are the six aims of 
education. Who is teaching all these today? 

We find that students are heroes in bookish knowledge and 
zeroes in practice. This is not true education. You have to be- 
come heroes in practice as well. You are writing a large num- 
ber of good books and giving discourses to spread the message 
of love and service. It is not enough if these are propagated; 
you should put into practice what you learn. Only then will you 
be blissful. 


Education must lead to experiencing bliss 


Embodiments of Love — Students, boys and girls! 

Modern education does not fulfil the aim of life. You 
gather graduate and postgraduate degrees, but these are mere 
burdens on your minds. What comfort do you derive from 
these degrees? Nothing whatsoever! Penniless, illiterate per- 
sons go to sleep without a care in the world. But educated per- 
sons with many degrees to their credit, acquired at great cost, 
wander about hunting for a job, almost facing starvation. 

Education is not solely for the purpose of earning a living. 
It must lead you to experience bliss. Of what use are the job 
and the wealth if there is no happiness? Man is in constant 
search for wealth. Just as the earth revolves round the sun, man 
is going round money. Even a beggar can get money. Is that 
sort of income worth acquiring? 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 176 


Virtue is the wealth that you should go after. In the absence 
of virtue, wealth merely makes you bloat with pride and os- 
tentation, destroys your humanness, and eclipses your human 
values. Studying to get a degree, getting a job, running a fam- 
ily —all these are worldly activities, emanating from the head. 

What should a learned person bring out? He should mani- 
fest the qualities of compassion, love, forbearance, peace, 
kindness, etc., which come from the heart. But, today, there is 
no compassion, there is only fashion. It is very important to 
have compassion. You should respect and love all your fel- 
lowmen and serve your parents. Parents undergo many priva- 
tions and difficulties to give you the facilities for acquiring 
good education. 


Respect your parents 


You know how difficult it is to get good education these 
days. It is only in our university that you have the privilege of 
free education. Anywhere outside, it costs ten to twenty thou- 
sand rupees to put a child in the First Standard. For graduate 
courses, you know what the monthly expense is. Who bears 
this cost? Is it not your parents? Out of love for you, with your 
welfare, progress, and future prosperity in mind, they undergo 
many difficulties, wearing themselves out day after day so that 
you may achieve academic success. You are just not mindful 
of all this. 

Today, you are a student. Tomorrow, you may be a parent. 
Unless you respect your parents today, your children will not 
respect you tomorrow. If you respect your friends and fellow 
students, they will also respect you. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 177 


What will happen to you 
when you become a decrepit old man, 
when your body becomes weak, 
legs stagger and vision fails, and 
You are no better than a leather puppet and 
are an object of ridicule for the world? 
[Telugu Poem] 


It is imperative that you imbibe divine qualities. You 
should grow up as an intelligent, sensible, and compassionate 
person with human qualities. Otherwise, you cannot achieve 
the purpose of human life. Instead, if you join evil company 
and take to all sorts of vices, you will dissipate all your ac- 
quired good education in worthless ways. Seek good company. 
Tyaja durjana samsargam, bhaja sadhu samagamam, kuru 
punyam ahoratram (abandon bad company, seek the company 
of good people, perform good actions day and night). This is 
the proper way. By evil association you also become evil. That 
is why it is said, “TeIl me your company and I shall tell you 
what you are.” 

Make friends after proper enquiry. You must love all. Do 
not hate anybody. But you must keep in your heart good peo- 
ple only. Similarly, mere bookish learning is fruitless unless it 
is put to practical use. 

Craftsmen like carpenters, potters, and blacksmiths were 
able to lead successful life in olden days. Today there is no 
connection between institutional education and practical voca- 
tion. Take the simple matter of washing clothes. Why can’t 
you wash your own clothes? Such savings can be put to more 
sacred purposes like helping a needy person. Money should not 
be wasted. 

Tread the path of purity, humility, divinity and set an ex- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 178 


ample to the world. When people extol you as a student of 
Sathya Sai Institutions by your exemplary conduct, how much 
good reputation is earned not only by you but also by your 
Alma Mater! Be sure to uphold your own dignity and respect. 
Only then can your parent institution have a good reputation. 
Otherwise, it will become a case of empty pocket, bare face, 
and shaven head! (A Telugu saying signifying total ruin.) 


Keep your parents and family happy 


Never mind whether your stomach is full or empty, but 
keep your parents and family happy. Speak gently and properly 
with them. That is why I say, “You cannot always oblige, but 
you can always speak obligingly.” 

Nowadays, it is difficult to make out whether a student is 
talking to his own parents or strangers, because his manner of 
talking to parents is so reprehensible. If the father is not highly 
educated and approaches his son with an enquiry, “My boy, 
what are you doing?” mostly he is shrugged off with “Go 
away, don’t bother me.” Instead of this, if you speak sweetly 
with humility, “Father, I am trying for a job,” how pleased he 
will be! If you can’t please your own parents, how on earth 
will you please society? 

What was the nature of convocation in olden days? After 
completing their studies, the pupils made appropriate offerings 
to the preceptor and prayed for his parting advice. Then, the 
preceptor used to advise them, “My children, now you are 
ready to go back to your families. Support your parents, get 
married and lead a righteous life.” 

What is the state of affairs today? When children get back 
home from the educational institutions, they do not treat their 
parents properly. But the parents still take care of their chil- 
dren, putting up with all their misbehavior. Modern students do 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 179 


not have even an iota of our culture. What a sacred tradition it 
is! Loka samasta sukhino bhavantu (May the entire world en- 
joy bliss) is the prayer that our culture enjoins us to utter each 
day. 


Understand the significance of ancient culture 


There was an old man who followed his rituals strictly and 
performed his prayers (Sandhya Vandanam) in the prescribed 
manner early in the morning and at sunset. He had a grandson 
who used to sit in the verandah doing his day’s homework, 
dipping his pen in the inkbottle every time he wrote a few 
lines. As he was busy with his study, his grandfather came out 
and sat on a little stool and started chanting the mantras, “Ke- 
savaya Namah, Madhavaya Namah, Govindaya Namah," etc. 
Taking water from a little vessel, he sipped half a spoonful at a 
time with each mantra as per the ritual. 

The modern lad stopped his study and started watching his 
grandfather. He started thinking, what a foolish thing his 
grandfather was doing! If he wanted to drink water why did he 
not drink it all in one gulp straight from the vessel? He stopped 
his work and asked his grandfather, “Grandfather, why are you 
drinking water sip by sip? Why don't you drink it in one gulp 
from the vessel if you are thirsty?” 

The old man was an intelligent person and knew the mod- 
ern mind. He said, “My boy, you do your work in your way, I 
shall do mine in my way.” 

But modern lads have the habit of arguing with elders. So, 
the boy questioned his grandfather again. 

When pestered further by his grandson, the old man shot 
back, “You simpleton, you dip your pen in the ink bottle every 
time you write a few words; why don’t you just pour the bottle 
of ink over the paper and be done with it?” 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 180 


Then the boy realized his mistake of arguing with his 
grandfather. 

The grandfather continued, “Dear boy, you have to dip the 
pen in ink to write every word. Only then will it be neat. When 
I chant a mantra and take water, it reaches the particular deity 
whose name is chanted. When you write a letter and write ad- 
dress correctly on the cover, it will reach the right person. 
Similarly, the mantras are addressed to the respective deities. 
If you don't understand, you should keep quiet.” 

Instruction was given in an informal and interesting way in 
those days. Today’s students neither know their own job nor 
understand the work of others. This kind of general knowledge 
has to be acquired by direct experience, not from any institu- 
tional study. Hence, try seriously to understand the signifi- 
cance of your ancient culture. 


Never forget your cultural values 


What are present-day scientists and technologists are do- 
ing? Have they any idea? They assert that all that is on the 
earth is for the use and exploitation by man. Indiscriminate 
mining of all kinds of minerals and ores is carried on for so- 
called benefit of mankind. The earth is spherical. Systematic 
removal of material from one side causes imbalance as the 
other side becomes heavy. It is divine dispensation that main- 
tains balance. This balance should not be disturbed. The loss of 
balance is the cause of earthquakes and other natural disasters. 

Man is not only causing imbalance on the earth, he is pol- 
luting the oceans with industrial and urban waste. Water pollu- 
tion has reached a stage where people are forced to drink pol- 
luted water. 

Science helps you to develop and sharpen your intellect. 
There are many scientists; many of you are also students of 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 181 


science. You must know that knowledge that comes from 
within is at the top level. At the second level is skill; at the 
third is balance; and at the fourth is insight. Swami tells you to 
convert your knowledge into skill, not to kill it. When knowl- 
edge is killed, imbalance ensues. Why is there such loss of bal- 
ance in the world today? This is because you have killed your 
God-given knowledge instead of turning it into skill. 


Past, present, and future 
Students! 


Past is past. Forget the past. Do not worry over the future, 
since it is uncertain. Live in the present. The present is not just 
ordinary present, it is omnipresent. The future is the conse- 
quence of the present. The present is the consequence of the 
past. The tree of the past gives the seed of the present, which 
grows into the tree of the future. 

Between the tree of the past and the tree of the future, the 
present is the seed, which is of utmost significance. It gets 
sustenance from neethi (morality). Without neethi, manava 
jathi (the human race) is bound to be ruined, and even its ex- 
istence is impossible. Manava jathi (human race) is a balanced 
blend of truth, morality, and sacrifice. But we are failing to 
recognize the sacredness of human nature. Amongst all beings, 
birth as a human being is the rarest (Jantunam narajanma 
durlabham). Loss of this humanness in man is the cause of 
chaotic conditions in the world. 

I said the other day, “Sathyam bruyat, priyam bruyat, na 
bruyat sathyamapriyam (speak the truth, speak sweetly, do not 
speak unpalatable truth).” This mode of living is true sacrifice. 
Who can assert that he is treading strictly this path? 

Some people make fun of the Brahmins when they chant 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 182 


mantras. Each mantra is potent, and all our ancient traditions 
are meaningful. A small example. There is a wedding going 
on. These days you have elaborately decorated pandals or 
shamianas. Those days they had no such elaborate external 
decoration. Just four posts were put up, covered over for shade 
with green leaves and branches, and the people used to sit un- 
der the shade to carry out the rituals. 

Even now, on holy days, we hang mango leaves on our 
doors and gates. It is not merely a sign of auspiciousness; it 
provides healthy environment too. The sudden influx of a large 
number of guests causes an increase in carbon dioxide. The 
green leaves help in reducing the carbon dioxide level and in- 
crease the oxygen in the place. Some people may ask why we 
should have green leaves; will plastic leaves not be better? Can 
the plastic leaves and flowers absorb carbon dioxide and re- 
lease oxygen? 


Atma Tattwa was the basis of ancient education system 


Dear Students! You should try to understand the inner sig- 
nificance of your cultural heritage. Swami never says you 
should not have modern education. Why would Swami make 
such an inhibition? All that is said is that along with this 
worldly study, pursue also an enquiry into the principle of your 
Self (Atma Tattwa). This was the basis of the ancient education 
system. 

You know, Krishna and Kuchela were taught in the forest. 
The friendship developed during that study was long lasting. 
Today there is no true friendship. If you have money in your 
pocket, there will be many who will be hailing you, “hello, 
hello.” If there is no money, then “hello” becomes “hollow”, 
and all friends desert you. Is this friendship? 

True friendship is like a single life embodied in two bodies. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 183 


Your effort should be to acquire friendship like this. While 
making friends, do not hate anybody. Do not harm anybody. 
Bhagavan wants that you should all acquire education of this 
kind, with broad-mindedness and purity, and become a model 
for humanity. This is My benediction for you. 


Television is the disease of modern times 


Dear Students! As long as you are here, you are safe and 
secure. When you get back to your homes, you are assailed by 
various distractions like television, video, cinema, etc. All 
these pollute your hearts. 

The programs on the television are very attractive, but you 
must realize that they are shown to you not for your gain but 
for the gain of sponsors and advertisers. Watch only such pro- 
grams that are related to education, or those dedicated to moral 
values. TV has, in fact, become a disease of modern times. So, 
it is not TV but TB (tuberculosis). If there are no moral 
thoughts in you, what will happen when such programs are 
watched? 

If you have leisure, take a walk. Don't sit in front of a TV 
set. You become so addicted that when someone intervenes, 
you lose your temper. Even the sound from the kitchen dis- 
turbs you, where your mother is busy making dinner for you. 
Why don’t you get up to help her and make her happy? This is 
the main principle of our culture: Help ever, Hurt never. 

Acquire big degrees, achieve fame. No harm. Go abroad, 
earn money and reputation; nothing wrong in that. But never 
forget your own culture. Don’t criticize the cultures of others. 
Wherever you are, make your life an ideal for others. Speak 
pleasantly. Do good deeds. Then you will be a good person. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 184 


Goodness versus greatness 


Do not strive to acquire the status of a great man. Always 
strive to become a good man. Great men may do many evil 
deeds, but the acts of a good man stand out as ideals for others 
always. Ravana was a great man. Rama is the example par ex- 
cellence of a good man. Both had mastered the same studies: 
but how different were their natures! Ravana, though endowed 
with extraordinary learning, was himself destroyed and was the 
cause of the destruction of his entire clan, because of one bad 
quality of desire. Hiranyakasipu, the master of all the five ele- 
ments, was ruined by his evil quality of anger. Duryodhana 
was ruined by greed. He refused to give even five villages to 
the Pandavas. 

All these persons not only destroyed themselves, they were 
the cause of the utter destruction of their entire clans. Even one 
evil trait is enough to cause ruin. Then imagine how much 
worse a fate one will be faced with if one has all six evil quali- 
ties of lust, anger, greed, pride, envy, and hatred! 

When you see an evil person, you will become aware of 
your own bad qualities. When you see a good man, your own 
goodness will come to your mind. Thus, your good or bad 
qualities have intimate common relationship with others. All 
men are bound together by their innate common qualities. It is 
necessary to unify all humanity. When such unity is achieved, 
then the divinity immanent in human beings will manifest. 

Do not make friends indiscriminately. Always enquire into 
the good and evil in your fellowmen and then choose your 
company. While helping, you need not discriminate. Help any- 
body in need. Earn a good name for your institution by your 
reputation as a good person. That alone will make Bhagavan 


happy. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 185 


Keep God in your heart and serve society 


There are no fees for the various facilities in the Sathya Sai 
institutions. You have complete peace in the absence of all 
fees. In other places, there are fees of many kinds. Paying out 
fees here, fees there, fees for this and fees for that, where is the 
room for peace? You only go to pieces. 

Lead a peaceful life. Be good. Be a model for society. This 
is the gift of Bhagavan to all of you today. Do not forget God. 
God is your very life. Keep God in your heart and serve the 
society. You are bound to succeed in all your endeavors. Bha- 
gavan wishes all of you to lead lives full of bliss. 

Today, Dr. Goldstein is the Chief Guest. Since he is a fa- 
miliar figure here, do not take him for granted. He is no ordi- 
nary person. He does not lack wealth. Nor is he short of aca- 
demic distinctions. He is quite well known. He is the Chairman 
of the American Medical Council. Very few here have all the 
qualities that he has. 

It is not for any of the material things like wealth, fame or 
health that he comes here. It is for the sake of the bliss he ex- 
periences here that he comes so frequently. When Bhagavan 
asked him, Goldstein replied that he found bliss here in Pras- 
anthi Nilayam that was not there in America. You know he is a 
rich man. If he wanted his son to be married in grand style, he 
could have done it in America. His son was to be married to 
the daughter of a well-known film star who is also a rich per- 
son. But Goldstein does not bother about grandness and great- 
ness, he is concerned only with goodness. The film star 
brought her daughter and Goldstein his son, and the marriage 
was performed in that little interview room of Bhagavan. The 
couple is happily living together. 

His second son insisted that Swami perform his marriage, 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 186 


too. For many years, Bhagavan delayed the decision. Finally, 
Swami asked Dr. Goldstein to bring his son here. Swami found 
a suitable bride for him from an ideal and well-to-do family. 
The marriage was again performed here. 

In olden days, girls used to cry a lot while leaving their 
parents’ homes after the marriage. Unlike modem girls, this 
girl also cried for Swami while departing from here, I told her 
not to cry and to come again with a child. 

Both the sons of Goldstein are very good. Their goodness 
is in fact a consequence of their association with the Sai Orga- 
nization. Their wives are also very good. 

Goldstein does everything according to the commands of 
Bhagavan. He is in charge of the Sai Organizations of several 
countries, including that of America. He is a good, devoted, 
and disciplined worker. As a loyal member of the Sai Organi- 
zation, he has the three sacred qualities: duty, discipline, and 
devotion. 

Emulate him and follow these three qualities and become 
ideal models in your lives. Earn a good name. Make your par- 
ents happy; do not neglect them under any circumstances. If 
you disobey your parents, remember you may face the same 
fate when you become parents. Be good, see good, and do 
good. This is the way to God. 


22 November 1999 
XVIII Convocation of SSSTHL 
Sai Kulwant Hall, Prasanthi Nilayam 


16 


Complete surrender confers Bliss 


Embodiments of Love! 


The Vedas, the very source of all spiritual principles, have 
been enlightening the whole world from ancient days from this 
holy land of Bharat (India). They are the very forms of God. 
Divinity pervades everything, living and non-living. Anora- 
neeyan Mahatomaheeyan —from the microcosm to the macro- 
cosm, the entire universe is pervaded by Divinity. This viswa 
(cosmos) is the form of Divinity. From dawn to dusk, you ex- 
perience this form of the Divine, and yet you fail to realise this 
fact. 

All that your eyes see are forms of the Divine. All the 
sounds you hear are similarly pervaded by Divinity. Even the 
thoughts in your mind are forms of the Divine. The bliss that 
emanates from the heart is also divine. When everything that is 
seen, heard, experienced, and enjoyed is divine, how foolish it 
is to search for God elsewhere! 

You are seeing God in the form of the world every mo- 
ment. Since you lack divine feelings, you see God as the world 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 188 


instead of seeing the world as God. Once you understand that 
Viswam Vishnu Swarupam (the universe is the form of 
Vishnu), you will certainly be able to see the world as God. 
Yad bhavam tad bhavathi (as the feelings, so is the result). 


Do not limit God to a particular name and form 


Divinity pervades the entire cosmos. Do not have the feel- 
ing that God is present at one place and not at another. He is 
everywhere. Wherever you search for Him, you will find Him 
there. But you should give up worldly feelings and fill your 
vision with divine feelings. Only then can you understand and 
experience the Vedic dictum, “Sarvam Vishnumayam jagat (the 
whole world is pervaded by God).” 

Do not limit God to a particular name and form. He exists 
in all beings and in all forms as Atmic Principle. In fact, it is 
the power of the Divine that makes you see, hear, talk, experi- 
ence, and enjoy. In that case, you may ask whether difficulties, 
wotries, and misfortunes are also divine! Yes indeed! They too 
are forms of the Divine. Here is a small example. 

Lord Narayana protected Prahlada, who constantly chanted 
His name and contemplated on Him. But he became the Lord 
of Death for Hiranyakasipu, who had no God consciousness 
and led a worldly life. So, both God and Yama (Lord of Death) 
are one and the same. He acts according to the feelings of the 
individual. 

Even the most evil of men have some good in them. This 
goodness is the aspect of Divinity in them. The Upanishads 
say, Easwara sarva bhuthanam (God is the indweller of all 
beings), Jsavasyam idam jagat (God pervades the whole 
world). Do not be misled by various terms like Atma, Brah- 
man, Easwara, Vishnu, etc. These are all different names of 
one and the same Divinity. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 189 


The term Bhagavan stands for Divinity. What is the inner 
meaning of this word? The syllable bha stands for effulgence, 
ga stands for one who gives, and van means one who is capa- 
ble. So, Bhagavan means the one who is capable of spreading 
light and effulgence to the world. 

This Divinity is latent in you. The principle of Atma is one 
and the same in all, be it a yogi (renunciant), a bhogi (pleasure 
seeker), a jogi (itinerant renunciant), or a vairagi (dispassion- 
ate one). It is present in theists and also in atheists. Forgetting 
this all-pervasive Divinity, you undertake various spiritual 
practices, limiting Divinity to a particular name of your indi- 
vidual preference. Spiritual practices should confer the aware- 
ness that Divinity is all-pervasive. Just as fire is needed till the 
rice is cooked, so also spiritual practices are needed till you 
realise the innate Divinity. 


Contemplate always on Divine Name 


Even if you sow seeds, you cannot expect the crop if there 
is no rain. Even when there is rain, you cannot expect the crop 
if you do not sow seeds. Likewise, both human effort and di- 
vine grace are needed to achieve success in any endeavour. 

Though butter is present in milk, one cannot see it unless 
one makes it into curd and churns it. Likewise, though Divinity 
is all-pervasive, one cannot experience it unless one makes ap- 
propriate efforts. Human effort can be compared to the process 
of churning. Once the butter is separated from the curd by 
churning, it will not get mixed with it again. If you partake of 
the churned butter, your entire being experiences it. Likewise, 
you will become one with Divinity once you experience it. 

Before partaking of food, you offer it to God by chanting 
the following sloka (verse) from the Bhagavad Gita: 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 190 


Brahmarpanam Brahma Havir 
Brahmagnou Brahmana Hutham 
Brahmaiva Thena Ganthavyam 
Brahmakarma Samadhina. 


Where is Brahman? He is very much present in you. That 
is why you get the reply immediately from within: 


Aham Vaishvanaro Bhuthva 
Praninam Dehamasritha 
Pranapana Samayukta 
Pachamyannam Chathurvidham. 


God is present in you in the form of Vaishvanara. He di- 
gests the food that you partake of and distributes the essence to 
all parts of the body. God, who is present within, is called 
Vaishvanara, and the all-pervasive Divinity is known as 
Vishnu. 


God is not separate from you; He is in you 


Devotees attribute different names and forms to God on the 
basis of their feelings. But God is one. Worship Him with the 
feeling that He is not separate from you. He is in you. He is the 
embodiment of love. He will manifest from within only when 
you develop pure and selfless love. 

Spiritual practices done without the principle of love are 
useless. Some people sit for hours together in meditation but 
are unable to experience Divinity because their mind is un- 
steady. Instead of wasting time in this manner, it is better to do 
some useful work. God is the embodiment of time. So, do not 
waste time. “Sarvada Sarvakaleshu Sarvathra Harichinthanam 
(think of God at all places, at all times, under all circum- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 191 


stances.)” Pure and selfless love is the only way to attain Di- 
vinity. Fulfillment of worldly desires will confer only tempo- 
rary happiness. So, put a check on your desires. Your goal is 
permanent and eternal bliss. It is within you and can be at- 
tained only through love. 

Every cell in your body contains the details of your whole 
being. In fact, every cell in your body holds your whole form. 
There are billions of cells in your body. While your form is 
immanent in each cell and in each limb in the microcosm, your 
body is your own macrocosmic form. In the same manner, 
each one of you is the cosmic divine form (Viswa Virat Swa- 
rupa). You must make efforts to fully appreciate this reality. 


The name leads you to the form 


You go to a village to see your friend, but you do not know 
his address. How can you expect to meet him unless you know 
his correct address? Here is another example: Many people 
have gathered here now. You want to meet a particular boy. 
You say that he is wearing a bush coat and pants and has got a 
good hairstyle. But this information is not sufficient to trace 
the boy, because there may be many boys in this crowd who fit 
this description. Instead if you announce his name, say 
Ramakrishna, from the stage, immediately he will get up from 
the crowd. It is the name that leads you to the form. 

That is why the ancient sages and seers started Namachin- 
thana (continuous contemplation on the Divine Name) to have 
the vision of God. They undertook various spiritual practices 
with total devotion and earnestness. Do not dismiss this effort 
as meaningless. 

The other day, I spoke about Bhavani Sankara. Bhavani 
symbolises sraddha (steadfast devotion), and sankara stands 
for viswas (faith). You can achieve anything in life if you have 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 192 


steadfast devotion and faith. Since this world is the very form 
of Bhavani-Sankara, it is called ardhanareeswara swarupa 
(androgynous). It is on this basis that we use Srimati to address 
women and Sri to address men. The ancient sages and seers 
said, “Sraddhavan labhate jnanam (only the devout can attain 
wisdom.)” You should consider viswasa (faith) as your swasa 
(life breath). 

God has many names and forms. Sambhartha and Bhartha 
are two of these names of God. Sambhartha is one who creates 
everything taking nature (prakriti) as the means, and Bhartha 
is one who sustains and protects the creation. Telugu-speaking 
people use this word Bhartha for husband, but actually Bhar- 
tha means master, sustainer and protector. 


Body is gifted to make proper use of time 


People waste their time and do not make any effort to 
know Divinity. Out of twenty-four hours in a day, you should 
allot six hours for personal work, six hours for social service, 
six hours for sleeping, and the remaining six hours for spiritual 
practices like japa, dhyana, and yoga. Some people say they 
do not have time to think of God, but they waste hours together 
in mundane matters. Life becomes meaningless if you do not 
think of God. 

The body is gifted to make proper use of time. Body will 
be sanctified only when it is used for sacred activities. You 
should understand the relationship between kaya (body), kala 
(time), and karthavya (responsibility). Do not waste even a 
single moment. 

Ramakrishna Paramahamsa used to contemplate on the Di- 
vine Mother day in and day out. Before going to bed, he would 
feel sad thinking that another day had passed without the vi- 
sion of the Divine Mother. He used to think, “Perhaps my heart 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 193 


hasn’t become ripe to deserve divine grace. What is the use of 
eating an unripe fruit? I shall ripen my heart and offer it to the 
Mother.” That is the true spiritual practice in its subtle essence. 


No one can question the powers of God 


There is no constraint of time, place, distance, or complex- 
ity to the actions of God. No creature can impose limitations or 
constraints on God. God is utterly selfless. All His actions are 
sacred, whether they seem pleasant or unpleasant to you. Stu- 
dents are sometimes confused. They feel that if Swami is God, 
will He do this or that? How can you decide what God should 
do? No one has the authority to question the powers of God. 
He alone decides whether to reward, punish, protect, or destroy 
anything. 


Yada Yada Hi Dharmasya 
Glanir Bhavati Bharata, 
Abhyutthanamadharmasya 
Tadatmanam Srujamyaham. 


God incarnates from age to age, whenever righteousness is 
on the decline. Sathya (truth) has to be upheld and asathya 
(untruth) is to be destroyed. Dharma is to be protected, and 
adharma is to be destroyed. 

How do we expound the unity principle (advaita)? There 
are three forms of this principle of oneness: unity of substance, 
unity of matter, and unity of action. This piece of cloth is a 
single entity. There is yarn in it. The yarn is made of cotton. 
When the yarn is woven, you get a piece of cloth. If you shred 
the cloth, the yarn and cotton fall apart. When such a combi- 
nation of matter in different forms is made, a simple object is 
produced. This is one kind of unity — material unity. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 194 


While the names and forms are different, the elements 
(pancha bhutas) of all bodies are the same. All are suffused 
with the same five sensory perceptions (sabda, sparsha, rupa, 
rasa, and gandha) and the same five life principles (prana, 
apana, vyana, udana, and samana). No matter where you are, 
your body is composed of the five elements only. There is no 
sixth element anywhere. 


This body is a heap of filth, full of diseases, 
continually changing. 
How can it cross the ocean of samsara? 
Oh mind! For certain, this body is transient. 
Keep your mind firmly on the Feet of the Lord 
and surrender to Him. 
[Telugu Poem] 


When the five elements disintegrate, the body loses its 
identity. Once the life goes out, the body is fit only for burial 
or cremation, as the elements fall apart into their original form. 
Therefore, before the body perishes, make all effort to experi- 
ence the Divinity within. It is only through body that one can 
experience Divinity. So, body has to be properly taken care of. 

The body is karmakshetra (field of activities) and the heart 
is dharmakshetra (field of righteousness). When Divinity is 
enshrined in the heart, it forms Brahmakshetra (field of Brah- 
man). So, to understand the pure Brahmakshetra, it is neces- 
sary for you to purify your dharmakshetra, that is, your heart. 

Karmakshetra and dharmakshetra are in the same body. 
That is why the Bhagavad Gita begins, “Dharmakshetre Ku- 
rukshetre....” All thoughts arising in the mind also pertain to 
karmakshetra (kurukshetra). Thus, karma and dharma are per- 
formed in the same field of the body, which comprises dhar- 
makshetra and karmakshetra. Divinity intervenes and sepa- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 195 


rates dharmakshetra from karmakshetra (kurukshetra). A man 
of discernment is able to make this discrimination between 
dharma and karma. 

In this world, there is nothing easier than attaining God. 
You face hardships and feel dejected because you do not un- 
derstand this truth. Last night, you would have seen the drama 
staged by the students, wherein a businessman weeps for not 
being able to get a business license from the government 
authority. Instead of shedding tears for such mundane things, 
why don’t you pine for the vision of God? 


Sacrifice leads to Ananda 


Once, Vivekananda asked Ramakrishna Paramahamsa 
whether he had seen God. Ramakrishna Paramahamsa em- 
phatically replied, “Yes, I have seen God. I have seen Him just 
as I am seeing you and you are seeing me.” 

“Then why I don’t see Him?” asked Vivekananda. 

Ramakrishna gave an appropriate answer, “You weep for 
your family, you suffer for your business and wealth, but do 
you ever weep or yearn for a vision of God? Do that and you 
will certainly see God! All the time I am pining only for the 
vision of God. Therefore, God is visible to me at all times in 
every human being.” 

The purpose of our birth should be achieved by the sacri- 
fice of everything. Therefore, the Vedas say, Na karmana, na 
prajaya, dhanena thyagenaikena amrutatwamanu (sacrifice 
alone ensures immortality). 

In the process of breathing, we inhale and exhale. If we do 
not exhale, the lungs will not be able to function properly. We 
eat food. If we do not excrete, our stomach becomes upset. 
Similarly, in our circulatory system, blood is traversing an 
enormous distance each day. If it is blocked a little at any lo- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 196 


cation in this journey, a clot develops. The flow of blood 
works for the removal of all kinds of toxic wastes produced in 
the body and helps in the ejection of the same. Without the 
evacuation of unhealthy substances from the body, good health 
is not possible. 

Thus, in sacrifice also there is satisfaction. In fact, there is 
ananda (bliss) in sacrifice. The practical man of today ques- 
tions the usefulness of sacrifice. Man is so selfish that he re- 
fuses to give even a handful of food to a starving beggar. How 
much joy is experienced when one is able to satisfy the hunger 
of a hungry person! Would you not feel joy when some starv- 
ing people are fed? In human society, narrow-minded selfish- 
ness is rampant. 


Even human life has little value in today’s society 


Once, in Mumbai, Indulal Shah, Dr. Keki, and Swami were 
going from Dharmakshetra to the city. As a beggar ap- 
proached, Indulal Shah gave him a two-rupee note. The beggar 
threw back the note, saying that it would not fetch even a loaf 
of bread. This is the state of our society today. Money has lost 
its value. Why money alone, even human life has very little 
value in today’s society. People struggle hard to amass wealth, 
comfort, and happiness, even risking their own life. When 
somebody dies in an accident or calamity, the government 
gives a few thousand rupees as compensation for the life lost. 
Is human life worth a few rupees only? Has it become that 
cheap? No, human life is worth a lot more. When the body is 
dead, the life principle is not altogether lost. 

People look for short cuts in everything, even in spiritual- 
ity. But, surprisingly, spirituality does have a short cut. There 
is no need to wander here and there. God is residing in your 
heart. Turn your vision inward. You can see God instantly. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 197 


This is the easiest path. Have full faith that Divinity resides in 
you. 

If you keep reminding yourself constantly that you are a 
part of Divinity, you are bound to become Divine yourself. On 
the other hand, if you harbour the feeling that you are some- 
thing apart from the Divine, you shall remain far from Divinity 
always. There is no need for you to give up your vocation. 
Keep doing your function in society, but always remember that 
you are essentially Divine. 

God Himself intervenes when His devotees are in distress 
in the performance of their functions in society. You all know 
the story of Gora Kumbhar and Kabir. When they were con- 
fronted with impossible tasks, God helped them in person; He 
completed their task of making pots or weaving cloth. 

God is capable of taking any form that He Wills. Hence, 
He is known as the Virat Swarupa. The Purusha Sukta (in the 
Rig Veda) says, Sahasra Seerasha Purusha, Sahasraksha Sa- 
hasra Pad ... while describing the Virat Swarupa. The Virat 
Purusha has innumerable limbs. 


Cultivate your faith and make it firm 


Become worthy of His love. You can achieve everything. 
This is possible only through nishkama prema (selfless love). 
By cultivating such selfless love, you become Divine yourself. 
And this Divinity is non- dual. Hence, it is said, “Advaita dar- 
shanam jnanam (perception of non-dual Divinity is true wis- 
dom).” 

Cultivate your faith and make it firm. There should be no 
ups and downs in this faith. If you allow such vacillations, you 
are likely to lose whatever faith you have. A firm faith results 
in your attaining Brahmananda (divine bliss). The happiness 
experienced with the body is human (dehananda). The joy felt 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 198 


in the mind is chitthananda (mental pleasure). Chitthananda is 
much greater than the bodily happiness (dehananda). When 
the mind is transcended, the joy experienced is Chidananda, 
which is immeasurably greater than the joy of the mind. You 
are needlessly losing your opportunity of attaining this level of 
bliss. Step by step, you have to rise through these levels of 
happiness until you attain Brahmananda. In this way, you 
merge your personal bliss into the universal bliss of Brah- 
mananda, which is eternal. 


Surrender you heart to God 


One has to experience this bliss, which is none other than 
Satchidananda. Sath is being, which is eternal. Chit is total 
knowledge, i.e. omniscience. When these two are united, total 
joy, i.e. Satchidananda, is realised. Since sath, chit, and 
ananda are present in each individual, it is said that God is 
present in everyone in the form of Satchidananda. Therefore, 
you need not perform any sadhana, and if you are following 
some such practice, there is no need for you to abandon it. But 
in any event, surrender your heart to God. This is called sa- 
ranagati (surrender). 

Once, Lakshmana told Rama that all his wealth, family, 
possessions, and his very body was for the service of Rama. 
Rama said, “I do not need all this. What use have I for all 
these? Just purify your thoughts, words, and deeds and your 
heart. With that, you will experience heaven itself.” 

Happiness is heaven itself. Happiness is obtained by the 
control of the senses. So, you can attain heaven by controlling 
your senses. Many people say that they experience the very 
heaven in Prasanthi Nilayam. How long will this happiness 
last? This will vanish the moment you leave this place. True 
heaven is inside you. This again is described as immortality. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 199 


What is meant by immortality? The body is mortal, but the 
life principle is imperishable. If you have to attain this level of 
immortality, extend total love to God. This should be uncondi- 
tional love. There should be no conditions to love. 

It is like going to a goldsmith with a piece of gold and 
asking him to make some jewelry of the design of your liking. 
Your business is only to leave the gold with him with the con- 
dition that the weight and design should be to your specifica- 
tion. You have no business interfering in the manner in which 
he converts your lump of gold into the piece of jewel you 
want. If you start stipulating that he should not burn it in fire, 
or beat it with a hammer, how can you get the ornament that 
you ordered? 

In the same way, if you surrender your heart to God with 
conditions and reservations, how can you attain the bliss that 
you seek? Once complete surrender is effected, God will grant 
you the bliss you deserve. What He does with it in the mean- 
while is His business. Love full of conditions will only result 
in very sad state of your body and mind. 

Therefore, pray to God with unconditional surrender. 
When all that you possess —your body, your mind, your in- 
tellect— are His gifts, where is the need for your laying condi- 
tions? 


Divinity is within your reach 


Be fearless. Lead your life without fear disturbing it. Do 
not be guided by the opinions and advice of others around you 
into actions not in line with your conscience. There are a few 
who piously place the mark of vibhuti on their forehead while 
at home but wipe it off the moment they step out. Some are 
even ashamed to say that they are coming to Prasanthi Nilayam 
and tell their friends that they are going to Anantapur. Why 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 200 


should you worry about their opinion? Is it something wrong to 
come here? There are so many wrong things that people do 
without any fear, then why are you afraid of saying that you 
are going to see God? One should never be afraid of express- 
ing one’s faith in God. Be courageous and bold. These days, 
people are afraid of performing their cultural and spiritual 
practices as also good deeds. 


Be fearless and seek the company of good people 


Give up fear and live in bliss. Involvement in worldly life 
engenders a sense of fear in you, and you forget your spiritual 
way of living. The bliss that is experienced when you are with 
God is beyond words; it is unimaginable. Words and thoughts 
return in utter futility, unable to describe this experience. It is 
this type of divinely bliss in which you should lead your life. 
That is how a human being should live. 

Having been born as a human being, do not waste your life 
living like an animal. Eating, drinking, procreation, sleep, etc. 
are common to men and animals. 

What distinguishes man from other living beings? Man is 
the only living being endowed with wisdom. A man without 
wisdom is no better than an animal. From living at a human 
level, one should aspire to reach the divine level. Of the sev- 
eral levels of living, the lowest level is the demonic, then the 
animal, higher than this is human, and ultimately the divine. 
When such a divine life is within your reach and sight, why 
should you fear? Be fearless and seek the company of good 
people; bad company can lead you astray. 

Three main principles are expounded in spirituality. These 
are: 


1. Don’t put all your faith in your body, for you do not 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 201 


know what will happen at any moment of time. 
2. Don’t put your faith in the world. 
3. Never abandon your faith in God. 


Once you are fully aware of these three principles, you can 
achieve anything. 

Swamis message for you today is that Swami is you and 
you are Swami. In fact Swami is not separate from you. 

Who invited you here? You have all come here out of love 
for Swami. Out of this love alone, so many thousands have as- 
sembled here. Here is Bhagavan, ready to be taken away by 
you. Carry Him away with you as you like. 

Those who love Bhagavan wholeheartedly, to them He 
belongs wholly. All that Bhagavan asks of you is your whole- 
hearted, unconditional love. Recognise this truth and lead your 
life filled with love. Take this as Swami’s gift to you. Do not 
hate anybody. Hating anybody is no different from hating God 
Himself. Surrender your whole being to God. Experience un- 
alloyed divine bliss. 


Never forget God 


Students! Pursue your study diligently. Obtain good posi- 
tion in your examination. Get good jobs in your appropriate 
chosen fields and serve your motherland. Swami has no desire 
to stop anybody from working in any profession or getting 
married or going abroad for study or work. Go wherever you 
please. Do whatever job that is your lot, but never forget God. 
Anything you do with God in your heart is pleasing to Me. 
Forgetting God is no different from forgetting yourself. 

One who is wandering in search of God is a fool. Is there 
anyone in the world who will go about searching for himself? 
If you go to somebody and ask, where am I, you will be 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 202 


promptly put in a mental asylum. Since you are Divinity itself 
and Divinity is your own self, where is the need for any 
search? Search for God is an expression invented by fake 
scholars. There is no need for such an expression. You can 
search for the things of the world, but do not go in search of 
God, for He is everywhere. If you have this faith, you cannot 
help seeing Him and for certain you will enjoy bliss. 
Strengthen your faith. 


23 November 1999 
Sai Kulwant Hall, Prasanthi Nilayam 


Man himself is God; all matter, even in the moon, 
is suffused with the divine Presence. To search for 
God with the instruments in the laboratory is like 
trying to cure pain in the stomach by pouring 
drops into the eye! There is a technique and a spe- 
cial instrument for that purpose, which the past 
masters in that science have developed and spoken 
about. 

— Baba 


17 


Divine love is true religion 


At the time of birth all human beings are 
pure and unspoiled. 
It is only the environment and company 
that pollutes the human mind. 
Follow the dictates of your conscience. 
Love and equality are the birthrights of man. 
[Telugu Poem] 


At the time of birth, the human heart is pure, selfless and 
steady. But with the passage of time, man loses his purity on 
account of his association with various individuals. 

The environment and company are mainly responsible for 
the good or bad in man. A piece of paper does not have any 
smell of its own. But if the same paper is used to pack pakodas 
or dry fish or jasmine flowers, it produces the smell associated 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 204 


with them. That is why it is said, “Tell me your company, I 
shall tell you what you are.” As your company, so you become. 
So, you should always join good company. You can attain ex- 
alted position only when he joins good company. Man is good 
by birth, but ruins himself because of bad company. Today 
man is not making any enquiry as to what is good and what is 
bad. Such an enquiry is very essential before making friend- 
ship with others. Adi Sankara declares: 


Sathsangathve Nissangathvam, 
Nissangathve Nirmohathvam, 
Nirmohathve Nischala Tathvam 
Nischalatathve Jeevanmukti 


By good company, attain detachment. 

By detachment, get rid of delusion. 

By freedom from delusion, attain equanimity. 
By equanimity, attain liberation. 


Bad company is the root cause of man’s downfall 


Satsang (good company) helps you to attain sense control. 
Sath is that which is permanent and eternal. In this world, eve- 
rything is transitory. Only Divinity is permanent. Your feelings 
will become noble and pure only when you associate yourself 
with Divinity. First and foremost recognise the fact that bad 
company is the root cause for man’s downfall. 

Man wants to accomplish many things in life but is inhib- 
ited by the sense of fear lurking in his mind. It is only associa- 
tion with God that will make man fearless. Every flower that 
blossoms will not grow into a fruit. Every fruit that the tree 
bears will not become ripe. But every ripened fruit is bound to 
fall down from the tree. The same thing can be said of human 
life. Man develops desires and indulges in undesirable prac- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 205 


tices which will ultimately lead to his downfall. 

Man has invented various wonderful gadgets, which can 
even take him to the moon, but the most wonderful and myste- 
rious of all machines is the human body itself, which is God’s 
creation. God has created this machine not merely for eating, 
drinking, and making merry. All these are common to animals 
also. This being the case, what is so unique about human birth? 


Deho Devalaya Prokto, 
Jeevo Deva Sanathana 


Body is the temple and the Indweller is God. 


You may own a car, but it will be of use to you only if you 
know driving. Otherwise, it may expose yourself to great dan- 
ger. Likewise, you should know how to make proper use of 
your body 

Today, man is deceived by attachment. He is unable to r e- 
alize the sacredness of human body. He is indulging in worldly 
pleasures just as birds and animals do. Human body is gifted 
to experience divine love, not to indulge in mean acts. Truth, 
righteousness, peace, and love are divine qualities. Birds and 
beasts have only love, but not the remaining three. Only one 
having all four qualities is a true human being. Man should 
make proper use of the body. Only then will his life find ful- 
fillment. 


Perform activities without expecting reward 


Embodiments of Love! Of all the gifts of God, Time and 
Love are the most precious. Man has to make proper use of 
time in order to experience Divine love. But today, man is 
wasting three-fourths of his time in mundane pursuits, whether 
he is brahmachari (student), grihastha (householder) vana- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 206 


prastha (recluse), or sanyasi (renunciant). Then how can he 
expect to have noble thoughts? He is unable to undertake any 
sacred activity because his mind is clouded with ego. 

The Bhagavad Gita declares, “Karmanyevadhikarasthe ma 
phaleshu kadachana (man has a right over action, but not on 
the result.) So perform all your activities without expecting 
any reward. Do not waste your time worrying over the fruits of 
your actions. This is what is meant by saying, “duty is God.” 
Divinity will manifest once you perform your duty with sin- 
cerity. 


Serve with the feeling that you are serving God 


It is a mistake to consider yourself a devotee if you under- 
take service activities expecting something in return. You have 
to render service with the feeling that God is present in all. Re- 
alize the truth, “Jsavasyam, idam jagat (God pervades the en- 
tire universe).” You may say that you have done rural service 
or served flood victims. But these cannot be termed service in 
its true sense if you have the feeling that you served others. 
Serve with the feeling that you are serving God, for God is 
omnipresent. 

Consider, for example, the sacred epic Bhagavatam, which 
speaks of the intense love and devotion of gopikas (cowherd 
maids) for Krishna. Bhagavatam chadivithe bagavatam in 
Telugu means, “If we study Bhagavatam, we shall become 
good.” That is to say, Bhagavatam confers goodness on all. It 
contains the essence of all Vedas. The five letters bha, ga, va, 
ta, and mu, stand for bhakti (devotion), jnana (wisdom), 
vairagya (renunciation), thapas (penance), and mukti (libera- 
tion) respectively. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 207 


Be one with the Lord, like gopikas 


This sacred epic, Bhagavatam, describes at length the 
gopikas (cowherd maids) yearning for Krishna when He left 
Gokul for Mathura, where He was actively involved in running 
the kingdom. The gopikas were unable to bear the pangs of 
separation from their dear Lord and were anxiously waiting 
His return. The entire Gokul bore the look of a barren land. 
There was no dearth of food and comforts in Gokul; yet, the 
gopikas did not enjoy any of them because they thought life 
was not worth living without Krishna, whom they considered 
as their very life breath. They lost their health and happiness 
because they were unable to bear the pangs of separation. 

Krishna, being aware of the gopikas plight, summoned His 
friend Uddhava and asked him to proceed to Gokul to console 
the Gopikas and pass on His message to them. Uddhava was a 
great philosopher and a jnani (one of wisdom). He knew that 
Krishna was omnipresent. As per Krishna’s command, He 
went to Gokul and conveyed Krishna’s message to the gopikas 
and gopalas. He told them that they should not limit Krishna to 
a small physical frame thinking that He was present only in 
Mathura. He tried to explain to the gopikas that Krishna is God 
Himself and that He is omnipresent. He advised them that 
since Krishna was present everywhere, there was no need for 
them to feel sorry that He was away. 

Since the gopikas had totally surrendered themselves to 
Krishna, they would not look at or talk to a stranger. So, they 
took a bhramara (bee) as an intermediary and talked to 
Uddhava through the bee. Having been used to worship 
Krishna’s beautiful form, they could not readily think of 
Krishna as a formless entity. Making fun of Uddhava’s 
preachings, they asked, “Do you practice what you preach? 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 208 


You are enjoying the proximity to our Lord Krishna but are 
telling us to experience His attributeless and formless aspect. 
We don’t want your preaching or philosophy. We are not in- 
terested in your formless, attributeless God. Bring our dear 
Krishna to us.” They said, “Krishna has stolen our hearts. We 
have only one mind, and that has gone with Him to Mathura, 
we do not have another mind to listen to what you are preach- 
ing.” 


One-pointed devotion of gopikas 


The declaration of the gopikas that they had only one mind 
made Uddhava recognize their one-pointed devotion. He real- 
ised that the pure, unsullied, and eternal divine principle can be 
attained only through fixing the mind on God. 

The gopikas lamented their separation from Krishna, “We 
want to see nothing but Krishna’s beautiful form, hear nothing, 
but the melodious music of His flute, and experience nothing 
but His Divine Love. We have cried for Krishna so much that 
our eyes are swollen and there is not a drop of tear left in them. 
How can the ship of your message sail in the barren lands of 
our hearts! So, take your ship and go back to the place you 
came from. We are not interested in the formless aspect of Di- 
vinity. We want to see the enchanting form of our Lord.” 

Hearing the words of the gopikas, Uddhava realised that all 
his jnana (wisdom) was worthless. He considered himself to be 
totally ignorant since he had underestimated the love and de- 
votion of the gopikas for Krishna. 

He stopped preaching and tried to hand over a piece of pa- 
per to the gopikas, saying that it contained Krishna’s message 
for them. He wanted them to read it. They refused to accept the 
letter, saying that they could not read it as they had no knowl- 
edge of akshara (alphabet). But their minds were merged in 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 209 


the Akshara Swarupa (immortal form) of Lord Krishna. 
Uddhava was a bit angry with the gopikas, thinking that they 
had no respect for even Krishna’s message. 

Then one of the gopikas started explaining, “There is no 
point in accepting Krishna’s letter since we, being illiterate, 
cannot read it. There may be one or two amongst us who can 
read. But we are afraid that our tears may drop on the letter and 
wash out the words written on it. There is another reason. Our 
whole body is heated up on account of separation from 
Krishna. So, it is possible that the letter may get burnt to ashes 
if our hands were to touch it. You are unable to understand our 
plight.” 

They sent a message to Krishna, addressing the bee, 


O bee, why don’t you go back and tell Krishna 

That He should look at us at least once? 

Can you not tell Krishna to illumine 

Our dark hearts with His resplendent form? 

Our life has become like a dried tree. 

Please tell Krishna that 

He should look at us at least once. 

Can you not tell Krishna to illumine 

Our dark hearts with His resplendent form? 

Our life has become like a dried tree. 

Please tell Krishna to put some life into it. 
[Telugu song] 


Radhika prayed, 


O Krishna, we are anyway going to die 
Because of separation from you. 
Please allow us to be with you 

At least in Your next incarnation. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 210 


If you take the form of a tree, 

Allow us to be creepers that twine around You. 

Tf you stand like Meru mountain, 

Let us be like a stream flowing from it. 

If you become the mighty ocean, 

Let us become the rivers ready to merge in it . 
[Telugu Poem] 


Thus, the gopikas always craved the Divine proximity. 
That is the sign of true devotion. Truth philosophy consists of 
establishing a relationship between the individual and God. 
The gopikas never gave scope for narrow individual feelings. 
They aspired for the intimate relationship with God. 

The best way to love God is to love all and serve all. Have 
the firm conviction that God is present in everybody. There is 
no place where God does not exist. But you cannot see God as 
long as there is the sense of ‘IT’ (ego) in you. The gopikas had 
absolutely no sense of ego. Their ‘I’ had merged with Krishna. 
As long as there is ego in you, you will find only multiplicity. 
Once you realize that you and I are one, you will find unity 
everywhere, which is true and eternal. 


Dedication of the ‘Messengers of Sathya Sai’ 


The old student association of Anantapur Campus, the 
Messengers of Sathya Sai, is celebrating its anniversary today. 
They are serving society and spreading Swami’s message in 
accordance with the sacred name of their association. You 
have listened to the report of their activities. Truly speaking, 
they have done much more than what was mentioned in the 
report. In fact, I instructed them to make the report as brief as 
possible. Though their report is brief, they are doing yeoman 
service to society. Not only here, but also in various other 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 211 


countries like Japan, Canada, America, and Germany. They are 
undertaking service activities, upholding the ideals of the Sri 
Sathya Sai Institute of Higher Learning. They are spending 
their earnings in service activities. When questioned by their 
parents, they reply, “Swami has given us free education and 
free medical care. We owe our wealth and health to Swami. 
So, all our earnings should be directed for the service of soci- 
ety. We are not misusing even a naya paisa.” Thus they are 
bringing about transformation even in their parents. 


Never underestimate the capacity of women 


You all know that there is a lady doctor, an eye specialist, 
by name Vansa in our General Hospital. She is a widow. Her 
daughter studied in our college and now she is living in Aus- 
tralia with her husband. She has brought about a transforma- 
tion in her husband and, as a result, he is also actively involved 
in various service activities. Both the husband and wife spend 
their earnings in service of the society. They do not have chil- 
dren. 

Dr. Vansa prayed to Me that her daughter be blessed with a 
child. Her daughter said that Swami is everything for her and 
she does not want to get entangled in bondage by having chil- 
dren. She said that she considers all children as her own. She 
prayed that she should have the freedom to render service ac- 
tivities to her satisfaction. 

There are many women who have such noble desires, but 
among men, we hardly find anybody having such broad feel- 
ings. 

Since ancient times, many noble women have taken birth in 
this sacred land of Bharat (India), women who have set an 
ideal to the world with their exemplary character and devotion. 
You might have heard of Savitri, who brought her dead hus- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 212 


band back to life; Chandramati, who extinguished the wild fire 
in a trice, demonstrating the power of truth; Sita, who came out 
of blazing fire unscathed; and Damayanti, who burnt a wicked 
hunter to ashes with the power of her chastity. All these noble 
women have brought name and fame to this sacred land of 
Bharat. Not only Bharat, the whole world will progress be- 
cause of women of character and nobility. So never underesti- 
mate the capacity of women. 


Women symbolise bhakti and men stand for jnana 


The 75th Birthday of this body is approaching. The Mes- 
sengers of Sathya Sai have chalked out elaborate plans for the 
75th Birthday and have already started executing them. They 
have purchased 1000 bags of rice for free distribution of food 
for 10 days to the devotees during the 75th Birthday celebra- 
tions. 

There are nearly 3000 members in their Organization. 
Their faith is unwavering, and their devotion for Swami is be- 
coming stronger and stronger day by day. They are preparing 
to distribute 75,000 saris. They want all the saris to be of the 
same design, so they have already placed an order in this re- 
gard. Such devotion and sincerity are present more among 
women than men. 

In fact, women symbolise bhakti (devotion) and men stand 
for jnana (wisdom). The one with devotion has the right to 
enter even the inner chambers of the divine palace, whereas the 
one with wisdom has access only to the audience hall of God. 
You may be aware that kings of yore would convene meetings 
in their royal audience hall, where only men would assemble. 
Men had no entry into the antahpura (inner chambers of the 
palace). Only women who symbolize devotion have the access 
to the antahpura of God. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 213 


What is the antahpura of God? What is antahpura? Anta- 
ratma (Indwelling Spirit) is the antahpura. It is only devotion, 
not wisdom, that has entry to antahpura. 

Most of the men who have assembled here today are here 
only because of the inspiration of their women. Women are 
responsible for men treading along the path of devotion. In My 
opinion, the Messengers of Sathya Sai should take the lead in 
spreading the divine message throughout the country. Mainly 
by the effort of women will the country progress. Not only 
Bharat, the whole world should progress. The ancient culture 
of our country should be revived. 

The heart of Uddhava, who was considered one of wisdom, 
transformed on seeing the love and devotion of the gopikas for 
Krishna. He approached Krishna with a prayer that he may be 
blessed with at least a fraction of their devotion. The gopikas 
said they had only one mind, and that was centered on Krishna. 
But men have many minds! The statement of the gopikas is in 
itself the highest philosophy. 


True Christmas spirit in Prasanthi Nilayam 


If you look at the world with material view, you see vari- 
ety. If you look at it with an understanding of Divinity, all of it 
will appear to be the form of God. Yad bhavam tad bhavati (as 
your feelings, so you become). Allah, Jesus, Zoroaster —all 
these are names for the same Divinity. 

Today (Christmas) is mainly celebrated by Christians, but 
do not make the mistake that it is only for Christians. It is a 
holy and happy occasion to be celebrated by the entire man- 
kind. Get rid of religious and philosophical differences and 
enlarge your matha (religion) and mathi (mind). There is only 
one God, and He is the indweller of your heart. If you realise 
this truth, the entire humanity becomes a single race. There is 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 214 


only one religion in the universe and that is divine love 
(prema). 

The one without this principle of love in his heart is neither 
a Hindu nor a Christian nor a Muslim nor a Sikh. He is no 
better than a demon. Complete unity of all religions can be 
seen only in Prasanthi Nilayam. Imagine what a phenomenon it 
is that Christians from 64 countries in this world have assem- 
bled here to celebrate Christmas. 

This principle of unity is the sign of true devotion. Swami 
reiterates that it is not a celebration for Christians only but is a 
holy occasion for the entire humanity. It is the desire of Swami 
that such differences be completely eradicated. 

There are several tasks in front of the Messengers of 
Sathya Sai. Mere distribution of food and medicines and con- 
ducting bal vikas programs is not enough. Of course, all these 
are necessary, but along with these activities, spiritual teach- 
ings are also essential. If the spiritual element of life is lost, life 
is a waste. Therefore, all of you ensure that your spiritual life is 
in the forefront of all your activities. These words are ad- 
dressed not only to the ladies of the Messengers of Sathya Sai. 
Young men should take up similar activities. 


Women can transform the world 


Women generally have less freedom than men. If only 
women had been given the level of freedom that is allowed for 
men, the shape of society on the face of the earth would have 
been changed. They work under many constraints put by their 
husbands, fathers, and children. In spite of severe pressures 
from all sides, they are advancing. 

On the other hand men have hardly any such constraints. It 
is surprising why people with such freedom do not enter into a 
spiritual quest or social service. What is the use of your educa- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 215 


tion if you do not use it for the service of society? You might 
as well throw your books in the fire. 


Accumulate guna, not dhana 


It is more important to achieve virtues (guna) than to ac- 
cumulate wealth (dhana). Wealth is accumulated by so many 
persons. What have they taken away with them when they 
leave this world? Nothing. Of course, one has to earn wealth. 
But, accumulation of wealth should be within limits. All your 
faculties should be at the disposal of society. Only then your 
country will also advance. 

You know very well the kind of unrest that is prevalent all 
over the world today. Fear and terror haunt you wherever you 
turn. It is the duty of the youth of this generation to set right 
this situation. First of all, serve your parents. Then, look after 
your family. Serve your community. Then, you should under- 
take the task of serving your country. But do not be hankering 
after the results for your efforts. The appropriate reward for all 
your actions will be granted to you by God. Service to the 
country itself becomes worship of God. 

Swami is pleased with the services that you have per- 
formed so far. But, it is the desire of Swami that you should all 
perform much more. You know how a mother blesses you. It is 
necessary for you to act in such a way as to get your parents’ 
blessings and approval. Tomorrow you may also become 
mothers. Serve your parents today so that in turn your children 
may serve you in times of your need. As you sow so you reap. 

The only worthwhile thing in this world is divine love. 
This is the noblest acquisition, which leads to bliss and im- 
mortality. Once you obtain this divine love all else in the world 
is yours for the asking. For this you first immerse yourself in 
social work. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 32 part 2 216 


The vain desire to obtain higher and higher educational 
qualifications should be moderated. You may earn as much 
wealth as you can, but use it for the welfare of society. Con- 
template on God with your whole mind and heart. Only then 
will you attain a meaningful goal of your life. 


25 December 1999 
Sai Kulwant Hall, Prasanthi Nilayam 


Be pure in words and deeds and keep impure 
thoughts away. I am in every one of you, so I be- 
come aware of the slightest wave of thoughts. 
When the clothes become dirty, you have to give 
them a wash. When your mind is soiled, you have 
to be born again for the cleansing operations. 

— Baba 


