SATHYA SAI SPEAKS 


VOLUME - 35 


Discourses of 


BHAGAWAN SRI SATHYA SAI BABA 
Delivered during 2002 


PRASANTHI NILAYAM 


SRI SATHYA SAI BOOKS & PUBLICATIONS TRUST 
Prasanthi Nilayam - 515 134 
Anantapur District, Andhra Pradesh, India 
Grams: BOOK TRUST = STD: 08555 ISD : 91 - 8555 
Phone: 287375. Fax: 287236 


© Sri Sathya Sai Books & Publications Trust 
Prasanthi Nilayam (INDIA). 


All Rights Reserved 


The Copyright and the Rights of translation in any 
language are reserved by the Publisher. No part, para, 
passage, text or photograph or artwork of this book 
should be reproduced, transmitted or utilised, in origi- 
nal language or by translation, in any form or by any 
means, electronic, mechanical, photo copying, recording 
or by any information, storage or retrieval system, ex- 
cept with and prior permission, in writing from the 
Convener, Sri Sathya Sai Books & Publications Trust, 
Prasanthi Nilayam (Andhra Pradesh) India, except for 
brief passages quoted in book review. This book can be 
exported from India only by the Publishers: Sri Sathya 
Sai Books & Publications Trust, Prasanthi Nilayam (In- 


dia). 


International Standard Book No. pe 


81-7208-118-9 (set) 


FItsle FBATEION 2 barewaes nat , 2003 


Published by 


The Convener, 

Sri Sathya Sai Books & Publications Trust 
Prasanthi Nilayam, India - Pin Code 515 134 

Grams : BOOK TRUST STD : 08555 ISD : 91- 8555. 
Phone : 287375 Fax : 287236 

email : sssbpt_psn@rediffmail.com 


CON DAR WN 


No NO FF FR FR FE Pe ORO EEO ES 


22, 


pies 


CONTENTS 


Live: In Attic CONSCIOUSIIESS: «i sscccecccscegatssneeeiiaeaxeeatsies 1 
Light The Lamp Of Morality In Your Hearts .............. 19 
Sanctify Your Life By Chanting The Divine Name .....33 
Idols Are Pointers To Divinity s..isssscccesstsccssedesaccssszcceess 47 
Realise The Magnetic Power Within ..0.... eee 61 
Celebrate Ugadi By Purifying Your Heart ........0...0.. 75 
Redeem Your Life By Namasmarana ..............eeeeeeee 93 
Imprint Rama’s Name On Your Heart «0.00... 109 
Mother Is: Your First God sscaciuco1ia sccteeceracceetbearctasenss 129 
Service Activities For Unity In Society .................... 147 
Shun Desires And Attain Divine Proximity ................ 139 
Keep Spirituality As First Goal q.:ccc.0scsccesesssecescennsenes 177 
Develop Broadmindedness To Experience Divinity .. 189 
The ‘TV’ (Aham) Is Brahman ...............cccccecceececeeeeeenees 205 
Divine Leelas Reflect The Glory Of Avataras ........... 217 
Significance Of Vinayaka Worship .............::cscceeeeees 231 
Retiniscence (0 Tie Dye ics icin erensnastacvasereneaace 253 
Unity In Diversity - The Fundamental Truth ............. 269 
Responsibility Of Women — Character Building .....285 
Character - End Of True Education 0.0.0... 301 
The Best Way To Love God 

Is To Love All And Serve All occ: cocctestnosenceencnvedecareus 317 
Listen To The Master Of The Universe and 

Transform Yourselves Into Ideal Human Beings ....... oa7 


Love And Morality — The Need Of The Hour ......... SRP) 


Publisher’s Note 


It is a fact well known to the devotees of Bhagawan 
Sri Sathya Sai Baba that no celebrations, festivals or spe- 
cial functions will be considered complete without the bless- 
ings of Bhagawan in the form of His Discourses. Such 
discourses cover a wide variety of subjects centering around 
Man and his spiritual progress which alone can confer peace 
and joy on him eternally. This shower of nectar sweetens 
every subject discussed because of its natural qualities of 
unique presentation and universal appeal. Even a high 
philosophical point is made simple, understandable, enjoy- 
able and fit for consumption by the layman. Examples and 
anecdotes are drawn from every day happenings and fa- 
miliar but meaningful stories related to the great epics like 
the Ramayana and the Mahabharata. In short it is a grand 
feast serving all kinds of delicacies contributing to the health 
and well-being of heart and mind alike. 


The present volume, 35 in the series is a compilation 
of 23 such scintillating discourses during the year 2002. The 
discourses relating to Summer course and Dussera of the 
relevant year are not included in this volume as they are 
bunched and published in a separate volume. 


Paragraph headings and a bigger font continue to be 
adopted here to suit easy reading by elderly persons. 


The Book Trust prayerfully presents this volume at 
the Lotus Feet of Bhagawan for the benefit and enjoyment 
of the millions, who adore Him. 


Jai Sai Ram 
Convener 


Sri Satya Sai Books & Publications Trust 
Prasanthi Nilayam 


Live In Atmic Consciousness 


The sun appeared serenely peaceful. The day 
started to get shorter. And the chill wind blew 
fiercely. The fields were ripe with golden crop. 
The farmers rejoiced in singing. The buds of 
flowers blossomed on the banks of rivers like 
garlands. The sweet festival of Sankranti has 
arrived filling our homes with the newly 
harvested grain. (Telugu Poem) 


When people give up hatred and violence, 
inculcate the feelings of love and acquire the 
wisdom to realise the unity of mankind, the 
earth will then become verily heaven. 
(Telugu Poem) 


It Is Not All Work, But Play Too 
Embodiments of Love! Boys and Girls! 


URING the last four days, Prasanthi Nilayam looked 
like a unique world. Students of Prasanthi Nilayam, 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 2 


Anantapur and Brindavan campuses, and also of Higher 
Secondary School and Primary School worked hard with 
dedication and devotion and displayed all-round skills. Not 
merely the students but also the teachers, young and old 
alike, rendered all possible help to the students in their 
preparation. Truly speaking, such principles of love, unity, 
devotion and dedication cannot be found in any other in- 
stitution in the world. The world will be rid of all prob- 
lems if such institutions are present everywhere. Students 
— boys and girls displayed wonderful items of skill and 
beauty. In addition to academics, students have demon- 
strated their talents in diverse fields. Awareness is life. 
Our students excelled not only in sports and games but 
also in performing on the Band and Nadaswaram, giving 
joy to all. The lion dance group consisted of boys from 
lower classes as well as from postgraduate courses like 
M.B.A., M.Tech., M.Sc., etc. They performed with great 
enthusiasm and perfection and made everybody happy. 
Girls from Anantapur Campus have undergone training 
under experts and have learnt Nadaswaram, particularly 
for performing on Swami’s Birthday and Convocation 
functions. This morning also you might have listened to 
their performance. They participated in sports, music and 
cultural events not for their own satisfaction but with the 
sole intention of pleasing Swami. They went through many 
difficulties and inconveniences with strong determination 
and achieved success. 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 3 


It Is Faith That Pays 


You have just listened to the speech of a student, who 
hails from Darjeeling. He is a member of the lion dance 
group. During one of the rehearsal sessions, he went up to a 
height of 12 ft. to perform a daring feat. Swami had told 
him not to go to such a height, but in his enthusiasm to 
please Swami, he ignored Swami’s words. He lost his bal- 
ance and fell down. There was a swelling on his neck. Then 
I told him to take rest for a few days. He said, “Swami I 
have come all the way from Darjeeling only to dedicate 
myself at Your Feet. Let anything happen to my body, I 
will not give up my resolve.” He was determined to partici- 
pate in the dance. I was pleased with his strong faith and 
determination. J gently touched his neck with My hand and 
told him that everything would be all right. He was com- 
pletely cured. I respond to each of you in accordance with 
the feelings you have toward Me. My San-kalpa (Will) is 
based on your feelings. Ultimately, the boy rose to the oc- 
casion and performed the feat admirably. 


Mind And Matter 


Today you find many people, young and old, accom- 
plishing stupendous tasks by dint of their strong determi- 
nation. But so far no one has been able to unravel the mys- 
tery of mind and matter. All the activities of man, from 
dawn to dusk, are related to these two. Even the highly 
educated do not make any effort to understand this. If you 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 4 


ask them, what is ‘mind’, they say, “It does not matter”. 
They argue that there is no point in trying to understand the 
nature of the mind. If you ask them, what is ‘matter’, they 
say, “Never mind”. First and foremost, man should under- 
stand the relationship between mind and matter. The one 
who does not know the nature of the mind can be called a 
fool. The one who understands the nature of the mind is 
truly a mahaneeya (noble). 


What is the form of the mind? Where has it originated? 
What is its nature? What is the mystery behind it? One 
should make an enquiry on these lines. 


The atma has three powers associated with it: 1) the 
manas (mind), 2) buddhi (intellect) and 3) samskara (cul- 
turally inherited mental propensity from past and present 
lives). The vastness of the mind is indescribable. It can 
travel to any distance in a trice. Its power is beyond de- 
scription and human comprehension. No task can be ac- 
complished without the power of the mind. The mind has 
no form. It works only with the help of the atmic power. 
Therefore, it is the inner Self that operates through the mind 
and performs all activities in the world. Even ages of ef- 
fort is inadequate to understand the nature of the mind. 


The second is the power of intellect. It is full of 
illumination. It discriminates between good and evil with- 
out giving room to selfishness. 


The third is the power of samskara. Its results are 
experienced not only in this birth but also in future births. 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 5 


Samskara is giving up of evil and cultivating goodness in 
thought, word and deed. It is not possible for any book to 
describe in detail the powers of manas, buddhi and 
samskara. Hence, I have decided to explain to the students 
about these three. 


To begin with, try to understand the relationship be- 
tween the mind and matter. One cannot exist without the 
other. Here is arose. This corresponds to matter. Without 
the mind, you cannot see this rose flower. The mind is 
based on the principles of reaction, resound and reflection. 
A true human being is one who understands the nature of 
the mind and its effect. You think that the mind is a bundle 
of thoughts. Then from where do the thoughts arise? The 
Self is the basis of thoughts. They arise out of chaitanya 
(awareness). Everyone is endowed with vijnana (wisdom). 
But some foolish people feel proud of their bookish knowl- 
edge. Such people cannot be called truly educated. With- 
out the knowledge of the Self, all other forms of knowl- 
edge are useless. 


Take for instance a person who is highly educated in 
the physical sense. Ask him a question, ““Who are you”? He 
will not be able to give the correct answer in spite of his high 
qualification. He might say, “I am Rama Sastri’”. This is the 
name given to his body and it does not correspond to his true 
Self. If you put the same question again, he will say, “I am a 
scholar’. Even this is not the correct answer, because it cor- 
responds to his worldly education and has nothing to do with 
his true Self. Ifyou ask him the same question again, he will 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 6 


say, “Iam an Indian’. He fails to understand that neither his 
name nor his profession nor his nationality correspond to his 
true Self. 


The body and the mind are only instruments. They 
are under your control. Do not identify yourself with these 
instruments. You are the master. Master the mind and be a 
mastermind. When you explain to him in this manner, he 
will realise the truth and give the correct answer, “All these 
days I was deluded with body attachment. Now I realise 
that I am the atma which transcends the body; which is 
beyond time and which cannot be comprehended by worldly 
education.” 


It is the unseen atma which makes the body function. 
People forget the Master (the atma) and get deluded by their 
attachment to the body. All that is related to the body, 1.e., 
name, profession and education are temporary. Truth is your 
name. You are the Self, which is eternal. Hence, give up 
body attachment and live in Atmic consciousness. So long 
as one 1s attached to the body, one can never attain the knowl- 
edge of the atma. You may be able to quote from the scrip- 
tures but that corresponds to only bookish knowledge which 
cannot lead you to your true Self. You are the Atma, which is 
the source of all powers. In order to understand the power of 
the atma, first of all enquire into the nature of the mind. The 
effects of the mind cannot be described in words. The mind 
is responsible for birth, death, action, family, childhood, old 
age, happiness, sorrow, success and failure. The entire life is 
based on the mind. Once you understand the nature of the 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 8 


mind, you will know the nature of matter. To understand the 
nature of the mind, you should have control over your senses. 
How can you control others when you cannot control your 
own senses? You should have sense control in order to be- 
come a good leader. 


The Nature Of The Mind 


The mind is very powerful. Without understanding 
its power, man feels proud of his limited knowledge. It is 
utter foolishness. He feels he knows everything. He is di- 
verting his mind on trivial objectives without trying to know 
the atma. This is the reason why man is subjected to diffi- 
culties and misery. You are responsible for your happiness 
or misery. You should not blame others for your condition. 
As you are unable to realise your true Self, you are experi- 
encing the dualities of pleasure and pain. Once you know 
your true Self, you will not be affected by them. It is a sin 
to blame others for your suffering. You suffer because of 
lack of morality in your feelings and of improper conduct. 
Your destiny is based on your character. Character is based 
on actions. Actions are based on thoughts. Therefore, cul- 
tivate morality and sacred thoughts. None can escape the 
law of action. It is based on the mind. 


Embodiments of Love! 


You cannot exist without the mind. The mind is with 
you always. You can be called a human being only when 
you know the nature of the mind. This is the teaching of the 
Vedanta. Vedanta is the essence of the Vedas, which teach 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 8 


the atma jnana (knowledge of the Self). Atma is like the 
control room. Once you gain access to the ‘control room’, 
all your senses and the mind will be under your control. 
When the main switch of the house is turned on, the bulbs 
in all the rooms will glow. The atma is like the main switch 
and the senses are like the bulbs in different rooms. Take 
for instance a mansion consisting of various rooms like 
bedroom, storeroom, dining room, bathroom, kitchen, etc. 
These rooms are of your own making. Each room is sepa- 
rated from the other by a wall. Once the walls are demol- 
ished, only one big hall remains. Body attachment is like 
the wall that separates one from the other and which comes 
in the way of realising the Self. Once this wall is broken 
down, you will realise the infinite and immortal Self. In- 
stead of realising the infinite and immortal Self, you are 
developing attachment to the body over a number of births. 
Develop detachment at least from this birth. You claim 
something as ‘mine’ but it will be yours only so long as 
your body exists. After your death, what you earlier claimed 
as yours will belong to somebody else. Such being the 
case, why should you develop attachment to worldly pos- 
sessions? Human life is based on ‘I’ and ‘mine’. ‘T’ refers 
to the atma and ‘mine’ refers to matter. The mind has origi- 
nated from the atma. Matter is the effect of the mind. Once 
you know the nature of the mind and matter, everything 
else will be known. 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 9 


Students! 


You have a long life ahead of you. Do not wait till 
old age to take to the path of spirituality. Start early, drive 
slowly, reach safely. Be very cautious in this age and do 
not waste your time in trivial pursuits. Time is very pre- 
cious and once it is lost, you can never get it back. Make 
every effort to know what ought to be known while your 
sensory faculties are strong. If you cannot do it now, you 
can never do it in your life. 


“Oh man, do not take pride in your physical beauty, 
youth and sensory powers. Very soon, you will become 
old. Your hair will turn grey, your skin will develop wrinkles 
and your vision will be blurred. The children will make 
fun of you, calling you an old monkey. Your body 1s noth- 
ing but a doll made of skin. Try to understand the mystery 
behind this puppet show.” (Telugu Song) 


Who will come to your rescue in the old age? Hence, 
make proper use of your senses and be self-reliant. No- 
body can say for sure what will happen to the body in the 
next moment. So, do not develop body attachment. But 
you should take care of it properly so that you do not de- 
pend on others. Do your duty sincerely. 


You refer to yourself as ‘I’which is nothing but the 
atma. Let your body be under the control of the atma and 
none else. When you ask, who is Ramaiyya, somebody 
will get up and say ‘I’; if you ask who is Anil Kumar, the 
person standing here will say ‘I’. In this manner, the prin- 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 10 


ciple of ‘I’ is fundamental and is present in one and all. 
Just as one lamp lights another, it is from the fundamental 
‘T’ that all other ‘I’ s have emerged. The same current illu- 
mines all bulbs. Each being is like a bulb and God is like 
the generator. 


Mind Is An Aspect Of The Self 


If someone were to ask you, “Who are you”, you 
should say with conviction that you are the atma. What is 
Mind? It is an aspect of the Self. Just as sugar is the basis 
for all sweets, the atma is the basis for the body, mind and 
intellect. One should hold on firmly to this fundamental prin- 
ciple. You belong to mankind. Do not let your mind behave 
like a monkey. In fact, monkey is better than man in the 
sense that it participated in the service of Rama. Once a 
monkey taught a lesson to a man thus: “Oh mad fellow! You 
make fun of me, but, in fact, I am far better than you. Are 
you participating in the service of God, just as I did? I obeyed 
the command of Lord Rama, crossed the ocean and found 
the whereabouts of Mother Sita. I stood in front of Lord 
Rama like a deena (obedient servant) and faced Ravana like 
a dheera (one of valour). Likewise, you should be humble 
before the noble and courageous before the wicked.” 


Today man is behaving like a mad monkey. He may 
not have a tail, but he has the traits of a monkey. Give up 
monkey traits and take to the sacred path keeping the atma 
as your goal. Understand that you are the spark of the atma 
and strive to harmonise the mind, the intellect and the 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 11 


samskara. Samskara is very subtle. You may not under- 
stand its implication now. It follows you like a shadow 
from birth to birth. Samskara refers to the process of re- 
finement. You have the power to refine yourself but you 
are not making use of it. You have to refine yourself. This 
is the sacred teaching of Indian culture. 


Indian culture is like pure gold, but such a precious 
culture is being ignored today. People do not respect their 
parents and elders. They have forgotten the sacred values 
of love and humility. They give importance to only worldly 
education and material possessions. These will be with 
you so long as you are alive. When you leave the body 
what follows you is only samskara (innate tendency) and 
not samsara (family). But you ignore samskara and get 
caught up in samsara and suffer from lack of peace. 


“In spite of his education and intelligence, a foolish 
man will not know his true Self and a mean-minded person 
will not give up his wicked qualities. Modern education 
leads only to argumentation, not to total wisdom. What is 
the use of acquiring worldly education if it cannot lead you 
to immortality? Acquire the knowledge that will make you 
immortal.” (Telugu Poem) 


You will attain immortality only when you acquire 
the knowledge of the Self. “Oh student! You struggle hard 
in life merely for the sake of filling your belly. You acquire 
many forms of knowledge from various fields. Examine 
and enquire for yourself what great happiness you have 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 12 


achieved by spending all the time from dawn to dusk in 
acquiring knowledge and earning wealth while forgetting 
God.” (Telugu Poem) 


Merely by looking at the world map, can you say that 
you have toured the length and breadth of the world? Like- 
wise, mere acquisition of bookish knowledge is of no use. 
Enquire, what have you gained by forgetting God and repos- 
ing your faith in the world? Nothing whatsoever! You may 
go abroad and earn crores of rupees, but can you take with 
you even a naya paisa when you depart from this world? 
What is the use of merely going round the world? Does the 
spoon, which is used to serve various items like sambar, chut- 
ney, rasam and payasam (sweet pudding) experience their 
different tastes? Likewise, man is going to various countries 
and reading various books without any benefit. 


Embodiments of Love! Students! 


Develop love and share it with others. Transform 
this world into a paradise of love. Then there will be no 
misery at all. Understand the nature of the mind and you 
will be redeemed. You took part in Sports Meet, exhibited 
great talent and won many prizes. This is also very essen- 
tial from the worldly point of view. Worldly education is 
for life here and spiritual education is for the life hereafter. 
So, both are essential. Worldly education is like left leg 
and spiritual education is like right leg. Both the legs are 
needed for marching. Likewise, both forms of education 
are needed for progress in life. Left (world) has to be left 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 13 


some day or the other, but right (spirituality) is always right. 
Most of us use right hand to do our work. What does it 
mean? It means that we should do only right things and 
make everybody happy. Even in the daily life, the left hand 
is used to clean the dirt and the right hand is used for per- 
forming one’s duty. 


Recognise The Principle Of The Atma 


What is the goal of human life? One has to recognise 
the fundamental truth, 1.e., the principle of atma. It is within 
you. It is possible to know this only through the intellect 
because it has the capacity to discriminate. If you want to 
partake of an orange, you have to peel out the bitter rind. 
Even the monkey peels out the skin of a banana before par- 
taking of it. Likewise, the intellect should give up evil and 
accept the good. What is the use of human birth 1f man acts 
in the same manner as a monkey or a buffalo? There is a 
lesson to be learnt even from buffaloes and cows. They 
graze in the fields without wasting a minute and masticate 
leisurely whatever they have eaten. Likewise, whenever 
you come across anything good, accept it without delay. 
Later on contemplate on it and assimilate it. 


Students! 


Even birds and beasts are conducting themselves in 
accordance with their nature. But man, in spite of his educa- 
tion, has forgotten his true nature and is behaving like a 
fool. What is the use of securing 100 per cent marks in 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 14 


your examinations if you do not know the fundamental prin- 
ciple of life? You may fill your head with bookish knowl- 
edge and vomit the same in the examination to get good 
marks. But how many marks have you secured in the field 
of spirituality? There is no point in getting first class in 
worldly education and getting a zero in spiritual education. 
No doubt marks are important, but you should also see that 
you do not get bad remarks. 


The boy who spoke earlier narrated his experience. 
When he fell down during one of the rehearsal sessions, he 
thought that he had lost his chance, and felt extremely sad. 
He prayed to Me to cure him of his pain so that he could 
participate in the dance. Seeing his determination and faith, 
I cured him instantly. Such faith and determination are 
necessary to win Divine grace. Saint Purandaradasa said, 
“Oh God! When You protect Your devotee, You are Rama 
and when You punish the wicked, You are Yama. To 
Prahlada, You appeared as Narayana and to the demon 
Hiranyakasipu, You appeared as Yama. You manifest Your- 
self in the same manner as the devotee thinks of You.” 


Help ever, Hurt never. The same is stated by Sage 
Vyasa, Paropakaraya punyaya, Papaya parapeedanam (one 
attains merit by serving others and commits sin by hurting 
them). There can be no sinner worse than the one who 
criticises God. There can be no hell worse than distancing 
oneself from God. You may argue that there are many in 
the world who have forgotten God and yet lead a comfort- 
able life. No doubt they are living, but are living their lives 


I 


like dogs and foxes. One should strive to live like a devo- 
tee to earn Divine grace. 


Cultivate Morality 
Students! 


Uphold the name of the Institute and be ideals to 
society. This is the gratitude you are expected to show to 
the Institute for having given you free education. In other 
institutes, you cannot get a seat without paying donation. 
But here, education is provided totally free. Money comes 
and goes but morality comes and grows. So, cultivate 
morality. Having been the recipients of Swami’s love, ev- 
ery drop of your blood should be filled with gratitude. 


Here is a small example. The Vice Chancellor made a 
phone call to Singapore and asked a trainer to come here and 
train the boys in the lion dance. Accordingly, he arrived and 
trained the boys. Yesterday, I called the warden and asked 
him, “The trainer came here and made us happy. How can 
we express our gratitude to him?” The warden said he had 
no idea. I said that we would give him 40,000 rupees to- 
wards his travelling expenses. In this manner, I give per- 
sonal attention to every boy and every trainer. You may think 
that Swami is somewhere and does not know what is hap- 
pening, but Swami is here, there and everywhere as the prin- 
ciple of the atma. I give satisfaction to one and all and take 
upon Myself all the difficulties and losses that may arise out 
of your actions. But you are unable to understand this. 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 16 


Unity Is Divinity 


All the teachers worked hard to make this Sports Meet 
a grand success. In spite of their advanced age, Radhasamy 
and Ramamurthi worked tirelessly and extended their sup- 
port to the students. They are serving in our Institute even 
after retirement. All have worked with unity. Where there 
is unity there is Divinity. Once you have Divinity with 
you, everything else will follow. The success of the Sports 
Meet is the result of collective effort. There is no Institute 
like that of ours. The unity, harmony and love that you find 
here cannot be found anywhere else. Swami is the cause of 
all this. Swami’s love has brought about this unity. I am 
prepared to spend crores of rupees for the benefit of stu- 
dents. My only aim is to transform them into ideal citi- 
zens. Some people act in an ungrateful manner after re- 
ceiving Swami’s love in abundance. That is their fate. 
Uphold the name of the Institute wherever you go. That is 
what I desire from you. I am prepared to give you what- 
ever you ask for. Many people who come here are very 
happy seeing our Institute. 


Girl students from Anantapur Campus also have 
worked very hard. Truly speaking, those living in Puttaparthi 
are very fortunate because they are able to have Swami’s 
darshan, sparshan and sambhashan everyday. But the 
Anantapur students do not enjoy such privilege. It is twelve 
years since I visited Anantapur, yet they are working with 
steadfastness and devotion with the conviction that Swami 
is always with them. Their devotion and sincerity will cer- 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 17 


tainly yield rich rewards. Very soon I will visit Anantapur 
and confer bliss on all of them. There is result for every 
action, but one has to wait for the appropriate time. 


Today many people are fear-stricken thinking that 
there is going to be a war between India and Pakistan. No 
such war will take place. Bharat will be blessed with aus- 
piciousness. Bharat is a sacred land and will be safe al- 
ways. There may be minor skirmishes here and there. These 
days there is no unity even in a small family consisting of 
four members. In such a situation, how can a country with 
crores of population be free from minor conflicts? But there 
will be no war. All will stand united as one family. Pray 
whole-heartedly for the welfare of humanity — Loka 
samastha sukhino bhavantu (may all the world be happy). 
You can be happy only when the world is happy. There is 
an intimate and inseparable relationship between you and 
the world. Chant the Divine Name. Pray for the welfare of 
the world and participate in service activities. 


Makar Sankranthi 14.1.2002, Prasanthi Nilayam 


Light The Lamp Of Morality In Your 
Hearts 


“One may master all forms of knowledge, 

One may vanquish one’s adversaries in debate, 

One may fight with valour and courage in the 
battlefield, 

One may be an emperor reigning over vast kingdoms, 

One may offer cows and gold as an act of charity, 

One may count the countless stars in the sky, 

One may tell the names of different living creatures 
on the earth, 

One may be an expert in eight forms of Yoga, 

One may reach even the moon, 

But is there anyone who can control the body, mind 
and senses? 

Turn the vision inward And achieve the supreme state 
of equanimity of the mind.” 

(Telugu Poem) 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 20 


“Forbearance is the real beauty in this sacred land 
of Bharat. Of all the rituals, adherence to Truth is 

the greatest penance. The nectarous feeling in this 

country is the feeling of love toward ones mother. 

Character is valued far higher than the very life 
itself. People have forgotten the basic principles of 
this great culture and are imitating Western culture 
today. Alas! What has happened to this country? 

The Bharatiyas are not aware of the greatness of 
their own cultural heritage just as a mighty elephant 
is not aware of its own strength.” 


(Telugu Poem) 


Embodiments of Love! 


M anis making every effort to attain the state of 
perfection. It is culture that leads man to this state of 
perfection. Man has to undertake sacred activities to up- 
hold his purity, culture and character. Love is the funda- 
mental principle of life. Fill your li20ves with love. Love 
is God. Live in Love. Ignoring such sacred principle of 
love, man is misusing his life by cultivating wicked quali- 
ties like hatred, jealousy, pomp and show. 


“The honour of a nation depends upon the morality 
of its people. Lack of morality will certainly put a 
nation to disrepute. True human race is that which 
upholds morality. Listen to this truth, O valourous 
sons of Bharat!” (Telugu Poem) 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 21 


Today morality has declined among human beings. 
One without morality cannot be called a human being. Light 
the lamp of morality in your hearts. Only then can you lead a 
true human life. Morality alone can confer health and wealth 
on man. One should not develop undue attachment to the 
body which is physical and ephemeral. Besides the body, 
there is mind and spirit in every human being. Man should 
lead his life with morality as the basis. He should recognise 
the truth that human life is meant to uphold morality. 


Strive For Unity, Purity And Divinity 


In order to attain Divinity, first of all, man has to 
cultivate unity. In unity lies the true culture. Unity is the 
ideal that man should strive to attain. Any mighty task can 
be accomplished through unity. Man has achieved inde- 
pendence, but he is yet to attain unity. We find only diver- 
sity. Some people think that Swami has established this 
Super Speciality Hospital to render service to the people of 
Karnataka. But in fact, I have not constructed it for the 
people of a particular region. I have done it for the sake of 
the entire nation. 


Man should make efforts to visualise unity in di- 
versity and thereby attain divinity. Unity leads to pu- 
rity. Where there is purity there is divinity. Only 
through unity, purity and divinity, can one experience 
bliss. You can never attain bliss if you do not give up the 
feeling of diversity and cultivate the spirit of unity. 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 22 


It is true that health is wealth. Dharmarthakama- 
mokshanam arogyam moolamutthamam. Health is the 
fundamental requirement to achieve the four goals of hu- 
man life, namely, dharma (righteousness), artha (wealth), 
kama (desire) and moksha (liberation). However, once you 
attain the state of bliss, you can always enjoy good health. 
Man is deluded with the feeling that he can lead a blissful 
life by acquiring wealth and position of authority. Neither 
wealth nor position of authority can confer bliss on you. 
Bliss can be experienced only when you visualise unity in 
diversity. If you do not understand the principle of unity 
and attain bliss, all the service activities like construction 
of hospitals will be of little consequence. 


Everyone working in a hospital, be they doctors, 
nurses, paramedical staff or technicians, should have the 
spirit of unity. This hospital demonstrates the ideal of unity. 
All the staff in this hospital work with the feeling that they 
belong to one family. Our hospital stands for unity in 
diversity. It does not crave for money, name and fame. 
In olden days, education, health care, food and water 
were provided free of cost. I have determined to pro- 
vide them all free. 


Treat Patients With Love 


Our hospital is not a business centre. Most of the 
hospitals have become business centres. It is the worst of 
sins to run a hospital with the sole purpose of earning money. 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 23 


You should understand that you too might fall ill some day. 
Hence, you should treat the patients with love, without ex- 
pecting anything in return. You should not aspire for money 
from them. After I have started this hospital, many doctors 
have become jealous of Me and have started putting ob- 
stacles. Come what may, I will never give up this sacred 
task. Their jealousy will only motivate Me further to carry 
on with sacred activities. Their jealousy will ruin them 
ultimately. There will be peace and security in the world 
only when people give up hatred and violence, inculcate 
the feelings of love and realise the unity of mankind. (Telugu 
Poem) One should never be jealous of others’ prosperity. 
Jealousy is the worst quality. 


Asuya (jealousy) and Anasuya (one without jealousy) 
are sisters. Anasuya was blessed with three sons, the Di- 
vine Trinity of Brahma, Vishnu and Maheswara. Asuya 
also has three sons, namely, desire, anger and hatred. Once 
you give up asuya, you can win the grace of the Divine 
Trinity. You should participate in good activities and ex- 
tend your cooperation to those who undertake them. Once 
I take up a sacred task, I will never go back on it. There are 
many poor and down-trodden people who are suffering for 
want of proper medical care. Nobody cares for them in big 
hospitals as they cannot afford costly treatments. In some 
hospitals, they are not even permitted to enter the main gate. 
Can there be a greater sin than this? My intention is to 
provide free medical care to all such poor and forlorn 
people. 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 24 


Pure Drinking Water 


For a happy and healthy life, apart from proper medi- 
cal attention, pure drinking water is also very essential. My 
plan of action for the welfare of humanity is stupendous. It 
is bound to succeed. If one takes up a sacred task, one 
need not be concerned about the resources. There is no 
dearth of resources in our country Bharat. But there are 
very few who have the noble intention of doing good to 
society. When you undertake a sacred task, even Nature 
will extend all its help. The sacred epic Ramayana stands 
ample testimony to this. When Rama, the embodiment of 
Dharma, was proceeding to Lanka to rescue His consort 
Sita, Nature extended all its cooperation. He was helped 
by monkeys and even by a small squirrel. 


When you sow a good action today, you reap 
samskara tomorrow. Samskara leads to purity which in 
turn confers merit. Man should always be prepared to un- 
dertake good activities. He should never postpone them. 
On this sacred occasion, I have decided to undertake yet 
another service project. In Chennai, there is scarcity of 
drinking water. The rich can afford to get water through 
tankers and lorries, but what about the poor? They spoil 
their health by drinking polluted water from ponds and 
puddles. Hence, whatever may be the difficulty, I have 
decided to provide drinking water to the people of Chennai. 
The waters of Godavari and Krishna are being drained into 
the sea without being properly utilised. Even in 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 25 


Rayalaseema, people are suffering from water scarcity. The 
districts of Bellary, Anantapur, Cuddapah and Kurnool are 
classified as Backward regions. I want to provide pure drink- 
ing water to all these four districts also. This project is bound 
to be successful. There is no doubt about it. 


Make Proper Use Of Your Senses 


Man should have unwavering faith. But today man 
has no faith in himself. Then how can he have faith in God? 
People have become blind having lost the eyes of faith. 
One with faith alone can be called a true human being. Man 
is misusing such a sacred birth. Jan-thunam narajanma 
durlabham (out of all the living beings, the human birth is 
the rarest). Help others. Only then can your life find 
fulfilment. You know why hands are given to you? Is it 
merely to partake of food? No. They are meant to render 
service to others. You know why tongue is given? Is it to 
indulge in vain gossip? No. It is meant to chant the Divine 
Name. In this manner, all the senses should be properly 
utilised. This is what Buddha did. He studied various sa- 
cred texts, met many noble souls and listened to their teach- 
ings, but he was not satisfied. Ultimately, he realised that 
spiritual practices are of no avail if one does not make proper 
use of one’s senses. 


See no evil, see what is good; 
Hear no evil, hear what is good; 
Talk no evil, talk what is good; 
Think no evil, think what is good; 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 26 


Do no evil, do what is good; 
This is the way to God. 


In order to sanctify your senses, you should utilise 
them in the service of others. Yad bhavam tad bhavathi 
(as you think so you become). If you have bad vision, 
listen to bad talk, indulge in bad activities, you will ulti- 
mately ruin yourself. If you cannot undertake any service 
activity, at least speak softly and sweetly. You cannot al- 
ways oblige, but you can speak always obligingly. Today 
man talks harsh words which hurt the feelings of others. 
He puts his senses to misuse; then, how can he expect to be 
happy and healthy. In order to enjoy perfect health, make 
sacred use of your senses. You may be a pauper or a mil- 
lionaire. You may have money or not, but God has given 
each one of you five senses. Make proper use of them and 
sanctify your lives. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Each one of you is endowed with hridaya (heart). 
That which 1s filled with daya (compassion) is hridaya. But 
today man has become stone-hearted. Truly speaking, man 
is not one of wicked qualities. He is one of virtues. It is 
said, human birth is the rarest, but if man indulges in bes- 
tial and demonic traits, how can we say that he is superior 
to other beings. He should utilise his education, wealth and 
energy for the welfare of others. No doubt money is essen- 
tial, but one should not crave to amass wealth. One may 
build a hospital spending crores of rupees, but one should 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 27 


not expect manifold returns. One should spend at least fifty 
per cent of the money earned on charity. Today doctors do not 
give free medicine even to a single patient. The cost of medi- 
cines has gone up these days. 


Sacrifice Confers Immortality 


It is ten years since we constructed the Super Special- 
ity Hospital in Puttaparthi. Believe it or not, so far we have 
conducted 70,000 operations free of cost. This hospital has 
completed one year and here also we have performed hun- 
dreds of open heart and bypass surgeries. Crores of rupees 
are being spent every month. Not many are aware of this. 
Even if I have to spend thousands of crores, I will not give 
up this sacred task. I want this hospital to grow further and 
serve the needy. Our Chief Minister Krishna helped us to a 
great extent in the construction of this hospital. Besides other 
things, he gave us the land free of cost. His heart is filled 
with the spirit of sacrifice. Thyagenaikena amrutatthwama- 
nasu (only through sacrifice can one attain immortality). The 
Chief Minister of Maharashtra who is with us here today 
wants a similar hospital to be constructed in Mumbai. He is 
prepared to give the required land for it. In Mumbai, life is 
becoming increasingly difficult because of pollution. Health 
is very essential to achieve any task. Human life is not meant 
to amass wealth. When you depart from the world, can you 
take even a naya paisa with you? Man cannot take even a 
fistful of sand when he leaves the world; otherwise, there 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 28 


would have been rationing for sand also. What you ulti- 
mately carry with you is only the results of your actions, 
merit or sin. Hence, do not indulge in sinful deeds. Under- 
take meritorious activities. Paropakaraya punyaya, Papaya 
parapeedanam (one attains merit by serving others and com- 
mits sin by hurting them). Help ever, Hurt never. To the 
extent possible, perform acts of charity and help everybody. 
Fill your hearts with love. We consider it our duty to treat 
the patients and alleviate their suffering. Duty is God. Work 
is worship. 1am doing it with love. It is from the source and 
not by force. 


Spreading Untruth Is A Sin 


I want to make another point clear to you. People, 
including those who are sitting here are indulging in wild 
imagination regarding the incident that occurred day be- 
fore yesterday. Actually, there is no truth in it. People may 
think whatever they want. Newspapers are mainly respon- 
sible for this restlessness. They are interested in publicising 
only bad news items and not in sharing good news with 
others. What is the purpose of a newspaper? It has to col- 
lect NEWS from the four sides — North, East, West and 
South and disseminate the same. Today instead of gather- 
ing authentic information, people write what they feel like 
in newspapers. However, there are some good newspapers 
like The Times of India and The Hindu, which give correct 
information. Newspapers should present the facts as they 
are. But they distort the truth and publicise it in a sensa- 
tional manner only to make money. 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 29 


Be it good or bad, report the incidents as they hap- 
pened. Do not spread false news. What had happened day 
before yesterday was only a fraction of what has been mag- 
nified and reported by the print media and the television. 
Even the television does not seem to have any work other 
than spreading such false news. Now Iam seventy-six years 
old. Till this day, I have not had any contact with people 
from either print media or television. I have nothing to do 
with newspapers. One can definitely develop friendship 
with those who report the truth. What is the use of talking 
to those who publicise untruth? Spreading untruth is a sin. 
If you speak untruth once, you will have to face its conse- 
quences in many births. Such being the case, you can very 
well imagine the fate of those who indulge in untruth hun- 
dreds of times every day. Newspapers should report events 
exactly as they happened. No one will have any objection 
to it. It is a sin to spread false news. 


Actually, what had happened day before yesterday was 
nothing. I went till the last row of the Hall, went near even 
those who were sitting outside, collected letters from them, 
then sat on the dais for forty minutes. Nothing happened. 
After that, I went inside, had a little food and visited the 
hospital to oversee the arrangements. By the time I returned 
to Brindavan from there, all sorts of false news had spread 
all over. I did not see anybody nor did anyone come near 
Me. But the newspapers have reported that someone came 
near Me with a pistol. Is it not a blatant lie? Did any of the 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 30 


journalist see the incident with his own eyes? Why should 
they write untruth? After all, it was only an air pistol which is 
used to shoot down birds. Such a minor incident was exag- 
gerated. It is a great mistake. Let the journalists think what 
they want. I have nothing to do with newspapers. My heart is 
filled with love and love alone. I share My love with one and 
all. All are Mine and I belong to all. I do not have hatred 
towards anybody. All love Me and I love all. Love is the 
intimate relationship that exists between you and Me.The 
newspapers made a mountain of a molehill and caused anxi- 
ety to many. What a sin they have committed! There should 
be a limit to their jealousy. Devotees from various countries 
like America, Japan, Germany, England, etc., sent telegrams 
to Me expressing their concern. 


The President of America has said that the terrorists 
should be wiped out. Who are the terrorists? Anger and 
jealousy are the ‘terrorists’. These wicked traits are present 
in every man. Man should make every effort to annihilate 
them. Only then can the world progress. One should not 
kill one’s fellow human beings; instead one should destroy 
the ‘terrorists’ within and cultivate virtues. This is what I 
desire from you. The country will attain plenty and pros- 
perity and set an ideal to the rest of the world only when 
jealousy and anger are completely eradicated. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Today we are celebrating the first anniversary of our 
hospital. I am not interested in such celebrations. I want 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 31 


each one of you to cultivate purity, love and compassion. 
There is no human being in the world without love. Love is 
sacred, infinite and most wonderful. Having been endowed 
with such divine love, why do you behave in a manner that 
is contrary to your true nature? I wish that you lead your 
lives with love and make this country an ideal one. With 
this, I bless you all and bring My Discourse to a close. 


First Anniversary of SSSIHMS, 19.1.2002, 
Whitefield, Bangalore) 


Sanctity Your Life By Chanting 
The Divine Name 


If you leave ego, you become dear to all; 
If you conquer anger, you become free from 
worries, 
You become prosperous when you control your 
desires; 
You attain happiness only when you conquer greed. 
(Sanskrit Verse) 


Embodiments of Love! 


T is the main duty of man to acquire a cool mind 

like the moonlight and shining wisdom like sun 
light. As long as man is egoistic, none will love him, in- 
cluding his own wife and children. He will win the love of 
all when he gives up his ego. Ego is like a bomb that de- 
stroys man. So, in the first instance, man should get rid of 
ego. So long as there is anger in man, he cannot be free 
from sorrow. He will be respected by all only when he gives 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 34 


up anger. One with greed can never attain happiness. Man 
can be happy and make others happy only when he gives 
up greed. Ego, anger and greed are three evil qualities that 
turn man into a demon. 


Do All Service As An Offering To God 


There is One in this world, by knowing whom you 
would have known all. If That is not known, there is no 
point in knowing the rest. That is the knowledge of the 
Self. Zero gains value only when the number one is associ- 
ated with it. The more the number of zeros, the more is the 
value. When one is removed, all zeros lose their value. Love 
for the Self can be compared to the number one. Man’s life 
gains value only when he has love for the Self. Zsavasyam 
idam sarvam (the entire universe is permeated by God). 
Who is Easwara? It is the chaithanya (consciousness) that 
pervades all beings. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Your lives will be redeemed only when you 
contemplate on the Divine Name incessantly. All your 
wealth and comforts will be of little consequence if you do 
not have love for God. In Bharat, there are millions of people 
who serve their fellowmen with God’s Name on their lips. 
“Neither by penance nor by pilgrimage nor by study of 
scriptures nor by japa can one cross the ocean of life. One 
can achieve it only by serving the pious.” (Sanskrit verse) 
Service is very important. Serve everybody with the 
conviction that God dwells in all. As you serve others, you 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 35 


have to kill your ego. It cannot be called service if it is 
done with the feeling that “I am serving others”. Sarva 
karma Bhagavad preethyartham (do all actions to please 
God). This is the attitude one should have while serving 
others. There are many who take part in service activities, 
but how many are able to enjoy the benefits derived 
therefrom? First of all, you should understand the term 
service. True service is that which is done with divine 
feelings, forgetting oneself. Service should be done as an 
offering to God. Service has value only when it is done 
with daivabhimana (love for God) and not dehabhimana 
(attachment to body). Even a small act of service done with 
the sole intention of pleasing God will acquire great 
significance. 


Cultivate The Spirit Of Oneness 
Embodiments of Love! 


Enquire, who is serving whom. The one who is 
serving and the one who is served are one and the same. 
Ekatma sarvabhutantaratma (the same atma is present in 
all beings). Ekam Sath viprah bahudha vadanti (Truth is 
one but scholars refer to it by many names). Ek Prabhu ke 
anek naam (one God has many names). God is one though 
you extol Him by various names. Names and forms are not 
important. Feeling is the basis for devotion. God is 
bhavapriya (lover of feelings) not bahyapriya (lover of 
external show), which means God sees the feeling behind 
your activities. People from Bejawada (Vijayawada) have 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 36 


come here after taking part in Grama Seva (service to 
villages) chanting the Divine Name for the last 76 days. 
Thousands of devotees from Shirdi have come here on a 
pilgrimage. They visited various pilgrimage centres and 
have come here from Kanyakumari via Bangalore. 
Karmanubandheeni manushya loke (human society is 
bound by action). Why is the body given to you? God has 
given you the body to perform Joka seva (service to the 
world). Do not misuse the body by indulging in evil 
thoughts and deeds. Undertake noble deeds and sanctify 
your lives. Man’s foremost duty is to serve society with 
noble feelings. Consider the body as an instrument given 
by God in order to serve your fellowmen with love. 


God is present in every being as the eternal witness. 
This truth is proclaimed by ‘Soham’ which is pronounced 
with each breath, ‘So’ with each inhalation and ‘Ham’ with 
each exhalation. ‘So’means That (God) and ‘Ham’ means 
I. This process goes on for 21,600 times a day in every 
human being. In this manner, the inner voice reminds man 
of his divine nature as many times everyday. But man acts 
in a foolish manner without paying heed to his inner voice. 
Who is the doer? Who breathes, who speaks, who listens, 
who acts? It is the Self within, which is the same in all. 
Cultivate this spirit of oneness. The one who does and the 
one who makes you do are one and the same. Understand 
that you are not serving others, you are serving yourself. 
The same truth is proclaimed by the Vedas in the four 
Mahavakyas: Prajnanam Brahma (Brahman is Supreme 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 37 


Consciousness); Aham Brahmasmi (1 am Brahman); 
Tattwamasi (that thou art), Avam Atma Brahma (this atma 
is Brahman). These are the greatest teachings given to 
mankind by the Vedas. Unfortunately, man today has lost 
faith in the teachings of the Vedas. Divinity shines in every 
breath of man. Truly speaking, man is endowed with 
sujnana (wisdom) and prajnana (awareness). But man, 
out of his ignorance, is acting contrary to his divine nature. 
Before partaking of food, you offer it to God with the prayer: 


Brahmarpanam Brahma Havir 
Brahmagnou Brahmanahutam 
Brahmaiva Thena Ganthavyam 
Brahma Karma Samadhina. 


You say that the food is an offering to Brahman. Then 
where is Brahman? He is within. So, immediately God 
replies from within: 


Aham Vaishvanaro Bhutva 
Praninam Dehamasrita 
Pranapana Samayukta 
Pachamyannam Chaturvidham. 


Glorify Human Life By Your Meritorious Deeds 


God is present in the form of Vaisvanara in every- 
body. So, when you help others, you are helping your- self. 
Similarly, hurting others amounts to hurting your own self. 
Sarva jeeva namaskaram kesavam pratigachchhati (whom- 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 38 


soever you salute, it reaches God) and Sarva jeeva tira- 
skaram kesavam pratigach-chhati (whomsoever you deni- 
grate, it reaches God). There is no point in undertaking pil- 
grimages or chanting the divine name without understand- 
ing the oneness of divinity. You may call Him by any name 
and worship Him in any form, but God is one. Never forget 
this principle of unity. But, unfortunately, man fragments 
unity into diversity. Try to visualise unity in diversity. This 
is the true service that man is supposed to undertake. Man 
mein ram hath mein kam (install God in your heart and use 
your hands in the service of society). Then whatever work 
you do will be transformed into worship. 


Today man lacks faith in the path of service. For the 
past many years, you have been listening to discourses and 
performing various service activities. But what have you 
achieved? What have you known? Nothing whatsoever. 
Therefore, in the first instance, you should cultivate righteous 
conduct. Develop right vision, right listening and right speech. 
By practising these, you can develop goodness. Only then 
can you attain Nirvana (liberation). Do not be under the 
impression that God is confined only to temples. It is not 
enough if you merely visit temples and offer your salutations 
to the idols of God. Offer your salutations to all beings with 
the conviction that you are saluting the Lord Himself. There 
is no being without God. God is the Indweller of all beings 
(sarvabhutantaratma). Man’s foremost duty is to understand 
this truth and act accordingly. 


Sathya Sai Sp By 


You have been listening to various discourses, going 
on pilgrimages and reading sacred texts. But what is the 
use if there is no transformation in you? Man today has 
become stone-hearted. Heart should be as soft as butter. 
Mind should be as cool as moonlight and speech should be 
as sweet as honey. These are the main values that the Sathya 
Sai Organisation stands for. These are the true ornaments of 
man. Though man is endowed with sacred qualities and 
immense powers, he is leading a meaningless life without 
making use of them in the service of others. Though God 
has endowed man with a sweet heart and a sacred mind, 
man is not putting them to proper use. Never utter harsh 
words; always speak softly and sweetly. Make proper use 
of the faculties given to you by God. 


Embodiments of Love! 


To be born as human being is the greatest blessing. 
Janthunam narajanma durlabham (out of all the living 
beings, human birth is the rarest). It is the result of merits 
accrued over many previous lives. Such a sacred life should 
not be misused. Speak sweetly and offer your respects to 
all with a smiling face. You call yourself a devotee. But 
there is no truth in this statement if you lack these noble 
qualities. Fill your mind with noble thoughts and perform 
meritorious deeds. There lies the glory of human life. You 
should earn the respect of everybody by your behaviour. 


Do not consider yourself a mere mortal. Jiva is deva 
(man is divine). This is the fundamental teaching of Indian 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 40 


philosophy. Easwara sarva bhutanam (God 1s the Indweller 
of all beings). Fill your hearts with such noble feelings, put 
them into practice and sanctify your lives. Remember that 
you are born as a human being. Live up to your stature as a 
human being. Spirituality does not mean doing worship, 
going on pilgrimages or doing bhajans alone. Spirituality 
lies in destroying the animal tendencies and rising to the 
level of divinity. So long as there are animal tendencies in 
man, he cannot rise to the level of divinity. Day by day, 
animal qualities are increasing in man. You are neither a 
wild animal to cause fear in others nor a docile domestic 
animal to be afraid of others. You are born as a human be- 
ing with noble human qualities. So, recognise your human- 
ness and divinity. But man today is not able to realise this 
truth and consequently he is wasting his life. 


Divinity Can Be Attained Only By Love 


Embodiments of Love! 


It is most important for you to take note of these teach- 
ings, which I am repeating time and again. Never neglect 
them. The divine power latent in you is limitless. 
Anoraneeyan mahato maheeyan (divinity is subtler than the 
subtlest and vaster than the vastest). Therefore, it is impos- 
sible to estimate the nature of divinity. Words are inadequate 
to describe it. Whatever description you give is only for 
your own satisfaction. It is a great mistake to try to gauge 
the infinite power of divinity with your limited mind. 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 41 


However, the microcosm and the macrocosm differ 
only in quantity, not in quality. Here is a small example. 
The ocean water is saline. Go to an ocean and get a potful 
of water. The water in the ocean and the water in the pot 
differ only in quantity but the taste remains the same. You 
should always have quality in mind, not quantity. God is 
interested only in quality. One teaspoon of cow’s milk is 
better than barrels of donkey’s milk. Don’t get carried away 
by quantity. Do not run after material objects. Do not be 
greedy. Greed leads to sorrow. Aspire for quality. It is the 
quality and not the quantity that gives you happiness. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Today there are many who are in search of God. 
Where is God? He is here, there and everywhere. Such being 
the case, where is the need to search for Him? Prahlada 
said, “Never doubt that God is here and not there. Wherever 
you search for Him, He is there.” (Telugu Poem) He was a 
small boy. His teachers Chanda and Amarka tried to change 
his mind and even subjected him to punishment; but 
Prahlada was undeterred in his resolve. His mind was always 
focused on Lord Narayana. He was constantly repeating 
His Name. One day his father Hiranyakasipu summoned 
him and said, “My dear one, it seems you have studied many 
subjects; let me have the pleasure of listening to some of 
them.” Prahlada replied, “Father! The teachers have taught 
me many things, I have understood the four objectives of 
life: Dharma (righteousness), Artha (wealth), Kama (desire) 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 42 


and Moksha (liberation). J have studied many things; in 
fact, I have understood the very essence of education.” 
(Telugu Poem) When his father asked him as to what the 
essence of education was, Prahlada chanted the Divine 
Name, Om Namo Narayanaya. Hiranyakasipu became 
furious. He could not tolerate Prahlada repeating Lord 
Narayana’s name. He punished him and sent him away. 
Hiranyakasipu hated God, whereas Prahlada had intense 
love for God. Only through love can manavatwa 
(humanness) be transformed into Daivatwa (divinity). 


Embodiments of Love! 


Never have hatred and jealousy. Kill your ego. Only 
then will love blossom in you. Through love alone can you 
attain divinity. That is why the Gopikas sang, “Oh Krishna, 
play your sweet flute and sow the seeds of love in the desert 
of loveless hearts. Let the rain of love fall on earth and 
make the rivers of love flow.” (Telugu song) How nectarous 
is the song of the Divine! Only those who are filled with 
divine feelings can experience its taste. 


Do Namasmarana And Redeem Your Life 
Embodiments of Love! 


It may not be possible for you to undertake rigorous 
spiritual practices like meditation, penance, yoga, etc. It is 
enough if you chant the Divine Name. Do not undertake 
practices which you do not understand. Take to the sim- 
plest path, i.e., namasmarana. In Krita Yuga, meditation 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 43 


was prescribed as the means to liberation. In Treta Yuga, it 
was yajna. In Dwapara Yuga, people performed archana 
(worship), and in this Kali Age, namasmarana is the pre- 
scribed path to liberation. “Jn this Kali Age, chanting of 
the Lords Name alone can grant you liberation. There is 
no greater path than this.”’ (Sanskrit sloka) So, sing His 
glory and cross this ocean of worldly life. Namasmarana 
is the basis of all spiritual practices. 


Embodiments Of Love, Students, Pilgrims And Sevaks! 


There are nine paths of devotion: sravanam 
(listening), kirtanam (singing), vishnusmaranam 
(contemplating on Vishnu), padasevanam (serving His 
Lotus Feet), vandanam (salutation), archanam (worship), 
dasyam (servitude), sneham (friendship), atma-nivedanam 
(self-surrender). Paths may be different but the goal is one 
and the same. Follow any path and reach the goal. With the 
passage of time, you should move closer to the goal. Do 
not go away from it. Never act against the divine command. 
Do not submit to selfishness and self-interest. Selfishness 
takes you away from spirituality. Give up selfishness and 
dedicate your lives for the divine cause. When you proceed 
along the divine path, you will be charged with divine 
energy. 


Today thousands of people from Shirdi have come 
here after visiting many Punya Kshetras (pilgrimage 
centres). They have been chanting the Divine Name all 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 -t- 


along. It is the power of namasmarana that has brought 
them to Prasanthi Nilayam. Kshetras (fields) may be 
different but the kshetrajna (knower of the field) is one. 
The Lord says in the Gita, Kshetrajnam chapimaam 
viddhi... (recognise Me as the knower of the field also). 
There can be no kshetra without kshetrajna. You may visit 
any number of punya kshetras but in the first instance, you 
have to purify your hridaya kshetra (field of the heart). 
Never utter harsh words. Do not criticise others. Give up 
para chintana (thinking about others) and cultivate 
paramatma chintana (thinking about God). This is the true 
sadhana. 


Serve the needy to the extent possible. The service 
you render should be meaningful and purposeful. Here is a 
small example. Many of our former students are undertaking 
various service activities in the neighbouring villages, e.g., 
Brahmanapalli, Beedupalli, Enumula-palli, etc. How should 
one serve? One should do it in the true spirit of service. 
When you go to a village for service, you should involve 
the villagers also in the service activities and motivate them 
to undertake such sacred work everyday in their village. It 
is not possible for you to go to the villages everyday. You 
may go to a village once in a month or two. Therefore, 
when you involve the villagers in the service activities, they 
will earn to serve themselves. You should teach them the 
importance of cleanliness.Usually, villagers live in 
unhygienic conditions which cause various diseases. So, 
you should teach them to keep their village clean. The water 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 45 


that we drink and the air that we breathe should be free 
from pollution. Only then can we lead a happy and healthy 
life, 


Cultivate samyak drishti (right vision), samyak vak 
(right speech), samyak sravanam (right listening), samyak 
bhavam (right thinking) and samyak karma (right action). 
This will make your life perfect. Then you become 
deserving of divine grace. Only then can you attain 
sayujyam (liberation). Salokyam (perception of the divine) 
is the first step, sameepyam (proximity to the divine) is the 
second, sarupyam (identity with the divine) is the third and 
sayujyam (merger with the divine) is the fourth. Just as 
rivers ultimately merge with the ocean, man should become 
one with God. Nadinam sagaro gathi (the ocean is the goal 
of the rivers). What is the goal of human life? Is it to enjoy 
worldly pleasures? No. You may have all the comforts you 
like, but ultimately you should strive to become one with 
the divine. The very purpose of life is to have the vision of 
God, experience Him and ultimately merge with Him. But 
today man is doing just the opposite. He has forgotten God 
and is wasting his life in the pursuit of worldly pleasures. 
Human life is highly sacred, noble and divine. It should 
not be wasted in such unworthy pursuits. 


Students! Pilgrims! 


Do not be carried away by worldly pleasures. Take 
to the sacred path and sanctify your time by chanting the 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 46 


divine name. There is no need to allocate a specific time or 
place for namasmarana. You can do it wherever you are 
and whatever you are doing. One needs to pay tax for water, 
electricity, etc., but there is no tax for namasmarana. 
Nobody can stop you from doing it. It is very simple, yet 
most effective. But man does not realise the value of 
namasmarana as it is so easy to practise. He thinks that 
God can be attained only through severe austerities. This is 
a misconception. Without troubling yourself or causing 
trouble to others, you can chant the divine name. 


Cultivate love for God. That is true devotion. Without 
love, there is no devotion. Love is the basis of all spiritual 
practices like japa, thapa, yoga, dhyana, etc. Bereft of love, 
any spiritual practice is a futile exercise. For the life here 
and hereafter, love is most important. Love is the basic 
requirement for all, whether one is an aartha (one in 
distress), an artharthi (seeker of wealth), jijnasu (seeker of 
knowledge) or a jnani (one of wisdom). Love is the 
foundation for a theist as well as an atheist. Develop such 
sacred love. Do not criticise or ridicule anybody. Give 
happiness to all by sharing your love with them. This is the 
true spiritual practice. Follow this simple path, experience 
ananda and sanctify your lives. 


Discourse on 24th February 2002, Prasanthi Nilayam. 


Idols Are Pointers To Divinity 


God is the basis of the universe. Truth is the 
essence of God. The virtue of noble souls is truth. 
Such noble souls are verily Divine. (Sanskrit Verse) 


Embodiments of Love! 


UR ancients enquired into the nature of 

divinity through many paths, but were not suc- 
cessful in recognising the reality. Hence, they started wor- 
shipping Prakriti (Nature). Thereafter, the Bharat-iyas took 
to murthi aradhana (idol-worship). Every creature that 
takes birth in this universe has a form (murthi). Idols are 
inert in nature and do not possess the qualities of compas- 
sion, love, forbearance, etc. It is for this reason that some 
people are against idol-worship. This is ignorance. You use 
your forefinger to point to a specific object, say, a flower 
or a tumbler. Similarly, idols are like pointers to Divinity. 
Once you recognise divinity, you don’t need the pointers, 
say, idols. Such being the case, 1s it not foolish to object to 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 48 


idol worship? Are you not worshipping the pictures of your 
parents and grandparents? Do these pictures have life in 
them? No. Nor do they have the qualities of compassion, 
love, sacrifice, etc. Then what is the point in worshipping 
them? It is through these pictures that we are reminded of 
their virtues and ideals they stood for. Take for instance a 
hundred rupee note with dimensions of 6 inches x 4 inches. 
There is neither life nor virtues of love, compassion, etc., 
in this currency note. Yet people love it and would like to 
possess it. Is there anybody in the world who dislikes 
money? Irrespective of the country or religion, everyone 
loves money. There are innumerable instances wherein 
people gave up their lives for the sake of money. Money is 
valuable because it bears the government’s seal. Similarly, 
we respect the national flag for the value it stands for, though 
it is merely a piece of cloth, which is inert. If idol worship 
is considered foolish, then the same should apply to love 
for money and respect for flag, which are also lifeless. Man’s 
beliefs are based on his likes and dislikes. 


Names Of Gods Have Deep Inner Meaning 


Isavasyam Idam Jagat (the entire world is perme- 
ated by God). Every being is an embodiment of Easwara. 
It is also said, Easwara sarva bhutanam (God is the 
indweller of all beings). He is present in all beings in the 
form of Consciousness. Easwara is the master of six forms 
of wealth — dharma (righteousness), aiswarya (wealth), 
yashas (fame), shakti (power), jnana (wisdom) and vairagya 
(detachment). Easwara has another name, San(m)kara. 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 49 


‘sam’ refers to chidanandam (eternal bliss) and 
atmanandam (bliss of the Self). ‘Kara’ means one who be- 
stows. Therefore, Sankara is one who confers eternal bliss. 
Every word has a deep inner meaning. Take for instance 
the name Sathya Sai. Sathya stands for Rig Veda. ‘Sa’, ‘Aa’ 
and ‘Ya’ in Sai stand for Sama Veda, Atharvana Veda and 
Yajur Veda, respectively. Therefore, Sathya Sai is the very 
personification of the four Vedas. What is the meaning of 
the term Linga? It is the symbol of divinity, as it has nei- 
ther beginning nor end. Divinity is immanent in the heart 
(hridaya) of every man. Hridaya means that which is suf- 
fused with compassion. So, Divinity is the embodiment of 
compassion. 


Today people are unable to understand the principle 
of divinity. Though the modes of worship vary, they all are 
directed towards different forms of the same God. You may 
call Him Rama, Krishna, Easwara, etc. All are one. They 
refer to the same God. Each person worships a particular 
form according to his or her likes. Some people worship 
Rama because they are attracted by Rama’s Name and Form. 
It is said, Ramayate Iti Rama (Rama is one who captivates 
the hearts of one and all). 


Today is Sivarathri, meaning auspicious night. Siva 
symbolises the breathing process ‘Soham’, that takes place 
in every man. This is referred to as Hamsa Gayatri. ‘(A) 
Ham’ refers to ‘I and ‘So’ means ‘That’ (God). This mes- 
sage of ‘I am God’ is conveyed through this breathing pro- 
cess — 21,600 times a day. Such teachings have been propa- 
gated and practised since ancient times. 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 50 


It is the finger that points to a flower. Likewise, idols 
point to the divinity. So, idol worship cannot be considered 
foolish. Never disregard idols because they are inert. Even 
in inert objects, there is chaitanya (consciousness). 
Anoraneeyan mahato maheeyan (Brahman is subtler than 
the subtlest and vaster than the vastest). This chaitanya is 
present in the smallest to the biggest. From your point of 
view, an object may appear to be inert, but from the Vedic 
point of view, everything is chaitanya. It is foolish to over- 
look the existence of chaitanya. One may question if 
chaitanya is all-pervasive, why is it not visible to the na- 
ked eye? You are all well aware of the fact that there is 
butter in every drop of milk. Can you deny its existence 
merely because it is not visible to the naked eye? The pro- 
cess of obtaining butter involves curdling the milk and then 
churning it. Man is unable to perceive this chaitanya prin- 
ciple because of two defects: 


1. He overlooks his innumerable mistakes; and 
2, He magnifies the minutest mistake of others. 


One can attain divinity only when he stops hiding 
his mistakes and highlighting the faults of others. It is a 
great sin to search for others’ faults. Instead, look for your 
own. Consider your smallest defect as a great blunder and 
try to rectify the same. Ignore the faults in others however 
big they may be. Do not criticise others, instead criticise 
and question yourself — Is this the way I should behave, 
having been born as a human being. True spiritual practice 
lies in finding out one’s own mistakes and correcting them. 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 51 


It involves giving up of evil tendencies and developing noble 
traits. That is ‘Sa’ ‘Dhana’ (spiritual practice). ‘Sa’ 
symbolises divinity which is the embodiment of all forms 
of wealth (Dhana). Today the people who seek the faults of 
others are on the rise. This is the cause for restlessness in 
society. All who aspire to be peaceful should eradicate all 
their defects. Only then can you realize Sivatwa (divinity). 


Use Your Power Of Discrimination 


Man is falling a prey to anger. Who is affected by 
this anger? It is not others but he himself. It is said, “An- 
ger is one S own enemy, peace is the protective shield, com- 
passion is the true relation, happiness is verily the heaven 
and misery is the hell.” (Telugu Poem) Therefore, make 
efforts to control your anger. Do not consider yourself to 
be superior to others. 


Where is God? He is present in every human being 
and in every living creature. That is why it is said, Easwara 
sarva bhutanam (God is the indweller of all beings). 
Daivam manusha rupena (God takes the form of man). 
When you consider all as divine, you will never indulge in 
criticism. God judges a person by his feelings not by his 
actions. God is Bhavapriyva, not Bahyapriya. So, make 
efforts to turn your vision inward. Pashyati iti pashuhu 
(one who goes purely by external vision is an animal). A 
true human being is one who looks inward. The moment 
an animal spots a green patch of land, it immediately rushes 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 52 


to that spot without weighing the pros and cons. It is the 
duty of man to use his power of discrimination and act ac- 
cordingly. Man should be conscious of his duties 
always. Otherwise, he has to pay a heavy price. Whenever 
there is a delay in the arrival of a bus or a flight, the passen- 
gers start criticising all those responsible for the delay. This 
is because duties were not carried out diligently. Likewise, 
man becomes an object of criticism if he does not discharge 
his duties properly. 

Man cannot be called a human being unless he prac- 
tises human values — Sathya, Dharma, Santhi, Prema and 
Ahimsa. These are like the five life-breaths of man. The 
absence of these life-breaths amounts to living death. Each 
one is responsible for his own downfall. Man kills himself 
by not practising these human values. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Love is your greatest asset. Develop love and always 
speak the Truth. Truth sounds bitter whereas people are eas- 
ily pleased by falsehood. People do not relish milk, which 
is brought to their doorstep, whereas they are prepared to 
traverse miles together to consume a bottle of liquor. False- 
hood has become the order of the day. Falsehood may please 
others but not your conscience. Strive to satisfy your con- 
science before satisfying others. Under all circumstances 
follow the path of Truth. In case the utterance of truth is 
likely to lead to some danger, remain silent. A hermit was 
deeply engrossed in the contemplation of God. He had 
vowed to speak “Truth always”. Lord Easwara wanted to 


Sathya Sai Spe 33 


subject him to a test. He assumed the form of a hunter and 
started chasing a deer, which, out of fear, hid in a bush 
close to the hermitage. This was noticed by the hermit. On 
being questioned by the hunter about the whereabouts of 
the deer, the hermit was in a dilemma. He could not feign 
ignorance and say that he had not seen the deer as that would 
amount to uttering a lie. At the same time he could not 
reveal the whereabouts of the deer, lest the hunter should 
kill it. In that case he would be a party to the crime. He 
prayed to Lord Easwara fervently to show him a way out. 
A brilliant idea flashed in his mind by God’s Grace. God is 
always with you, in you, around you, above you guiding 
and guarding you. Why fear when He is near? The hermit 
replied, “O hunter, that which sees cannot speak; that which 
speaks cannot see.” By such a tactful answer, the hermit 
not only upheld his adherence to Truth but also protected 
the life of the deer. Then Lord Easwara manifested in His 
true form and declared, “Such yukti (tact) which safeguards 
your interests as well as those of others is true yoga.” There- 
fore it is said, Truth is the life of the tongue. Righteousness 
is the life of hands. Non-violence is the life of the heart. 
Sivarathri is celebrated to teach man the significance of 
these values. 


Develop Positive Tendencies 


Siva also stands for humility. A person with humility is one 
of Sivam (auspiciousness). On the other hand, a person with 
ego is verily a Savam (corpse). 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 54 


By constant prayer, man can overcome any difficult 
situation. You should develop noble thoughts and help the 
needy. Do not harm anyone. The harm that you inflict on 
others will boomerang on you. Criticism and accusation 
are worldly traits and negative in nature. Develop positive 
tendencies. What is the use of all your education if you 
cannot give up your evil tendencies? 


“In spite of his education and intelligence, a fool- 
ish man will not know his true Self and a mean- 
minded person will not give up his wicked quali- 
ties. Modern education leads only to argumenta- 
tion, not to total wisdom. What is the use of ac- 
quiring worldly education if it cannot lead you to 
immortality? Acquire knowledge that will make you 
immortal.” (Telugu Poem) 


Paropakaraya punyaya, Papaya parapeedanam (one 
attains merit by serving others and commits sin by hurting 
them). Help ever, Hurt Never. This is the essence of the 18 
Puranas. Never mind if you have to suffer, but do not put 
others to suffering. God will take care of you. 


Your behaviour should be befitting human birth. Neeti 
(morality) and nijayati (integrity) are the life principles of 
manava jathi (human race). Develop morality and lead an 
honest life. Only then can you attain Easwaratwa. 


The main teaching of the “Culture of Bharat” is to 
realise unity in diversity. But today man fragments unity 
into diversity because of his narrow-mindedness. 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 55 


Embodiments of Divine Atma! 


Never give scope to feelings of I and mine. First 
know yourself. Question yourself, “Who am I?” Once you 
know who you truly are, you will realise the oneness of all. 
Once you realise that you are the embodiment of atma, you 
will know that all others are also embodiments of the atma. 
However, in daily life, it is difficult to recognise this equal- 
ity based on profession. 


What is adhyatmikam (spirituality)? Weeding out 
animal qualities and rising to the level of Divine consti- 
tutes true spirituality. Adhyatmikam refers to Adhi (eter- 
nal) and Atma. Therefore, true Adhyatmikam is that which 
relates to the eternal Atma.Recognising the fact that I and 
you are one is true Adhyatmikam. 


When Dharmaraja offered Krishna the agratam- 
bulam (prime offering), the wicked Sisupala felt that 
Krishna did not deserve it. He abused Krishna endlessly 
and said, Do you think that you deserve this honour be- 
cause you Stole the saris of Gopikas when they were hav- 
ing a bath or do you think that you deserve this because 
you played pranks with the Gopikas. Stop this self-aggran- 
disement and shut up! (Telugu Poem)Krishna smilingly 
replied, “Yes, you are right, you speak truly.” 


Dharmaraja felt deeply hurt and fell at Krishna’s Feet 
and said, “O Lord! How is it that you continue to smile in 
the face of such harsh criticism? You may be smiling, but 
I am shedding tears of sorrow.” Then Krishna replied, 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 54 


“Dharmaraja, praise or blame relate to the body, not to the 
atma. Why should one feel depressed when criticised and 
elated when praised? In fact, we criticise our own body 
because it gives scope to various diseases and makes us 
suffer. Hence understand that whoever criticises your body 
is in fact doing you a favour.” Dharmaraja was immensely 
satisfied with Krishna’s reply and said “Because there is a 
shortage of such teachers people are afflicted by ignorance”. 


What about Duryodhana? He was no ignoramus. 
But in spite of knowing all (about right and wrong), he fell 
into the path of ignorance. He also asked Dharmaraja to 
keep his mouth shut. 


What is silence? One should never speak ill of 
others. Mounath kalaham nasthi (strife does not arise out 
of silence). Salute those who offend you. Don’t return 
offence with offence. If you act in the same manner as 
your opponent, how can you become greater? While say- 
ing that the other is acting wrongly, will you be right if you 
act in the same manner? Never act in this manner. Let 
those who commit offence continue their offensive 
behaviour. Never react. Wish for the welfare of everyone. 
Our daily prayer is Loka samastha sukhino bhavantu (May 
all people of the world be happy!) When all are happy, you 
are included. We pray for the welfare, wealth, and health 
of all. Never wish for the misfortune of any other person. 
There is no room for hatred in this world. All are friends. 
If you persist in this manner, wishing well for everyone, 
praying for their prosperity, you become an ideal for the 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 57 


whole world. You are born in this world for this ideal only. 
There is a purpose behind the creation of every individual. 
That is why God created you. And for this you have been 
gifted with the capacity to love. Act according to your con- 
science. Consecrate to God every action of yours. 


“O Lord! That heart which You have gifted me, all 
its actions are being offered back by me. What else 
is there for me to worship Your feet with? Please 
accept this with my humble salutations.’ 

(Telugu Poem) 


,d 


“The one valuable gift that You have bestowed on 
me is love. It is my duty to share this love with all my 
fellow beings. That is the sign of my understanding Your 
gift.” One who is filled with anger, hatred and envy will be 
shunned by all those who are near to him including his wife 
and children. Hence, you should avoid these evil tenden- 
cies. Once you understand the principle of love, all these 
evil tendencies leave you by themselves. Humanness is di- 
vinity in essence. When a child is born, he is naturally pure; 
but, as he grows, he starts accumulating these evil tenden- 
cies more and more. The evil tendencies are of your own 
making. They will ultimately destroy your humanness it- 
self. Don’t ruin your human nature. How sacred, how noble, 
how humble and how valuable is humanness! Such a noble 
humanness is wilfully ruined by you. Never harm others 
for the sake of your selfish and greedy desires. Be happy 
at the happiness of others. Then only will you realise hu- 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 58 


manness. Being born a man, don’t turn mean. Cruelty is 
the nature of animals. By hurting others, you lose your 
humanness and become a beast. When you threaten oth- 
ers, you become a wild beast. If you are scared by some- 
body, you become an animal of prey. You are neither a 
hunting beast nor an animal of prey. You are a human be- 
ing. Never hurt anybody; cultivate an attitude of happi- 
ness in yourself. Then you will be doubly happy. The Lord 
is constantly saying, Thathastu, Thathastu! (so be it !). As 
you wish, so will it happen. From evil intentions evil, re- 
sults. If you are always filled with good intention, they are 
equally blessed by God. The consequences of all your ac- 
tions will result in reactions. May be not immediately, but 
definitely sooner of later. Therefore, we should live with- 
out hurting others or being harmed by others, and thus lead 
a blissful life. Put your learning to good use. Give respect 
and take respect. This is true humanness. Love and be 
loved in return. Your education is meant to cultivate such 
virtues. 


Study Positive Things, Worship God And Nature 


Students study some limited subject or the other. Of 
what value is such specialisation? All such academic un- 
dertakings are essentially negative. There is a saying in 
Telugu that a washerman is better than a scholar. When the 
washerman collects clothes from your house, you make a 
detailed record of the number and type of clothes, if no- 
where else,atleast by a few marks on the wall. But the 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 59 


washerman does not need any such devices. He carries all 
the information in his head, and will return your clothes to 
you duly washed and pressed. What study has he made? 
This is not the only type of studies one should undertake. 
You should study positive things. Your education should 
benefit the society at large. Only when you help others do 
you become pure. 


Our ancients worshipped Nature. It is Nature that 
gives us food, raiment and shelter.Not merely that, it also 
gives us precious metals like gold and silver. So, what is 
wrong in worshipping Nature? All the modes of worship 
that our ancients practised were highly sacred. Bhumatha 
(Mother Earth), Gomatha (cow), Vedamatha (the Vedas) 
and the Dehamatha (physical mother) are to be revered. 
As people have stopped worshipping God, we find chaos 
all over the world. People are plunged in sorrow as they 
have lost faith in the Self. What is the use of life without 
self-confidence? Worship of God alone can safeguard the 
nation. The country will be blessed with plenty and pros- 
perity and people will lead a happy life once they start think- 
ing of God. We repeat the Santhi Mantra thrice in our daily 
prayers. What does this mean? We should attain peace at 
three levels, i.e., physical, mental and spiritual. There is 
no peace in the external world; we find only pieces. Peace 
is in fact, within you. Make efforts to manifest your inner 
peace. 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 60 


Embodiments of Love! 


Spend the whole night in chanting the holy Name and spread 
this spiritual energy to the world at large. Who is Easwara? 
He is all-pervasive. Just as the wind blows freely every- 
where, so do we find the principle of Easwara pervasive. 
Share your love with all and propagate the Divine Name to 
the entire world. 


Sivarathri, 12.3.2002, Prasanthi Nilayam. 


Realise The Magnetic Power Within 


With the crescent moon dancing, the matted locks 
waving, the cool waters of the Ganga flowing 
between, with the eye in the middle of the fore- 
head shining, the purple neck gleaming like the 
sheen of a black berry, wearing serpent-brace- 
lets, and a snake-skin belt, the entire body 
smeared with Vibhuti, with the forehead adorned 
with kumkum dot, lips ruddied by the juice of the 
betel, Gold embellished diamond ear rings dan- 
gling, with whole swarthy body glowing, the Lord 
of Kailasa appeared in person. (Poem) 


Embodiments of Love! 


he entire earth is permeated by magnetic power. 
All the living beings and objects that are present 
on this earth also have this magnetic power. The rivers that 
flow, the wind that blows, the flowers that blossom, etc., 
everything is endowed with magnetic power. The rivers flow 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 62 


on earth because of magnetic power. The magnetic power 
is all-pervasive. 


Temples Reflect One’s Own Magnetic Power 


People with bhakti and prapatti (devotion and faith) 
visit temples, which have magnetic power. The flowers and 
fruits that people offer with devotion in temples also have 
this magnetic power. Since thousands of devotees gather 
here, our mandir is suffused with magnetic power. The all- 
pervasive magnetic power shines with added brilliance in 
this mandir. This magnetic power is ever on the rise as there 
is a continuous flow of devotees. 


Even an iron nail turns into a magnet because of its 
association with the magnet. In a similar manner, people who 
visit the mandir are filled with magnetic power. It is only 
from the magnetic power of the devotees that the mandir 
gets charged with mighty powers. Every individual is filled 
with magnetic power from head to toe. But man does not 
realise his innate potential and visits temples for blessings 
and grace. One does not acquire any special powers from 
temples. What one gets is only the reflection of one’s own 
magnetic power. People visit various pilgrimage centres like 
Tirupati, Haridwar, Rishikesh, etc. The power that is present 
in pilgrimage centres is only due to the power of devotion 
and faith that pilgrims carry in their hearts. 


God is the embodiment of all forms of opulence and 
so is man. Sampada (wealth) aiswarya (authority/control), 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 63 


yashas (fame), shakti (power), jnana (wisdom) and ananda 
(bliss) — all these are the gifts of God. They are latent in 
every man, but he is losing them, as he is unable to put 
them to proper use. Divinity shines resplendently in man 
when he makes proper use of these shadaiswaryas (six 
forms of wealth). There is divine effulgence on the face of 
every man. 


As Venkataraman mentioned, every man is a 
combination of materialisation, vibration and radiation. The 
human body with all its limbs and muscles is known as 
‘materialisation’. The life-force (prana shakti) is known as 
vibration. These two are coordinated by the atmic power 
known as radiation. All the divine powers are latent in man. 
But man is not directing his attention on them. He identi- 
fies himself with the body, but in reality he is not the body. 
Otherwise, why would he say, ‘this is my body’? When 
you say, ‘this is my body’, you are different from it. Man is 
deluded by thinking that he is the body. He is losing his 
divine effulgence because of his mistaken identity. 


Vibration symbolises the breathing process. Sometimes 
people say, ‘my breathing is not proper’. It shows that you are 
different from it. Pashyannapicha na pashyati moodho (he is 
a fool who sees with his eyes yet does not recognise the real- 
ity). Man is immersed in ignorance as he identifies himself 
with something from which he is totally different. 


Radiation 1s divine and that is man’s true nature. This 
is the magnetic power which is latent in every man. It is the 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 64 


same divine power that is present in temples, which attracts 
all. Magnetism is the nature of all temples. 


Lingodbhava Is A Bodha For You 


There is gold in every man. Iron and various other 
metals are also present in him. The Vedas declare, Raso 
vai saha (God pervades the body in the form of essence). 
What is the significance of Jingodbhava? God is known as 
Hiranyagarbha (one having a golden womb). The golden 
rasa (essence) present in His womb undergoes a vigorous 
churning process and assumes the shape of a Jinga. Linga 
means a symbol or a sign. (showing the golden /inga that 
He created in the beginning of His discourse) Bhagawan 
said — As you can see, it has no distinctive features like 
eyes, face, etc. It has neither feet nor head. It can be placed 
in any manner. It symbolises the formless divinity. Leeyathe 
gamyathe ithi lingaha. It is the basis of everything. The 
golden rasa after assuming the shape of a Jinga emerges 
out. You need fire in order to melt gold. Similarly, the fire 
within melts the gold and moulds it in the shape of a Jinga. 
Hence, the difficulty at the time of its emergence. It has to 
assume the form of a /inga and come out. You feel Swami 
is put to a lot of badha (suffering) at the time of lingodbhava. 
It is not really a badha (suffering) but a bodha (teaching) 
for you. Is it not natural for a mother to undergo labour 
pains while giving birth to a child? Will any mother curse 
her child just because she is put to a lot of suffering? She 
always prays for the well-being of the child. In the same 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 65 


manner, Swami does not feel any pain at the time of the 
emergence of linga. I do not consider it a badha. I am happy 
that Iam imparting a significant bodha to so many of you. 
God has absolutely no suffering, no worries and no diffi- 
culties whatsoever. But you feel that Swami is undergoing 
great pain and suffering. In order to facilitate the forma- 
tion of these Jingas, My body had turned into a magnet. It 
is for this reason that I was finding it difficult to walk for 
the last three days, as My feet were getting stuck to the 
ground because of magnetic pull. Likewise, whatever ob- 
jects I touched were getting stuck to My hands. It was not a 
trouble for Me. It is but natural because My whole body 
became magnetic. Such power of attraction cannot be ex- 
perienced by all. It is only in divinity that you find such 
highly powerful magnetic force. These things cannot be 
revealed to all. Every man has such a divine magnet in him. 
But there are certain limitations. Divinity has no limita- 
tions whatsoever. Though divinity transcends all limits, 
you try to impose certain limitations on it. 


Magnetic power is present everywhere. The air, wa- 
ter, food, sound, everything is suffused with magnetic 
power. On deep enquiry you will know that magnetic power 
has no limitations. Daivadheenam jagatsarvam (the whole 
universe is under the control of God). Sathyvadheenamtu 
Daivatam (God is governed by Truth). Everything is con- 
tained in the principle of Truth. When you uphold Truth, 
all the divine powers will manifest in you. Tatsathvam 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 66 


utthamadheenam (Truth is controlled by the virtue of noble 
souls). Who is a noble soul? He is one of peace, love and 
compassion. Utthamo paradevata (such noble souls are 
verily the supreme divine). 


Human Body Is Like A Magnetic Car 


Man goes on pilgrimages in search of God, as he is 
ignorant of his latent divine power. One who recognises 
the latent divine power need not undertake any such spiri- 
tual practice. A Russian lady by name Brigitte was full of 
magnetic power. Whenever she walked on the road, iron 
filings got attracted to her. She was not allowed to enter 
any shop because the items there would get attracted to 
her. It is not enough if one has magnetic power; one should 
be able to keep it under one’s control. She had no control 
over her magnetic power. She could not even have her 
food. Consequently, she died after a few days. Though 
she had the divine magnetic power, she died a premature 
death because she did not have the capacity to control it. 
The one who drives a car should also have the ability to 
control it. If he has no control over the vehicle he is driv- 
ing, he is sure to meet with accident. Our body can be 
compared to a magnetic car. The eyes are the headlights, 
mouth is the horn, mind is the steering and the stomach, 
the petrol tank. The four objectives of human life —- Dharma, 
Artha, Kama and Moksha are like the four tyres. You should 
fill these tyres with the air of faith. The pressure of air filled 
in the front tyres should be different from that is filled in 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 67 


the rear tyres. The petrol (food) that is filled in the tank 
(stomach) should be pure and sacred. When the petrol is 
impure, there could be a blockage. Hence, sathwic food is 
recommended. The water that we drink should also be pure 
and unpolluted. Only then will the ‘car’ be in good condi- 
tion and will take us to the destination. Man’s life will be 
redeemed only when he understands the principle of his 
body. 


“To be born is a worry, to be on the earth is a worry, 
world is a cause of worry and death too; entire 
childhood is a worry and so is the old age; life is a 
worry, failure is a worry; all actions and difficul- 
ties cause worry, even happiness too is a mysteri- 
ous worry.” (Telugu Poem) 


Happiness or worry is based on your feelings. If 
you consider the body to be a cause of worry, it will be so. 
On the other hand, if you consider it as sacred, it will be a 
source of happiness for you. In fact, there is nothing bad in 
God’s creation. Everything is sacred and full of magnetic 
power. Body is like a temple with magnetic power. So, 
whatever actions you undertake should be sacred. When 
you do unrighteous activities, you have to face the conse- 
quences. Spiritual practices like japa and dhyana confer 
only mental satisfaction. They cannot reveal the magnetic 
power. There are nine paths of devotion. They are: 
sravanam (listening), kirtanam (singing), Vishnusmaranam 
(contemplating on Vishnu), padasevanam (serving His 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 68 


Lotus Feet), vandanam (salutation), archanam (worship), 
dasyam (servitude), sneham (friendship), atmanivedanam 
(self-surrender). Atmanivedanam comes only after sneham. 
Hence, you should try to cultivate the friendship of God. 
Without sneham, you cannot reach the state of 
atmanivedanam. Until you reach atmanivedanam, you can- 
not understand the all-pervasive principle of divine mag- 
netic power. Whatever activity you do, magnetic power is 
the basis. 


Temples are nothing but ayaskantha mandiras (cen- 
tres of magnetic power). Whatever power you experience 
in a temple is only due to the presence of magnetic power. 
You feel there is a great power in Tirupati. It is not the 
power of Venkateswara Swami, the presiding deity. It is 
the power of devotees’ faith and surrender. Hence, there is 
tremendous magnetic power. Ramayathi ithi Ramah (that 
which attracts is the principle of Rama). God has the power 
of attraction. Take any temple for instance. Only the mag- 
netic power is present there. That is the power of divinity. 
It can be experienced only in temples and nowhere else. 
What is the reason? The deities installed in temples, the 
water used for abhishekam, the flowers and the yellow rice 
used for worship, everything is full of magnetic power. That 
is the reason why people are attracted to temples. 


Creation Is Divine, Refinement Is Human 


Our body is also like a temple with magnetic power. 
Hence, it has to be utilised for sacred purposes. When you 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 69 


give room to evil traits like anger, jealousy and hatred, much 
of your magnetic power is wasted. The sense of smell, 
touch, taste, etc., is but the effect of magnetic power. A 
programme that is being broadcast in Delhi or Madras Ra- 
dio station can be heard here simultaneously. What is re- 
sponsible for this? The magnetic power carries the sound 
waves. No scientist or engineer can understand this. Cana 
scientist explain the process of digestion and blood circu- 
lation in the body? No. In every being, the heart beats for 
a particular number of times. Which scientist can explain 
this? All this is ordained by God. Doctors feel proud of 
their achievements. But, in fact, nobody can achieve any- 
thing without Divine Will. They know how a heart beats, 
but they do not know why it does so and who makes it 
function. It is not because of human effort but by the Di- 
vine Will that the body functions. But man is not able to 
understand this because of his ego and sense of doership. 
No doubt, human effort is required but nothing can be 
achieved without Divine grace. Here is an example. God 
has created paddy. But you cannot eat it as it is. You have 
to remove the husk, boil the rice and prepare the food. This 
process of refinement is known as samskara. It lies in the 
human effort. But creation is in the hands of God. Every- 
body should have firm faith in God. The ignorants do not 
believe in the existence of God. Even such people agree 
that there must be some transcendental power behind this 
creation. That very power is God without whom man can- 
not exist. 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 70 


As I have said earlier, man is the combination of 
materialisation, vibration and radiation. With the help of ra- 
diation (atma) and vibration (life-force), man is able to carry 
out his life using materialisation (body) as the instrument. 
Body is the basis for performing action. It symbolises karma 
yoga. Vibration helps man to think. Radiation is responsible 
for the functioning of vibration and materialisation. This is 
referred to in the Vedas as Prajnanam Brahma (Brahman is 
supreme consciousness). This is not just awareness, but con- 
stant integrated awareness. It exists everywhere all the time 
totally. It has no distinction of day and night. It transcends 
the three states of jagrat (waking), swapna (dream) and 
sushupti (deep sleep). It is one and the same in all three 
periods of time. Ekam Sath viprah bahudha vadanti (Truth 
is one, but scholars refer to it by many names). This is the 
divine magnetic power. It can assume any form like Rama, 
Krishna, Easwara, etc., depending on the feelings of devo- 
tees. All names and forms are your imaginations; but, in 
reality, God has no name and no form. Take for instance, 
water. It has no specific shape, but assumes the shape of the 
vessel into which it is poured. Likewise, air is formless, but 
assumes the form of a balloon or a football when it is filled 
in them. The names and forms are of your own making and 
are bound to disappear one day or the other. Hence, hold on 
to the fundamental principle of divinity. 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 71 


Never Forget God 
Embodiments of Love! 


You may forget anything, but not God. Forgetting 
God amounts to forgetting yourself. In ancient times, people 
lived for 110 and 120 years because they led their lives 
constantly thinking of God. They never suffered from any 
diseases. They used to eat simple food. They had no knowl- 
edge of vitamins and proteins. They never took tablets like 
Vitamin A, Vitamin B, Vitamin C, etc. They got the re- 
quired vitamins and proteins because they offered their food 
to God. You can achieve anything in life if you strengthen 
your faith in God. In fact, you will become God yourself. 
You are not different from God. Understand this truth and 
attain the state of oneness. (Showing the golden Linga to 
the devotees) “As you all can see, the size of this Linga is 
rather big. There is a meaning behind this. This is five Tulas 
in weight. In every human being, there is the golden es- 
sence of five Tulas known as Hiranyagarbha. You may be 
aware that there are some medicines with gold content. Gold 
represents energy in man and is the cause of his radiance. 
The gold content within each body is of this size only. It is 
this golden essence that makes the eyes see, ears hear. There 
are thousands of taste buds in our tongue and lakhs of light 
rays in the eyes. The eyes, tongue, and other sense organs 
derive their strength from the magnetic power present 
within. The golden essence pervades the entire body as a 
shield of protection. There is a thin layer of white skin just 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 72 


beneath the normal skin which acts as a protective sheath 
for the blood. There will be bleeding only when the white 
skin is cut. God has kept the white skin below the normal 
skin for the sake of protection. Whatever God does is for 
the welfare of all. This is the meaning of the prayer, Loka 
samastha sukhino bhavantu (May all the beings of the world 
be happy!). The Bhagavata says, “The stories of the Lord 
are most wonderful and sacred in all the three worlds. They 
are like sickles that cut the clinging creepers of worldly 
bondage.” (Telugu Poem) The Gopikas had unwavering 
faith in Lord Krishna and thus could redeem their lives. 
Faith is the magnetic power that attracts divinity. Though 
the mothers-in-law abused and the husbands were angry 
with them, the Gopikas never rebutted. They were neither 
angry nor afraid. The sweet form of Krishna was imprinted 
on their hearts just like a picture printed on paper. Can the 
picture and paper be separated? No. Likewise, Krishna was 
firmly installed in the hearts of Gopikas. Such firm faith 
and devotion is the result of merits accrued over many births. 
In order to attain God, one should have love and compas- 
sion. The taste of love is beyond description. It is highly 
sacred and makes one forget oneself in ecstasy. Sage Narada 
described love thus: 


Yallabdhwa Puman Ichcharamo Bhavathi Trupto 
Bhavathi 

Matto Bhavathi Atmaramo Bhavathi 

(having attained That, man gets total satisfaction, 
fulfilment, ecstasy and bliss.) 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 73 


When you chant the Divine Name with love, you 
forget yourself. Man attains fulfilment only when he be- 
comes the recipient of divine love. In order to attain divine 
love, develop love in you more and more. When you have 
the magnetic power of love in you, whatever you study 
will get imprinted on your heart. If you do not have the 
magnetic power, you can never succeed in your endeavours, 
however hard you may try. You may study day and night, 
but without any result. Whenever you try to study, you will 
be overpowered by Nidra Devi (goddess of sleep). 
Kumbhakarna will put you to sleep. On the other hand, 
when you develop the magnetic power in you, you will 
never feel sleepy while studying. Kumbhakarna will dare 
not look at you. 


Students today waste a lot of time. They try to study 
only at the time of examinations. “O man! Do not feel proud 
of your education. If you do not offer your salutations to 
God and think of Him with devotion, all your education 
becomes useless.” 


Think of God at least once in a day. Do not pay heed 
to what others say. Someone may come to you and say, 
there is no God. Then immediately, you should ask, “Whose 
God? Is it my God or your God? Your God may not exist 
for you, but who are you to deny the existence of my God?” 
With such firm conviction, you should argue with them. 
But unfortunately today, people have become blind, hav- 
ing lost the eyes of faith. Develop faith and sanctify your 
lives. Faith alone can protect you at all times and under all 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 74 


circumstances. Do not give room for bad or ill-feelings. 
Do not harm others. Do not criticise others. If you make 
others suffer, you will suffer much more. Not only you, 
even your family will have to face the consequences. Never 
forget this truth. God will confer well-being on you and 
your family only when you aspire for the welfare of others. 
Develop noble feelings, think of God and make proper use 
of your time. 


Sivarathri, 13-3-2002, Prasanthi Nilayam. 


Celebrate Ugadi By Purifying Your Heart 


Man should enquire how the sun rises and sets with 
utmost regularity every day and how the stars which 
glitter in the sky at night though they are not visible 
during the day. (Telugu Poem) 


Embodiments of Love! 


E have been experiencing the bliss of 

celebrating Ugadi (Telugu New Year) for the 
past many ages and generations. The Bharatiyas have 
been spreading peace and security to all the nations of the 
world with their strength of spirituality.Since time imme- 
morial the prayer of the Bharatiyas has been: Loka samastha 
sukhino bhavantu (May all the people of the world be 
happy!) But the present-day condition is just the opposite. 
Man has progressed in the worldly sense but morally he 
has regressed. He is not able to give up his narrow- 
mindedness and criticism of others. 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 76 


Desirelessness Leads To Bliss 


If one enquires into the reason for this, one will realise 
that one’s selfishness and self-interest are the cause for this. 
Man does not love objects or individuals for their sake; he 
does so for his self-interest. He does not love his country 
and work for its welfare. All his thoughts, words and deeds 
are motivated by selfishness. We will be celebrating Ugadi 
in its true spirit only when we give up our narrow- 
mindedness and selfishness. 


On Ugadi day, people get up early, have a sacred bath, 
put on new clothes and partake of sweets and various deli- 
cious items. They are interested only in external cleanliness 
and are not concerned about purifying their hearts which are 
tainted with evil thoughts and evil feelings. It is rather easy 
to have external cleanliness and to wear new clothes but that 
is not the purpose of celebrating festivals. True celebration 
of Ugadi lies in giving up evil qualities and purifying one’s 
heart. Human heart in its pristine state is highly sacred and 
human birth is difficult to attain. Janthunam narajanma 
durlabham (out of all the living beings, the human birth is 
the rarest). Having attained such a precious life, man is not 
making any effort to live like a true human being. Today he 
has become a bundle of desires. He is spending all his time 
and effort in fulfilling his desires. He is under the mistaken 
notion that fulfilment of desires will confer happiness on him. 
He should realise that only annihilation of desires will lead 
him to ultimate bliss. True happiness lies in the state of 
desirelessness. 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 77 


Unity Is The Essence Of Human Life 
Embodiments of Love! 


Ages have gone by and the world has undergone many 
changes; but there is no transformation in the human heart. 
Some people say that education is bringing about a change 
in man. No doubt, there has been a change. But what type 
of change is it? It is a peculiar change that is leading to 
perversion of human mind instead of transforming his heart. 
In fact, modern education has added to the confusion of man. 
Man is not learning what he is supposed to. He is wasting 
his life by cultivating bestial qualities and by indulging in 
demonic deeds. The culture of Bharat lays great emphasis 
on the underlying unity in diversity. It wants us to under- 
stand this principle of unity and work for our own redemp- 
tion. But we are following what is contrary to our ancient 
culture. So, there is a rise today in the number of the so- 
called educated and intellectuals who fragment unity into 
diversity, but the number of noble souls who visualise unity 
in diversity is on the decline. It is unfortunate that Bharatiyas 
themselves have not understood how sacred and noble their 
culture is! Oh sacred souls of Bharat! Try to understand fully 
the value of Bharatiya culture. You are endowed with un- 
limited potentialities. But you are unaware of your mighty 
strength. The way of life of ancient Bharatiyas was such that 
they evinced great concern for everyone’s welfare. They 
found fulfilment in giving happiness to others. But man to- 
day lacks such broad-mindedness. He is not able to realise 
and experience his innate noble qualities. 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 78 


Time is highly sacred and valuable. Each one has to 
introspect whether he is making proper use of time. Time 
once lost is lost for ever. Future is not in your hands. So, 
man should make proper use of the present. This is the teach- 
ing of Bharatiya culture. Time is God. Hence, the Vedas 
extol Him as Kalaya namah, Kala Kalaya namah,Kaladarpa 
Damanaya namah, Kalateetaya namah, Kalaswarupaya 
namah, Kalaniyamitaya namah (salutations to the embodi- 
ment of time, to the one who has conquered time, to the one 
who transcends time and to the one who ordains time). God 
dwells in all. He has thousands of heads, eyes and feet. Our 
ancients realised this unity in diversity and recognised the 
innate divinity of man. They sanctified their lives with such 
noble feelings and exemplary behaviour. Our ancient sages 
and seers stressed the need for unity and cooperation among 
human beings. They prayed, “Let us move together, let us 
grow together, let us grow in intelligence together, let us live 
in harmony with each other without giving room for con- 
flicts.” (Telugu Poem) This is the main principle of Bharatiya 
culture. But such spirit of unity is lacking in modern society. 
These days there is no unity even among the members of the 
same family. Unity is the essence of human life. One can 
attain the goal of human life only by putting this principle of 
unity into practice. This divine principle of unity is being 
forgotten today. 


Faith In God Is The Basis Of Bliss 


Every man aspires for bliss. In order to attain ever- 
lasting bliss, he studies sacred texts, listens to the discourses 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 79 


of noble souls, undertakes pilgrimages and performs vari- 
ous spiritual practices like penance, meditation, etc. But 
none of these confers bliss on him. There are five sheaths 
in every human being, namely, annamaya kosha (food 
sheath), pranamaya kosha (life sheath), manomaya kosha 
(mental sheath), vijnanamaya kosha (wisdom sheath) and 
anandamaya kosha (bliss sheath). Though man has bliss 
sheath in him, he is unable to experience bliss. There is no 
trace of bliss in him. The happiness that man derives out of 
worldly comforts is limited. It is utter foolishness to think 
that wealth and property, comforts and conveniences can 
bestow unlimited joy on him. None of these can give true 
happiness. True happiness has no limits. How can it be 
attained? It cannot be attained from outside. It originates 
from the heart. The heart is the dwelling place of God. To 
experience true happiness, man should develop firm faith 
in God. Where there is faith, there is love. Only when man 
has love in him can he practise righteousness. Righteous- 
ness leads to truth which in turn leads to God. 


God alone is the source and basis of bliss. Truth is 
the basis of God. Righteousness is the basis of truth. Love 
is the basis of righteousness. Faith is the basis of love. But 
man today has no faith. A person without viswasa (faith) is 
verily without swasa (breath). A faithless man is virtually 
a living corpse. Our ancient sages and seers therefore 
emphasised the need for faith. But man today has become 
virtually blind having lost his faith. What are the two eyes 
of man? The two eyes of man are sastra (scriptures) and 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 80 


dharma (righteousness). But today even the Brahmins who 
are supposed to study the scriptures are neglecting them. 
All sections of society, whichever caste or community they 
may belong to, should perform their duty with devotion 
and dedication. Instead of discharging his duty, man is wast- 
ing his life in mean pursuits. Consequently, he is unable to 
enjoy even a fraction of the unlimited peace and happiness 
he is endowed with. 


Gratitude is the most fundamental virtue of man. 
People, while performing Suryanamaskara (offering salu- 
tations to the sun), praise the sun god in various ways. One 
of them is Kritaghnaghnaya namah (salutations to the one 
who punishes the ungrateful). The light of the sun god is 
present in our eyes in a subtle form. Chandrama manaso 
jatah chaksho suryo ajayatah (the moon was born out of 
the mind and the sun out of the eyes of the Supreme Be- 
ing). It is said that the sun god withdraws his light from the 
eyes of the ungrateful. One without the sense of gratitude 
can be called a blind person. Whoever he may be, one should 
always remain grateful to one’s benefactor. One should 
show gratitude even without caring for one’s own life. God 
is helping man in ever so many ways but man does not 
show gratitude to Him. He is all the time engaged in selfish 
pursuits. How can such a foolish person be called a human 
being? What is adhyatmikata (spirituality)? It is not just 
contemplating on the adhi atma (primordial spirit). True 
spirituality lies in destroying one’s bestial nature and rising 
to the level of the divine. But instead of ascending to divin- 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 81 


ity, man is degenerating to animality. He has forgotten the 
principles of spirituality. He celebrates festivals by merely 
partaking of sweets and wastes his time in pomposity. One 
should ponder over the inner significance of each festival 
and celebrate it in a meaningful manner. Man should have 
total faith that he is not just a human being but there is God 
within. Only then will the animal nature in him be sub- 
dued. As man has forgotten his true nature, he has become 
bestial. You may belong to any country, religion, race, caste 
or sex, but you should firmly hold on to humanness. Do 
not waste your time keeping selfish goals in your mind. 


Who Is A True Devotee Of God? 


Once Lord Narayana wanted Narada to search for a 
true devotee who spent his time in a sacred way. Then 
Narada asked the Lord for the qualifications of a true 
devotee. The Lord said, “A true devotee is one whose heart 
is pure and who chants the Divine Name wholeheartedly at 
all times. He may involve himself in worldly activities, but 
he should not be attached to them. His mind should be 
constantly focused on God.” Then Narada said, “Swami, I 
chant Your Name wholeheartedly at all times and under all 
circumstances. There is not a single moment when I don’t 
remember You. Can there be a greater devotee than me?” 
To consider oneself as the greatest devotee is a sign of ego. 
Narada became egoistic with the feeling that he was the 
greatest devotee. Lord Narayana replied, “Narada, there 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 82 


are many devotees like you. You find them in every house 
and in every place. But this is not true devotion. True devo- 
tion is that which finds expression in every thought, word 
and deed of man. Just as the food partaken gets digested in 
the stomach and its essence is supplied to all limbs of the 
body, likewise, when you fill your heart with the divine 
name, its effect should spread to your eyes, ears, tongue, 
hands, feet, etc. When the sacred effect of the divine name 
spreads to your eyes, you will develop sacred vision. Like- 
wise, your speech will become sacred, and you will listen 
only to sacred words. Your hands will undertake sacred 
deeds and your feet will take you to sacred places. Thus, a 
true devotee will sanctify each of his limbs with sacred 
activity.” 


Lord Narayana wanted Narada to search for such a 
devotee. Narada went round the world, but his ego pre- 
vented him from accepting anybody as a devotee greater 
than himself. As he was returning, he found a tribesman in 
a forest. He was sitting under a tree and chanting the divine 
name. He was carrying a big sword in his hand. Narada 
out of curiosity asked him, “May I know who you are?” 
He replied, “Sir, I am a hunter and an ardent devotee of the 
Lord.” Narada asked, “If you are a devotee, then why should 
you carry a sword in your hand? Whom are you going to 
kill?” The hunter replied, “Sir, I want to kill four persons. 
The first of them is Droupadi.” Narada was startled to hear 
this. “Don’t you know that Droupadi was constantly chant- 
ing the Name of Lord Krishna? Pleased with her devotion 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 83 


and surrender, Krishna came to her rescue and protected 
her honour when Kauravas tried to disrobe her in the royal 
court. Why do you want to kill such a great devotee?” The 
hunter said, ““No doubt, she was a devotee. But she called 
out Krishna while He was having His food. Immediately, 
my Lord left His food and rushed to her rescue. As she was 
responsible for my Lord not having food on that day, I want 
to kill her.” “Who is the second person whom you intend to 
kill”, queried Narada. The hunter said, “My Lord could 
not have proper food and rest because of Prahlada who 
chanted His name continuously and time and again sought 
His help. When he was being trampled over by elephants, 
he prayed to the Lord for succour. In order to protect him, 
the Lord had to take upon Himself the pain of being tram- 
pled over by elephants. As he was the cause for my Lord’s 
suffering, I want to kill him. The third person is Mira. She 
was all the time chanting the Name of Giridhar Naagar. As 
a result, all the persecutions inflicted on her had to be borne 
by the Lord Himself. It amounted to hurting God. So, she 
should be killed.’’ Narada asked, “Then who is the fourth 
one?” “There is a person called Narada, who carries a 
Tanpura and keeps chanting the name of Narayana. His is 
only swartha bhakti (devotion intended for selfish gains) 
and not parartha prema bhakti (devotion filled with pure 
love for God). So, he also should be killed.” 


Narada got frightened and did not want to prolong 
this conversation. He realised that it was his ego that was 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 84 


responsible for this predicament. Narada went to Vaikuntha 
and told Lord Narayana about his encounter with the hunter, 
“Swami, I have investigated that even those who chant Your 
name continuously are guilty of causing suffering to You.” 
Lord Narayana said, “Narada, you are mistaken. This inci- 
dent only reflects the intense love the hunter has for Me. 
He is a true devotee who considers God’s happiness as his 
own. He always aspires to give happiness to the Lord and 
does not want to cause any inconvenience to Him. Only 
the one who always gives happiness to the Lord is a true 
devotee.” This incident was an eye-opener for Narada. He 
said, “Swami, now I realise that you enacted this play only 


99 


to crush my ego.” The history of Bharat contains many 
such sacred stories in order to spread the message of the 


Lord to mankind. 


You should never cause inconve-nience to God in 
the name of devotion. If you earn the displeasure of God, 
it will reflect on you. Consider that God’s happiness is your 
happiness and your happiness is God’s happiness. Imbibe 
this spirit of oneness. “God and I are one.” Today most of 
the devotees are selfish. They have only swartha bhakti. 
They are concerned with their own happiness and not that 
of Gods. God is the embodiment of love. Such divine love 
is present in all. You should see to it that your love is al- 
ways pure. Share your love with everyone. This is what 
God expects from you. 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 85 


God Resides In Every Heart 


Since ancient times, the Bharatiyas have been shar- 
ing their sacred culture with the rest of the world. They 
considered God as one and never nurtured the feeling of 
difference between man and man. They believed in the 
Vedic statement: Sahasra seersha purusha sahasraksha 
sahasra pad (God has a thousand heads, eyes and feet). It 
does not mean that there is someone with thousand heads, 
eyes and feet. It only means that all heads, eyes and feet are 
His. God is present in everyone. He resides in every heart. 
So, do not confine God to a temple, a mosque or a church. 
Where man is, there God is. Daivam manusha rupena (God 
takes the form of man). As you do not realise this, you 
indulge in criticism of others. Whom are you criticising? 
Whom do you adore? Enquire yourself. God is present in 
all. So, when you criticise others, it amounts to criticising 
yourself. When you love others, you love yourself. If you 
criticise others, you criticise God. Sarva jeeva namaskaram 
Kesavam pratigachchati (whomever you salute, it reaches 
God) and sarva jeeva_ tiraskaram Kesavam 
pratigachchhati(whomever you denigrate, it also reaches 
God). 


Embodiments of Love! 


Today is Ugadi, the beginning of the New Year. Since 
ancient times, people have celebrated many Ugadis, but 
they are yet to give up bad qualities. True Ugadi is the day 
when you give up bad qualities, fill your heart with love 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 86 


and take to the path of sacrifice. Do not limit the celebra- 
tion of Ugadi to merely putting on new clothes and partak- 
ing of delicious food items. Today you may wear a new 
shirt, but how long will it remain new? Tomorrow it be- 
comes old. Nobody reads the same newspaper everyday. 
Today’s newspaper becomes tomorrow’s waste paper. Our 
life is like a newspaper. Once you have finished reading a 
newspaper, you do not like to read it again and again. You 
have been given this birth, and you have gone through var- 
ied experiences of pleasure and pain. Enough is enough. 
Do not ask for another birth as you would not like to read 
yesterday’s newspaper. You should pray, “Oh God! You 
have given me this life and I have gone through all the 
experiences of pleasure and pain. I do not want to have 
another birth.” 


Adi Sankara said, 


“Punarapi jananam punarapi maranam 
Punarapi janani jathare sayanam 

tha samsare bahu dustare 
Kripayapare pahi murare.’ 


d 


(Oh Lord! I am caught up in this cycle of birth and 
death; time and again, I am experiencing the agony of stay- 
ing in the mother’s womb. It is very difficult to cross this 
ocean of worldly life. Please take me across this ocean and 
grant me liberation.) Sankara was a great scholar and was 
well-versed in all forms of knowledge. Yet he propagated 
the path of devotion. Once while he was going to the river 
Ganga with his disciples, he noticed a person sitting under 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 87 


a tree and trying to learn the rules of Panini’s grammar by 
rote. He was repeating “Dukrun Karane, Dukrun Karane”’. 
Sankara who was very young at that time took pity on him. 
He went near him and said, 


“Bhaja Govindam, Bhaja Govindam 
Govindam bhaja moodha mathe 
Samprapthe sannihithe kale 

Nahi nahi rakshati dukrun karane.”’ 


(Oh foolish man, chant the name of Govinda, the 
rules of grammar will not come to your rescue when the 
end approaches.) 


Sankara authored many Vedantic texts, but ultimately 
he also took to the path of devotion. Namasmarana (chant- 
ing of God’s name) is the easiest path to liberation. This 
was his main teaching. Even today there are many people 
who do namasmarana, but they are not experiencing its es- 
sence. What is the purpose of life? Is it to be born again 
and again? 


Man is performing various tasks and undergoing 
many experiences in this world. But what is the use of all 
that he does if he is unable to enjoy everlasting bliss? Nei- 
ther by wealth nor by action nor by study of texts nor by 
darshan, sparshan and sambhashan (vision, touch and con- 
versation) of noble souls can man attain eternal bliss. He 
can visualise the manifestation of God and experience bliss 
only when he purifies his heart. Love all. Have faith that 
God is present in all. Make everybody happy. Only then 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 88 


can you attain happiness. It is impossible for you to attain 
happiness without making others happy. 


True Significance Of Celebrating Ugadi 


On this day of Ugadi, take a firm resolve to purify 
your heart. Past is past. It cannot be retrieved. When you 
are walking on the road, you should look at the path ahead 
of you. What is the point in looking behind? Likewise, there 
is no point in brooding over the past. Future is not certain. 
What is the guarantee that you will be alive until tomor- 
row? So, do not worry about your future. Live in the present. 
It is not ordinary present. It is omnipresent, meaning the re- 
sults of past and seeds of future are contained in it. So, 
when you make proper use of the present, you can be rest 
assured that your future is safe and secure. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Today is Ugadi, the New Year day for the people of 
Andhra Pradesh. Tomorrow happens to be the Tamil New 
Year day and also Vishu, the New Year Day for the people 
of Kerala. There are many festivals in a year. You should 
celebrate them by understanding and experiencing their true 
significance. Right from this moment, embark on a new 
life giving up bad thoughts and bad qualities.Purify your 
heart. Only then will your life be blissful. There is no point 
in reading sacred texts or visiting noble souls unless you 
purify your heart in the first instance. Let your thoughts, 
words and deeds be sacred. This is the true significance of 
celebrating Ugadi. 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 89 


Tomorrow is the New Year day for the people of 
Tamil Nadu. Hence, many of them have come from Ma- 
dras (Chennai) and other places of Tamil Nadu. Madras is 
not new. Since long it has been an important centre for the 
Bharatiyas. Later on, due to political considerations differ- 
ent States were formed and Madras was bifurcated. But I 
do not observe any difference between one region and the 
other. I adhere to the principle of unity. All are one, be 
alike to everyone. This is My ideal. At present, the people 
of Chennai are suffering from scarcity of drinking water. 
The rich can afford to buy water and quench their thirst. 
But what about the poor? They are drinking impure water 
and spoiling their health. Hence, I have decided to provide 
them pure drinking water so that they can lead a happy and 
healthy life. In this connection, Chakravarthi (Secretary, 
Sri Sathya Sai Central Trust), V. Srinivasan from Chennai 
(President, All India Sri Sathya Sai Seva Organisations) 
and Indulal Shah from Mumbai (Chairman, Sri Sathya Sai 
World Council) met the World Bank authorities yesterday 
and explained to them about the selfless service activities 
that we have undertaken. They told the World Bank au- 
thorities that all our activities were purely service-oriented 
and we did not expect anything in return. They repeated 
what Swami had told them to convey. 


The World Bank people were very much impressed. 
They said they had never heard about or seen such stupen- 
dous service activities undertaken by a charitable 
organisation anywhere else in the world. (loud applause) 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 90 


They were happy that Sathya Sai Baba was providing drink- 
ing water to a distant place like Chennai. They have agreed 
to provide funds for this project. On this sacred day of Ugadi 
before I came out to give darshan, we received a telephone 
call at about 7 a.m. conveying this message. If the feelings 
are sacred, the result is bound to be sacred. They told us, 
“You don’t need to be concerned about the funds and you 
don’t need to come to us again. We are prepared to meet all 
your requirements.” With broadminded ness, they have come 
forward to extend their help. 


When you undertake any task with a sacred heart, you 
will certainly meet with success. I am the living proof of this 
ideal. There is no trace of selfishness in whatever task I 
undertake. Whatever I do is for the benefit of humanity. Many 
people do not try to understand this and think that it is done 
with some expectation. But I do not expect anything from 
anybody nor do I get any benefit out of it. I derive only one 
benefit, i.e., I feel happy when everybody is happy. As you 
claim to be Sai devotees, you should strictly adhere to the 
Sai path and make everyone happy. 


When you follow in My footsteps, you will certainly 
achieve sacred results and earn a good name. You do not 
need to wait even for a fraction of a second. Whatever Sai 
says 1s bound to happen. Being Sai devotees, you should 
give up selfishness and dedicate your lives for the welfare 
of society. Fill your lives with love. Stop criticising others. 
Respect even those who hate you. Hatred is a bad quality. 
It will ruin you. Hence, get rid of this evil.Love everyone. 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 91 


Help the poor and needy to the extent possible. Help ever, 
Hurt never. Sage Vyasa has given the essence of eighteen 
Puranas in two sentences, Paropakara punyaya, papaya 
parapeedanam (one attains merit by serving others and 
commits sin by hurting them). This is the main principle 
of Bharatiya culture. When you help others, you will re- 
ceive help tenfold. If you harm others, you will be put to 
harm ten times more. Keep this in mind. On this sacred 
day, fill your hearts with love and undertake sacred activi- 
ties. 


Ugadi, 13th April, 2002, Brindavan, Bangalore 


REDEEM YOUR LIFE BY 
NAMASMARANA 


If money is lost, one need not be worried about it 
for one can earn it again. If a friend is lost, one 
can have another. If wife is lost, one can marry 
again. If one loses one’s piece of land, one can 
purchase another. All these can be regained; but 
if body is lost, one cannot get it back. 

(Sanskrit Verse) 


Embodiments of Love! 


IME is infinite. You undergo varied experiences 
in the infinity of time. These experiences are 
momentary. At times, you may lose money, but you don’t 
need to be worried about it for you can earn it again. You 
come across many friends but none of them is permanent. 
You lose some and gain some others. At some stage in life, 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 94 


people get married and enter grihastha ashrama (stage of a 
householder). But neither the husband nor the wife is per- 
manent. If the wife passes away, man can remarry to carry 
on with his life. Similarly, if you lose your piece of land, 
you can buy another. But once the body is lost, it is lost 
forever. 


Man’s Desires Are Responsible For His Suffering 


It is through the medium of this body that you expe- 
rience happiness at worldly and spiritual levels. Man ac- 
quires wealth and property, experiences pleasure and pain 
through this body. What is the cause of all the suffering of 
man? His desires are responsible for this. These are: 
Dhaneshana, Dareshana and putreshana (desire for 
money, wife and progeny). This ishanatraya (triad of de- 
sires) is responsible for man’s misery. 


Kings in the past acquired wealth and property. 
Could they retain them forever? Wealth is not permanent. 
It can never redeem man. Wealth can never provide per- 
manent happiness. Spiritual wealth is the true wealth. Man 
is not able to enjoy true happiness due to his greed for 
money. Yet he craves for money. No doubt, money is nec- 
essary but it should be under certain limits. The second is 
dareshana. One may have wife and children, wealth and 
property and enjoy family life for some time. But such hap- 
piness is not true and eternal. It is foolish to think that one 
can remain happy for ever in family life. The third is 
putreshana. Man wants to have a son thinking that he would 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 95 


bring happiness to him. There is nothing wrong in aspiring 
to have a son but the happiness that results is only tempo- 
rary. King Dhritarashtra had 100 sons, but did he enjoy 
happiness through his sons? No. He, in fact, had to un- 
dergo a lot of suffering and was put to disrepute because of 
his sons. They brought his vast kingdom to ruin. “King 
Dhritarashtra had a number of sons but ultimately what 
was his fate? Sage Suka was not married and had no son, 
but did he suffer on account of this?” (Telugu Poem) 


It is a mistake to think that a person having many 
sons will enjoy happiness and one without a son will suffer. 
It is but an illusion to think that money, wife and children 
will give happiness. In fact, dhaneshana, dareshana and 
putreshana act as a binding for man and subject him to suf- 
fering. What is the use of having many sons who are wicked? 
It is enough if you have one son who is noble and ideal. 


Sumitra Was The Embodiment Of Selflessness And 
Sacrifice 


Take Ramayana, for instance. According to the 
Telugu calendar, this is the month of Chaitra. This is the 
month that witnessed the advent of Lord Rama. He was 
born on the Chaitra Suddha Navami day. Among the three 
wives of Dasaratha, not much has been said about the sec- 
ond wife Sumitra anywhere in history. Kausalya attained a 
good name because of her son, Rama. Her name figures 
first in the Suprabhatam which begins with the words — 
“Kausalya Supraja Rama ...”’ (Oh! The noble son of mother 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 96 


Kausalya ...) Kaikeyi desired that her son Bharata should 
be made the crown prince. But Sumitra had absolutely no 
desire whatsoever. She was the epitome of all virtues. She 
was mitha bhashini and hitha bhashini (one who talks less 
in a pleasing manner). Her conduct was appropriate to her 
name Su-mitra (good friend). 


She had two sons, Lakshmana and Satrughna. There 
was no way that either of them could become the crown 
prince. Yet Sumitra was not worried. She demonstrated 
the ideal of service to the rest of the world. “When Lord 
Rama becomes the king, my first son Lakshmana should 
dedicate himself to his service.” This was her desire. Like- 
wise, she wanted her second son Satrughna to be in the 
service of Bharata. The servant is always by the side of the 
master. That is why Lakshmana followed Lord Rama, and 
Satrughna was always in the company of Bharata. She 
understood the sacredness of service and exhorted her sons 
to follow this divine path. When you carefully go through 
the sacred story of Lord Rama, you will be able to under- 
stand and appreciate the noble and ideal character of mother 
Sumitra. 


When Lord Rama was leaving for the forest, mother 
Kausalya wept inconsolably. It was only Sumitra who did 
not shed tears. She tried to pacify Kausalya and instil cour- 
age in her, saying, “Dear sister, my son Lakshmana would 
accompany Rama to the forest to look after his needs. He 
will make sure that Rama is put to no difficulty under any 
circumstances. Just as eyelids protect the eyes, Lakshmana 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 97 


will take full care of Rama with devotion. You don’t need 
to be worried about Rama’s safety and security.” She will- 
ingly sent her son to the forest along with Rama. Will any 
mother act in such a courageous and selfless manner? 


As per the two promises extracted by Kaikeyi from 
Dasaratha, only Rama was obliged to go to forest. It was 
not obligatory for Lakshmana to accompany him. Sumitra 
could have argued in this manner and prevented Laksh mana 
from going to the forest. But Sumitra did not raise any ob- 
jection whatsoever. “Lakshmana is born only to serve Lord 
Rama. He is an instrument in Rama’s hands. So, Rama is 
taking his instrument with him. Who am I to send 
Lakshmana with him and who is Lakshmana to decide about 
his going with Rama? Rama has every right to take 
Lakshmana with him.” These were her feelings. She blessed 
her son Lakshmana and said, “My dear, take proper care of 
Sita and Rama.” When Bharata was proceeding to his 
uncle’s kingdom of Kekaya, Satrughna had no information 
whether to stay back or follow. Yet, Satrughna got ready to 
accompany Bharata as he knew it was his duty to serve 
him. In the history of Bharat, there are many noble moth- 
ers like Sumitra who encouraged their sons to take to the 
path of service. 


Urmila’s Nobility And Piety 


While Sita felt extremely sad at the thought of sepa- 
ration from Rama and accompanied him to the forest, 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 98 


Urmila showed exemplary spirit of sacrifice and felt happy 
that her husband Lakshmana got the rare opportunity of 
serving Sita and Rama in the forest for 14 years. But Urmila 
does not find a place of prominence in the Ramayana. Both 
Sumitra and Urmila were highly pious and virtuous. They 
led a life of sacrifice. 


Lakshmana conveyed his decision to Urmila to ac- 
company Rama to the forest. Will any wife keep quiet when 
she comes to know that her husband is going to the forest 
for 14 years? Urmila could have asked many questions: 
“Why should you follow Rama? You are under no obliga- 
tion to go to the forest. Only Rama is ordered to go. So, 
you need not go with him.” Any ordinary woman would 
have argued in this manner. But Urmila did not raise any 
objection. In fact, she was very happy that her husband got 
an opportunity to serve Sita and Rama. She said, “You are 
very lucky to have got this great opportunity. Please follow 
them without wasting a minute.” She asked him to go with 
Sita and Rama, saying, “I don’t want to come in the way of 
your going with Sita and Rama. Please do not waste even 
a minute. Go with them at once and be in their service.” 


She wanted Lakshmana to give her a promise before 
going to the forest. She said, “You are going to live in the 
forest without me for 14 years. It is possible that you may 
think of me and mention my name at some time or the other. 
So, I want you to promise that you would not think of me 
or mention my name at any point of time. Contemplate 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 99 


constantly on the divine names of Sita and Rama and serve 
them with all sincerity and devotion. If I accompany you 
to the forest, you may not be able to devote your entire 
time to their service. I will stay back so as not to become 
an impediment in your way.” Hearing the words of Urmila, 
Lakshmana was surprised and elated. “Can one find such 
a noble and devoted wife anywhere in the world?” he 
thought to himself. He took leave of her and left the place 
immediately. 


Bharat Is The Land Of Unity And Divinity 


In this land of Bharat, there are many noble mothers 
like Sumitra and virtuous wives like Urmila. Since ancient 
times, Bharat has attained great reputation because of such 
noble women. In the northern side of Bharat, the Hima- 
layan mountains are the boundary. This land is sanctified 
by the perennial rivers of Ganga, Ya-muna and Saraswati. 
These three symbolise the triad of bhakti, jnana and 
vairagya (devotion, wisdom and renunciation). Not merely 
this, the great epics of this land, the Ramayana, the 
Bhagavata and the Mahabharata shine as beacons illumin- 
ing the path of man. They teach how man should mould his 
life into an ideal one. 


This land is the birthplace of sacred scriptures like 
the Bhagavadgita which gave the message of unity to man- 
kind. This land has given birth to noble souls like Buddha 
who propagated the message of non-violence. He taught 
ahimsa paramo dharma (nonviolence is highest dharma). 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 100 


The syllable ‘Bha’ stands for light, radiance and effulgence. 
So, Bharatiyas are those who aspire for light and divine 
effulgence. Hence, you should live up to your reputation as 
Bharatiyas by making your lives sacred and attain divinity. 
When you make an enquiry into the sacred history of Bharat, 
you will know that since ancient times this country has been 
propagating the sacred message of divinity and has been 
radiating peace and security to the other nations of the world. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Neither any individual nor wealth can give you eter- 
nal bliss. Bliss originates from your heart. So, turn your 
vision inward. Antarbahischa tatsarvam vyapya Narayana 
sthita (That all-pervasive God is present within and with- 
out). When you develop inner vision, you will automati- 
cally experience eternal bliss. Man is ananda pipasi (one 
who thirsts for bliss). He need not go in search of bliss. It is 
in him and with him. Happiness is not related to the body. 
“This body is a storehouse of dirt, and prone to diseases, it 
cannot cross the ocean of Samsara. O mind, do not be un- 
der the delusion that body is permanent. Instead take ref- 
uge at the Divine Lotus Feet.” (Telugu poem) How can 
such a body give you eternal happiness? Only the Lotus 
Feet of the Lord can grant you true happiness. There is no 
devotion and sense of surrender among the Bharatiyas to- 
day. People are deluded by the worldly, physical and ephem- 
eral things. Are they able to derive any happiness out of 
these? Nothing whatsoever. The darkness of ignorance is 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 101 


the root cause of man’s delusion. How can you understand 
the sathwic (pious) principle when you are immersed in 
thamo guna (ignorance)? 


Embodiments of Love! 


To be born in Bharat is in itself your good fortune. To 
live here is a greater fortune. You should take pride in the 
fact that you are the children of Bharat. If someone were to 
ask you your qualification, you should proudly say, you are 
a Bharatiya. This is in itself the greatest qualification. There 
is a sacred inner meaning in this word Bharatiya. But you 
are not making efforts to understand this. Oh the children of 
Bharat! Lead your lives in an exemplary manner and radiate 
peace and happiness to the rest of the world. 


Embodiments of Love! 


You should never forget the sacred history of Bharat. 
Don’t brush it aside saying it is rather old. It is not easy to 
understand the subtle principles contained in our history. 
You might have gone through the Ramayana many times, 
but have you understood the nobility of Sumitra and sa- 
credness of Urmila? Today people remember the names of 
Kaikeyi and Manthara but not that of Urmila. Urmila dem- 
onstrated sacred ideals and set an example of ideal life be- 
fore the world. She remained in the same room for 14 long 
years where Lakshmana had left her while going to the for- 
est. She did not stir out till the return of Lakshmana. She 
never had any worldly desires. Being the daughter of King 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 102 


Janaka, she had no body attachment. King Janaka was 
known as videha, one without body attachment. When you 
enquire deeply, you will know that there are many hidden 
secrets in the Ramayana. But Bharatiyas themselves are 
not making any effort to understand them. Once a person, 
after listening to many discourses on Ramayana, was asked 
to tell the name of Rama’s consort. He replied, “Mrs. 
Rama”, as he did not remember her name. Such is the sorry 
state of affairs. Bharatiyas are leading a life of ignorance. 
They ignore their ancient culture and are being carried away 
by modernism. 


We have only one friend, and He is God. There is 
only one sacred text and that is the ancient history of India. 
You should study this sacred text. Do not spoil your mind 
by reading meaningless novels. He who has_ purified his 
heart alone can inculcate sacred feelings. 


Imbibe Noble And Divine Feelings In The New Year 


Today you are celebrating the commencement of the 
New Year. But, in fact, you should treat every moment as 
the beginning of a New Year. Many people are worried as 
to what changes would the New Year bring in the social, 
political and economic fields. Any change, if it were to take 
place, will not wait for the arrival of the New Year. In fact, 
many changes are taking place from moment to moment. 
You may wonder as to what are the big changes that would 
take place in this New Year. Whatever happened in the pre- 
vious year would take place this year also. One need not 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 103 


be worried about these things. You should be worried that 
there is no transformation in your heart though years have 
rolled by. You have to get rid of your evil thoughts, words 
and deeds. You should celebrate the arrival of New Year by 
inculcating noble and divine feelings. You should experi- 
ence bliss by visualising the unmanifest atmic principle in 
this manifest world. 


From this New Year day onwards, contemplate on 
the sacred ideals demonstrated by the great men and women 
of the Ramayana. Follow in their footsteps. Attain happi- 
ness and share it with others. Uphold the glory of Bharat. 
Develop the feeling of nationality. Never forget your moth- 
erland. If someone were to ask you who you are, you need 
not say, Iam Ramayya, Krishnayya, etc. You should proudly 
proclaim that you are a Bharatiya. Ramayya, Krishnayya 
are pettinna perlu (names given to the body), whereas 
Bharatiya is your puttina peru (name acquired by birth). 
Who 1s a Bharatiya? ‘Bha’ means effulgence, light and 
divinity. Hence, Bharatiya is one who basks in the light of 
divinity. Bharat is the centre of peace and security. That 
which is not present in Bharat is not present anywhere else 
in the world. Bharat has attained the highest reputation in 
the world. The glory of this country has to be upheld. Fol- 
low the teachings of the Ramayana and make your lives 
sacred. This sacred epic has a great message to convey. 
Many histories could not stand the test of time but the 
Ramayana, though thousands of years have passed, con- 
tinues to remain ever fresh in the minds of people. The 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 104 


name Rama given by Sage Vasishtha has immense inner 
significance. When you utter the word ‘Ram’, you first 
open the mouth with the sound ‘Ra’. All your wicked quali- 
ties go out when your mouth is open. When you utter ‘M’ 
by closing the mouth, the entry is barred against wicked 
qualities that have gone out. This is the inner meaning of 
chanting the name of Rama. On this new year day, you 
have learnt many new things. Sanctify your lives by put- 
ting into practice whatever you have learnt. 


(Here Bhagawan sang the Bhajan, Hari Bhajan Bina 
Sukha Santhi Nahin ... After this, Bhagawan added): 


Drive Out Your Wicked Qualities By Namasmarana 
Embodiments of Love! 


Yesterday happened to be the Telugu New Year, Ugadi. 
Today we are celebrating Tamil New Year and also the 
Malayalam New Year, Vishu. Names are different but the in- 
ner significance is one and the same. When we understand the 
inner meaning of these celebrations, everything will appear to 
be new to you. Celebration of a festival does not merely mean 
getting up early in the morning, having a sacred bath, wearing 
new clothes, partaking of sweet dishes, etc. Only when you 
understand their inner significance can you say that you have 
celebrated the festivals in their true sense. 


“That is the place encircled by the sacred river 
Chitravathi which meanders its way in its pristine 
beauty. That is the place around which there are 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 105 


beautiful mango groves symbolising auspicious- 
ness. Standing on guard on four sides are the dei- 
ties Parvati and Parameswara protecting the place. 
Nearby is the town of Bukkapatnam which speaks 
of the glory of Bukkaraya. There stands Puttapuram 
(Puttaparthi) in its divine majesty, spreading its 
grandeur and glory all over the world. 

(Telugu Poem) 


What is the meaning of the name Puttaparthi? Parthi 
means effulgence. So, Puttaparthi is the place of effulgence. 
It is the beacon of light. Earlier it was called Puttavardhini. 
Putta means anthill. There used to be anthills and snakes 
everywhere. The Ramayana has a close relationship with 
anthills in the sense that anthills grew over its composer, 
Sage Valmiki. He was completely covered by anthills, and 
snakes were moving in and out of them. There are many 
snakes of wicked qualities in the anthill of your heart. When 
you do namasmarana (remembering the divine name), all 
the ‘snakes’ of bad qualities will come out. Namasmarana 
is like nadaswaram which attracts snakes and brings them 
out of anthills. This nadaswaram is your jeevanaswaram 
and pranaswaram (breath of life). One has to repeat God’s 
name in order to get rid of evil qualities. 


Today there are many who do not attach any impor- 
tance to namasmarana. It is a great mistake. “In this Age 
of Kali only chanting of the divine name can redeem your 
lives. There is no other refuge.” (Sanskrit sloka) Singing 
the glory of the Lord is highly sacred. Today the country is 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 106 


facing a lot of problems because people are not doing 
namasmarana. Let each and every street reverberate with 
the singing of divine glory. Let each and every cell of your 
body be filled with divine name. Nothing else can give you 
the bliss, courage and strength that you derive from 
namasmarana. Even if some people make fun of you, do 
not bother about it. People may say, “He is an I.A.S. of- 
ficer. How is it that he is also doing namasmarana?’”’ Who- 
ever has a heart has the right to do namasmarana. Heart is 
the same in everyone. What is wrong if an I.A.S. officer 
does nama-smarana? Be he young or old, rich or poor, ev- 
erybody has to do namasmarana. Only fools make fun of 
people doing namasmarana. Do namasmarana with full 
mind and total dedication. 


Do not be afraid of anyone. Sing the glory of God 
wholeheartedly without any inhibition. Only then can you 
experience divinebliss.Begin this sacred nama-smarana 
right from this moment on this New Year day. You may not 
have any musical instruments for this. It is enough if it 
emerges from the core of your heart. Play on the veena of 
your heart and sing the glory of God. Take care that you do 
not have evil thoughts as they will produce discordant notes. 
Only then will you become the recipient of divine grace 
and energy. 


Today the people of Kerala are celebrating their New 
Year, Vishu. On this auspicious occasion, I bless you all to 
enjoy peace, happiness and prosperity. This also happens 
to be the New Year day for the people of Tamil Nadu. May 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 107 


you all sanctify your lives by leading an ideal life and giv- 
ing happiness to all! May you lead a blissful life! You don’t 
need to search for bliss outside. It is within you. From this 
day onward, develop your devotion and sense of surrender. 
Be fearless and sing the glory of the Lord wherever you 
are. Only then can you lead the life of a true human being. 
Having been born in this sacred land, lead your lives in a 
befitting manner. Very soon all countries of the world will 
follow Bharat. Bharat should become the leader of world 
in the field of spirituality. This is what I desire. 


Vishu and Tamil New Year, 14th April, 2002, 
Brindavan, Bangalore. 


Imprint Rama’s Name On Your Heart 


Sweeter than sugar, tastier than curd, sweeter 
indeed than honey is the Name of Rama. Constant 
repetition of this sweet Name gives one the taste of 
divine nectar itself. Therefore, one should contem- 
plate on the Name of Rama incessantly. 


(Telugu Poem) 


Embodiments of Love! 


YODHYA was the capital of the kingdom of 

Kosala. It was built in such a way that no en- 
emy could enter it. Hence, it was named Ayodhya (a place 
secure from enemies). It was built by Emperor Manu on the 
bank of the river Sarayu. Sarayu was a part of Manasasarovar 
created by the Will of Brahma. Emperor Dasaratha ruled over 
this sacred place. 


The Vedas Incarnated As Dasaratha’s Sons 


In spite of having all the wealth and comforts, 
Dasaratha’s life was devoid of happiness as he had no chil- 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 110 


dren. Dasaratha had a minister by name Sumantra who was 
sacred-hearted and highly virtuous. One day, he approached 
Dasaratha and said, “Oh king! I have a plan that would 
solve your problems and give happiness to you and the 
people at large. The country will attain plenty and prosper- 
ity if you perform Aswamedha yajna. There is another sa- 
cred ritual called Putrakameshti yajna, by performing which 
you are sure to beget children.” Dasaratha was happy with 
the advice. After seeking the approval of Sage Vasishtha, 
he commanded Sumantra to make necessary arrangements 
for the performance of the yajnas. Sumantra requested 
Dasaratha to invite Sage Rishyasrunga as the chief priest 
to preside over the yajnas as he was well-versed with these 
type of rituals. 


At that time, King Romapada was ruling over the king- 
dom of Anga. He had pleased Sage Rishyasrunga who saved 
his kingdom from severe famine. One day King Dasaratha, 
Sumantra and Romapada together went to the hermitage of 
Rishyasrunga. As per the request of Dasaratha, 
Rishyasrunga came over to Ayodhya and performed the 
yajnas. As the Putrakameshti yajna was in progress, there 
emerged an effulgent being from the flames with a vessel 
containing payasam (sweet rice pudding). He handed over 
the vessel to Sage Vasishtha, who in turn gave it to Dasaratha 
and told him to distribute it equally between his three wives. 
The composers of the Ramayana like Kamban, Valmiki, 
Tulasidas, etc., gave different versions of the proportion in 
which the payasam was distributed between them. But none 
of them gave the correct version. Dasaratha gave equal share 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 111 


of the payasam to each of his three queens in three differ- 
ent cups. Whether it is then or now, the principle of equal- 
ity is most essential for man. Dasaratha told his wives to 
have a sacred bath and seek Sage Rishya-srunga’s bless- 
ings before partaking of the payasam. 


The queens accordingly took a sacred bath and sought 
the blessings of Sage Rishyasrunga. Sumitra however went 
to the terrace to dry her hair in the sun. She had kept the 
payasam cup by her side. In the meantime, a servant-maid 
came running to her and informed that King Dasaratha had 
asked her to come at once. She plaited her hair and was 
about to pick up the cup. Just then, an eagle swooped down 
and took away the cup in a trice. She was afraid that her 
husband Dasaratha and Sage Vasishtha would get annoyed 
with her. She shuddered at the thought of being cursed by 
Sage Rishyasrunga. So, she ran to Kausalya and Kaikeyi and 
explained to them her predicament. “Sisters, an eagle took 
away the cup because of my negligence. No doubt, it was a 
mistake but it was not done intentionally.” Both Kausalya 
and Kaikeyi sympathised with her. Immediately, Kausalya 
brought a similar cup from inside and poured half of her 
share of payasam into it. Kaikeyi followed suit. Sumitra was 
happy at their consideration and cooperation. All this hap- 
pened in a natural manner. The three queens went to the Puja 
room and partook of their share of payasam. Nine months 
passed. On an auspicious day, Kausalya gave birth to Rama. 
That was the time when the five elements were in harmony 
with each other. While Sumitra gave birth to two sons, 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 117 


Lakshmana and Satrughna, Kaikeyi gave birth to Bharata. 
The four sons of Dasaratha were the very personification of 
the four Vedas. 


Unshakable Bond Of Love Between Four Brothers 


The birth of four sons of Dasaratha brought happi- 
ness in the royal household. There were rejoicings in the 
entire kingdom. But Sumitra faced a peculiar problem. The 
sons of Sumitra were restless and cried non-stop right from 
their birth. They neither would drink milk nor would go to 
sleep. Seeing the pathetic condition of her sons, Sumitra 
was grief-stricken. When there was no one around, she ap- 
proached Sage Vasishtha and explained to him the sad plight 
of her sons. She said, “Guruji, I don’t expect anything from 
my sons. It is enough for me if they lead a happy and healthy 
life. They don’t seem to be having any physical ailments. I 
am unable to understand why they are restless and con- 
tinue crying right from their birth.” Vasishtha closed his 
eyes to contemplate on the reason for the children’s strange 
behaviour. After some time, he opened his eyes and said, 
“Mother Sumitra, you are very fortunate. You are endowed 
with the noble virtue of samadrishti (equanimity). As your 
name suggests, you are a good friend of all. You don’t 
need to be worried at all. With the permission of Kausalya, 
put Lakshmana in the cradle of Rama. Likewise, seek 
Kaikeyi’s permission and put Satrughna by the side of 
Bharata in the same cradle. Then, they will stop crying and 
behave in a normal way.” 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 113 


Kausalya and Kaikeyi readily consented to Sumitra’s 
request. They said, “Sister, bring Lakshmana and Satrughna 
at once. They are also like our children. Is it not a matter 
of joy for us to watch the four brothers grow together?” 
Sumitra did as per the advice of Sage Vasishtha. No sooner 
did she put Lakshmana by the side of Rama in the cradle 
than he stopped crying. The same was the case with 
Satrughna too. He stopped crying as soon as he was put by 
the side of Bharata. Lakshmana and Satrughna were ex- 
tremely happy in the company of Rama and Bharata, re- 
spectively. They were all smiles and started moving their 
hands and legs in a blissful manner. Watching her sons en- 
joying themselves thus, Sumitra felt greatly relieved. 


After a few days, Sumitra approached Sage Vasishtha 
again and requested him to explain the strange behaviour of 
her sons. She wanted to know why Lakshmana and Satrughna 
were crying continuously till they were placed by the side of 
Rama and Bharata, respectively. Sage Vasishtha started ex- 
plaining in this manner: “Oh Sumitra! You are a noble soul. 
Your heart is pure and unsullied. You are totally selfless. So, 
it is not difficult for you to understand the reason behind 
this. Do you remember when your share of payasam was 
taken away by an eagle, Kausalya and Kaikeyi came to your 
rescue by sharing their payasam with you? As a result, you 
bore two sons. Lakshmana is born from Kausalya’s share of 
payasam and Satrughna is born from that of Kaikeyi. It means 
Lakshmana is an amsa (aspect) of Rama and Satrughna is an 
amsa of Bharata. So, it is natural that Lakshmana is blissful 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 114 


in the company of Rama and so too is Satrughna in the com- 
pany of Bharata.” Lord Krishna says in the Bhagavadgita, 
Mamaivamsho jeevaloke jeevabhuta sanathana (the eternal 
atma in all beings is a part of My Being). Lakshmana, being 
an aspect of Rama, was in his company always. Likewise, 
Satrughna and Bharata were always together. 


Rama And Lakshmana Protect The Yajna Of 
Viswamitra 


Years rolled by and the four brothers grew up as 
young men. Dasaratha thought of performing their mar- 
riages. One day when he was thinking on these lines, a 
messenger entered and informed him about the arrival of 
Sage Viswamitra. Everything happens according to time, 
situation and circumstances. God creates the necessary cir- 
cumstances to fulfil His divine plan. Dasaratha personally 
went up to the entrance and welcomed the sage, saying, 
“Swami, it is our great good fortune that you have come 
today. I am contemplating on performing the marriages of 
my sons. So, I am extremely happy and indeed blessed to 
have you with us today. Please tell me what I can do for 
you. I will certainly fulfil your desire.” Viswamitra said 
that he had come to take Rama with him to protect his yajna 
from demons. Viswamitra’s words were like a bomb blast 
for Dasaratha. He thought to himself, “I begot these chil- 
dren as a result of performing several rituals and sacrifices 
over a number of years. Moreover, Rama has never en- 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 115 


tered a forest or seen a demon. He has no hatred towards 
anybody. He is full of love and forbearance. How can I 
send tender-hearted Rama to the forest to fight the demons 
who are very cruel?” Thinking thus, Dasaratha felt very 
sad. 


He said to Viswamitra, “Oh venerable sage, my son 
is very young. How can I send him to forest?” Viswamitra 
said, “Oh king! You promised that you would fulfil my 
desire. Now you are going back on your words. Kings be- 
longing to Ikshvaku clan never failed to keep up their prom- 
ise. If you go against your promise, you will bring disre- 
pute to your clan. So, decide as to whether you want to put 
your clan to disrepute or send your son with me.” Dasaratha 
thought for a while but was unable to decide. He called 
Sage Vasishtha and sought his advice. Vasishtha said, 
“Dasaratha, your sons are not ordinary mortals. They are 
born to you because of Divine Will. They are born out of 
fire, which means they are the embodiments of power and 
wisdom. No danger can ever befall them. So, uphold your 
promise given to Sage Viswamitra.” 


Here is an important point worthy of note. 
Viswamitra had come to take only Rama with him. Rama 
was prepared to go with him. Rama did not ask Lakshmana 
to accompany him. Neither Viswamitra nor Dasaratha asked 
him to follow Rama. Lakshmana followed Rama of his own 
accord because he was an amsa of Rama. Just as shadow 
follows an object, Lakshmana followed Rama. Seeing this, 
Viswamitra thought to himself, “Everything happens ac- 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 116 


cording to the Divine Will.” Prior to his departure, 
Viswamitra said to Dasaratha, “Oh king! There is no power 
in this world that is not in me. I am endowed with all mighty 
powers and all types of knowledge. But once I undertake 
yajna deeksha (vow of yajna) and start performing the ritual, 
I am not supposed to involve myself in any act of violence. 
This is the discipline prescribed for the one performing a 
yajna. Hence, I cannot kill the demons on my own. That is 
why I am taking Rama with me.” 


When they reached the bank of Sarayu river, 
Viswamitra said, “Rama come here.” He called only Rama 
and not Lakshmana. Though he was not called, Lakshmana 
also went and sat by the side of Rama. Viswamitra said, 
“My dear ones, I am taking you to Siddhashram where yajna 
is going to take place. You have come here to protect the 
yajna from demons. I don’t know how many days you have 
to stay in the forest. You are used to royal comforts and 
delicious food. But there is no one to prepare food for you 
in the ashram. You may have to stay awake day and night 
forgoing food and water in order to protect the yajna. So, I 
will teach you two mantras: Bala and Atibala. With the 
power of these mantras, you can remain without food, wa- 
ter and sleep for any number of days.” 


Knowing fully well that Rama was the divine incar- 
nation and had the power to protect the yajna, why did 
Viswamitra teach him these mantras? These are only ex- 
ternal activities meant for the world. Rama and Lakshmana 
chanted these mantras and consequently had no hunger, 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 17 


thirst or sleep during their stay in the Siddhashram. When 
the yajna was in progress, there came a thunderous noise. 
Rama asked Viswamitra, “Swami, what is this noise? It 
sounds as though mountains are falling apart.” Viswamitra 
said, “It has nothing to do with mountains. It is the voice 
of demonness Thataki. She makes everyone tremble with 
her ferocity. Be prepared to face her. She is coming.” Rama 
had a doubt whether it was proper for a Kshatriya to kill a 
woman. Viswamitra said, “Rama, when it comes to pro- 
tecting a yajna, you do not need to observe any difference 
between a man and a woman. Your main duty is to drive 
away all demons who come to disrupt it.” As this was the 
command of the Guru, Rama implicitly obeyed him and 
killed the ogress. But she was not the one to be killed eas- 
ily. A fierce battle ensued. We do not need to go into its 
details. Maricha and Subahu also came with their army of 
demons to disrupt the yajna but Rama killed Subahu with 
one arrow and with another threw away Maricha at a long 
distance. Thereafter, peace prevailed in Siddhashram. There 
were rejoicings all around. Even gods of heaven showered 
flowers from the sky. The yajna was completed success- 
fully. 


In the meantime, a messenger from the city of Mithila 
arrived and handed over a letter to Viswamitra from King 
Janaka. It was an invitation to Viswamitra to take part in a 
yajna that Janaka was going to perform. Viswamitra at once 
set out on the journey to Mithila. Being a sanyasi, he had 
no luggage to carry with him. He asked Rama and 


Sathya Sai Sp 118 


Lakshmana to follow him. But Rama was reluctant to do 
so. He said, “Swami, my father has sent me to protect your 
yajna. | am not interested in the yajna that King Janaka is 
going to perform.” In order to arouse interest and enthusi- 
asm in them, Viswamitra said, “The yajna is not an ordi- 
nary one. In the palace of King Janaka, there is a Shiva 
dhanus (bow of Shiva) which ordinary mortals cannot lift. 
It is very difficult to move it even an inch. One day it so 
happened that Sita, the daughter of Janaka, lifted the bow. 
That day Janaka decided to give his daughter Sita in mar- 
riage to aman of valour who could tie the string to the bow. 
This yajna 1s arranged in this connection.” 


Divine Plan Of The Marriage Of Dasaratha’s Sons 


Viswamitra persuaded Rama and Lakshmana to ac- 
company him to Mithila. Huge crowds had assembled there. 
Kings belonging to various countries had also arrived. 
Ravana was one among them. He was very powerful and 
had a fearsome personality. He was the first one to come 
forward to lift the bow. As he was proceeding towards the 
bow, kings were surprised at his gait and personality. They 
thought, “If he is able to lift the bow, King Janaka has to 
give his daughter in marriage to him. The very sight of 
Ravana is terrifying. How can Janaka give his daughter in 
marriage to him? Anyway, let us see what is going to hap- 
pen.” Ravana in the first instance tried to lift the bow with 
his left hand. But it did not move. He used all his strength 
and tried with both his hands. Yet it did not move. In the 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 119 


process, he lost his balance and fell down. He became the 
object of ridicule. One with ego is bound to face humilia- 
tion. He cannot receive respect and honour in society. Ego 
leads to ruin. Seeing the mighty Ravana fall down in sucha 
manner, all the kings were surprised. They said to them- 
selves, “If Ravana cannot lift it, nobody else can do it.” 
They were afraid even to come forward to try lifting the 
bow. 


At that moment, Viswamitra gave a meaningful look 
to Rama. Rama understood its implication and got up. He 
was only fifteen years old. As He was walking majestically 
toward the bow, people were attracted by His divine 
splendour. It looked as though all powers were following 
Him like a shadow. People were mesmerised by His divine 
form and were unmindful of what was going to happen. 
Smilingly, Rama went near the bow, adjusted his upper gar- 
ment and put his left hand on the bow. And lo and behold! 
The mighty bow was lifted up in a flash of a moment. But 
the bow had to be bent to tie the string. As Rama was bend- 
ing it, the bow broke with a deafening sound. The onlook- 
ers were stunned at Rama’s mighty power. Immediately, 
Sita was brought by her maids with a garland in her hand. 


Viswamitra enquired, “Rama, are You ready for the 
marriage?” Rama said, “Swami, My father sent Me to 
Siddhashram to safeguard your yajna. I did not have his per- 
mission even to come here. I am unable to accept this pro- 
posal without his consent.” Viswamitra whispered this into 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 120 


the ear of Janaka. He also supported Rama’s view as he was 
well-versed in Rajaneeti (royal protocol). Immediately, he 
sent his messengers to King Dasaratha to bring him and his 
family to Mithila with royal honours. King Dasaratha, his 
family and their entire entourage reached Mithila in three 
days. Rama and Lakshmana did not move out of their room 
during this period. The four brothers were extremely happy 
to meet each other. The holy wedding took place on the 
fourth day. I have described this event in great detail many a 
time. Sita was born of mother earth and Urmila was Janaka’s 
real daughter. Sita was to wed Rama and Urmila was to marry 
Lakshmana. Janaka’s brother had two daughters Mandavi 
and Sruthakeerti. Their wedding was fixed with Bharata and 
Satrughna, respectively. It looked as though they were per- 
fect divine couples. 


During the wedding, Sita had to garland Rama. Sita 
being short in stature could not do so as Rama was ajanubahu 
(tall personality). Rama was expected to bend His head be- 
fore Sita so that she could garland him. However, he would 
not do so, lest people should say that Rama, one of valour, 
bowed his head before a woman. Women in those days did 
not look into the face of men. Hence, Sita was looking down 
holding the garland in her hand. Lakshmana was the incar- 
nation of Adisesha who carried mother earth on his hood. 
Rama looked at Lakshmana as if to say, “Look, why don’t 
you raise that part of earth where Sita is standing to enable 
her to garland Me.” Then Lakshmana indicated to Rama that 
it was not possible to raise any particular area. If he tried to 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 121 


raise that part of earth where Sita was standing, simultane- 
ously Rama would be raised and so also others. The onlook- 
ers became anxious and were wondering as to why Rama 
was not bending his head so as to enable Sita to garland him. 
Lakshmana, being one of intelligence, thought of a plan to 
solve the problem. All of a sudden, he fell at the feet of 
Rama and did not get up for a long time. Rama bent down to 
pick up Lakshmana. Seizing this opportunity, Sita garlanded 
Rama. 


Saint Thyagaraja sang a song extolling the mighty 
power of Rama: “But for the power of Rama, could a mere 
monkey cross the mighty ocean? Would Lakshmi Devi, the 
goddess of wealth, become His consort? Would Lakshmana 
worship Him? Would the intelligent Bharata offer his salu- 
tations to Him? But for the mighty power of Rama, would 
all this happen? Indeed, Rama’ power is beyond all de- 
scription. ” 


The wedding was celebrated in a glorious manner. 
All of them reached Ayodhya safely in spite of a minor clash 
with Parasurama on the way. As the saying goes, “Pleasure 
is an interval between two pains”. 


Unparalleled Spirit Of Sacrifice Of Sumitra And 
Urmila 


People of Ayodhya rejoiced to see the royal couples. 
One day at three o’clock in the morning, Dasaratha had a 
dream. It was his belief that whatever one saw in a dream in 
the early hours would come true. He had dreamt that he had 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 122 


become very old and that his hands and legs were shaking. 
He woke up in a disturbed state of mind considering this as 
a bad omen. Dasaratha felt that he might not live long, so 
he decided to coronate Rama immediately. When the king 
decides to do something, who can stop him? He thought 
that there was no time to make elaborate arrangements for 
the coronation. He sent word for Sage Vasishtha and ob- 
tained his permission. When Dasaratha told Rama that He 
was to be made the crown prince the following day, Rama 
remained silent. Rama was omniscient and knew what was 
going to happen. But being an obedient son, He did not 
want to say anything against His father’s wish. 


People go through Ramayana. They have books on 
Ramayana as big as pillows. They learn the slokas by rote, 
but what is the use? They don’t understand the essence. 
Mother Kausalya was highly virtuous. Being the eldest queen, 
everyone respected her and obeyed her command. Though 
Kaikeyi was the youngest queen, nobody could go against 
her wish as she exercised great influence over Dasaratha. 
Dasaratha could not deny any of her wishes. But Sumitra 
was not given much importance in spite of her numerous 
noble qualities. In fact, the qualities of Sumitra and her sons 
cannot be described in words. 


The coronation of Rama did not take place. Accord- 
ing to the wish of Kaikeyi, Rama was to spend fourteen years 
in exile. Before going to the forest, Rama went to mother 
Kausalya to seek her blessings. She wept inconsolably. Not 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 123 


only she, everyone in the antahpura (inner chambers) was 
in tears. When Lakshmana went to mother Sumitra and sought 
her blessings, she said, “My dear one, do not think that you 
are going to the forest. In fact, this Ayodhya is like an aranya 
(forest) without Sita and Rama. The forest where Sita and 
Rama live is verily Ayodhya. Rama is your father and Sita, 
your mother. Let nothing come in your way of serving them.” 
Will any mother speak in such a manner? She would have 
argued, “‘As per the boon granted to Kaikeyi, only Rama is 
supposed to go to the forest. You don’t need to go with Him.” 
Any other mother would have stopped him from going to 
the forest. But Sumitra, a noble mother, did not think on those 
lines. She had all the virtues of an ideal mother. 


Then Lakshmana went to his wife Urmila to inform 
her about his decision to go with Rama. Urmila was highly 
virtuous. Her spirit of sacrifice and generosity was unparal- 
leled. Being unaware of the happenings, she was painting a 
picture of Rama’s coronation. She wanted to send it to her 
father Janaka. As she was deeply engrossed in her work, all 
of a sudden Lakshmana entered and called her in a raised 
voice. She was startled and at once stood up. As she got up 
in a hurry, she accidentally spilled the paint on the picture 
she was painting. She felt sad for having spoiled the picture. 
Then Lakshmana said, ““Rama’s coronation is stalled because 
of Kaikeyi, and the picture of coronation that you are paint- 
ing is spoiled because of your husband Lakshmana. So, don’t 
worry about it.” He informed her that he was accompanying 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 124 


Rama and Sita to the forest to serve them. She was happy 
with his decision. She entreated him to serve Sita and Rama 
with utmost devotion. She said, “Dear husband, my mother- 
in-law Sumitra gave birth to you and your brother Satrughna 
to tread the path of service. You are meant to serve Rama, 
and Satrughna has to serve Bharata. So, discharge your du- 
ties. But at no point of time should you remember me dur- 
ing your stay for fourteen years in the forest. If you think of 
me even for a moment, you will not be able to serve Sita and 
Rama wholeheartedly.” 


She did not pressurise him to allow her to accom- 
pany him. She entreated him to serve Sita and Rama with 
utmost devotion. She said, “Think of their well-being al- 
ways and serve them diligently. Forget me altogether for 
the next fourteen years.” Will any wife speak in such a self- 
less manner? No. Her broad-mindedness and utter selfless- 
ness moved Lakshmana to tears. He praised her, saying, 
“Urmila, I never knew that you were so broad-minded. I 
will always treasure your noble intentions in my heart.” 
Urmila said, “Don’t think of my noble intentions. Think of 
the nobility of Sita and Rama and obey their command. 
See to it that they are never put to any inconvenience.” It is 
difficult to find many examples of nobility and sacrifice 
set before the world by Sumitra and Urmila. 


During the war between Rama and Ravana, 
Lakshmana fell unconscious one day. Seeing His dear brother 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 125 


in such condition, Rama was very sad. He shed tears, say- 
ing, “If I search in this world, I may be able to find a wife 
like Sita but not a brother like Lakshmana. How can I live 
without him?” The physician present there said,‘ Lakshmana 
can be revived with the help ofa herb called Sanjivini which 
is available on a particular mountain.” Hanuman at once flew 
to the mountain. As he could not identify the herb, he up- 
rooted the entire mountain and started his return journey. As 
he was flying over Nandigrama with the mountain, Bharata 
mistook him for a demon and shot an arrow at him. Hanuman 
fell down along with the mountain. People of Nandigrama 
and Ayodhya came running and surrounded him. Hanuman 
offered his obeisance to everyone. He turned to Bharata and 
said, “Your brother Lakshmana has fallen unconscious in 
the battlefield. The physician there wanted Sanjivini herb to 
be brought in order to revive Lakshmana. As I could not 
locate the exact herb, I carried the entire mountain with me.” 
On coming to know that Lakshmana had fainted and Rama 
was grief-stricken, everyone assembled there started shed- 
ding tears; the ladies in particular were inconsolable. When 
Hanuman looked around, he found everyone in tears except 
for one lady. She was none other than Sumitra, the mother 
of Lakshmana. “Lakshmana can never be put to any harm. 
He constantly chants Rama’s name. Every cell of his body is 
filled with Rama’s divine name. So, nothing untoward can 
happen to him.” With such conviction, she was composed. 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 126 


Bharata took Hanuman to Urmila and introduced him. 
She never stepped out of her room. Wherever she was at 
the time of Lakshmana’s departure to the forest, she remained 
in the same room for fourteen long years until his return. 
Such was her determination. She asked Hanuman as to where 
he was coming from. Hanuman narrated to her in detail what- 
ever happened right from the time Lakshmana fainted in 
the battlefield. On listening to Hanuman’s narration, Urmila 
laughed and said, “Hanuman, don’t you know even this? 
The very breath of Lakshmana is filled with the divine name 
of Rama. How can any danger befall such a person?” 


The sense of devotion and surrender of Urmila and 
Sumitra have not been given any place of prominence in the 
Ramayana. They were the embodiments of truth, righteous- 
ness and sacrifice. Their ideals are the beacons of ideal life 
for the world. Everyone should become a Su-mitra (good 
friend) and a Su-putra (ideal son). The country today needs 
ideal men and women. Though thousands of years have 
passed, the glory of Ramayana has not diminished a bit. It 
has remained ever new and ever fresh in the hearts of people. 
One who chants Rama’s name and has the vision of his di- 
vine form will not be born again. That is why Sage Valmiki 
has extolled the greatness of Rama’s power and his name. 


(Bhagavan sang the bhajan, Rama Kodanda Rama ... 
Then He continued the discourse.) 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 127 


Always Chant The Divine Name 
Embodiments of Love! 


There is no amruta (ambrosia) greater than Rama’s 
name. Today people have forgotten nama chinthana (con- 
templation on the divine name). They repeat only film songs. 
That is why the country is facing hardships. The educated, 
intellectuals and scientists do not think of God at all. They 
deem it below their dignity to apply vibhuti on their fore- 
heads. Some of them have it on their foreheads when they 
are at home and rub it off the moment they step outside. This 
type of conduct is responsible for degeneration in society. 
Why should one be afraid of chanting God’s name? Let 
people talk as they like. You don’t need to be afraid. Spread 
the glory of Rama’s name in every nook and corner of the 
world. You can chant any name of your choice — Rama, 
Krishna, Govinda, Narayana, Shiva, Vishnu, etc. As people 
have forgotten the divine name, every home is in turmoil. 
There are conflicts even among brothers. Since there is no 
purity within, unsacred feelings have crept in. People are 
running after money and high position. Can money and po- 
sition give you protection? You find so many in this world 
who have plenty of money and are occupying positions of 
authority. Are they able to enjoy peace and happiness? No. 
Only the divine name can grant peace and happiness. Those 
who neglect God’s name bring about their own ruin. 


There is an inner significance of the word Rama. The 
letter ‘Ma’ is the life-force of the panchakshari mantra, “Om 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 128 


Namah Sivaya.” If ‘Ma’ is removed, it reads as ‘Na Sivaya’, 
which connotes inauspiciousness. Likewise, the letter ‘Ra’ 
is the life-force of the ashta-kshari Mantra, “Om Namo 
Narayanaya,”’ without which it loses its meaning. The life- 
force of the pancha-kshari mantra ‘Ma’, and that of the 
ashtakshari mantra ‘Ra’ together form the divine name 
RAMA. 


Students! Devotees! 


Chanting of the divine name alone can protect you. 
Money and high position are like passing clouds. You should 
not clamour for them. One may join politics and attain 
some position of authority, but how long can one remain in 
power? Any moment one may be dislodged from power. 
One should not get carried away by politics. Instead one 
should take refuge in the divine name. He alone is truly 
blessed whose heart is filled with the divine name. People 
who do not relish the divine name may make fun of you. 
Somebody may tell you there is no God. What should be 
your reply? “God may not exist for you but He exists for 
me. Who are you to deny the existence of my God?” No 
one has any right to deny God. Never forget the divine name 
wherever you are and under any circumstances. Sarvada 
sarva kaleshu sarvatra Hari chintanam (everywhere, at all 
times, under all circumstances contemplate on God). Im- 
print the divine name on your heart firmly and permanently. 


Sri Rama Navami, 21st April 2002, 
Brindavan, Bangalore. 


Mother Is Your First God 


All the names and forms are but the manifestations of 
the Supreme Being who is Existence-Knowledge- Bliss 
Absolute and non-dual. He is the embodiment of 
Sathyam, Sivam, Sundaram (Truth, Goodness, 
Beauty). (Sanskrit verse) 


Embodiments of Love! 


Z”AD Drishyam Thannashyam (all that we see with 
our Pe ae eyes is bound to perish). It is not only man 
who is endowed with physical eyes but birds and animals 
also have them. Even worms and insects have eyes. But 
what is the use of eyes if we cannot see that which is eter- 
nal and changeless? These eyes perceive only ephemeral, 
impermanent and unreal things. In the world, we find people 
spending their whole life in mundane activities, perceiving 
only ephemeral things. Jnana (wisdom) is true and eternal. 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 130 


Only he who has the eye of wisdom deserves to be called a 
human being. It is therefore essential that man should turn 
his vision inward and try to recognise the atmic principle. 
We can experience the atmic principle only when we turn 
our vision inward. With our outward vision, we perceive 
only transient, ephemeral phenomena. 


Imprint The Teachings Of Your Mother On Your Heart 


In the land of Bharat, the ideal of motherhood has 
been held in high esteem. Every individual has a mother. 
But today reverence and love for the mother is on the de- 
cline. People do not try to make their mothers happy. There 
is no love greater than that of the mother in the whole phe- 
nomenal world. 


Ramas divinity blossomed under Kausalya’ loving 
care; 

Because of the tender feelings and austerity of Sita, 
Lava and Kusha achieved name and fame; 

The loving care of Jijabai made Shivaji a great 
warrior. (Telugu Poem) 


Similarly, many eminent persons in the world 
achieved greatness in life due to the loving care of their 
mothers. It is therefore important for every individual to 
respect his or her mother. The ideal conduct of children is 
based on the ideals set by their mothers. The sacredness of 
motherhood is unparalleled all over the world irrespective 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 131 


of country or time. Material wealth or high levels of schol- 
arship are not necessary for this. Character is the basis for 
this ideal. Every mother aspires for the welfare of her chil- 
dren. There may be bad children but there can never be a 
bad mother in this world. There is an urgent need for ideal 
children who obey the instructions of their mothers and 
follow the ideals set by them. They should imprint the teach- 
ings of their mothers on their hearts. 


Bharatiya culture declares: Matru Devo Bhava, Pit- 
ru Devo Bhava, Acharya Devo Bhava, Atithi Devo Bhava 
(revere your mother, father, preceptor and guest as God). 
But the highest place has been given to the mother. She is 
truly your first god. How many are there today who give 
due respect and love to this embodiment of divinity? Let 
alone giving love or respect to their mother, how many 
behave in a proper manner so as to deserve the love of their 
mother? A true son or daughter is one who acts in a way 
that earns him or her the love of his or her mother. One can 
never hope for peace or happiness in life if one hurts the 
feelings of one’s mother. It is the duty of every child to 
respect and love his mother; he should never cause her any 
distress. Be one a great scholar or an officer having high 
authority, one is but a child to one’s mother. But due to the 
influence of Kali Age, modern boys and girls are forgetting 
their duty toward their mother. This is a grave error. Those 
who forget their duty toward their mother are sure to lose 
themselves in wilderness. You are but a reflection of your 
mother. Therefore, first of all you should carry out your 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 132 
duty toward your mother and make her happy. 


Fulfil Your Mother’s Wishes 


The mother of this body Easwaramma looked upon all 
children with great love and tenderness. Whenever she saw 
little children, she caressed them with great affection without 
observing any difference whatsoever. As Karanam Subbamma 
had no children, she requested Easwaramma to send her chil- 
dren to her house once in a while. Thus, Subbamma took Me 
to her house and looked after Me with great love. Once when 
I was in Subbamma’s house, Easwarmma came in a hurry. I 
asked her, ““What is the hurry? What has happened?” She re- 
plied, “Swami, near our house there is a young mother whose 
little daughter is sick. She is helpless and in great distress. 
Even a dispensary does not exist in this desolate village. There 
is no one who can treat even a simple cold, cough or fever. So 
many devotees are coming to You. Do not think that all of 
them are true devotees. Only those who feel the distress of 
others and try to help them are true devotees. Wealth, scholar- 
ship or authority is of little consequence. Sympathising with 
others in their suffering and trying to alleviate it is the sign of 
true devotion. One should share the sorrow of others. But this 
is scarce today. There are people who keep talking at great 
length about the achievements of their own children, but they 
have little concern for the suffering of others’ children. Thou- 
sands of devotees come here but it has occurred to none to do 
something to solve the problems that exist here. It is now left 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 133 


to You. So, You must construct a small hospital in this village 
for the poor children.” I comforted her and said, “Why are 
you disturbed so much over such a small matter? It will be 
done. But for everything the time must be ripe. A new born 
child cannot become a youth all at once; some time is required. 
Do not worry so much; in due course of time, Swami will 
fulfil your desire. Try to comfort those who are suffering and 
pray for their well-being.” Easwaramma was a little upset think- 
ing that Swami was unconcerned and indifferent. But I had 
this Sankalpa all the time. Mother’s wish had to be fulfilled, 
be it small or big. Any task to help others is My responsibility 
and so I resolved to undertake this task. 


Society Needs Selfless Doctors 


The very next day, I arranged for the foundation to 
be laid, and within a month a hospital started functioning. 
There was a doctor named Brahmam. He was a great devo- 
tee. He acted in a manner befitting his name. After him, 
there came another doctor called B. Sitharamiah. He was a 
great devotee of Swami. He prayed to Me to give the re- 
sponsibility of the hospital to him. From that day till his 
last breath he worked in the hospital. You do not see any 
such doctors with dedication and commitment these days. 
From the moment they qualify, the sole concern of modern 
doctors is how much money they can earn. They are pre- 
pared to risk even their life for the sake of money. They 
neglect their prime duty which is healing the sick. They do 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 134 


not want to work in villages. They want to stay in cities and 
enjoy all the comforts of city life. They want to earn more 
and more money. What is money? What can it give us? It 
does not stay with anyone forever. It is transient and im- 
permanent. Money is required but too much money is harm- 
ful. Today people are ready to go to any length to earn 
money. As the proverb goes, man today is ready even to eat 
grass to gain a rupee. So, a greedy man can earn only grass, 
not grace. 


Today we need men of sacrifice in the world. What I 
want is not your devotion. You must apply your mind to 
the problems of society and find remedies for them. One 
should aspire for social welfare. Society today needs the 
service of self-sacrificing doctors. Doctors these days have 
large incomes of thousands of rupees per month. But they 
do not want to do work worth even a rupee. They want to 
have money without work. Society today needs servants. 
Only those who truly serve can become true leaders. When 
a leader looks upon himself as a servant renders true ser- 
vice to society. 


Ideal Motherhood Exemplified By Mother Easwaramma 


Easwaramma breathed her last in this very Mandir. 
Summer classes were going on in the month of May 1972. 
She used to come and sit in these classes. Swami used to be 
amused at her presence and asked her what she followed in 
the classes. She used to say, “I am not interested in these 
studies. I come here to see how the students of Swami con- 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 135 


duct themselves, how they obey His commands and how 
they react to Swami’s advice and teachings:” The parents 
take great pains in bringing their children with expectation 
that they may lead a respectable life. Are the children be- 
having in accordance with the expectations of their par- 
ents? They wear new clothes provided to them by their par- 
ents, but do they spare any thought for the hardships their 
parents undergo to procure these clothes? 


Embodiments of Love! 


You are boys today; tomorrow you will be men. If 
your children cause you worry how will you feel? Will you 
be happy? No not at all. All that happens to you in future 
will be in accordance with your conduct today. Everything 
is reaction, reflection and resound. Today’s good deeds will 
blossom into good results in the coming time. If you do 
bad deeds today, you cannot expect to be rewarded with 
good results in future. If you do evil today, you cannot es- 
cape its consequences later. You may become a powerful 
officer or an employer. But the results of your past bad 
deeds will always keep haunting you. Keeping these facts 
in mind, make your parents happy and serve them to your 
utmost capability. Only then will you find fulfilment in life. 
What for is man born in this world? Is it merely to roam 
around and indulge in the pleasures of the world? Under- 
stand that worldly pleasures are not permanent. A true son 
will see to it that his parents do not shed tears of sorrow. 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 136 


It is not a matter of great celebration when a son is 
born in a family. Only when he earns a good name in soci- 
ety should his birth become an occasion for celebration. 
Many parents in their exuberance of joy at the birth of their 
son indulge in all sorts of senseless celebrations. Such par- 
ents spoil their own children. Mothers should keep a close 
watch on the conduct of their children. Is he going on the 
right path? Is he working for the welfare of society? Is so- 
ciety approving his conduct? Is he gaining the respect of 
society? Mothers should keenly observe all this. 
Easwaramma was very conscious of these matters; she was, 
in fact, an ideal mother. When visitors came to the house, 
she would send her children to greet them properly, to ask 
about their welfare and requirements and to offer them a 
seat in a respectful manner. You scarcely find such conduct 
anywhere today. Children are well-educated, their talents 
are encouraged, but what for? To earn money? Even a beg- 
gar earns money. Money is not the goal of life. 


When you have a visitor to your house, you should 
greet him with respect and love. These days you cannot 
find any such courteous behaviour at all. That is why I of- 
ten say: You cannot always oblige but you can speak al- 
ways obligingly. But today’s education is making the chil- 
dren veritable demons. There is no humility or friendliness 
in them. They learn the stuff given in books by rote, go to 
the examination centre, empty the stuff in their heads on 
the answer papers and return home with empty heads. Is 


Sathya Sai Spe 137 


this education? Not at all. True education is that which is 
imprinted on the heart of the learners. It should remain un- 
changed over the years. Such sacred feelings are not to be 
found in today’s students. Everyone pretends to be a devo- 
tee without any trace of devotion. What is all this acting 
for? People learn such false values from cinema, TV, etc., 
which are ruining them, especially the children. The world 
today seems to be happy with TV and cinema. But Swami 
does not approve of them. Are cinema, TV, etc., helping in 
the redemption of mankind? Everyone should cultivate 
human qualities and lead the life of a true human being. 
But there are few such people to be found. There are, of 
course, a few parents who bring up their children with great 
love and affection and put them on the right path. Only 
such parents can be called ideal parents. Their children grow 
up to be ideal and noble. 


Ingratitude Is The Worst Sin 


Today people have little sense of gratitude. Even if 
you get a little help from anyone, you should always re- 
member it. It is unfortunate that people even harm those 
who help them. Such people are the worst sinners. We 
should help even those who have harmed us. This is the 
vow of Sai. No matter if some people criticise or ridicule 
Me or even try to harm Me, I will always look at them with 
kindness. I have declared: My life is My message. How many 
people follow the path shown by Me? If you follow in My 
footsteps, no harm will ever touch you. Swami is giving 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 138 


free education to thousands of students. Education in Sai 
institutions is free up to Ph.D. level. What is the cost of 
education these days? Even for admission to primary class, 
many schools charge 20 to 30 thousand rupees. It is in this 
environment that Swami is giving free education to all His 
students. The students should remember this with gratitude. 
It is harmful for them if they do not recognise it. These 
were some of the truths that Easwaramma taught. When 
somebody came to see her, she would tell him, “See how 
much help Swami is giving to the poor and needy. It is all 
for their welfare. But some people are not at all realising its 
value and are not grateful for it. It is not good for them. 
Everyone should bear this in mind.” She spoke in a gentle 
and sweet manner to all the visitors. She was a source of 
great solace to women who lost their husbands in young 
age. She helped them to relieve their suffering. 


Ever be grateful even for a small help. Do not be a 
kritaghna (ungrateful). Ingratitude is utter cruelty. There is 
a mantra in Suryanamaskara, “Kritaghnaghna-ya namah”’ 
(salutations to the sun who punishes the ungrateful). What 
is the significance of this? It emphasises the fact that any 
help received should be reciprocated to the extent possible. 
Hurting someone who has helped you will result in losing 
your eyesight. It is the radiance of the sun that is reflected 
in man’s eyes. All that you see is through the reflection of 
the sun’s radiance. The sun withdraws its radiance from 
the eyes of those persons who commit the sin of ingrati- 
tude. Some people may brush it aside, saying it is a mere 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 139 


katha (story). Truly speaking, it is not a Aatha but a vyatha 
(suffering) that an ungrateful person has to undergo. There- 
fore, we should always be grateful. We should return help 
for help to the utmost extent possible. 


Do Charity With Discrimination 


You should always help the aged and distressed. At 
the time when this building was being constructed, the 
Rajmata of Jamnagar prayed to Me to stay in her house. I 
accepted her prayer and started staying in her house. There 
was a driver in that house. One day, it was very cold and 
the driver was shivering as he had no coat or rug to protect 
himself from cold. My driver came and told Me. I gave 
him a rug. As he got the rug given by Me, he started crying 
loudly, saying even his parents had not given him so much 
love. He lived for quite a long time and stayed with the 
Rajmata. The Rajmata was also a very considerate lady and 
used to look after the welfare of all her staff. There are 
many such needy persons in the world. Whoever it may be, 
do not make distinction between your people and others. 
When you see anyone in distress, help him immediately. 
Education that does not inculcate such values of caring and 
sharing is not fit to be called education. “Jn spite of his 
education and intelligence, a foolish man will not know his 
true self and a mean-minded person will not give up his 
wicked qualities. Modern education leads only to argumen- 
tation, not to total wisdom. What is the use of acquiring 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 140 


worldly education if it cannot lead you to immortality? 
Acquire the knowledge that will make you immortal.” 
(Telugu poem) What is the use of such an education? What 
is the outcome of endless arguments? One thinks of one- 
self to be very learned but this arrogance is the source of 
one’s utter downfall. Students! It is necessary for you to 
cultivate humility and obedience. There are a large number 
of people who are in much poorer circumstances than you. 
You must strive to ameliorate their condition as much as 
you can. When you help others, that itself is your reward. 
The scriptures declare: Paropakaraya punyaya papaya 
parapeedanam (you earn merit by helping others and com- 
mit sin by hurting them). Hence, always try to be helpful. 
Do not commit the sin of hurting others. Set an example 
before young children. This is an important duty of the stu- 
dents today. I have noticed that students today have a craze 
for going to foreign countries. When they return, they are 
dressed in a pompous manner and their behaviour is ob- 
noxious. What is the use of wearing a costly dress if your 
behaviour is mean? 


There are many foreigners who come here and feel 
moved to help poor people. But this creates more compli- 
cations. They are not aware of the conditions here. It is 
said that if there is somebody distributing money, even the 
dead will get up and stretch out their hands. So when these 
foreigners start giving money, poor people run after them. 
If somebody is hungry, give him food, not money. Simi- 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 141 


larly, if he is in need of clothes, give him clothes. Indis- 
criminate distribution of money does more harm than good. 
People of this country should not run after money. Lead a 
respectable life. Maintain the dignity of human life. Honour 
and respect cannot be bought with money. 


Here is a small matter Swami wants to tell. The other 
day, a devotee came and told that since My cars had be- 
come old, he wanted to replace them with new cars. He 
brought the cars. Three days passed. I did not even look at 
him. What is the reason? I already have a sufficient num- 
ber of cars. I have no desire to move about in fancy big 
cars. I do not accept anything from anyone. When I was 
coming here, Srinivas came to Me and said, “That person 
is feeling miserable. Please accept the cars.” I told him, 
“Do not interfere. He can take back his cars. In fact, I am 
ready to give My own car. Rather, I will give you two cars; 
you and he can take one each.” Develop the spirit of sacri- 
fice and set an example before others. I have been practis- 
ing this since My childhood. If you follow the path shown 
by Me, you will become blessed. This path will lead you to 
liberation. It is liberation that is the goal of life. What is 
moksha (liberation)? Mohakshaya is moksha (giving up of 
attachment is liberation). You must reduce your attachment 
(moha). That is moksha. 


Love everyone. But do not trust everyone without dis- 
crimination. One who puts his trust wholly in others is headed 
for ruin. Love all, Serve all. But put trust in yourself. De- 
velop self-confidence. Give up worldly desires. Develop di- 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 142 


vine feelings and give up worldly feelings. This is the dharma 
(righteous path) of humanity. Students! You have been study- 
ing in Sai institutions. You have studied well and passed ex- 
aminations. Take to the right path. Develop good qualities. 
Love all, hate none. Love even those who bear hostility to- 
wards you. This is the characteristic of Sai. There are many 
who are hostile towards Me. Many ridicule or criticise Me. 
If they say it aloud, it is lost in air. If they do it internally, it 
returns to them. None of it will reach Me. Therefore, one 
should attach no importance to praise and abuse. See to it 
that love principle is installed firmly in you. This is what 
Mother Easwaramma practised and taught. 


Face the vicissitudes of life with confidence. I am 
never deterred by hardships or obstacles. When there is no 
defect in you, why should you have fear? Love even those 
who criticise you. This is the ideal that Swami expects when 
He says, “My life is My message”. If you lead your life 
strictly according to My ideal, you will rise to the same 
level. Therefore, develop good qualities and help those who 
are in distress. 


Good People Have A Sacred End 


Mother Easwaramma used to go to the house of 
Gogineni from Brindavan. On the day of her passing away 
also, she walked all the way to their house and came back. 
After coming back, she had a cup of coffee. She used to 
have paan (betel leaf). In fact, I Myself used to like paan in 
the early days. She was pounding the areca nut in a mortar 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 143 


and was eating it bit by bit. Suddenly she shouted, “Swami, 
Swami, Swami”’. I called back, saying, “I am coming, I am 
coming, I am coming:” She said, “Come quickly, come 
quickly.” As I came down, she caught hold of My hands 
and said, “You are capable of helping all the people of the 
world to any extent. But children need more help. You have 
to transform them. You need not make them scholars. Make 
them good and virtuous.” Saying this, she placed My hands 
on her eyes and breathed her last. She had anayasa maranam 
(peaceful death). What more can one desire in life than a 
glorious death? 


Bodies come and go. “Punarapi jananam puna-rapi 
maranam, Punarapi janani jathare sayanam” (man is 
caught up in the cycle of birth and death; time and again, 
he undergoes the agony of staying in his mother’s womb). 
Birth and death are natural to man. One need not worry 
over this matter. I called the driver. The body was placed in 
a van and sent to Prasanthi Nilayam. I sent Ramabrahmam 
with the body. He was a very good person. He performed 
all the work assigned to him personally. Ramabrahmam 
requested Me to go to Prasanthi Nilayam for the final rites. 
But I firmly told him, “This is a matter relating to the exter- 
nal world and I have no connection with it. I have seen her 
and blessed her here. So, you may take her body for the 
final rites to Prasanthi Nilayam:” Ramabrahmam carried 
out My instructions faithfully. Gokak and Bhagavantam 
came and said that the classes were cancelled. I asked them, 
why. They said, it was because of the demise of Swami’s 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 144 


mother. I said, ““What if she is dead? The boys are all alive 
and so the classes must go on:” Gokak was amazed. He 
announced that the classes would be held. Everyday I used 
to go to the classroom at the beginning of the class. The 
students were anxious whether Swami would come or not. 
I went to the classroom that day. As I entered, all the chil- 
dren started shedding tears. I asked, ““Why are you griev- 
ing? Whoever is born is bound to die one day or the other. 
So, there is nothing to grieve about. After that, the classes 
went on as per schedule. It is because of this self-confi- 
dence and courage that I have been able to make every- 
thing happen according to My resolve. 


The father of this body also had an easy death. I had 
selected some people for interview at Prasanthi Nilayam 
when he came there. I asked him why he had come there. 
He replied, “Swami, I have something to tell You.” I told 
him to wait until I finished the interview. But he said, it 
was an urgent matter. So, I called him and asked the reason 
for his coming. He took out some money from the knot of 
his Dhoti and told Me, “Swami, this is all the money I have. 
With this, You should perform my last rites on the 10th day 
in a proper manner.” I gently chided him, saying why he 
was talking about his death as if he knew all about it. He 
went back and bought four bags of rice for this purpose. 
Rice was very cheap those days. One could get a bagful for 
Rs. 20 or so. Besides rice, he bought some jaggery and 
other provisions. After reaching home, he played with his 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 145 


grandson for some time. Then he called his wife. Men never 
used to call their wives by their names those days. ‘Hey, 
hey’ was the way they used to address them. He told her, “I 
have just now seen Swami. I have no worries now.” He 
then asked her to get him some water to drink. As she gave 
him water, he breathed his last. 


Good people have a good death. What sort of death? 
Anayasa maranam (peaceful death). How was that possible 
for the parents of this body? They shared My sacredness 
and led a sacred life. I Myself chose My parents. My selec- 
tion is always correct. That is why My parents had such a 
blissful life. Every person must serve his parents. When 
they fall sick, you should serve them with total dedication. 
Service leads to liberation. “Jt is not through performing 
penance or going to places of pilgrimage or studying sa- 
cred texts that one is able to cross the ocean of worldly life. 
It is only through service to the good that you attain the 
ultimate goal of life.” (Sanskrit verse) Such a sacred end is 
possible only for people who have earned it in this way. 


Embodiments of Love! 


All of you who have gathered here have to take a 
pledge today. Live a good life. Be ready to help others. 
Love children, respect elders, respect all according to their 
status in society. If you live according to these principles, 
there is no better way of life. Imprint these principles firmly 
on your heart. Act in a manner so as to please your parents. 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 146 


Only then will your life find fulfilment. You are conduct- 
ing bhajans at various places and at different times. But 
mere singing of bhajans is not enough. Behaviour and con- 
duct are vital. 


Easwaramma Day, 6th May 2002, 
Brindavan, Bangalore 


10 


Service Activities For Unity In Society 


If you lack pure mind and good character, how do 
you expect Sai, the bestower of peace, love, 
happiness and prosperity, to appreciate you? How 
do you expect Prema Sai to treat you as His own? 


(Telugu Poem) 


UMAN life is one of compassion; time is sa- 
cred; t art is pure; and the mind is nectarous. Having 
been blessed with such a sacred human birth, what is man 
supposed to do? What is the foundation on which the man- 
sion of life is to be built? Every man aspires for peace and 
happiness. How can one lead a peaceful life? It is possible 
only when he puts human values into practice. Human val- 
ues need not be acquired from outside, they are latent in 
every man. If such values are forgotten how can man 
progress in life? In the first instance, man should enquire 
into the purpose of his birth. 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 148 


You Are Not Serving Others 


Human life is based on samata (equality), samaikyata 
(unity), saubhratrutvam (fraternity) and saujanyam (nobil- 
ity). They constitute the very foundation of the mansion of 
life. Life will be meaningless even if one of them is absent. 
Everyone must cultivate and safeguard these four virtues. 
First of all, man should recognise the meaning of human- 
ness. Truth fosters neeti (morality); righteousness confers 
khyati (reputation); thyaga (sacrifice) is the Jyoti (light) of 
life; manava jathi (human race) is the combination of these 
three — neeti, khyati and jyoti. But man today is neglecting 
the principles of truth, righteousness and sacrifice. He has to 
adhere to these principles not for the sake of society but for 
his own redemption. If you expect to be respected by all, 
you have to develop self-respect, which is the basis of hu- 
man life. One who lacks self-respect cannot command re- 
spect from others. First and foremost, man should respect 
others and share his love with others wholeheartedly. This is 
the primary duty of man. Man is not merely a vyashti jivi 
(individual), he is a samashti jivi (part and parcel of society). 
Vyashti relates to jivudu (individual), samashti relates to 
devudu (God). Man has to travel from the level of individual 
to the level of society. What is the path prescribed for this? 
Firstly, man has to recognise the common principle of jeevana 
Jyoti (light of life) that is present in all. The principle of 
samatvam (equality) can be experienced and practised only 
when man understands the principle of ekatvam (unity). The 
service activities that we undertake are meant to experience 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 149 


unity in society. It is a great mistake 1f you think that you are 
serving others. In fact, you should not consider anybody as 
‘other’, for all are the embodiments of divinity. But man is 
not making efforts to realise this truth. Hence, he is sub- 
jected to difficulties. Once man realises that God 1s all-per- 
vasive, he will be free from suffering. In order to get rid of 
suffering, man has to practise the principle of unity in soci- 
ety. Once he understands the principle of unity, he can attain 
the Cosmic principle. 


Give Up Body Attachment 


Every individual is endowed with a physical body. 
Nature is like a mirror. What you see in this mirror is only 
your reflection and nothing else. Today, man is leading a 
life of selfishness and self-interest. Selfishness is rampant 
in society. Dehabhimanam (body attachment) is on the rise 
and deshabhimanam (love for one’s motherland) is on the 
decline. Even spiritual aspirants and noble souls with pure 
hearts are unable to give up body attachment. So long as 
there 1s dehaabhimanam, man cannot develop 
daivaabhimanam (love for God). 


The body which is made up of five elements is weak 
and is bound to disintegrate. Though hundred years of life- 
span is prescribed, one cannot take it for granted. One may 
leave his mortal coil at any time, be it in childhood, youth 
or old age. Death is certain. Hence, before the body per- 
ishes, man should make efforts to know his true nature. 

(Telugu Poem) 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 150 


Body is given to you to know your true self. It is 
foolish to waste your time and energy in worldly pursuits. 
If you know your true self, you would have known every- 
thing else. 


Embodiments of Love! 


All that you see in the external world, from micro- 
cosm to macrocosm, is present in you. The mountains, 
oceans, cities, villages, etc., are present in your heart. All 
beings are in you. You are the basis of everything. Such 
being the case, what is it that you want to see in the exter- 
nal world? How foolish it is on your part to get carried 
away by the reflection outside, ignoring the reality within! 


Practise Human Values 


Know the human values in the first instance. The 
first among them is Truth. It is changeless and beyond time 
and space. There is nothing like American Truth, Russian 
Truth, Indian Truth or Pakistani Truth. Truth is one and the 
same for all countries at all times. You are the embodiment 
of Truth. Truth is God. So, make efforts to understand this 
Truth. Sathyam bruyaath, Priyam bhruyaath, Na bhruyaath 
sathyamapriyam (speak the Truth, speak pleasantly and do 
not speak unpalatable truth). Having forgotten such eternal 
principle of Truth, man is in search of ephemeral things. 
Adherence to Truth is neeti which is nothing but proper 
conduct. Sathyannasti paro dharmah (there is no dharma 
greater than adherence to Truth). Sathya and dharma to- 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 151 


gether will confer peace. One who adheres to Truth and 
righteousness will always remain peaceful. One need not 
search for peace outside. Where there is Truth, there is peace. 
Where there is peace, there is non-violence. 


We call the human values as Sathya, Dharma, Santhi, 
Prema and Ahimsa (Truth, righteousness, peace, love and 
non-violence). In fact, love is the fundamental basis for 
Truth and righteousness. Love is God, Truth is God, righ- 
teousness is God. One bereft of these principles is verily a 
living corpse. The five human values can be compared to 
five life principles (prana) present in us. If you do not speak 
truth, you would have lost one life principle. Unrighteous 
conduct amounts to losing the second life principle. Simi- 
larly, other life principles will be lost. Hence, all your ef- 
forts should be directed to safeguard these life principles, 
which are divine in nature. 


There is divinity in humanity. Understand this. To- 
day every field of human activity is polluted. Once man 
purifies his heart, he will find purity everywhere. The world 
outside is just a reflection of your heart. If you fill your 
heart with love, you will experience love everywhere. If 
there is hatred in your heart, the same is reflected outside. 
Whatever you see, hear and experience outside is only the 
reflection, reaction and resound of your inner being. All 
the good and bad that you come across in the external world 
are just your own reflections. So, do not point an accusing 
finger at others. The whole world depends on man’s 
behaviour. If man is good, the world will be. You think that 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 152 


there is profanity all around you. It is a mistaken notion. In 
fact, the profanity in you is reflected outside. If your feel- 
ings are demonic, you will find the same all around you. If 
your feelings are divine, you will find divinity everywhere. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Your heart is full of love. The yearning for God that 
emanates from your heart is love. Let truth and righteous- 
ness be reflected in your word and deed, respectively. The 
harmony of truth, righteousness and love will lead to peace. 
Your breathing process — Soham is reminding you of your 
reality 21,600 times a day. Of what use is your education if 
you are unable to remember the truth that is taught to you 
so many times day in and day out. You may listen to any 
number of sermons, study any number of sacred texts, visit 
any number of noble souls, but all these will prove futile if 
you forget the principle of truth that your inner voice 
teaches. 


Buddha renounced all the palatial comforts and took 
to sanyasa (renunciation). He wandered in the forests, lis- 
tened to the teachings of noble souls and studied holy texts. 
But none of these could give him satisfaction. Ultimately, 
he realised that his heart is the true holy text given by God 
and God is his true friend. He discarded all books and 
stopped visiting noble souls. He turned inward and enquired 
into the truth. Ignoring the holy text (heart) and forgetting 
the true friend (God), man is going hither and thither in 
search of peace. 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 153 


Firstly, make sacred use of the eyes given by God. 
Only then will your life be sanctified. He alone is a true hu- 
man being who has a good mind and whose behaviour is 
exemplary. All your spiritual pursuits will be of little conse- 
quence if your vision 1s sullied. Your nethra (eye) is the sastra 
(scripture) given by God. Understand this sastra and con- 
duct yourself accordingly. Once you have control over your 
vision, you will have control over your speech. Speak only 
truth, there is nothing greater than truth. Samyak drishti (pure 
vision) and samyak vak (pure speech) will lead to samyak 
sravanam (pure hearing) and samyak bhaavam (pure feel- 
ing). The youth in particular should exercise control over 
their vision. Manava (human being) becomes Madhava 
(God), once he understands the importance of human values 
and puts them into practice. The youth of today are the fu- 
ture emancipators of the country. So, they should develop 
steadiness of mind and self-confidence. 


Where there is confidence, there is love; 
Where there is love, there is Truth; 
Where there is Truth, there is peace; 
Where there is peace, there is bliss; 
Where there is bliss, there is God. 


Without confidence you can never attain divinity. Your 
confidence is your God. So, develop unwavering confidence 
in the self. Self-confidence and self-respect will lead to atmic 
bliss and the vision of the self. You are all seated in this mag- 
nificent hall with many supporting pillars. You are enjoying 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 154 


its beauty. Without a strong foundation this hall would not 
have come into existence. Likewise, self-confidence is the 
foundation for the mansion of life. Once you have self-con- 
fidence, you can raise the walls of self-satisfaction over which 
you can lay the roof of self-sacrifice and lead a life of self- 
realisation. Hence, lay the foundation of self-confidence 
strong and sturdy. 


Truth Is The Basis Of Every Culture 


The culture of Bharat proclaims Sathyam vada 
dharmam chara (speak truth, follow righteousness). Not 
only Indian culture, the culture of all countries proclaims 
the same truth. Truth is the basis of every culture. Do not 
give scope for any differences based on culture. The whole 
world is like a mansion and various countries are like dif- 
ferent rooms in it. So, do not divide humanity based on 
nationality. It is because of such division that humanness is 
on the decline. Sai devotees should not entertain any such 
differences. All should stand united. Names, forms and com- 
plexions may be different but humanity is one race. God is 
one. All human beings belong to one family. 


Cows are many, but milk is one. 
Beings are many, but indweller is one. 
Castes are many, but humanity is one. 
Flowers are many, but worship is one. 
Paths are many, but God is one. 


Hence, you should give up all the differences based 
on caste, religion and nationality and develop the spirit of 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 155 


love. Young men and women should work for the progress 
of the country. The country will prosper only when the 
youth develop sound character. Human life is based on char- 
acter. Today there are many who are heroes in precept and 
zeroes in practice. Your actions should be in harmony with 
your words. Develop sacred feelings. Only then can you 
perform sacred activities. Devotion does not mean merely 
performing rituals like worship. Any work done with pure 
and selfless love is devotion. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Right from this day, let your lives be suffused with 
love. Let your hands undertake deeds that are beneficial to 
society at large. Let your thoughts be centred on the prin- 
ciple of love. You should rise from the level of vyashti (in- 
dividual) to samashti (society) and ultimately merge in 
parameshti (God). In this physical and ephemeral world, 
wherever you see there is only restlessness. At times your 
physical body may be subjected to diseases. You should 
not be unduly perturbed. Body comes and goes. 


This body is a storehouse of dirt, and prone to dis- 
eases; it cannot cross the ocean of Samsara. Oh mind! Do 
not be under the delusion that body is permanent. Instead 
take refuge at the Divine Lotus Feet. (Telugu Poem) 


Greatness Lies In Practice, Not Preaching 


One should not be unduly attached to the physical 
body, but it has to be taken care of properly. Sometimes 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 156 


you are afflicted with diseases because of negligence on 
your part. I take the sufferings of devotees because of My 
love for them. It disappears in the same way as it appears. 
Here is a small example. A young boy was suffering a great 
deal because of mumps (swollen cheek). The doctor said 
that it would take a minimum of 20 to 25 days to get cured. 
He was crying bitterly unable to bear the severe pain. I 
called him inside and consoled him saying, “When Swami 
is with you, why do you cry?” I materialised a sweet for 
him and made him eat. I took his pain upon Myself. For 
any other person, the pain would have been unbearable. 
Srinivasan was very worried about conducting this confer- 
ence, when Swami was undergoing so much pain. As the 
swelling was between the two jaws, it was not possible to 
eat or speak. What does it matter if the body is not given 
food for a few days? Hence, I did not care for it. I told the 
organisers to go ahead with the conference. He asked, 
“Swami, how are you going to deliver the inaugural ad- 
dress?” I said, “I feel the pain if I think that this is My 
body. But this is not My body, it is yours.” All your bodies 
are Mine. Hence, I take your suffering upon Myself. That 
is My duty. This is not My body, so I do not care for it. Not 
only now, at any point of time, I do not care for any suffer- 
ing. I practise whatever I preach. That is why I say, My life 
is My message. It is not possible for all to understand and 
realise My Divinity. I do not want to say it in public. I do 
not indulge in advertisement. All that is Mine is yours and 
vice-versa. I have no desires at all. All My desires are meant 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 157 


to give you happiness. Greatness does not lie in preaching, 
it lies in practice. A true acharya (preceptor) is one who 
practises and then preaches. That is what I am doing. 


Youngsters — Men and Women! 


Understand your true nature. Follow the path of 
Truth. Sathyam (Truth) is the name of this body. Develop 
this Truth in you. Truth is God, Love is God; live in love. 
When you follow the path of truth and love, you will cer- 
tainly attain bliss. Some people put the blame on Me ignor- 
ing their own defects. It is a great mistake. There are no 
defects in Me whatsoever. I am like a pure mirror. There is 
no scope for even a trace of impurity in Me. You see the 
reflection of your own feelings in Me. Purify your hearts. 
Only then can you understand the truth. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Today we have inaugurated this Conference. Many 
more programmes are to follow. Hence, I bring My dis- 
course to a close in order to give sufficient time for other 
programmes. I am prepared to spend any length of time to 
give you necessary guidelines. 


International Seva Conferences Inaugural 
Address, 21-7-2002, Prasanthi Nilayam 


11 


Shun Desires And Attain Divine Proximity 
Embodiments of Love! 


HE one who realises that it is the same atma 

that dwells in him and in all other living beings, 
will experience and enjoy divine proximity always. He may 
be a renunciant or a householder or a celibate or one who is 
attached to the world; one who realises the atmic principle 
leads his life with the firm conviction that daiva sannidhi 
(divine proximity) is his pennidhi (greatest wealth). What 
is the primary duty of man? He should make efforts to un- 
derstand the teaching of the Gita, Sarvatah panipadam tat 
sarvathokshi siromukham, Sarvatah sruthimalloke 
sarvamavruthya thishthati (with hands, feet, eyes, heads, 
mouth and ears pervading everything, He permeates the 
entire universe). You should realise the truth that the prin- 
ciple of atma that is present in all beings is one and the 
same. As man is unable to understand his true nature, he is 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 160 


facing all kinds of problems in life. He is deluded by the 
thinking that he is the body. Consequently, he is forgetting 
his true Self and is wasting his time and energy. 


The Message Of SAI 


Today man gives topmost priority to his individual 
progress. Then he turns his attention toward society. Lastly, 
he enters the path of spirituality. This is a grave mistake. It is 
because of this that he is unable to realise the truth and faces 
hardships. What is the message of SAI? ‘S’ stands for Spiri- 
tuality, ‘A’ for Association and ‘I’ for Individual. It means 
that you must give first priority to spirituality, next to society 
(association) and only lastly to individual interest. But man 
follows the reverse order; he holds his individual interest 
above social responsibilities and gives last priority to spiri- 
tuality. Consequently, he is distancing himself from God. In 
this manner, he is wasting his time. Time is precious. In fact, 
Time is God. 


In the first instance, man should take to the path of 
spirituality and then serve society, understanding the prin- 
ciple of unity. Only then will there be progress at the indi- 
vidual level. On the other hand, if you concentrate on the 
individual level in the first instance, you will never be able 
to understand the spiritual aspect. Personages like 
Hiranyaksha, Hiranyakasipu and Kamsa were centred on 
their individual interests ignoring wholly the spiritual as- 
pect. Physically and intellectually they were mighty. 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 161 


Hiranyakasipu was a great scientist. But what is the use of 
scientific knowledge which cannot give you everlasting 
bliss? Hiranyaksha and Hiranya-kasipu filled their hearts 
with negative feelings. They entertained worldly desires 
which were ephemeral and negative in nature. The modern 
scientists have reached the moon, but Hiranyakasipu and 
Hiranyaksha could reach even the Sun. In spite of their 
mighty powers and scientific knowledge, they met their 
doom because of their materialistic attitude. They could 
not experience divinity. Likewise, man is also putting his 
powers and knowledge to misuse. He is not focusing his 
attention on his real goal. Manava (human being) is en- 
dowed with immense power. That is why the Upanishads 
exhort man thus: Uthishtha, jagratha, prapya 
varanibodhata (arise, awake, stop not till you obtain full 
understanding). “O simpleton, wake up from this slumber 
of ignorance. Turn your vision towards the effulgence of 
prajnana. Get rid of thamasic quality. Give up worldly de- 
sires. Understand the ephemeral nature of the world.” 
Hiranyakasipu and Hiranyaksha had all powers at their 
command, yet they could not attain divine proximity. They 
investigated into the mysteries of creation and could even 
alter the planetary positions. But they could not understand 
even a small fraction of the principle of divinity. But 
Hiranyakasipu’s son, young Prahlada had realised the di- 
vine principle. Once Hiranyakasipu asked Prahlada what 
he had learnt from his preceptors. Prahlada replied, “The 
teachers have taught me many things. I have learnt about 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 162 


the four objectives of life, dharma, artha, kama and moksha. 
In fact, Oh father! I have learnt the very essence of educa- 
tion.” Hiranyakasipu was overjoyed to hear all these. He 
said, “Oh son! Let me have the pleasure of listening to what 
you have learnt from your teachers.” Prahlada said, “I have 
realised the truth that God is all-pervasive. Wherever I look, 
I find Him there.” Hiranyakasipu became furious on hear- 
ing this. He pushed him from his lap and roared, “You said 
that your teachers have taught you many things. Is this what 
you have learnt? There are many things to be learnt regard- 
ing artha and kama (wealth and desire) which are very 
important for us. But you have ignored them and are talk- 
ing about God. 


Unflinching Faith Of Prahlada 


Where is God?” Prahlada very calmly replied, ““Fa- 
ther, never doubt that God is here and is not there. In fact, 
He is present wherever you search for Him.” (Telugu Poem) 
Hiranyakasipu’s ego was pricked. “How dare this young 
fellow try to teach me a lesson?”, he thought to himself. “If 
God 1s all-pervasive, can you show Him in this pillar?”, he 
challenged Prahlada. “Yes, I can”, pat came the answer. 
Such was his faith and devotion. Hiranyakasipu at once hit 
the pillar with a mace, and lo! God emerged from it. What 
is the inner meaning of this incident? Man can have the 
vision of God only when he breaks the shackles of body 
attachment. Today man is immersed in ignorance in spite 
of his learning. 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 163 


You can make God appear before you when you have 
unwavering faith and devotion coupled with a steady and 
pure heart. Here is an example. You curdle the milk and 
extract butter out of it, and then heat it to get ghee. If there 
is water content in the butter, it will emit some unpleasant 
smell as you heat it. The smell will gradually diminish as 
you continue to heat it. So long as there is water in the 
butter, you cannot escape from the unpleasant smell. The 
water has to completely evaporate. Butter represents the 
individual nature. The evil tendencies in you can be com- 
pared to unpleasant smell. When you make efforts to melt 
‘butter’ completely, the ‘unpleasant smell’ will gradually 
subside. When man performs sadhana the disagreeable 
smell of evil propensities emanate from him during the pro- 
cess. He should continue with his sadhana and overcome 
those evil tendencies. As he performs sadhana more and 
more, all evil tendencies in him will evaporate like water. 
Ultimately, his sadhana will yield the desired result just 
like pure ghee is obtained on heating butter. 


Every man is endowed with body, mind, intellect and 
Chittha (Will). On being questioned by Hiranyakasipu, 
Prahlada replied, “Father, I am neither the body nor the 
mind nor the intellect nor the inner instrument. I am the 
embodiment of atma.” One will remain like pure butter if 
one gets rid of ego, does not develop attachment to the body 
and does not get deluded by the vagaries of the mind. If the 
butter is not free from the water of worldly desires, it will 
start emitting foul smell. So long as there are worldly de- 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 164 


sires in the mind, one cannot escape from the foul smell. 
This was the fate of Hiranyaksha and Hiranyakasipu. 


Even today there are many who do bhajans and give 
lectures on spiritual matters but are unable to get rid of the 
foul smell of worldly desires. Until and unless they give up 
the worldly desires, they cannot attain the state of purity. 
They are accustomed to a materialistic life. They do bhajans, 
meditation, etc., with a view to fulfil their worldly aspira- 
tions. They can be compared to butter mixed up with wa- 
ter. In the spiritual path, one should not give scope for the 
foul smell of worldly desires. Some people call themselves 
devotees but are turning wicked because of their desires. 
Can such people be called devotees? No. No. If they are 
really devotees, how is it that they emit bad odour? Their 
body, mind, intellect and also their actions are tainted with 
impurity. 


Devotees! 


Firstly, you should enquire into the reason for the 
foul smell that is emanating from you. Your mind should 
remain steady and unwavering through the vicissitudes of 
life. You should have strong faith. Only then can you lead a 
peaceful life. Prahlada was subjected to various kinds of 
punishments but his faith remained as steady as a rock. His 
love for God never diminished a bit. He considered Love 
for God as his very life-breath. But the devotees today stand 
in stark contrast to Prahlada. Their faith is so shaky that 
their mind is disturbed by the slightest trouble. They start 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 165 


entertaining doubts and lose their faith altogether. Losing 
viswasa (faith) amounts to losing swasa (life-breath) itself. 
Come what may, one should continue his sadhana with 
unflinching faith. This is the sign of true devotion. Devo- 
tion does not constitute merely singing of bhajans, perform- 
ing rituals and chanting the divine name. You should firmly 
install divinity in your heart. You should take care that 
worldly desires find no place in your mind. Burn to ashes 
all desires completely in the fire of wisdom. Even if a trace 
of worldliness is left in you, it will multiply manifold and 
lead you astray. In order to free yourself from bad deeds 
and bad habits, make sure that you do not have even a shred 
of desire in you. But due to the impact of Kali Age, even 
devotees are filling their hearts with desires. Desires can 
be compared to foul-smelling pigs. One cannot stand the 
stink of a pig even when it is at a distance. Such being the 
case, how is it that man is giving room to so many ‘pigs’ in 
his heart? 


Fill Your Heart With Virtues 
Embodiments of Love! 


Truly speaking, man is very fortunate; but he is 
haunted by the misfortune of worldly desires. He is unable 
to earn the deservedness to get closer to God. He goes 
through many books and gives lectures, but what is the use? 
His actions do not match his words. He tries to deceive 
others with his speeches. In fact, he is deceiving himself. 
It is enough if he practises at least a fraction of what he 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 166 


preaches. His heart is filled with untruth. His deeds are 
unrighteous. Hence, he is unable to experience peace. Dis- 
tance yourself from untruth and unrighteousness. The Vedas 
exhort man, Sathyam vada, Dharmam chara (speak Truth, 
practise Righteousness). Truth is God. If you forget truth, 
who can protect you? 


Embodiments of Love! 


You may be performing a number of spiritual prac- 
tices, but do not feel proud of them. Firstly, purify your 
heart. Do not give scope for the foul smell of worldly de- 
sires. Fill your heart with the fragrance of virtues. Do not 
pay heed to the words of wicked people whose only job is 
to poison the minds of others. You do not get much benefit 
by merely reading books or listening to discourses. First of 
all, develop sraddha (steadfastness) and bhakti (devotion) 
in you. Sraddhavan Labhate Jnanam (with faith, wisdom 
iS won). 


Embodiments of Love! 


What is the sadhana that you are supposed to under- 
take? Make your hearts pure. Thiruthonda Alwar once said, 
“If one lacks purity of heart, one does not even deserve to 
chant the Divine Name of Rama.” What is the use of chant- 
ing the divine name with polluted mind? Today the world 
is afflicted with all types of pollution. Man’s thoughts, words 
and deeds are also polluted. How can such a person de- 
velop Bhakti? Today people are wearing the mask of Bhakti 
and trying to cheat others. Do not deceive others. Help ever, 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 167 


hurt never. This is the essence of the eighteen Puranas. 
Deceiving others amounts to deceiving yourself. 


Do Not Misuse The Name of Sai 


In the world, the so-called devotees have increased 
in number. Now I feel the time is ripe to tell you a few 
important things. The feelings that spring in your heart must 
be as pure as the waters of the Ganga where it springs. 
Words do not suffice, what is needed is action. There should 
be unity of thought, word and deed. He is a wicked person 
whose thoughts, words and deeds are at variance. The proper 
study of mankind is man. Today we find unity of thought, 
word and deed only in acts of untruth, unrighteousness 
and violence. Man who 1s supposed to have noble thoughts 
and perform meritorious deeds is doing just the opposite. 


There are some people who are doing business in 
the Name of Sai. They are cheating others, pretending to be 
devotees of Sai. J do not approve of such behaviour. They 
are not devotees at all. They are going to different parts of 
the country and also abroad to make money in the name of 
Sai. It is a big crime. I do not ask for even a single paisa 
from others. I never approve of such business. Whoever it 
may be, if somebody approaches you with such a crass mo- 
tive, tell him to get out at once. Do not allow business to 
enter the field of spirituality. One may do what one likes 
for the maintenance of one’s family, but nobody should do 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 168 


business using Sai’s name. Unfortunately, such activity is 
on the increase. In many villages, we find people misusing 
Sai’s name for their selfish gains. This is happening even 
in many other countries like America, England, Japan, Ger- 
many, Singapore, Malaysia. Do not associate yourself with 
such wicked people. Keep your hearts pure and sacred. Oth- 
erwise, you are equal to a living corpse. Such people should 
not be respected. Better you perform their obituary rites! 


You should pray to God with sacred feelings. When 
you entertain worldly desires, you will be moving away 
from divinity. 


Embodiments of Love! 


You are coming here with all devotion and sincerity. 
Do not get deceived by people who do business in the name 
of devotion. In many places, we find people indulging in 
such mean practices. Maintain safe distance from them. 
Tyaja durjana samsargam; Bhaja sadhu samagamam; Kuru 
punyam ahorathram (run away from bad company; join 
good company and perform meritorious deeds day and 
night). You may even live in the company of snakes, but 
should not tolerate the company of such evil-minded people. 
We are undertaking so many social welfare activities, but I 
have never asked anybody even for a paisa. You are all 
aware of this. I do not involve Myself in money matters. 
But people today consider money as God. How can such 
people be called devotees? I told you earlier about this. I 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 169 


have started a service programme to look after children who 
do not have parents. One lakh rupees would be deposited 
in their name, which will take care of their needs. I have 
not asked anybody for any help in this regard. But today 
some people are collecting money saying that they would 
donate the amount to Swami for this purpose. Some others 
are proclaiming that they have taken up the responsibility 
of looking after the children. Can there be a worse sin than 
this? All such people are betrayers of God. Better they beg 
in the streets, than use My name to collect money. 


This morning a few old students came to Me with a 
request. You all know C. Srinivas from Bangalore. He com- 
pleted his education in our Institute and served as Warden 
of our Hostel for some time. He did not want to take up any 
job outside because he wanted to serve Swami. He always 
involves himself with such activities which will please 
Swami. He is looking after our Hospital at Bangalore. He 
said, “Nowhere else, education and medical care of such 
high standards are provided free of cost to all. You have 
given us free education and taken care of us with so much 
love and care. We want to express our gratitude to Swami 
by serving Him in our own humble way.” He brought a 
plan with him. He wants to establish schools in villages 
where there are no schools. He wanted Swami to commence 
the project today itself. I told him not to hurry. Youngsters 
today want to do things fast. That is not the right attitude. 
Start early, drive slowly and reach safely. Hence, I told him 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 170 


to go slow. But he said, “Swami, many of our old students 
are here. Is it not our duty to express gratitude to You for 
all that you have done to us?” He prayed that Swami should 
make an announcement in this regard. I agreed. I will never 
say “no” to good deeds. Those who want to undertake such 
sacred tasks should take up the responsibility and discharge 
it diligently. Only then will the old students would have 
sanctified their lives. In Chennai and Hyderabad, there are 
many of our old students who are eager to serve Swami. 
But in some circumstances, they have to obey the com- 
mands of elders. If the elders pursue the wrong path, the 
youngsters will also do the same. What to speak of the fate 
of our Organisations at Chennai and Hyderabad! I told them 
to select a suitable piece of land and that I would construct 
the building. But they lack such devotion and sincerity. They 
only pretend to have devotion and sincerity. Such insincere 
behaviour is not good for them. Many devotees there are 
put to inconvenience. The youngsters want to do many 
things. But what can they do without the support of elders? 
The elders neither take the initiative nor do they allow the 
youngsters to act on their own. Swami does not require any 
shrines. Swami is not interested in real estate. All that Swami 
wants is you should serve the society with bliss and with- 
out selfishness. If the elders do not want to accept your 
suggestion, disregard it. That is their fate. You, the youth 
make a sincere effort. Help the helpless. Feed the hungry. 
Do not go about seeking other people’s help. If any help is 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 171 


needed, come to Me. Swami shall provide without hesita- 
tion. Do not collect a single paisa as donation. There are 
those who donate a hundred rupees and make a thousand 
rupees worth of self-glorification out of it. Swami is not 
interested in such activities. When Swami is standing by 
your side like a mountain, why should you seek any assis- 
tance from anybody? Do not subserve anybody. They will 
merely preach high philosophy, which is vainglorious. It is 
not only in India that such a situation prevails. All over the 
world, it is the same. Whether you go to England, Japan or 
Germany, it is the same sort of business that is going on. 
From everywhere, it is the same kind of news of such trans- 
actions; Swami receives a lot of such information. I feel all 
this as nuisance. This is not the kind of information that 
Swami wants to hear. What Swami desires most is to hear 
that all are well and are enjoying happiness and bliss. Mar- 
keting with Swami’s name is highly disgusting and dis- 
tressful. There can be no commerce in matters of devotion. 
Even the salty ocean may yield drinkable water, but this 
kind of devotion is worthless. It is already late. Swami never 
solicits donations from anybody nor He has agents for 
propagating His Message. I do not have any association 
whatsoever with these deceitful persons. Swami needs no 
material wealth. The only need of Swami is genuine love. 
Give love and take back love. That is the only exchange. 
With that love, fulfil your life. There is no devotion greater 
than love. Any little service performed with love is enough. 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 172 


If you give a glass of water to a thirsty person with genuine 
love, it is more than enough. Almost 90 per cent of the so- 
called devotees are, in fact, deceitful. Earlier, it was quite 
different; devotees were few, but they were genuine. Nowa- 
days, there are too many self-seeking cheats masquerading 
as devotees. First thing in the morning, they adorn their 
forehead with vibhuti, wrap a scarf round their neck and 
roam about freely in the guise of devotees. Even the stray 
dogs scrounging around for something to eat are better than 
such fake devotees! 


Your Heart Only Need Be My Temple 
Embodiments of Love! 


Develop love in you. Swami needs no temples or 
rest houses. The temple of your heart is more than enough. 
Swami shall stay happily therein. The news that I get from 
those so-called temples is highly distressing to Me. The 
amount of anguish that I undergo because of these is be- 
yond your imagination. Do not do bad acts in the name of 
God. If you are unable to do good, at least keep quiet and 
stay out. There is no need for you to make all kinds of wild 
promises. Enjoy the bliss of divinity in silence and love. 
As people from all over the globe are assembled here, I 
have had to say these harsh words. Do not have any deal- 
ings with people who are doing commercial transactions in 
the name of Sai. Send them packing with a namaskar. If 
you need anything, ask Me. I have never deceived or let 
down anybody nor will I ever do so. Untruth will not be 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 173 


uttered by Me. My wish is that no such undesirable act 
should be perpetrated on any of the genuine devotees. Ear- 
lier, when I visited Mumbai, I used to find people doing 
bhajans and nagar sankirtan all over, unmindful of place 
or time even including the Airport. Today, you can hardly 
see anyone even chanting the Name in public anywhere. 
Of course, there are quite a few devotees. But they are shy 
of engaging in namasmarana. Earlier, I have been travel- 
ling around various cities like Chennai, Mumbai, 
Hyderabad, etc. But these days, I have no inclination to go 
anywhere. All these places have become overcrowded with 
such wicked people. It is of foremost importance for us to 
get rid of them and encourage the godly. God never aban- 
dons anybody. All are His. God does not make any unfair 
discrimination. It is only people who have feeling of ha- 
tred; God has no hatred in Him. God is pure embodiment 
of divine love only. All of you try to acquire such love in 
your hearts. Tomorrow, in the Valedictory function, I shall 
tell you more about the dos and don’ts that you have to 
adopt in your activities. I am not interested in seeing this 
Hall packed to its capacity. I want only quality, not quan- 
tity. One teaspoonful of cow’s milk is better than barrels of 
donkey’s milk. It is enough if we have a handful of people 
with noble hearts. The State Presidents and Trust Conven- 
ers should take necessary steps in the right direction or it is 
better that they resign. We will ourselves take up the re- 
sponsibility. The All India President of Sai Organisations 
should deal firmly with such people. He should relieve them 
of their responsibilities immediately. I am deeply anguished 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 174 


over the current state of affairs in our Organisation. Though 
this feeling has been there in Me for quite some time, I 
have been waiting for a suitable opportunity to express it. 
Since so many of you from various parts of the world have 
gathered here today, I felt this is the most opportune time 
to express My feelings. 


My Love Made Me Speak So 
Embodiments of Love! 


Help ever, hurt never. Eschew evil tendencies. Be- 
ing members of Sathya Sai Organisations, you should fol- 
low the path of truth which is eternal. Some people pretend 
to be humble devotees so long as they are within the por- 
tals of Prasanthi Nilayam. Once they go out of its precincts, 
they get back to their old ways. Such evil traits should be 
burnt to ashes. Develop godly feelings in you. God is ever 
ready to fulfil your prayer. Never entertain doubts in this 
regard. God is always in you, with you, around you, above 
you and below you. God will never be away from you. So, 
develop faith in God. 


Embodiments of Love! 


I have spoken to you in this manner only out of My 
immense love for you. Understand what has been conveyed 
to you and explain to your fellow devotees. Devotion has 
to be cultivated in a silent and sincere manner. Do not spoil 
your lives by resorting to untruthful ways. sathyam bruyath 
(speak the truth). Truth is God. Hence, lead a truthful life 
and ultimately merge in truth. 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 175 


Tomorrow, bring to Me all your doubts and I shall clarify 
them. First of all, keep away from bad company. I am not 
asking you to work for My sake. I do not want anything for 
Myself from you. I do all My work Myself. I do not seek 
others’ help. If only I Will it, the whole world will help Me. 
So, you help yourself, serve the society and mould your lives 
into ideal ones. 


Here Swami sang the Bhajan, “Hari Bhajan Bina 
...” and continued His discourse. 


Suffering Dissolves In My Love 
Embodiments of Love! 


For the last four days, many devotees are very much 
worried that Swami is suffering because of the pain He has 
taken upon Himself. Understand that Swami has no pain at all 
because He has taken it upon Himself out of His love. How 
can I have pain when I have alleviated the suffering of My 
devotee? However, there are certain rules and regulations to 
be observed in this regard. I have taken it from somebody. 
Hence, I have to put up with this for as many days as the 
person would have suffered in the normal course. I have no 
difficulty whatsoever. If I were really suffering due to pain, 
would it be possible for Me to speak to you at this length? I 
have no suffering, it has dissolved in My love. All should be 
happy, blissful and comfortable. This is what I desire. Do not 
be worried over this matter. I have no suffering. In fact, I am 
ready to accept all your sufferings. Be happy always. 


International Seva Conference, 22-7-2002, 
Prasanthi Nilayam 


12 


Keep Spirituality As First Goal 


In spite of acquiring great wealth, 
Peace eludes man; 
People forget to recognise humanness; 
This is the Truth revealed by Sai. 


HAT man has to aspire for today is not 

happiness. It is not sorrow either. In fact, hap- 
piness and sorrow are only transitory in nature. Man’s duty 
is to realise divinity in the unity of happiness and sorrow. 
Even while you feel elated at the prospect of happiness, 
you will encounter sorrow. Similarly even while you feel 
depressed on account of sorrow, happiness will beckon you. 
Since ancient times, several great rishis made efforts to rise 
above the feelings of happiness and sorrow. They recognised 
the fact that it was only in times of sorrow that the divine 
nature in a human being manifested. More than happiness, 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 178 


it is sorrow that is helpful to man in several ways. “Na 
sukhaath labhathe sukham” (happiness does not come out 
of happiness). It is only from sorrow, that happiness springs. 
The main source of happiness in man is sorrow. Just as we 
welcome happiness, we must welcome sorrow also. 


Acquire The Wealth Of Love 


Not only in India, but in all countires of the world, 
children and youth have an important role to play. Money 
is quantitatively more than the materials it can buy. If there 
is real wealth, we can achieve anything material. Today 
man is wasting his life in the pursuit of mere material wealth. 
First and foremost, the wealth that man has to acquire is 
the wealth of Love. With the wealth of Love, everything 
else can be acquired. Several issues were being discussed 
in this conference for the last three days by the delegates 
comprising youth, the middle-aged and old people. What 
is the outcome of these discussions? Whatever be the texts 
studied and sadhanas undertaken by man, everything goes 
waste, if man does not cultivate the feeling of love in his 
heart. Today, what man has to recognise and realise is the 
principle of Love. That is true devotion. In the world to- 
day, parents, children and even wife, everybody is running 
after material wealth. Scarcely anyone wishes to acquire 
steady, selfless and divine love. God’s love cannot be ac- 
quired with wealth, education, or the various sadhanas we 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 179 


undertake; it is only by offering pure, unconditional and un- 
selfish love for love’s sake can one achieve divinity. People 
undergo so many difficulties today, not realising the funda- 
mental nature of this pure love. They are concerned with 
only the worldly and physical aspect of love. None can at- 
tain divinity by any method, except through love. If divin- 
ity is attained, everything is attained; if divinity is not at- 
tained, everything else is a waste. But man makes no effort 
to realise this truth. Assuming that material wealth is the 
foremost to be acquired, they are making several kinds of 
effort to acquire it. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Strive to acquire Love; try to achieve Love. Love is 
your real property. Realise this truth. There is no other qual- 
ity greater and valuable than Love. Even if some such qual- 
ity exists, it is of no real use for the goal of life. Therefore try 
to recognise the love manifest in every human being. It is 
only then, you would have realised your own true nature. 
All the Indian Vedantic texts exhort one to realise one’s real 
nature. You are not the body. You are not the mind. You are 
not the intellect. You have to achieve that, from which all 
these have emanated. Suppose you want ghee. What is its 
source? Milk. From milk comes curd, from curd comes but- 
ter and from butter comes ghee. Therefore, if you go to the 
source itself, namely milk, you can be happy. 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 180 


Contemplation On Soham Is Real Sadhana 
Embodiments of Love! 


You are not the body, mind, intellect, senses or 
antahkarana — you are verily the source for all these. There- 
fore, you should not waste your time in the pursuit of all 
sorts of material possessions. 


Today, the members of Sri Sathya Sai Organi-sation 
are undertaking several types of sadhana. But are they real 
sadhanas or illusory? No, no; they are not real sadhanas. 
They appear to be real for some time and later on they are 
given up. You start doing japa as a sadhana and continue 
it for some time. Later, you give up japa and enter into 
dhyana. Even this dhyana is only till you achieve your ob- 
ject of dhyana. When once it is achieved, it loses its pur- 
pose. Thus, all the sadhanas you undertake are only tem- 
porary. It should not be our aim and endeavour to achieve 
temporary result by doing temporary sadhanas. We must try 
to achieve that which is permanent, true, eternal, pure and 
of lasting happiness. “Sarvadaa sarvakaaleshu sarvathra 
Harichinthanam”’. We must always, at all times and under 
at all circumstances spend our time in constant contempla- 
tion of God. This should become the very breath of our life 
and as natural as we inhale and exhale. This is “soham 
that-thwa”. This constant contemplation on the soham that- 
thwa is the real sadhana. Wherefrom does this “soham” 
come? It comes from the enquiry “koham” (who am I?) 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 181 


The result of this enquiry is “soham”. It is only when you 
realise this eternal truth, your sadhana will fructify. 


Today, we are building the mansion of our life on a 
water bubble. We do not know at what moment it will 
burst. Human nature should rest upon the eternal truth, not 
on a momentary thing like the water bubble. Human life is 
becoming more and more uncertain today. Adi Sankara 
described the same point in one of his famous Bhajagovinda 
slokas thus: 


“Maa kuru dhana jana yavvana garvam 
Harathi nimeshaat kaalassarvam” 


(Oh! Man! Do not take pride in wealth, family, friends 
and youthful vigour; time will destroy everything in a trice.) 


God Is In You, With You 


Nothing is permanent in this world. Therefore, why 
should we rely on such impermanent things? Only atma is 
eternal. This is also referred to as Brahman. Brahman is 
divinity. This Brahma thatthwa is also called “Brihat’. The 
atma thatthwa that has emanated from this “Brihat’ is the 
real “Aham’’. This is true and eternal. We must, therefore, 
make an effort to realise such a true and eternal aham 
thatthwa. These three terms appear to be different; but, in 
fact, the inner meaning of all these three is one and the 
same. This pure and unsullied Brahma thatthwa is con- 
stantly with us, whether in the waking state or in the dream 


Sathya Sai Sp: 182 


state or in the deep sleep state. That Brahman is divinity in 
human form. And such a divinity is in you, right now. In 
fact, you are verily that Brahma thatthwa and none else. 
Therefore, it is futile to seek God in some distant place. 
God is in you, with you, above you, below you and every- 
where. Why should you seek such an omnipresent divinity 
elsewhere? 


Man, today, is wasting his precious life in the pursuit 
of physical, worldly and artificial desires. Man’s life today 
is full of selfishness and self-interest. These two, together, 
are destroying the human nature. Some people question, 
“How can we live in this world without self-interest?” But, 
let Me tell you, this is not the right way of leading a purpose- 
ful life. You are deluded to think that you are helping and 
serving society. No, you are in fact hurting the society by 
your self-interest. I told you the other day in My discourse 
that spirituality should come first, then society and then in- 
dividual. The unity of these three is SAI. Human beings 
must, therefore, keep spirituality as their first goal. It is only 
when this goal is pursued, society becomes nearer. When 
you reach the goal of society, then the enquiry should begin 
“Who am I?” It is only when you recognise who you are, 
you will be able to understand society. When you thus un- 
derstand society, you will be able to realise the divinity in 
the form of society. You first try to understand your own 
nature. 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 183 


Food Must Contribute To Spiritual Development 
Embodiments of Love! 


You are not able to understand spirituality properly. 
You require, no doubt, food for the body, in the first in- 
stance. But, you must ensure that you take food that con- 
tributes to your spiritual development. Those who wish to 
attain divinity, should never touch impurity. You should 
always take pure and sathwic food like vegetables, green 
leafy vegetables, etc. You should never consume impure 
items like egg, meat, etc. Also, you keep away completely 
from intoxicating drinks and drugs. By consuming such 
items, all your sense organs will be paralysed. Alcohol is 
not at all conducive to spiritual sadhana. In spiritual 
sadhana one has to attain ecstatic level by natural process, 
not by artificial methods like drugs and alchohol. All that 
is related to divinity comes by a natural process. That is 
what Sage Narada emphasised by declaring “Thriptho 
bhavathi, Maththo bhavathi” (become completely fulfilled, 
ecstatic, etc.). We must immerse in natural divine intoxica- 
tion, not artificial intoxication induced by drugs and alco- 
hol. Human nature transforms itself into demonic nature 
by consuming meat and intoxicating drinks. Certain types 
of food and medicines contain ingredients causing intoxi- 
cation. Keep away from such things. Even if they are 
medicines, we should not take. Under no circumstances 
should you consume intoxicating food and medicines. 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 184 


Embodiments of Love! 


You are undertaking a lot of sadhana. Several people 
take milk and curd, assuming that they come under sathwic 
food. Strictly speaking, they are not totally sathwic. There 
are some intoxicating ingredients even in those food items. 
Therefore, we must consume them in limited quantities. 
All the food we take must conform to certain timings, stan- 
dards and limits. When we feel hungry, we should not eat 
to our fill. We must stop eating while we still feel that we 
can eat more. If we eat bellyful, the thamoguna (sloth and 
slumber) sets in. We should never give scope to this 
thamoguna. You are all doing sadhana. But some mis- 
takes are creeping in this sadhana, knowingly or unknow- 
ingly. You sit for dhyana (meditation). You think achiev- 
ing concentration is meditation. No, concentration is not 
meditation. In our daily life, we do several things with con- 
centration. But, they do not constitute meditation. Some 
people think steady sitting is sadhana and it is great. This 
is not correct. It is possible that during meditation, our body 
moves and mind wavers. But, it is only from that wavering 
mind we should develop an unwavering and steady mind. 
That is the real dhyana (meditation). We must develop a 
firm conviction that we are not the impermanent body, but 
we are the true and eternal atma thatthwa. It is only when 
you attain that stage in dhyana, it becomes the real dhyana. 
You should not begin your sadhana with the feeling that 
God is somewhere in a distant place and that you wish to 
install Him in the temple of your heart. First and foremost, 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 185 


develop a firm conviction that divinity lies in you. You 
must realise your own divine nature. Not only that, you 
must make others also realise that you are divine. Today, 
all our sadhanas are like the swords used in a drama on the 
stage. They are useful only for the purpose of acting, not 
in real life. We must gradually become free from our illu- 
sion. There are several types of dhyana like, sankalpa 
dhyana, sthira dhyana, chiththa dhyana, etc. 


To Get Rooted In Atma Tattwa Is Dhyana 
Embodiments of Love! 


Knowingly or unknowingly you are doing sadhana 
based on what you think to be correct. If you desire to know 
what is dhyana in the real sense, ask Me. I will explain to 
you. In fact, you do not need any sadhana. Do as I say; you 
will get the result in a moment. Divinity is that which mani- 
fests right in front of you out of His grace. It cannot be 
obtained with the help of rigorous practices. Everybody is 
doing sadhana attaching himself to certain forms. In the 
process, he is trying to establish the glory of his own form. 
This is not correct. You should forget your own form and 
lose your consciousness in divinity. What is the use of do- 
ing dhyana, all the while concentrating upon one’s own 
form? When somebody enquires what you are doing, you 
reply that you are doing dhyana. How do you know that 
you are doing dhyana when in fact your body conscious- 
ness itself is lost in dhyana? That means, you are not doing 
real dhyana. Dhyana is that, in which you forget your own 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 186 


self; you develop purity of conscience and establish the 
eternity of your atma thatthwa. Without achieving this, 
dhyana is a waste and real cheating. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Cultivate pure and sacred love. You run after several 
elders, sadhakas and gurus and try to be their followers. 
This is not guruthwa. You concentrate on one feeling of 
divinity that is already established in your heart. Do not 
change your mind every now and then. Let it be firmly 
established as your goal. Buddha followed the same prin- 
ciple. Earlier, Buddha went in search of divinity everywhere 
outside. He wandered in several places. But, he could not 
succeed in his endeavours. Ananda, his cousin saw the 
plight and enquired why he was wandering here and there. 
Then, suddenly Buddha realised that he was all the while 
following his manasika thatthwa (mental impulses), which 
is impermanent and momentary. He, therefore, decided not 
to follow the mind. He, immediately started contemplating 
on divinity with full heart and attained Nirvana (liberation 
from bondage). It is clear from this example that one should 
never rely on the mind which weaves fantasies. Forget the 
mind, establish divinity firmly in your heart and finally 
merge in that divinity. That is the real nirvana. 


What is the nature of human body? It is made up of 
the five elements. It is unreal, impermanent and perishable 
in nature. Keeping this body attachment, if you do dhyana, 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 187 


how can it be fruitful? How can it lead you to your goal? 
Hence, you must forget the deha bhranthi (the illusion of 
body). Merge in divinity with atma-bhimana (attachment 
to the atma). That is the real dhyana. That is the true thyaga 
(renunciation or detachment). That is your real yoga. That 
is your real bhoga. That bhoga is ananda (bliss). Always 
follow the principle, “Sathyam bhruyaath, Priyam 
bhruyaath, Na bhruyaath Sathyam apriyam” which means 
always speak the truth; speak the truth pleasingly; never 
speak truth which is unpalatable. Only then will you be 
able to attain Nirvana. Several people aspire for liberation. 
Liberation cannot be attained by temporary sadhanas. It 
can be obtained by constant contemplation on divinity, for- 
getting the mind totally. That is real nirvana. Wherever you 
see, if the mind only is visible, how can you attain nirvana? 
It is only the one who forgets the mind can attain nirvana. 


Embodiments of Love! 


I presume you have never undertaken such a great 
sadhana so far. Do not bother; we will look into it later. 
First and foremost, begin your contemplation on divinity 
with pure love. Only then will you gain spiritual strength. 
Even the Pandavas started their spiritual quest by giving 
first priority to God, then to ‘we’ and lastly to ‘I’. In spiri- 
tual literature, every letter and every word carries subtle 
meanings. You must try to understand those subtle mean- 
ings and act accordingly. That is real sadhana. You need 
not do sadhana for attaining ephemeral and impermanent 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 188 


things. Try to attain divinity through love. Do all your 
sadhana with pure love. Only then will they become fruit- 
ful. 


Guru Purnima 
Embodiments of Love! 


Tomorrow is the Guru Purnima day. Any amount of 
time can be spent in explaining the importance and 
significance of Guru Purnima. The Guru is coming as 
Purnima (full moon) on Guru Purnima day. If you forget 
guruthwa (the real nature of guru), all your sadhanas will 
be of no use. Today, we are forgetting guruthwa totally. 
This is a great mistake. Keep the essential nature of a guru 
in your heart and do your sadhana to merge in divinity. 
Hence, tomorrow, we will try to know the significance of 
Guru Purnima, to some extent. 


International Seva Conference, Valedictory Address, 
23-7-2002, Prasanthi Nilayam. 


13 


Develop Broadmindedness To 
Experience Divinity 


“The moon illumines the world at night and the 
sun during the day. Righteousness illumines the 
three worlds, and a noble son illumines his entire 
clan. (Telugu Poem) 


URING the day the sun shines resplendently and 

enables people to see the world. During the night 
the moon gives us light. It is dharma that shows the ideal 
path to all beings in all the three worlds. Similarly, a noble 
son illumines his entire clan by his exemplary behaviour. All 
these are related to the ephemeral and transient world. 


Atom Is The Fundamental Basis Of Creation 


Kaanaada was the one who experienced and propa- 
gated the truth that God 1s all-pervasive. Anoraneeyan 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 190 


mahato maheeyan (Brahman is subtler than the subtlest and 
vaster than the vastest). Kaanaada recognised the existence 
of God in every atom. He even described God as 
Anuswarupa (the very form of atom). The world cannot 
exist without the atom. Earlier, nothing existed in the uni- 
verse. In the beginning, the sun, the moon, the stars, the 
earth, the sky, etc., did not exist. There was only pitch dark- 
ness all around. The combination of atoms resulted in the 
formation of hard matter of a very high density. As a result, 
a lot of heat was generated. Then all of a sudden, the hard 
matter exploded with a big bang into pieces and spread all 
over. This was the cause of creation. This was also the ex- 
perience of Kaanaada. The sound that emanated when the 
big bang took place is “Pranava’’. That is Omkara, the pri- 
mordial sound. This sound of Pranava is all-pervasive. It 
originated from paramaanu (minutest atom). There is noth- 
ing other than atom in this creation. “How can one under- 
stand and realise this?” This was the enquiry of Kaanaada. 
Ultimately, he realised the principle of Pranava. This pri- 
mordial sound has to be contemplated upon by man for 
attaining liberation. 


The primordial sound ‘Pranava’ is verily the Di- 
vinity, which is subtler than the subtlest and vaster 
than the vastest. It is all-pervasive and stands as 
the eternal witness. (Telugu Poem) 


This truth was propagated by Kaanaada. It is from 
this Pranava that the sun, the moon, the earth, the sky, etc., 
originated. The atom is the fundamental basis of the entire 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 191 


creation. Every human being is a combination of atoms. 
There is no matter without atoms. But modern man is un- 
able to understand the mystery of atoms. He considers the 
teachings of our ancient rishis as mere stories and ridicules 
them. He does not have the ability and capacity to under- 
stand the sacredness of ancient Bharatiya culture. He is 
not able to understand the reality that is within him. He 
installs the statues of ancient rishis and noble souls as a 
mark of respect for them but fails to understand their teach- 
ings and put them into practice. He has to install their sa- 
cred forms not outside but in the altar of his heart and fol- 
low their teachings. To which time does Kaanaada belong? 
Twenty thousand years ago, people were all praise for 
Kaanaada and his teachings. Kaanaada recognised the prin- 
ciples of Hydrogen and Oxygen. The scientists observed 
that hydrogen represented the water principle, while oxy- 
gen represented the fire principle. Today people attach great 
value to the observations made by scientists, but fail to 
understand and appreciate the great truths taught by our 
rishis out of their experience. 


How can one understand atomic power? Atom is not 
visible to the physical eye but it is present everywhere. The 
water we drink, the food we eat, the words we utter, the sound 
we hear, everything is permeated by atoms. Though man 
treads on atoms, eats atoms, drinks atoms, he is unable to 
understand their mystery. He thinks that only scientists can 
investigate the nature of atoms. Atomic process is highly 
sacred. By conducting a proper enquiry into this, one can 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 192 


understand divinity. This was the teaching of Kaanaada. But 
today nobody is conducting a proper enquiry to experience 
the atomic process. People are leading their lives with mate- 
rialistic outlook. 


The Lesson Taught By Shivaji 


Once Emperor Shivaji and his minister were going 
on an evening stroll. On the way, they came across a Bud- 
dhist monk. Immediately, Shivaji removed his crown and 
prostrated at the feet of the monk. The minister did not like 
this. He thought Emperor Shivaji demeaned his own stat- 
ure by placing his head at the feet of an ordinary monk. 
The Emperor atonce sensed the feeling of his minister and 
wanted to teach him a lesson. Shivaji was one who fol- 
lowed the path of righteousness and sacrifice and set an 
ideal to mankind. 


One day he asked the minister to bring the head of a 
goat, a sheep and of a human being. He collected the heads 
of a goat and a sheep. He went to a burial ground and cut 
the head of a dead person. He took them to the emperor. 
Shivaji commanded him to sell them in the market. The 
heads of the sheep and goat were sold in no time, but no- 
body came forward to buy the head of a human being. When 
this was informed to the emperor, he said, it may be given 
free of cost to anybody. The minister took the human head 
to the market and waited there for a couple of days. In spite 
of his best efforts, nobody was willing to accept it. When 
this was conveyed to the Emperor, Shivaji said, “Oh minis- 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 193 


ter, you felt very sad when I placed my head at the feet of a 
monk. Do you realise that the same would be the fate of 
our heads too, when we leave our mortal coils. They would 
have absolutely no value. Hence, we should sanctify our 
lives by prostrating before noble souls.” Material wealth 
and position are momentary. Only Truth and right conduct 
will remain with man and redeem his life. 


The Mystery Behind The Atom 


The body will be respected so long as there is so- 
ham (life-breath) in it. That is the sound of Pranava. That 
is the energy contained in an atom. This energy has its ori- 
gin in Divinity. None can create it. This truth was propa- 
gated by Kaanaada. It is very difficult to understand the 
power of an atom. God is in the form of an atom. The entire 
world is the manifestation of the atom. The space and sound 
are the expressions of the atom. Therefore, do not neglect 
the principle of atom. It has mighty power in it. Scientists 
have been experimenting on this principle since long. /t 
takes twenty-two thousand crores of years for an atom to 
go back to its source. It is rather strange that man is unable 
to unravel the mystery behind an atom. 


The Earth rotates on its axis and revolves around the 
sun. Who is responsible for this phenomenon? Nobody can 
explain this. As earth rotates on its axis, we have day and 
night. As it revolves around the sun, we are able to get the 
food required to sustain our body. It is the Divine Will that is 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 194 


responsible for all this. It is the Divine masterplan for the 
benefit of the world. Nobody has understood the anushakti 
(power of the atom) in its totality till this day. People think 
that the atom has no life in it. It is a wrong notion. The life- 
force that holds the entire world together is present in the 
atom also. Hence it is said, God is present in microcosm as 
well as macrocosm. Man should make an attempt to under- 
stand the mystery of creation. He should recognise his re- 
sponsibilities and conduct himself accordingly. Man has to 
necessarily understand the principle of the atom. If he un- 
derstands this, he will understand everything else, for atom 
is God. The life principle present in the atom is present all 
over the universe. Kaanaada said that proper understanding 
of the principle of atom will lead to understanding of divin- 
ity. When you close your fist, you catch hold of many atoms. 
When you release it, the atoms will travel in different direc- 
tions. The sound of Pranava that emerges from the atoms 
will be as minute as the particles themselves. 


The Efficacy Of Prayer 


Devotees offer their prayers to God. Some people 
doubt the efficacy of prayer. But, in fact, any mighty task 
can be accomplished through prayer. It makes impossible 
things possible. Here is a small example. There has been a 
swelling on My cheek for the past ten days. I never take 
any medicine. Yesterday I observed that the attention of all 
those assembled here was focused on My cheek, not on 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 195 


Me! They were worried that the swelling had still not re- 
duced and that Swami was undergoing a lot of pain. After I 
delivered the Valedictory Discourse, I retired to My room. 
As I was resting, a number of devotees were praying to Me 
that I should cure Myself at least by the auspicious day of 
Guru Purnima. All their prayers reached Me. When I got 
up in the morning, the swelling reduced and there was ab- 
solutely no pain whatsoever. In fact, I had not willed that it 
should be so. It was the result of the prayers of devotees. 
Yesterday, many did not even take food. With tears in their 
eyes, they were praying continuously. My thoughts went 
to them for a moment. But I never willed that I should be 
cured. I never do it. Why? As Sanjay Sahni rightly pointed 
out, “7 and you are one.” You are not different from Me. 
This is not My body, it is yours. So, it is your responsibility 
to take care of this body. I never think of My body and its 
well-being. I never make a Sankalpa (Will) that such and 
such a thing should happen, so far as My body is concerned. 
There is no selfishness in Me from head to toe. That is why 
I have got every right to declare that I and you are one. 


Atom Is Verily Divine 


Every man is endowed with the same atomic power. 
He has to make every effort to understand this. Since an- 
cient times, man got accustomed to worshipping God in 
the form of idols. You worship Rama and Krishna in the 
form of idols. But can you see their physical forms now? 


Sathya Sai Sp 196 


No. You worship Easwara. But are you able to see Him? The 
forms of Rama, Krishna, and Easwara are ever existing. But 
man is not able to visualise them because of his narrow- 
mindedness. Expansion of the heart is divine; narrow- 
mindedness is death. One with narrow-mindedness is verily 
a living corpse. One should always be broad-minded. You 
find divinity installed in the heart of one with expansive feel- 
ings. 


Saints and sages of yore undertook various types of 
spiritual practices. Kaanaada also performed penance. UI- 
timately, he realised that he had originated from the atom 
and would merge into it. He gave up body attachment. To- 
day man is leading a materialistic life and striving for his 
own selfish ends. So long as there is selfishness in man, he 
will not be able to understand the divine principle of atom. 
One may do japa, dhyana and penance, but one’s mind 
should always be steadily fixed on the principle of the atom. 
Everything is contained in this. Our body, mind, intellect, 
etc., are nothing but the manifestations of the atom, which 
is verily divine. 


God certainly listens to the prayers of His devotees. 
Some people hesitate to pray lest their prayers should cause 
inconvenience to God. They are mistaken, for God can never 
be put to any inconvenience whatsoever. God has no suf- 
fering at all. He considers devotees’ happiness as His hap- 
piness. However, your happiness results from material 
things; whereas My happiness is related to the principle of 
atma. J am pleased by the smallest of small offering if it is 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 197 


made with Love. Your tiny offering will assume gigantic 
proportions to Me. On the other hand, you are not satisfied 
in spite of receiving mighty favours. 


Significance Of Guru Purnima 


What is the significance of Guru Purnima? Guru is 
one who illumines the path to divinity. Purnima stands 
for the cool full moonlight. Full moon stands for a mind 
with total illumination.It is spotless, blem-ishless. Even 
if there is a trace of blemish in the mind, it will lead to 
darkness. It cannot give you total bliss. 


Embodiment of Love! 


Let your mind be filled with the radiance of divine 
love. Acquiring mere textual knowledge is of no avail. 
What you have studied is only a fraction of the total 
knowledge. Yet you feel proud about it. Your worldly 
education is insignificant compared to divine wisdom. 
You cannot attain God with your education, power and 
wealth. He is accessible by Love and Love alone. You 
can experience Him only when you develop Love. Devo- 
tion means to Love God wholeheartedly. 


Embodiments of Love! 


What is it that you are supposed to know on this day 
of Guru Purnima? You must understand that God is in you, 
with you, around you, above you, below you. In fact, you 
are God. Recognise this truth in the first instance. Do not 
entertain excessive desires and become beggars. Do your 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 198 


duty sincerely. That is the true sadhana. When you are in 
office, do office work only; do not think of your family 
matters. Likewise, when you are at home, take care of the 
needs of your wife and children. Do not make your home 
an office. But today because of too much work in office, 
people take office-papers to their homes to complete their 
work. They are thus facing difficulties because they mix 
up their office work, household work, business and spiri- 
tual matters. 


Hiranyaksha and Hiranya-kasipu were great scientists. 
The modern scientists have travelled only up to moon, but 
Hiranyakasipu travelled up to the sun. He even touched the 
pole star and consequently suffered. One may be a great sci- 
entist, but one will be put to suffering if one crosses one’s 
limits. The saints made concerted efforts to experience di- 
vinity. One should develop broad minded-ness in order to 
experience Divinity. 


Man has death but the mind has no death. Whatever 
he does during his lifetime are imprinted on his mind and 
get carried over to the next birth. None can understand the 
nature of the mind. Some people think that suicide is the 
only way of putting an end to all their troubles. They think, 
“Tt is the mind that is responsible for our suffering. Let us 
put an end to it.” It is the worst of sins. The mind cannot be 
killed so easily. One should never entertain such low ideas. 
One should be prepared to face any difficulties with forti- 
tude and strive hard to sanctify one’s life. 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 199 


Believe In The Omnipresence Of God 


Atma is God and God is Atma. Prahlada said, “Never 
doubt that God is here and not there. He is present 
wherever you search for Him.” 


“The Atma is eternal without birth or death. It has 
no beginning, middle or end. It is omnipresent as 
the witness of every being.” (Telugu Poem) 


Hence, man should lead his life with the conviction, 
“T am God. Only body has death. I have neither birth nor 
death.” So long as he is alive, his love is dedicated to God 
and God alone. One day a rich man came to meet Baba at 
Shirdi. He had stuffed his pocket with a number of cur- 
rency notes. Baba decided to test his devotion. He called 
Shyam, who used to be by His side always, and said, “I 
need five rupees very urgently. Go and ask Patel.” After 
sometime, Shyam returned saying that Patel was not at 
home. Baba asked him to approach another businessman. 
Shyam again returned with empty hands. Baba sent him to 
another person. The rich man was a witness to all this, but 
he did not volunteer to give five rupees from his pocket. 
He had no spirit of sacrifice. For many people, money is 
God; politics is God. Will the money or politics follow them 
after their death? What are they going to achieve? What is 
the purpose of life? Having attained human birth, do not 
waste it in trivial pursuits. Take part in activities that are 
beneficial to society. Do not misunderstand Me when I say 
this. Politics is the root cause of pollution of the world. The 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 200 


minds of even small children are polluted by politics. Con- 
flicts and agitations have become the order of the day. There 
is no unity even between husband and wife. Prior to Inde- 
pendence, people did not suffer this much. In those days, 
the conflict was between the whites and the coloured, 
whereas today the non-whites are quarrelling amongst them- 
selves in factions. This is not what is expected of people 
today. Shun evil qualities and develop noble feelings. 


Difficulties Bring Happiness 
Embodiments of Love! 


Fill your lives with Love and end your lives with 
Love. That is true human life. The Upanishads have ac- 
corded great value to human life. Manava is one who has 
to be loved and respected. He has to welcome happiness as 
well as sorrow with equanimity. In China there is a proverb 
which says, “Difficulties are our friends, let us welcome 
them.” The happiness that we get out of difficulties cannot 
be obtained anywhere else. Na sukhat labhyate sukham (one 
cannot derive happiness out of happiness). Many people 
come to Me saying they are facing lot of difficulties. I feel 
like laughing at them. I want to know what difficulties and 
sorrow mean. But they do not come anywhere near Me. I 
keep telling the devotees that they should not be bogged 
down by difficulties. I never give any scope for sorrow. 
This body has entered its 77th year. Till this day, I never 
experienced sorrow even for a moment. Man aspires for bliss. 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 201 


He is the embodiment of bliss. Bliss is his true property. Such 
being the case, why should he give scope for sorrow? It is 
because he has not understood his true nature. Worldly rela- 
tionship comes and goes. But that which comes and grows is 
the principle of Love. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Right from this day, try to reduce your attachment to 
the world to the extent possible. Be happy and make others 
happy. Do not hurt anybody. Consider difficulties as pass- 
ing clouds. You have developed family relationships and 
there are bound to be some worries. But do not be per- 
turbed by them. When you look at the vast sky, you find 
many clouds. Likewise, in the sky of your heart there are 
clouds of attachment. They just come and go. Do not worry 
about them. What is the shape of worry? It is a mentally 
created fear. It is the result of your imagination. Every man 
is bound to encounter difficulties and losses. We should 
face them with courage. 


Remember what Shivaji taught his minister. This 
body will be respected so long as there is life in it. Once the 
life ebbs away, it will not have any value. The same was 
stated by Duryodhana during his last moments. He said, “I 
was respected so long as I was alive. Tomorrow crows and 
dogs are going to feast on me.” Whatever has to happen 
will happen. Lead a respectable life while you are alive. 
Develop divine feelings in you. Only then you would have 
led a true human life. Today man is leading a purely mate- 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 202 


rialistic life. This is also necessary to a certain extent. Re- 
member that there is the transcendental principle even in 
this secular life. 


You Are The Embodiment Of The Trinity 
Embodiments of Love! 


From this day of Guru Purnima, make your hearts 
sacred. Just as you wave away the mosquitoes that bite you, 
brush aside any difficulties that assail you. Do not be de- 
pressed by sorrow nor be elated by happiness. Develop 
equanimity and strive to attain Divinity. 


Here Bhagawan sang, “Vahe Guru Vahe Guru Vahe 
Guru Ji Bolo ...” and then continued the discourse. 


There is only one Guru. There cannot be two Gurus 
— inner Guru and external Guru. Guru is one who treads 
along the path of Truth. He is truth himself. 


Gurur-Brahma Gurur-Vishnu Gurur Devo 
Maheswara; 

Guru Sakshat Param Brahma Thasmai Sri Gurave 
Namaha. 


(Guru is Brahma, Guru is Vishnu, Guru is Maheswara. 
Guru is verily the supreme Brahman. So, salutations to the 
Guru.) 


You are the embodiment of Divine Trinity — Brahma, 
Vishnu, Maheswara. Hence, Guru is not separate from you. 
You are everything. Let your concentration not waver. Let 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 203 


it be steadily fixed on your goal. Be he a student, a celi- 
bate, a householder or a renunciant, the goal is one and 
same for all. Contemplate on the principle of so-ham that 
your inner voice teaches. Say Aham Brahmasmi (I am 
Brahma). There is nothing wrong in this statement. Some 
people have a mistaken notion that, to say so is a sign of 
egoism. In fact, that is not ego at all. It is your right. To 
think that you are a mere human being amounts to demean- 
ing yourself. You are the embodiments of God. Develop 
such faith and become God. There cannot be any bad quali- 
ties in God. So, you should lead a pure, steady and selfless 
life. See good, speak good and do good. You should be an 
ideal to everybody. No benefit accrues from worship if you 
do not purify your heart. You are worshipping Swami and 
have been visiting Swami for a number of years. But is 
there any transformation in you? You are coming and go- 
ing without any aim. Such people need not come here at 
all. Wherever you are, do your sadhana. When you come 
here, you should imbibe divine feelings and become di- 
vine. Gradually reduce your attachment to the world. The 
world will not go with you when you die. You cannot even 
take away a fistful of dust. You can take only the virtues 
you have cultivated. Respect your teachers, elders and par- 
ents. Matru Devo Bhava, Pitru Devo Bhava, Acharya Devo 
Bhava, Atithi Devo Bhava (revere your mother, father, pre- 
ceptor and guest as God). Consider everyone as God. There 
is God even in a dog. Have faith that God is all-pervasive. 
There is no greater sadhana than this. When people de- 
velop such faith, the whole nation will be blessed with 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 204 


plenty, prosperity and all auspiciousness. Fill your heart 
with divine feelings. This is what you have to learn today. 


Guru Purnima, 24-7-2002, Prasanthi Nilayam. 


14 


The ‘I’? (Aham) Is Brahman 


All people aspire for pleasant life, positions of 
authority and prosperity. But few aspire for good 
intellect, wisdom and good character. What else is 
to be conveyed to this congregation of noble souls? 
(Telugu Poem) 


Embodiments of Love! 


N this world everyone, right from a pauper to a 

millionaire, a pamara (simpleton) to a parama- 
hamsa (realised soul) uses the word ‘I’ while referring to 
himself. Had the birds and beasts been endowed with the 
power of speech, they too would have introduced themselves 
saying ‘I’. The term ‘I’ is of great significance in spiritual 
literature and is explained in the Upanishads in detail. Aham 
Brahmasmi (1am Brahman) is an Upanishadic dictum. From 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 206 


this statement, it is evident that the term ‘I’ came into exist- 
ence before the name Brahma. The names of Divine incar- 
nations such as Rama and Krishna correspond only to their 
physical forms and not to their divinity. Aham (1) is their true 
and eternal name. In fact, ‘I’ is the first name of God. People 
address God by various names for their own satisfaction and 
happiness. However, ‘Aham’ is the true name of God. 


Spiritual Practices Are To Steady The Mind 


Mind is responsible for man’s delusions. It is pos- 
sible to grow a tree without any bend. A boulder can be 
carved into a beautiful statue. But it is very difficult to 
straighten and steady the mind. All our sadhana is meant 
to direct the mind to the right path. People undertake vari- 
ous types of spiritual sadhana that confer only temporary 
satisfaction. It is only when one understands the principle 
of aham that one can experience everlasting happiness. 
People attribute various names and forms to God as they 
are unable to understand the principle of divinity. 


“Is it possible to build a temple to the One who is 
all-pervasive? How can one hold a lamp to the One who is 
shining with the brilliance of a billion suns? How can one 
attribute a form to the One whom even Brahma, the cre- 
ator, cannot comprehend? How can one give an appropri- 
ate name to the One who is present in all beings? How can 
one offer food to the One who has the entire cosmos in His 
belly?” (Telugu Poem) 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 207 


Embodiments of Love! 


In this physical and ephemeral world, people wor- 
ship God with various names and forms. But in reality aham 
is the only true and eternal name of God. The four Vedas 
have declared this truth in the four mahavakyas (profound 
statements): Prajnanam Brahma (Brahman is supreme con- 
sciousness); Aham Brahmasmi (1am Brahman); Tattwamasi 
(That thou art); and Ayam atma Brahma (this self is Brah- 
man). The Veda has also declared: Ekoham Bahusyam (the 
One willed to become many). Ekam Sath viprah bahudha 
vadanti (the Absolute is one. But the wise call it by differ- 
ent names). Divinity is only one, and that is aham. 


Mind plays many tricks and makes man forget the 
reality. It is almost impossible for anyone to comprehend 
the nature of mind. Flies and mosquitoes land on every 
object but never do they go near fire. Likewise, the mind 
gets attracted by material objects and goes everywhere but 
always shies away from God. The mind should be made 
pure and selfless and it should always remain focused on 
God. That is true sadhana. All the spiritual practices are 
meant to control the mind. 


God Has No Specific Name 


Sravanam (listening), kirtanam (singing), vishnu- 
smaranam (contemplating on Vishnu), padaseva-nam (serv- 
ing His Lotus Feet), vandanam (salutation), archanam (wor- 
ship), dasyam (servitude), sneham (friendship), atma- 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 208 


nivedanam (self-surrender) are the nine forms of devotion. 
In each of these nine paths of devotion what is important is 
that the mind has to be totally surrendered to God. 
(Bhagawan showing His hand kerchief asked) “What is 
this?” You say it is a piece of cloth. It is not merely that. It 
is a bundle of threads. Cotton is made into threads and 
threads are interwoven to make a cloth. Likewise, you are 
not one person but three: The one you think you are (physi- 
cal body), the one others think you are (the mind), the one 
you really are (the atma). Your true self is ‘I’. That is 
Brahma, God. He has no specific name and form. He is 
nirgunam, niranjanam, sanathanam, niketanam, nitya, 
suddha, buddha, mukta, nirmala swarupinam (attributeless, 
pure, everlasting, final abode, eternal, unsullied, enlight- 
ened, liberated and embodiment of sacredness). Whatever 
names and forms man attributes to God are for his own 
satisfaction. Therefore, you should make efforts to see God 
in all forms. 


The principle of ‘I’ is non-dual, eternal, full of 
effulgence and of supreme bliss. Everything is contained 
in this. When someone questions, when did you come, you 
say, “I came yesterday.” Does this ‘I’ refer to you or your 
body? It is your body that came yesterday and not you. 
Since you identify yourself with the body, you think that 
you came yesterday. When you are walking on the road, 
suppose accidentally you have slipped and sustained a frac- 
ture. Then you say, “My leg is fractured.” Just ponder over 
this statement. When you say, “My leg”, it implies that you 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 209 


are different from your leg. It means that you are not the 
body. You say, it is “my body”, “my mind”, “my buddhi’’, 
“my leg”, etc., then, who are you? When you examine your- 
self in this manner, you will realise that none of these are 
your true self. Your body corresponds to akara (form), 
whereas your true Self (I) corresponds to ananda (bliss). 
The principle of ‘I’ is different from the body. Day in and 
day out, people make use of this term ‘I’ without actually 
understanding its meaning. Be he a pauper or a millionaire, 
the principle of ‘Tl’ is common to all. Jsavasyam idam sarvam 
(the entire universe is permeated by God). God is present 
in everybody in the form of ‘I’. Where there is ‘I’, there is 
God. Have firm faith in this declaration. When you say, 
Aham Brahmasmi (J am Brahman), ‘I’ precedes Brahma. 
Hence, ‘I’ is the first name of God. 


Kerala Is The Land Of Sacrifice And Devotion 


Bali was a noble king, one of selflessness and an 
ardent devotee. One who seeks alms is considered small. 
Hence, even Lord Narayana had to assume the form of a 
vamana (dwarf) when He went to beg for alms from Bali. 
The Pakshivahana (the one who has Garuda as His vehicle) 
has Lakshmi, the goddess of wealth on His chest. Yet He 
became very small and sought bhiksha (alms) from Bali. 
He sought just three footsteps of land. Being small in stat- 
ure, his feet were even smaller. Yet He could measure the 
three worlds with His steps. Sage Sukracharya, the precep- 
tor of Bali, cautioned him not to yield to Vamana’s request. 


Sathya Sai Sp 210 


He revealed that He was no ordinary being but Lord 
Narayana Himself. But Bali did not pay heed to his coun- 
sel, saying it was not proper for one to go back on one’s 
promise. Having given his word, he wanted to fulfil it, come 
what may. He even disobeyed his Guru and offered him- 
self to God. God has infinite potentialities. Nothing is im- 
possible for Him. Vamana occupied the three worlds with 
his footsteps. The three worlds are represented by Bhur 
Bhuvah Suvah. Bhur stands for material world. Bhuvaha 
represents the realm of thought, 1.e., the mind. Suvaha is 
the principle of the atma. All the three are contained in man. 


Kerala is the birthplace of sacrifice and the centre of 
devotion and surrender. No beggar is turned away empty- 
handed. Everyone does charity as per his capacity. It is this 
punya bhumi (land of merit) that gave birth to Bali. There 
are many in this world who perform bhudana, godana, 
annadana, vastradana, suvarnadana (giving away land, 
cows, food, clothes and gold in charity). But emperor Bali 
performed the supreme sacrifice by offering himself to God. 
With the passage of time, there might have been a few 
changes, but, nevertheless, Kerala continues to be the land 
famous for devotion and surrender. It is the birthplace of 
Prahlada, the great devotee of the Lord. Even as Bali dis- 
obeyed the command of his Guru for the sake of God, 
Prahlada too went against the wishes of his father and sur- 
rendered totally to the Lord. Many such noble souls have 
taken birth in the sacred land of Kerala. 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 211 


Modern scientists deny the existence of God out of 
their ignorance. There is no place where God does not ex- 
ist. Sarvatah panipadam tat sarvathokshi siromukham, 
Sarvatah sruthimalloke sarvamavruthya thishthati (with 
hands, feet, eyes, head, mouth and ears pervading every- 
thing, He permeates the entire universe). The same was 
stated by Prahlada, “Never doubt that God is here and not 
there. Wherever you search for Him, He is there.”’ (Telugu 
Poem) He had unflinching faith. Hiranyakasipu was a great 
scientist. He could travel up to the sun; he could even reach 
the stars. When he touched the Polestar, the planet earth 
began to shake. He was one of such valour and courage. 
Till this day, no scientist has been able to accomplish what 
Hiranyaka-sipu could achieve. But, in spite of his valour 
and knowledge, Hiranyakasipu could not comprehend di- 
vinity. One can understand divinity only through love. There 
is no other path that can take you to God. It is only love 
that enables you surrender to God. 


Love And Be Loved 
Embodiments of Love! 


‘T and love are one and the same. Man cannot exist 
without love. Love shines forth as ‘I’ in everybody. With- 
out the electric current, bulbs cannot glow. Likewise, with- 
out ‘I’, the body cannot function. It is because of ‘I’ that 
the eyes see, the ears listen, the tongue speaks, etc. It is not 
the eyes that see, it is ‘I’ that sees through the eyes. When 
you close your eyes, you do not see anything. The light 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 212 


present in the eyes is divinity. In fact, there is no place where 
divinity does not exist. All names and forms are the mani- 
festations of divinity. Hence, it is said, Sarva jeeva 
namaskarah Kesavam pratigachchati (whomever you sa- 
lute, it reaches God) and Sarva jeeva tiraskarah Kesavam 
pratigachchati (whomever you denigrate, it also reaches 
God). 


Embodiments of Love! 


If you want to be respected by others, you should first 
respect others. Likewise, love all and all will love you. Love 
is the principle of ‘I’. Keep this as your goal. In any house, 
there will be a switch in every room for the light to glow. All 
these switches are controlled by one main switch. Similarly, 
the eyes, the ears, the tongue, etc., are like various switches 
which are controlled by the main switch ‘I’. Only when this 
main switch is turned on, will there be life in each of limbs 
in the body. This ‘I’ is verily the truth. Truth is God. God is 
truth. Love is God. Live in love. No other spiritual practice 
is needed if you understand this truth and put it into practice. 
God is the eternal witness of our thoughts, words and deeds. 
Each one worships God in the name and form of his choice. 
In fact, all forms are His. Hence, respect and love every- 
body. Expansion of love is life. Do not give scope for nar- 
row-mindedness. Janthunam narajanma durlabham (out of 
all the living beings, the human birth is the rarest). Daivam 
manusha rupena (God takes the form of man). You may not 
believe in these axioms if you take only the physical form 
into consideration. Inner reality (I) is important, but not the 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 213 


physical form. When you go to the market, you find people 
selling sugar dolls of different moulds like cat, dog, deer, 
etc. Irrespective of the shape, each doll is priced 2 annas. 
‘Cat’ moulds attract some children and ‘deer’ moulds fasci- 
nate some others. Difference lies only in names and forms 
but the sugar content is the same in all of them. You pay 2 
annas not for the form but for the sugar content therein. Only 
children are attracted by names and forms. Likewise, an 
ordinary person is deluded by names and forms, whereas a 
true sadhaka or a devotee keeps in view the fundamental 
principle. Do not get carried away by names and forms. Know 
the nature of the self and develop love for it. This self is 
known as aham or atma or I. Names and forms are different 
but the fundamental principle is one and the same. Man will 
be transformed into divine once he understands this truth. 
Man is all-powerful. In fact, he is God. That is why God is 
always picturised and portrayed in a human form. Every man 
is endowed with hridaya (heart). That which is filled with 
daya or karuna (compassion) is hridaya. When man fills his 
heart with karuna, peace will reign supreme in the world. 
There will be no scope for jealousy, hatred or anger. One 
who has filled his heart with compassion will always remain in 
peace. People mistake hridaya for physical heart. Hridaya is noth- 
ing but the all-pervasive atmic principle, 1.e., aham. 


Let Heart Be The Custodian Of Virtues 


Nobody keeps valuables within the reach of a thief. 
But we are keeping the precious jewelry like compassion, 
forbearance, love, under the custody of the mind, which can 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 214 


be compared to a thief. When you leave precious jewelry in 
the hands of a thief, how can you get them back? It is impos- 
sible. The precious jewelry of virtues must be kept under the 
safe custody of hridaya. Never keep them with the thief, 1.e., 
the mind. But that exactly is what man is doing. He acts 
according to the dictates of his mind. He takes mind as the 
basis for all activities. One who follows the mind is verily a 
thief. Instead, one should follow the intellect. Only then can 
one understand the principle of Atma. Thiruthonda Alwar 
said that one should worship God with Chitta Shuddi (purity 
of heart). Never follow the dictates of the mind for it is al- 
ways unsteady. Every man is endowed with noble qualities 
and pure thoughts, which are like precious diamonds. But he 
keeps them under the care of mind. Consequently, he is not 
able to progress on the spiritual path. Take truth and love as 
the basis. Truth is only one. It is not constrained by time and 
space. One can experience peace and bliss only when one 
considers the changeless and eternal principles of truth and 
love as the basis of one’s life. 


Kerala Is Dear To God Also 


The two ministers, (who spoke earlier) prayed to Me 
to visit Kerala. This time I shall certainly come to Kerala. 
Not only this, from this year Kerala has every chance to 
progress in the field of science and technology. People are 
under the impression that only Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh 
have progressed in the field of science and technology, but 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 PAE 


Kerala is going to overtake them. Even the Prime Minister 
has promised that he would extend all necessary support in 
this regard. Kerala is bound to attain an exalted position. 
The culture of Bharat exhorts, Sathyam vada Dharmam chara 
(speak truth, practise righteousness). Kerala is the land of 
truth, love and righteousness. Hence, I will certainly visit 
Kerala this year. The people of Kerala are tender-hearted. 
They are full of love. In politics, people say something and 
do the opposite later on. Spirituality emphasises on the unity 
of thought, word and deed. Very soon Kerala will develop 
into an ideal State. Kerala stands first in many respects. Even 
the monsoon sets in the land of Kerala first, before spread- 
ing to the other States. Such a land is bound to be dear to 
God also. One can experience the presence of divinity in the 
land of Kerala. Siddhashrama was the place where Emperor 
Bali, Lord Vamana and Jamadagni were born. The name 
Siddhashrama implies that it was the place of fulfilment and 
success. That is why Viswamitra decided to perform pen- 
ance there. Siddhashrama attained eternal glory because of 
his penance. Not merely that, many saints and sages were 
born there and performed penance. Not many are aware of 
this. Viswamitra was initially a king. Later on, he renounced 
everything and performed penance. He was called a Rajarishi. 
On seeing Vasishtha who was called a Brahmarishi, 
Viswamitra resolved to earn the same appellation. One could 
become a Brahmarishi only when one gave up hatred com- 
pletely. As Vasishtha had no trace of hatred in him, he could 
attain the state of Brahmarishi. Viswamitra also became a 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 216 


Brahmarishi once he got rid of anger and hatred. He was 
responsible for the holy wedding of Sita and Rama. His de- 
sire for bringing together Prakriti (Nature) and Paramatma 
(God) was fulfilled. After the wedding, he left for the forest 
at once. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Love all. Do not hate anyone. Love even your en- 
emies. If there is any trace of anger or hatred in you, trans- 
form them into love. Then you will also become a great 
Rishi. 

Onam Discourse, 21-S-2002, Prasanthi Nilayam. 


15 


Divine Leelas Reflect The Glory Of 
Avataras 


Sweeter than sugar, tastier than curd, sweeter in- 
deed than honey is the Name of Krishna. Constant 
repetition of this sweet Name gives one the taste of 
divine nectar itself. Therefore, one should contem- 
plate on the Name of Krishna incessantly. 

(Telugu Poem) 


Embodiments of Love! 


INCE ancient times, the nectarous principle of 

Krishna has fascinated young and old alike. 
Right from His advent Krishna made people forget them- 
selves in ecstasy with His divine pranks, enchanting music 
and inexpressible bliss. Krishna and Balarama, along with 
other cowherd boys, would take cows for grazing to the 
banks of the Yamuna and immerse themselves in fun and 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 218 


frolic. One day, the cowherd boys were lost in bliss as they 
were watching the divine pranks of Krishna. Consequently, 
they forgot the surroundings and their cows. As they were 
resting after grazing, all of a sudden, they felt hot wind 
blowing from all directions. They realised that they were 
being surrounded by wild fire. The raging conflagration 
was so intense that they were even unable to open their 
eyes and see. The cows started running helter-skelter, un- 
able to bear the scorching heat. Nobody could control them. 
The intensity of heat became more and more every mo- 
ment. Then the cowherd boys prayed to Krishna to come to 
their rescue. “Oh Krishna! You alone can extinguish this 
fire and save us.” Seeing their plight, Krishna laughed and 
said, “Oh cowherd boys! You have been moving with Me, 
playing with Me and enjoying the bliss. It is rather strange 
that you are fear-stricken even after experiencing My di- 
vinity. Many times in the past, you were witnesses to My 
slaying the demons sent by Kamsa. Then why are you afraid 
when I am with you? 


“When you have the Kalpavriksha (wish-fulfilling 
tree) right in front of you, why do you desire for 
trivial things? 

When you have the Kamadhenu (wish-fulfilling 
cow) with you, where is the need to buy a cow? 
When you have the glittering Meru mountain with 
you, why do you crave for paltry silver and gold? 


Likewise, when you have the omnipotent Lord 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 219 


Krishna in you, with you and around you, why do 
you get panic over such a trivial matter?” 
(Telugu Poem) 


Krishna told them to close their eyes and contem- 
plate on Him for a while. The cowherds implicitly obeyed 
His command. They closed their eyes and started chanting 
His name. The next moment, Krishna commanded them to 
open their eyes. Lo and behold! The wild fire had totally 
disappeared and all their cows were grazing as if nothing 
had happened. Their joy knew no bounds. They wanted to 
return to their respective homes at once and narrate the 
wonderful miracle that Krishna had performed. The cow- 
herd boys had experienced many such miracles that proved 
the divinity of Krishna. 


The Mystery Of The Divine 


Not only in India, but also in a communist country 
like Russia, many such mysterious powers of divinity were 
experienced. A person by name Wolfe Messing was born 
on September 10, 1899 in Poland. Right from his birth, he 
radiated divine effulgence. He behaved in a mysterious 
manner even while he was very young. He would make 
some movements with his hands and laugh to himself. His 
parents were mystified as they could not understand his 
strange behaviour. One year passed in this manner. In his 
second year, he started talking to himself. He would scratch 
his head as if he was engrossed in deep thought. He would 
run here and there, laugh to himself and converse with some 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 220 


unseen beings. All this baffled his parents. They wondered 
why he was laughing to himself and to whom he was talk- 
ing. There was an element of anxiety and fear in them. 


One day a tall personality wearing a white robe came 
and stood in front of their house. He called Messing near 
him and said, “Your parents are planning to put you in a 
lunatic asylum or ina school for the mentally retarded. You 
do not need to go anywhere. How can those who are af- 
flicted with worldly madness understand your ‘madness’ 
which is of spiritual nature? If only everyone gets such a 
spiritual madness, the whole nation would prosper. Do not 
get yourself admitted to schools where only worldly edu- 
cation is taught. The formal or secular knowledge does not 
appeal to you. Learn spiritual knowledge. I have come here 
only to tell you this.” Messing asked him, “Grandfather, 
where do you come from?” He replied, “I will tell you later. 
I am going back to the place from where I came. Never 
forget my words. Do not have anything to do with worldly 
knowledge. Acquire only spiritual knowledge. Now you 
are very young. Till you attain a certain level of maturity, 
do not have any association with anybody. Now I am going 
back.” Saying this, he vanished right in front of Messing’s 
eyes. Messing wondered, “Where did he come from? Where 
has he gone? Will I also go back to the place from where I 
came?” He started enquiring thus. His parents did not al- 
low him to go anywhere. He was confined to his house 
only. It was 9th February 1909. On that day, his desire to 
go in search of spiritual knowledge erupted again, for he 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 221 


was not satisfied with the secular knowledge that was be- 
ing taught to him. He remembered the words of the old 
man who appeared at his doorstep sometime ago. He went 
inside the house and found 8 coins in an almirah. Keeping 
them in his pocket, he embarked on a spiritual journey in 
the wide world. He wandered and wandered not knowing 
where he was going. He toured the entire world. None ques- 
tioned him about tickets or the money required to buy them. 
Thus he roamed about for 10 years. Then he entered India. 
He boarded a train that was going from Cuddapah to 
Anantapur. In between, the train stopped for a while at 
Kamalapuram where I was studying at that time. In the 
classroom Ramesh and Suresh were the two boys sitting 
on my either side on a desk. Ramesh’s father was a 
Sirasthadar (Revenue Official) and their family was very 
rich. Every day we would go towards the railway station 
for a walk discussing some spiritual matters. In those days 
there were only one or two trains going via Kamalapuram. 
The three of us sat on a stone bench on the railway plat- 
form. As we were happily talking to each other, Wolfe 
Messing saw us through the window of the moving train 
and at once opened the door and jumped out. In the process 
he lost his balance and fell flat on the platform. Ramesh 
and Suresh were concerned that he might have fractured 
his leg. I told them not to worry saying, “He is coming only 
to see Me. So, nothing has happened.” He was not carry- 
ing any luggage, not even a small bag. He came straight 
toward Me and sat in front of Me, at a distance of about ten 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 222 


feet, shedding tears of joy. Ramesh and Suresh watched 
this scene. In those days, the boys were afraid of the White 
people that they might take them away and put them in the 
military service. Therefore, they wanted to take Me away 
from that place. As Messing was approaching Me, Ramesh 
ran to his house and requested his father to bring a jeep 
immediately and take Me away from the sight of a ‘White 
person’. Ramesh’s father at once brought a jeep, lifted Me 
up and put Me in the jeep. When he took Me to his house, 
Messing also followed the jeep and came up to the house 
of Ramesh. He sat there for a full day waiting for Me to 
come out of the house. In the meanwhile, whenever he 
would spot Me through the window, he would smile at Me, 
call Me and try to convey something to Me. But nobody 
was willing to permit him to meet Me. At that time, Seshama 
Raju (Swami’s elder brother) was working as a teacher. A 
word was sent to him through a peon informing him of the 
position. Messing waited for three days and left the place 
and went somewhere by train. Before leaving, he wrote on 
the door of the house with a chalk piece thus: “The people 
who live in this house are very fortunate. They are able to 
keep the Divine child with them and serve Him. I am not 
that fortunate. Anyway, thanks.” 


He finally reached his country, Russia. After twenty 
years, he again visited India. This time he brought a Kirlian 
camera, which was capable of taking photographs of the 
aura around human beings. Those who are of sathwic na- 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 223 


ture will have a resplendent white aura around their body. 
Those who are rajasic in nature will have a red colour aura 
and those who are thamasic in nature will have a black 
colour aura around them. He came straight to Kamalapuram 
and started enquiring about the whereabouts of Raju. But, 
by that time, I was no longer Raju, the high school student. 
Raju became Sathya Sai Baba. People told him that Sathya 
Sai Baba would be residing either in Puttaparthi or in Ban- 
galore. Therefore, he left Kamalapuram for Bangalore. 


When he arrived at Bangalore, he found a huge con- 
gregation. On enquiry, he came to know that they were wait- 
ing for Sathya Sai Baba’s darshan. He too waited for My 
darshan. When I was moving amidst the congregation, he 
saw Me and thought to himself, “Yes, this is the same person 
whom I saw as a boy many years ago. He has the same aura 
with divine effulgence surrounding him.” He approached the 
Principal of the College. At that time Narendra was the Prin- 
cipal. He was a great scholar in Sanskrit and a very good 
teacher. His father Damodar was a Judge and his father-in- 
law Sunder Rao was a reputed doctor. Both of them were 
present. He asked them to take him for Swami’s darshan. 
He told them, “You are not able to see the reality. Swami is 
verily God. You are seeing only His physical form and get- 
ting deluded. You will know the truth when you observe His 
aura.” 


He wanted to observe Swami’s aura through the cam- 
era he had brought with him. In those days, I used to give 
darshan to the devotees at the end of nagarasan-kirtan. As I 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 224 


stood in the balcony giving darshan, he clicked his camera. 
He could see that the entire place was permeated with light. 
When he showed the photograph, one could see great 
effulgence around My face. My entire body was engulfed in 
white light which symbolises purity. Nothing else was no- 
ticed. Narendra took that photograph and requested him to 
give the camera also as it was not available in India. He said 
he was prepared to give the photograph but not the camera 
as he had a lot of work to do with it. He expressed his desire 
to have an audience with Swami. In the evening a meeting 
was arranged in which he was to address the students. I also 
attended the meeting. He was not looking at the students or 
the teachers; he was trying to see where I was seated and 
what I was doing. When he spotted Me, he started coming 
towards Me, saying, “My dear, my dear’. He kept repeating, 
“You are My everything. I am Your instrument.” So far I 
have not revealed this to anyone. He stayed there for ten 
days. I taught him all that had to be taught. I told him that 
when God descended on earth, he would act like a human 
being. Daivam manusha rupena (God takes the form of man). 
He said that the same has been said even in their scriptures. 
He wrote a book and gave it to Gokak. Gokak was a scholar 
in English but had no knowledge of Russian. However, he 
kept the book with him. 


After a few days, Messing left without informing any- 
body. One day Narendra received a letter from Russia. Mess- 
ing wrote in the letter, “You are a teacher working for God. 
How fortunate you are!” He requested Narendra to keep him 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 229 


informed about the happenings related to Swami. One day 
Narendra was expressing some doubts and I was clarifying 
them. Only two of us were in the room. All of a sudden, 
Messing arrived there. How he came there was a mystery to 
Narendra. He did not have a ticket with him. He came, had 
My darshan and disappeared. It was not possible for all to 
see this. It was not easy to understand either. Divinity is highly 
mysterious. 


In The Dwapara 


One day, Krishna and Balarama along with the cow- 
herd boys were playing on the banks of river Yamuna. They 
were jumping from one branch to the other on trees. Some 
of them were tired. At that time, sages Vamana and 
Bharadwaja came to the banks of Yamuna. They asked the 
cowherd boys to show them a suitable and safe location 
where the waters were shallow so that they could have a 
bath. Krishna and Balarama jumped down from the trees. 
Bharadwaja at once recognised that Krishna was the 
Paramatma and Balarama represented Jivatma. He folded 
his hands in reverence and requested Krishna to show them 
a suitable location for having a bath. Krishna jumped into 
the water and showed them a safe place. He told them that 
he would keep sumptuous food ready for them. The cow- 
herd boys were wondering as to how Krishna would pro- 
vide food for the sages as He had not brought any food 
with Him. In those days there were no tiffin carriers. After 
the sages had completed their bath, Krishna opened a bag 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 226 


which appeared from nowhere. As he opened the bag, the 
entire place was filled with sweet aroma of rice boiled in 
milk. He served the food in a plate and requested them to 
eat. The cowherd boys were as restless as monkeys. They 
would not keep quiet. They repeatedly asked Krishna, 
“Where did You get the food from?” Krishna silenced them 
saying, it was not proper to indulge in excessive talk in the 
presence of sages. The sages performed the Sandhya wor- 
ship and started partaking of food. They asked, “Krishna, 
who prepared this food?” Krishna replied, “My mother 
Yashoda.” They said, they had not eaten anything more 
delicious and expressed their gratitude to Him. 


Brahma, who was observing these mysterious hap- 
penings, was wonderstruck at Krishna’s mighty powers. He 
wanted to play a trick with Krishna. One day as the cow- 
herd boys were ecstatically playing with Krishna and 
Balarama, Brahma made the cows and calves disappear 
from the scene. He even made the cowherd boys disappear. 
Krishna knew that it was Brahma’s trick. He at once cre- 
ated all the cowherd boys, cows and calves by His Will. 
These cowherd boys returned to their respective homes with 
their cows and calves. They were identical in all respects 
to the cowherd boys whom Brahma had hidden somewhere. 
Even their parents could not find any difference. Life went 
on as usual, with the cowherd boys taking their cows and 
calves for grazing every day in the company of Balarama 
and Krishna. This continued for one full year. Brahma felt 
ashamed and accepted defeat. He sought Krishna’s pardon 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 227 


and returned all the cowherd boys, cows and calves. As he 
returned them, the existing ones which Krishna had cre- 
ated earlier, disappeared at once. In this manner, Krishna 
performed many stupendous feats right from His childhood. 
On this basis, the Bhagavata says, 


The stories of the Lord are most wonderful and 

sacred in all the three worlds. They are like 

sickles that cut the creepers of worldly bondage. 
(Telugu Poem) 


Divine Play Of The Present Avatar 


At this juncture, I would like to narrate an incident 
which happened with this Avatar. I have not revealed this to 
anyone, so far. After this Prasanthi Mandir was constructed, 
I used to have My food in the room upstairs. Whenever I ate, 
the Griham Ammayi (mother of this physical body) would 
be by My side forcing Me to eat more. She would often ex- 
press her concern that I was losing weight. I would tell her, 
“Why should I eat more? Do I need to fight with somebody? 
I don’t like to become fat.” 


One day, somebody invited Me to their house for 
food. Actually their intention was to poison Me. They were 
feeling jealous of My growing popularity and prosperity. 
In those days, I used to relish vadas made of Alasanda 
grains. Hence, they mixed poison in vadas and offered them 
to Me. Before going there, I had told Easwaramma and 
Subbamma not to be afraid if any untoward incident was to 
happen. When I returned from there, My entire body turned 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 228 


blue and My mouth started frothing. I told Easwaramma to 
wave her hand in a circle. She did accordingly, and to her 
utter amazement, there appeared vibhuti in her hand. She 
mixed it in water and gave Me. Instantly, I became nor- 
mal. She wondered, “Swami can create vibhuti with a wave 
of His hand. But how is it that vibhuti appeared in My 
hand?” In fact, I had given her that power for that moment. 


When I was staying in the Old Mandir, I used to take 
children to Chitravathi everyday. In those days, there were 
no students, only the boys of the village would gather around 
Me. I would tell them to make a small mound of sand, out 
of which they could get whatever they wanted like pencil, 
pen, laddu, etc. Since they were small children, they would 
ask for trivial things. 


After one such evening session in Chitravathi, we 
were returning to the Old Mandir. Kuppam Sushilamma 
and her sister Kumaramma, the author of the book “Anyatha 
Saranam Nasthi’’, who were young at that time, started run- 
ning towards the Old Mandir to offer arati when Swami 
reached there. Then I signalled to Subbamma to stop them 
and herself go there to make arrangements for the arati. 
Subbamma implicitly obeyed My command. Those two 
ladies had a feeling that, being housewives, they only had 
the eligibility to give arati to Swami, not Subbamma, who 
was a widow. When Subbamma went to the Old Mandir, 
she found a big serpent. It was for this reason I had sent 
her. She was always careful. When she saw the snake, she 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 229 


called out “Sai Nageswara, Sai Nageswara, Sai Nageswara’’. 
In the meanwhile, all of us reached there. She did not want 
to kill it as she remembered the words of Swami that there 
was God in all beings. She wanted to catch it and leave it 
somewhere. As she caught the snake, it coiled around her 
hand. I made fun of her saying, “Subbamma, are you play- 
ing with snakes?” She said, “Swami, I know that you sent 
me ahead in order to save the lives of those two ladies.” In 
this manner, Subbamma witnessed many /eelas of Swami. 
She was very fortunate and highly meritorious. She attended 
to Me right from the beginning. Not only Me, she attended 
to the devotees who would come for My darshan by serv- 
ing them food. All her relatives turned against her but she 
did not care for them. She wanted only Swami and none 
else. She used to obey Swami’s command implicitly. She 
had unwavering faith. 


One day, I asked her whether she would like to see 
her deceased husband? I used to crack such jokes now and 
then. She replied that she had no such desire as she had 
nothing to do with her deceased husband. She further said 
that her husband passed away because he was not fortunate 
enough to serve Swami and that it was her good fortune that 
she was able to serve Me. But I insisted that if she had any 
desire to see him, I would grant her desire. I told her to go 
out and see. There was a drumstick tree. She found her hus- 
band Narayana Rao smoking a cigarette sitting under the 
tree. She saw the scene very clearly. She was happy to see 
her dead husband again, but she also scolded him saying, 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 230 


“Even after death, you have not given up your bad habits.” 
She came back at once as she did not want to see him any 
longer. Narayana Rao had two wives, Subbamma and 
Kamalamma. Kamalamma is living in the Ashram at 
present. I told Kamalamma to go and see her deceased hus- 
band. She did not want to see his face again. She said, hav- 
ing come to the Lotus Feet of Swami, she had no such de- 
sire. However, on My insistence, she went and saw. She 
found her late husband sipping hot coffee at that time. Both 
Subbamma and Kamalamma saw their deceased husband 
exhibiting the same habits he had when he was alive. Even 
during the Krishna Avatar, Krishna showed to His devo- 
tees incidents that had happened much earlier. 


Radha’s Ultimate Merger 


When Krishna lifted the Govardhana mountain, it 
was a matter of celebration. The unmarried Gopikas per- 
formed Varalakshmi Vratam. Even now ladies perform 
Varalakshmi Vratam. Radha was a great devotee. But those 
who did not believe in the divinity of Krishna subjected 
her to a lot of hardships. Even in those days there were 
atheists. Atheists, theists, theistic-atheists and atheistic-the- 
ists are present in every age. The atheists put Radha in a 
house and locked it from outside. (Taking this theme, I wrote 
a drama and got it enacted by children.) They felt Radha’s 
family reputation was being tarnished because of her go- 
ing after Krishna. And to stop her from doing so, she was 
locked up in the room. She started crying and praying. 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 251 


Krishna heard her prayers, opened the doors and released 
her. He chided those people saying, “Is this the way you 
treat a devotee? It is allright if you have no devotion to Me. 
But it is a great sin to harass a devotee.” Krishna took Radha 
with Him. Radha then prayed to Krishna to play a song on 
His divine flute. 


“Sing a song Oh Krishna! with each word 
dripping with honey and talk to Me to My heart’ 
content. Take the essence of the Vedas, let it flow 
through your divine flute and transform it into a 
melodious song. Sing a song Oh Krishna ...” 


(Telugu Song) 


Listening to His melodious music, Radha breathed 
her last. From that day, Krishna never touched His flute 
again. Krishna performed several /eelas. He was verily God 
in human form. None could comprehend or describe His 
divine nature. It was infinite and unfathomable. You do not 
find anything other than Divine love flowing from Him. 


In Devotion Women Always Excelled Men 


In Dwapara Yuga, women experienced Krishna’s 
divinity more. In fact, it was they who revealed the story of 
God through their devotion. Once some Brahmins were per- 
forming Gayatri Yajna in a forest. Krishna told the cow- 
herds to bring some food from the Yajnashala as He and 
His brother Balarama were very hungry. When the cow- 
herds requested the Brahmins for food, they turned them 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 232 


away saying, “Do you think it is a chowltry to feed you as 
and when you ask? No. Wait till the yajna is completed. If 
there is anything left out after we eat our food, then we will 
give you.” When this was conveyed to Krishna, he advised 
them to approach the women who were preparing the food 
at the backside of Yajnashala. As per His advice, the cow- 
herd boys went and saw the ladies preparing bobbatlu (a 
delicious sweet item). They asked those women, “Moth- 
ers, our Krishna and Balarama are hungry, can you give 
them some food?” The women were extremely happy for 
having got an opportunity to serve Krishna. Immediately, 
they packed whatever food items they had prepared and 
took them to Krishna. Some women raised an objection as 
to how they could serve food to Krishna (who belonged to 
the cowherd clan) before it was offered to their husbands 
(Brahmins). But their objection was brushed aside and 
Krishna and Balarama were fed the items that were pre- 
pared. They considered Krishna as God. On knowing this, 
the husbands chided their wives saying it was a sacrile- 
gious act. Later when they sat in meditation, realisation 
dawned on them. They recognised their own fault and told 
their wives that what they had done was correct. They took 
a bath again and requested their wives to serve the food 
blessed by Krishna, as prasadam. I wish to emphasise in 
this context that during the lifetime of any Avatar, it is only 
the women who recognise the divinity first. They are the 
people who lead their husbands to divinity. It is only be- 
cause of the devotion of women that men cultivate devo- 
tion to some extent at least. But for women, men will not 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 233 


have devotion at all. It is said that a house without a lady is 
literally a forest. Women are identified with bhakti (devo- 
tion) and men are identified with jnana (wisdom) since time 
immemorial. Women can enter even the inner precincts of 
a palace, whereas men are permitted to go only up to the 
Durbar hall (court room). It means that jnana will lead you 
up to God. Bhakti, on the other hand, will take you to His 
heart. That is why such a great value has been attached to 
Bhakti. In fact, it was gopikas who were responsible for 
the spread of bhakti tatthwa (path of devotion) in the world. 
Harer Nama Harer Nama Harer Namaiva Kevalam, Kalau 
Nastyeva Nastyeva Nastyeva Gathiranyatha (chanting of 
the Divine Name is the only path to liberation in this Age 
of Kall). 


In those days, even in this village of Puttaparthi, 
nobody was thinking of God except Karanam Subbamma. 
Griham Ammayi used to observe big officers coming for 
My darshan. She would be scared to see anyone in police 
uniform. She would request Subbamma not to allow any 
police personnel thinking that they would cause inconve- 
nience to Swami. Subbamma would alleviate her fears say- 
ing, “Why they should not come? They too are devotees of 
Swami. Everybody has to come to Swami. Do not have 
any such differences. Nobody can harm Swami. You don’t 
worry about it.” Hearing Subbamma’s words, Easwaramma 
would express her anger: “Since Swami is residing with 
you, several police are coming to your house. Please do 
not allow them.” 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 234 


Once IGP Ranganayakulu came from Madras. He 
wanted to take Me with him. Griham Ammayi was in a 
sorrowful state and was crying. She considered Madras to 
be a far-off place and a foreign country. Hence, she dis- 
suaded Me from going. Her intense love for Swami was 
responsible for this. She was concerned that Swami might 
be taken away from Puttaparthi permanently. It was due to 
her prayer that this mandir was built. 


Once Sakkamma came and said, “Swami, due to lack 
of proper roads and transport, we are finding it difficult to 
come to this remote village. Neither cars nor bullock-carts 
can reach this interior village. Every time we have to leave 
our car near Penukonda to come here. Hence, please come 
to Bangalore and settle there. We will get a big palatial build- 
ing built for you.” I told her that I did not need huge man- 
sions. All that I needed was only a small room. But she would 
not listen to Me. Easwaramma said, “Ifa sapling has to grow 
into a gigantic tree, it has to be manured and watered well 
without disturbing it. If it is shifted from place to place, it 
cannot grow. Hence, please remain in Your birthplace 
Puttaparthi. It will certainly progress.” Then I promised her 
that I would settle in Puttaparthi. 


When it comes to devotion and surrender, women 
are superior to men. They are the repositories of all forms 
of vijnana, sujnana and prajnana. So, never look down upon 
women. Do not talk derisively about others. Pray for the 
well-being of all. Loka samastha sukhino bhavantu (may 
all the people of the world be happy!). The main teaching 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 239 


of Bhagavadgita is that one should work for the welfare of 
all. Ekoham bahusyam (the one willed to become many). 
The same divinity is present in all. All forms are His. 


Yet Another Leela Of Krishna 


Before I conclude, I would like to narrate a small 
leela performed by Krishna in Dwapara yuga. So long as 
Kamsa was alive, he used to send demons to fight with 
Krishna. Kamsa had two wives whose father was a mighty 
king. Once Kamsa was killed, his father-in-law tried to wage 
a war against Krishna. The gopikas were worried, “How 
long are we to suffer these ordeals?”, they asked Krishna. 
He told them not to panic and pacified them saying, “Try 
to understand My powers and potentialities. Tonight, you 
sleep in Repalle and tomorrow morning, see for yourself 
where you will be.” When they woke up next morning, they 
found themselves in Dwaraka. Where was Repalle and 
where was Dwaraka? A distance of 1000 miles separated 
them. In this manner, Krishna could change one village into 
another. God can do anything. He can go anywhere. He 
can change anything. Do not give room for doubts. One 
who doubts divinity will certainly be doomed. Develop un- 
wavering faith and follow the Divine command. True 
dharma lies in following the Divine command. When you 
follow God, you will be blessed with all goodness and aus- 
piciousness. 


Krishnashtami, 3 1-8-2002, Prasanthi Nilayam. 


16 


Significance Of Vinayaka Worship 


Theism is on the decline and atheism is on the 
rise. Righteousness and respect for elders are 
gradually becoming extinct. Devotion and an- 
cient wisdom have become extinct. Education 
has become agitation today. 


ODAY is the sacred festival of Ganesh 

Chaturthi. ‘Ga’ symbolises buddhi (intel- 
lect), ‘Na’ stands for vijnana (wisdom). So, Ganapati is 
the master of buddhi and vijnana. The universe is sus- 
tained by Ganas (gods) and Ganapati is their master. In 
this world, everybody has a master, but Ganapati has 
none. He is a master unto himself. This is the birthday 
of the Master of Masters. Ganapati is also called 
Mooshika Vahana (one who has a mouse as his vehicle). 
You may wonder how a small mooshika can carry on its 
back a hefty personality like Vinayaka. Here mooshika 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 238 


does not mean a mere mouse. It symbolises the darkness of 
ignorance because it is in darkness that the mouse moves 
about. Hence, Mooshika Vahana is one who subdues igno- 
rance and dispels darkness. It is only when we understand 
the inner significance of the Vinayaka principle that we will 
be able to celebrate Vinayaka Chaturthi properly. One of 
the main teachings of the Bhagavad Gita 1s contained in 
the sloka: 


“Sarvadharman Parityaja Maamekam Saranam 
Vraja, 

Aham Twa Sarvapapebhyo Mokshaishyami Ma 
Suchah”’ 


(Surrender unto Me and perform all your actions as 
an offering to Me. I will destroy all your sins and confer 
liberation on you.) 


The Individual Must Identify Himself With Society 


So long as man is immersed in body attachment, all 
types of hardships and misery haunt him. Body attachment 
is the root cause of sankalpas (thoughts). That is why 
Krishna exhorted man to give up body attachment. The in- 
ner meaning of this statement is that man should experi- 
ence unity in diversity. Without vyashti (individual), there 
cannot be samashti (society). Without samashti, there can- 
not be srishti (creation). So, first of all we have to recognise 
the role of vyashti. Only then can we understand the prin- 
ciple of samashti, which will in turn lead to the understand- 
ing of srishti. One who understands srishti becomes one 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 239 


with parameshti (God). In fact, the principles of samashti, 
srishti and parameshti are very much present in vyashti. 
Hence, one has to make efforts to understand vyashti in the 
first instance. 


Vyashti symbolises the individual (jiva) whereas 
samashti stands for God (deva). There is not much differ- 
ence between the individual soul and the Cosmic Spirit. So 
long as vyashti identifies himself with the body he leads a 
very ordinary life. It is only when he identifies himself with 
samashti can he understand the principle of creation. So, 
firstly man should make efforts to understand the true mean- 
ing of vyashti. This is the message of Vinayaka. The letter 
‘Ga’ (intellect) in the name Ganapati symbolises this aspect. 
The letter ‘Na’ stands for vijnana (wisdom). So, Ganapati 1s 
one who grants good intellect and confers wisdom. 


Today people perform Vinayaka worship without ac- 
tually understanding its significance. Vinayaka symbolises 
the qualities of a true leader in all aspects. “Viyate Nayake Iti 
Vinayaka” meaning, He is a master unto Himself. In this 
world Vinayaka is worshipped by many. However, Vinayaka 
does not worship anyone as He has no master above Him. 
Even Easwara, the father, worships His son Vinayaka, but it 
does not happen the other way. 


Control Of The Mind Is True Spiritual Practice 


Today no one is making an attempt to know the prin- 
ciple of Parameshti, who is the fundamental force behind 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 240 


vyashti, samashti and srishti. Parameshti is the master of 
all. In this world, man undertakes various activities, of which 
some are good and some are bad. Man’s sankalpa (thought) 
is the root cause of this duality. Good thoughts lead to good 
actions and vice versa. Man is the embodiment of sankalpas 
and vikalpas (resolutions and negations). True spiritual prac- 
tice lies in controlling these thoughts and their aberrations. 


Today man is troubled by worry and anxiety. There 
is not amoment when he is free from worries. What 
are the worries that disturb man? “To be born is a 
worry, to be on earth is a worry; world is a cause 
of worry and death too, entire childhood is a worry 
and so is old age; life is a worry, failure is a worry; 
all actions and difficulties cause worry; even hap- 
piness too is a mysterious worry.” 
(Telugu Poem) 


Body attachment is the primary cause of all worries. 
Man cannot attain happiness without difficulties and worries. 
Pleasure is an interval between two pains. It is impossible to 
experience happiness without undergoing difficulties. There is 
divinity in every human being. The power latent in man is not 
present elsewhere. However, he is unable to make use of the 
divine power in him. Every man is endowed with buddhi (in- 
tellect) which has immense potentiality. Vijnana (wisdom) is 
far superior to intellect. The principles of buddhi and vijnana 
have to be properly understood in the first instance. 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 241 


All Offerings To Vinayaka Have Significance 


On this day of Vinayaka Chaturthi, people make 
kudumulu and undrallu as special dishes and offer them to 
Vinayaka. They are special and unique in the sense that 
they are cooked on steam without any oil content. Til seeds, 
rice flour and jaggery are mixed, made into balls, cooked 
in steam and offered to Vinayaka. You should enquire into 
the purpose of making such an offering. Til seeds are good 
for the eyes. Steam-cooked preparations without any oil 
content are good for your digestive system. One who par- 
takes of such food will be free from blood pressure and 
blood sugar and will always enjoy sound health and happi- 
ness. Food preparations, which are cooked on fire with oil 
content, are harmful to jatharagni (digestive fire). Such food 
gives rise to various diseases. One can lead a long, happy 
and healthy life, if one avoids food with oil content. 
Vinayaka has a pot-belly but he has perfect health as he 
partakes of steam-cooked food without oil content. 


Vinayaka is also called Vighneswara (remover of 
obstacles). No obstacle can come in the way of one who 
prays to Vinayaka. Worship of Vinayaka confers success in 
spiritual as well as worldly endeavours. God grants happi- 
ness at two levels, pravritti (outward) and Nivritti (inward). 
Pravritti is related to physical body and Nivritti to intel- 
lect. The former undergoes change with the passage of time, 
whereas the latter remains unchanged. Hence, one should 
try to reduce body attachment with proper food and habits. 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 242 


Excessive intake of food results in obesity and, conse- 
quently, heart will be subjected to greater strain to pump blood. 
Blood travels a distance of 12,000 miles in the body with each 
heartbeat. With increase in obesity, the circulation of blood 
and, consequently, the functioning of the heart will be im- 
paired. Hence, one should exercise control over one’s food 
habits. In fact that is what Vinayaka does. 


People worship Vinayaka by offering garika (a kind 
of white grass). What is the origin of this worship? Once 
Parvati and Parameswara were engaged in a game of dice. 
Nandi was asked to be the adjudicator. Nandi declared 
Easwara to be the winner each time. Mother Parvati thought 
that Nandi was biased in Easwara’s favour. She became furi- 
ous and pronounced a curse on Nandi that he should suffer 
from indigestion. At once Nandi fell at her feet and prayed, 
“Mother, I have not cheated you, nor did I show any 
favouritism towards Easwara. I have been highly impartial 
in my judgement. It is because of the power of His will that 
Easwara emerged victorious each time. Easwara’s sankalpa 
is vajra sankalpa (His will is bound to succeed). Hence, I 
seek your pardon and pray that I may be freed from the curse.” 
Parvati at once took pity on him and said, “Nandi! on the 
fourth day of the month of Bhadrapada, you worship 
Vinayaka with garika (white grass). You will be freed from 
indigestion when you partake of the grass offered to 
Vinayaka.” 


People who maintain pet dogs know this well. When 
they leave them in the lawns, the dogs search for white 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 243 


grass and eat it. What is the reason for this? The white grass 
is beneficial to their digestive system. Hence, we see that 
the offering made to Vinayaka ensures good health to one 
and all. Since times of yore, people believed that Vinayaka 
conferred His grace on those who worshipped Him on the 
fourth day of Bhadrapada month. 


Subdue Hatred And Anger 


Today man is not making proper use of his mathi 
(mind), gathi (effort), stithi (position) and sampatthi (wealth). 
As a result, he is losing the sacred energy that God has given 
him. Not merely this. He is subjected to misery and grief 
because of his evil traits like kama, krodha and lobha (de- 
sire, anger and greed). He has absolutely no control over his 
desires. When one desire is fulfilled, he craves for another. 
Anger is another evil trait which ruins man. 


“One with anger will not be successful in any of 
his endeavours. He will commit sins and be ridi- 


culed by one and all.” 
(Telugu Poem) 


“Anger is one’s enemy, peace is the protective 
shield, compassion is true relation, happiness is 
verily heaven and misery is hell.” 


(Telugu Poem) 


Hatred is more dangerous than anger. It gives rise to 
many evil qualities which come in the way of experiencing 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 244 


divinity. Man is supposed to live for a hundred years, but 
his life-span is cut short by these evil qualities. When these 
evil traits are totally subdued, man can enjoy a long and 
happy life. He will not lose his life even if he were to meet 
with a serious accident. Man is tormented by the reflec- 
tion, reaction and resound of his own evil qualities. Desire, 
anger and hatred are not human qualities; they are bestial 
tendencies. Man becomes a beast ifhe allows these wicked 
qualities to overpower him. He should constantly remind 
himself that he is a human being and not a beast. In this 
manner, he can keep a check over his bestial tendencies. 
Unfortunately, the youth of today are developing exces- 
sive desires and consequently their future is ruined. 


Human Life Needs A Strong Foundation 


Human life can be compared to a four-storeyed man- 
sion. Brahmacharya, Grihastha, Vanaprastha and Sanyasa 
(celibacy, householdership, recluse and renunciant) are the 
four stages of human life. Brahma-charya 1s the foundation; 
if the foundation is strong, the other three stages will be au- 
tomatically taken care of. But the modern youth are ruining 
three-fourth of their lives because they do not have a strong 
foundation of Brahmacharya. When elders advise them to 
sit for prayers for at least five minutes, they say they have no 
time, but they have all the time in the world to wallow in bad 
qualities and bad habits. Students and youth in particular 
should make every effort to build a strong foundation of 
Brahma-charya. Merely remaining a bachelor is not 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 245 


Brahmachar-ya; constant contemplation on Brahma is true 
Brahma-charya. Think of God and chant His Name under 
all circumstances. Lead a life of purity. Dedicate your life to 
the principle of love. This ensures the safety of the mansion 
of your life. You see the walls, you see the roof, you see the 
entire building, but you do not see the foundation. It is hid- 
den underneath. However, the safety of the mansion which 
is seen from outside, rests on the unseen foundation. When 
you build a house, you design the walls and roof to make it 
look attractive. But the foundation which bears the entire 
building does not require any beautification. Yet, it is the 
most important part of the building. Today man is not both- 
ered about the foundation of life. He is more concerned about 
external appearance. 


The first stage in human life is Brahmacharya. 
‘Charya’ means to conduct oneself. You should always think 
of Brahma. Your conduct should befit the stage of 
Brahmacharya. In olden days, the preceptor was referred 
to as acharya, meaning one who practises before preach- 
ing. One who merely preaches without practising is only a 
teacher. He may be able to teach a few lessons but he will 
not be able to render any help in controlling your mind and 
attaining spiritual progress. Only a true acharya can help 
you to control your mind. When we talk of acharyas, two 
names readily come to our mind. One is Bhishmacharya 
and the other is Dronacharya. Dronacharya was the Guru 
of the Pandavas in the sense that he taught them the art of 
archery. Bhishmacharya was the spiritual teacher of the 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 246 


Pandavas. He was a great jnani (one of wisdom). Jnana 
does not mean acquisition of textual knowledge. Advaita 
darshanam jnanam (perception of non-duality is supreme 
wisdom). A true jnani is one who dedicates his body, mind, 
and intellect to God. He thinks only of God and nothing 
else. He performs his activities with the sole purpose of 
pleasing God. Sarva karma bhagavad preethyartham (do 
all actions to please God). You should not crave for per- 
sonal satisfaction. You should make every effort to please 
God. This was the only endeavour of Bhishmacharya. He 
was the son of Mother Ganga. All his life he obeyed the 
command of his mother and ultimately when his end ap- 
proached, he wanted to experience the love and grace of 
his mother. He was wounded by the arrows shot by Arjuna 
and was lying on the bed of arrows for 58 days. His entire 
body was pierced with arrows. Before leaving his body, he 
requested Arjuna to bring his mother Ganga and quench 
his thirst. Arjuna means one with a pure heart. He had earned 
many appellations like Phalguna, Partha, Kiriti, 
Svetavahana, Bhibhatsa, Savyasaachi, Dhanunjaya, etc. On 
hearing the request of Bhishma, Arjuna with all his might 
shot an arrow into the earth. Immediately, mother Ganga 
sprang forth like a fountain and quenched the thirst of her 
son, Bhishma. Thus, he breathed his last peacefully. 


Today we find many people bearing the name Arjuna, 
but their conduct does not match their name. In the famous 
pilgrim centre of Srisailam, the divine couple Bhramaramba 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 247 


and Mallikarjuna are the presiding deities. Bhramara means 
a honeybee and Amba means mother. Malli means jasmine 
flower. Mallikarjuna symbolises a pure and white jasmine 
flower. Just as a bee sucks honey from a flower, likewise, 
Bhramaramba enjoys the company of Mallikarjuna. 


Arjuna The Pure 


Among the Pandavas, Arjuna was considered to be 
the greatest because he was pure-hearted. He never caused 
any harm to the innocent. Never did he use his weapons 
against anyone without a valid reason. Before the commence- 
ment of war, Arjuna requested Krishna to go to the Kauravas 
on a peace mission. Krishna asked him, “Whom should I 
approach?” Arjuna said, “Oh Krishna, you are the all-know- 
ing One. I don’t need to give you any instructions. Please 
make every effort to avert the war.” Krishna said, “What is 
the use of talking to the blind king Dhritarashtra? His attach- 
ment to his sons made him blind to the reality. He will listen 
to his sons but not to Me.” However, Krishna went to 
Kauravas as an emissary. But as He had predicted, His peace 
mission failed. War became imminent. He came back and 
told Arjuna, “All My efforts proved futile. Be prepared for 
the war.” Arjuna expressed his concern that many innocents 
would be killed in the war. Krishna said, “Arjuna, those who 
come to the battlefield will be totally prepared to face any 
eventuality. Nobody comes to the battlefield to merely watch 
the show. They are ready to give life or take life. So, there is 
no question of any innocents getting killed in the war. So, be 
prepared to fight.” Arjuna wanted to convey this news to 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 248 


brother Dharmaraja. Both of them went to him. Right from 
the beginning Dharmaraja was against war. He had no choice 
but to accept. The same was conveyed to Nakula and 
Sahadeva. Though they were young, they were highly noble. 
They were endowed with greater virtues than even Arjuna 
and Dharmaraja. Their joy knew no bounds when they saw 
Krishna. Knowing fully well the wicked nature of the 
Kauravas, they were prepared for a war. They were not both- 
ered about the outcome of Krishna’s peace mission. They 
were all the time praying for His safe return. Such was their 
love for Krishna. Ultimately, Arjuna said, “Krishna, is it pos- 
sible to get nectar out of poison? What is the use of giving 
good counsel to the wicked Kauravas? It is like throwing 
jasmine flowers into the fire. Let us put an end to this talk of 
peace and get prepared for the war.” 


When they actually reached the battlefield, seeing 
the vast Kaurava army, Arjuna became despondent. He was 
concerned that many innocents would get killed in the battle- 
field. He was afraid that he would be the cause of grief to 
many families. He said, “Krishna, I cannot bear the sight 
of my own kith and kin getting killed in the battlefield. 
When I think of this, my head is reeling. Let’s go back at 
once without wasting any time.” Krishna pretended to be 
angry. He said, “Arjuna, it was you who instigated Me and 
brought Me to the battlefield. How can you behave in such 
a cowardly manner now? Shame on you!” At this juncture, 
He imparted the teaching of Bhagavadgita to Arjuna. It gave 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 249 


Arjuna the necessary strength to fight the battle. However, 
when he confronted Bhishma, he could not withstand his 
might. In order to instill courage in Arjuna, Krishna at once 
jumped from the chariot and said, “Arjuna, I will kill this 
Bhishma and protect you.” Arjuna said, “Krishna, you have 
taken a vow that you will not fight the war. I don’t want 
You to go back on Your word for my sake.” As Krishna 
was approaching him, Bhishma folded his hands and prayed, 
“The one who is coming to kill me is the only one to rescue 
me.” Such was the devotion of Bhishma. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Our history is replete with sacred inner meanings. 
But the modern youth do not pay any attention to our his- 
tory. They waste their time in reading novels and mean- 
ingless stories. These kathas (stories) will give only vyathas 
(sorrow). Divine story alone teaches you the ideal path. 
His story is history. You should read such a sacred history, 
understand it and put it into practice. Sacred epics like the 
Ramayana, the Bhagavata and the Mahabharata are the 
repositories of great teachings. Likewise, the story of 
Vinayaka also has a great message for mankind. Vinayaka 
is the embodiment of wisdom. That is why all gods wor- 
ship him. On this day of Vinayaka Chaturthi, students place 
their textbooks in front of the Vinayaka idol and offer their 
prayers. The inner meaning is that they should pray for the 
divine wisdom to be bestowed on them. It is most essential 
that the students to worship Vinayaka on this auspicious 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 250 


day. He fulfills the desires of his devotees. He confers only 
anugraha (grace). He has no agraha (anger). Hence, not 
only the Bharatiyas, even the people of other countries, 
worship Vinayaka. 


Three Fruitful Decades Of The Central Trust 


At 2 o’clock in the afternoon, there is going to be a 
programme presented by our former students who are work- 
ing for Sri Sathya Sai Central Trust. They are doing a lot of 
good work. There are a few elders who have been looking 
after the Trust affairs for the last 30 years. All these years, 
I have been personally supervising the day-to-day affairs 
of the Trust. Ever since my students have joined the Trust, 
they have taken up the responsibility and are doing a good 
job. Be it in Book Trust, or in Accommodation office or 
anywhere else in the Ashram, our students are rendering 
yeoman service. They speak gently and sweetly. They do 
not use harsh words. They follow the dictum: Help ever, 
Hurt never. These Sathya Sai Central Trust boys will present 
a programme in the afternoon in which they will talk about 
various activities of the Trust. Each one of you must neces- 
sarily listen to what they have got to say. Whatever they 
are going to say is purely based on their own experience. 
My boys always speak the truth. They will not utter a lie, 
even for fun. They will be conveying the message of truth 
in the afternoon programme. They are young in age, but 
they are very efficient in their work. They are taking keen 
interest in the activities undertaken by the Trust. They are 
propagating Swami’s message all over the world. I am ex- 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 25 


tremely happy that these boys have come up well in life. 
They are highly intelligent. When asked a question, they 
give a suitable and prompt reply. Five boys are looking 
after our Central Trust accounts. Likewise, some boys are 
working for our Books and Publications. You do not find 
mismanagement of even a naya paisa. They are very hon- 
est. Every paisa is accounted for. They are endowed with 
noble qualities, good habits and ideal character. See it for 
yourself in the afternoon. They are actively involved in 
broadcasting all the programmes that are conducted in 
Prasanthi Nilayam over the Radio Sai Global Harmony 
Channel 24 hours a day. Though they are young boys, they 
speak in a highly polished language. You are going to lis- 
ten to them in the afternoon. It is essential that you learn 
their language. After all they are your brothers. All are broth- 
ers and sisters. I want every one of you to get such an op- 
portunity and come up well in life. 


Vinayaka Chaturthi, 10-9-2002, 
Prasanthi Nilayam. 


17 


Reminiscence Of The Divine 


On October 20, 1940, which happened to be a Sun- 
day, Swami lost the collar pin and with that the veil 
of Maya disappeared. The worldly attachment left 
Him in the form of the collar pin. He left home say- 
ing that Maya could not bind Him any longer. This 
happened after a visit to Hampi. 

(Telugu Poem) 


Embodiments of Love! 


T happened when I was at Uravakonda. The 

Corporation Commissioner of Bellary had a dream 
in which he was directed to go to a particular house in 
Uravakonda and bring Sathya to Bellary. At the same time, 
his wife also had a dream in which she was directed to ac- 
company her husband and bring Sathya with them. They 
thought Sathya would be a great and famous personality. Now 
My height is a little above five feet. I was much shorter those 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 254 


days. I used to wear shorts and a shirt. I was 14 years old at 
that time. As I came out of the house, the Corporation Com- 
missioner and his wife at once recognised Me to be the same 
person who had appeared in their dream. They felt extremely 
happy and prostrated before Me on the road itself. They were 
unmindful of the fact that I was a small boy. I was on My 
way to school with a few books in My hand. 


The Commissioner and his wife approached Seshama 
Raju, the elder brother of this body, and asked him: “Please 
bring Sathya to Bellary today. You may have to apply for 
leave but does not matter.” One cannot say no to a person 
of the status of the Corporation Commissioner. Hence, 
Seshama Raju approached the Head Master of the school 
Kameswar Rao with a request to grant him leave. He also 
explained the reason for taking leave. Kameswar Rao was 
very fond of Me. He said, “You may take Sathya to Bellary 
or wherever you want. You do not need to seek my permis- 
sion in this regard.” He even gave his car to take Me to 
Bellary. 


Sathya As Virupaksha 


The Commissioner and his wife played host to us 
for three days. They took us to the Virupaksha temple in 
the nearby Hampi Kshetra (Temple). Seshama Raju and 
his wife told Me to remain outside the temple and keep a 
watch over their belongings as they would go inside to have 
darshan of the deity. I readily agreed and remained outside. 
As soon as they entered the temple, to their utter astonish- 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 255 


ment, they found Me standing inside the sanctum sanctorum 
where the deity is supposed to be standing. Seshama Raju 
could not believe his eyes. He thought, ““Why did he come 
here when I told him specifically to remain outside and 
take care of our belongings?” He at once came out of the 
temple only to find Me standing there! He again went in- 
side and found Me there also! Still he was not convinced. 
He told his wife, “You go outside and keep a watch over 
Sathya. Do not allow him to go anywhere. Meanwhile, I 
will go inside and see whether he is still there.” She did 
accordingly. He again saw a smiling Sathya standing in the 
sanctum sanctorum. The Corporation Commissioner was 
also a witness to all this. He recognised My divinity. When 
they came out of the temple, he caught hold of Seshama 
Raju’s hands and said, “Raju, do not be under the impres- 
sion that Sathya is your brother. He is not an ordinary per- 
son. You are deluded seeing His physical form. There is 
divine power in Him.” 


We came back to the Commissioner’s house, had our 
food there and started our return journey to Uravakonda. 
The Commissioner wanted to give Me a gift. He said that 
he would get four pairs of shorts and shirts stitched for Me. 
I firmly told him that I would not accept even one. He did 
not want to force Me either. Then his wife suggested that a 
gold collar pin would be an appropriate gift for Me. In those 
days, it was a matter of prestige for children to wear a col- 
lar pin. Immediately, he bought a gold collar pin and put it 
on the collar of My shirt. I protested. Under any circum- 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 256 


stances, I never accepted anything from others. But Seshama 
Raju insisted that I accept the gift. He said that my refusal 
to accept the gift would amount to showing disrespect to 
the Commissioner. So I obeyed him. 


The Veil Of Maya Goes 


After returning from Hampi, I was going to school 
wearing the collar pin. The pin dropped on the way and 
could not be traced. A major change took place in Me. 
Worldly attachment left Me in the guise of a collar pin. I 
decided to embark on My mission to alleviate the suffer- 
ings of My devotees. I threw away the books and entered 
the garden of the Excise Commissioner Hanumantha Rao. 
He was an ardent devotee. Seeing Me, he told his wife to 
prepare various delicacies. But I did not touch any of those 
preparations. Seshama Raju came there and forced Me to 
return home. I said I would not. Never before I had talked 
to him that way. It was not My nature to talk back to elders. 
Hence, Seshama Raju was surprised. “How could Sathya 
get such courage”, he wondered. He could see brilliant 
effulgence around My smiling face. Immediately, he wanted 
to send a telegram to Puttaparthi. In those days, it took a 
minimum of one week for a telegram to reach Puttaparthi 
from Uravakonda. Hence, he sent a school boy with a mes- 
sage that the parents of this body Easwaramma and Pedda 
Venkama Raju should go to Uravakonda at once. When 
they arrived, Seshama Raju brought them to Me. 
Easwaramma pleaded with Me, with tears in her eyes, 
“Sathya, come, let us go back to Your brother’s house.” 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 257 


But, I did not agree. “If you want Me to come, I will go with 
you to Puttaparthi. I will go of My own accord and make 
the villagers happy.” 


In those days, I used to lead the school prayer at the 
loving insistence of the headmaster. He would say, “Raju, 
you may be young, but your prayer melts our hearts.” The 
day after I left the school, another boy, who used to sit close 
to Me in the class, was asked to lead the prayer. When he 
went on the dais, he broke down in tears remembering Me. 
All the students and teachers were in tears, and the prayer 
meeting was cancelled. They wanted to accompany Me to 
Puttaparthi. But how was it possible to accommodate so many 
of them in this village? Then I told Kameswar Rao to some- 
how convince the boys not to follow Me. 


God Can Do Anything For The Devotee 


In the classroom, three of us used to share a desk — 
Myself in the middle, flanked by Ramesh and Suresh on ei- 
ther side. They were not too well in their studies. Whenever 
teachers asked them questions, they would give the answers 
prompted by Me. It was the time of our E.S.L.C. public ex- 
ams. Our register numbers were such that we had to sit sepa- 
rately, quite at a distance from each other. It was not possible 
for them to copy. They were much worried. I infused courage 
in them saying, “You don’t need to write anything. You just 
attend the examination and feign to write the examination. I 
will take care of the rest”. The duration of the examination 
was two hours. I completed My answer paper in just 10 min- 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 258 


utes. I took some more papers from the invigilator and wrote 
the answers in Ramesh’s handwriting. After completing it, I 
took another set of papers and wrote the answers in Suresh’s 
handwriting. I also wrote their names on the answer sheets. 
When the final bell rang, all the students got up, and I si- 
lently placed all the three papers on the table of the exam- 
iner. Nobody raised any objection. The results were an- 
nounced on the following day and only we three got first 
class. The teachers were surprised as to how Ramesh and 
Suresh also got first class. There was no scope for any doubt. 
They could not have copied from Me, since we were seated 
far from each other. Their answer sheets were in their own 
handwriting. The local people were overjoyed. They carried 
us on their shoulders, and took us in a grand procession. Those 
two boys had such intimate relationship with Me. When I 
left Uravakonda, Ramesh and Suresh could not bear the sepa- 
ration from Me. Ramesh, utterly dejected, fell into a well 
and died. The second boy went on repeating “Raju, Raju, 
Raju ...” and ultimately turned mad. He was taken to vari- 
ous mental hospitals, but there was no improvement. Finally 
his parents came to Me and prayed, “Raju, he will be cured 
of his madness if he sees You at least once. Please come and 
see him.” I went to the mental hospital to see him. He was 
continuously repeating “Raju, Raju, Raju ...” Seeing Me, he 
shed tears, fell at My feet and breathed His last. They had 
surrendered themselves to Me. They prayed that they should 
never be separated from Me. 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 209 


Death Could Not Separate Them 


When I came to Puttaparthi, Karanam Subbamma 
gave one acre of land near Sathyabhama temple where a 
small house was built. There I used to live. The same 
Ramesh and Suresh were born again as two puppies, and 
came to Me. The sister of Mysore Maharaja named them 
Jack and Jill. They were always with Me. 


One day the Maharani of Mysore came to have My 
Darshan. She was a great devotee and a highly orthodox 
woman. She would perform Puja with flowers everyday. 
She would personally pluck the flowers after sanctifying 
the plants by sprinkling water and milk. As there were no 
proper roads to Puttaparthi, she alighted from the car at 
Karnatakanagepalli and walked the rest of the distance to 
Old Mandir. There used to be a small shed where the Pedda 
Venkama Raju Kalyana Mandapam stands now. The Ma- 
harani decided to rest for the night in the Mandir. The driver 
had his dinner and was returning to Karnatakanagepalli where 
the car was parked. I told Jack to accompany the driver and 
show him the way. Jack walked in the front and the driver 
followed. Jack slept under the car. Next morning, the driver 
started the car not knowing that Jack was sleeping under it. 
The wheel of the car ran over the back of Jack and its back- 
bone broke. Jack dragged itself across the river, wailing 
all the while. A washerman named Subbanna used to take 
care of the Old Mandir day and night. He was very loyal 
and considered Swami as his very life. He came running to 
Me and said, “Swami, Jack might have met with an acci- 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 260 


dent. It is coming wailing in pain. I came out at once. Jack 
came close to Me, wailing loudly, fell at My feet and 
breathed its last. It was buried behind the Old Mandir and a 
brindavanam was erected. As per My instructions, it was 
built by the side, not at the centre. I told there should be a 
place for another samadhi. As Jack had passed away, Jill 
stopped eating food and died after a few days. It was also 
buried by the side of Jack’s samadhi. In this manner, Ramesh 
and Suresh did penance to be with Me. Even after their 
death, they took birth as dogs to be with Me. 


First the collar pin was lost; then I stopped going to 
school and parents arrived and brought Me here. Owing to 
all these changes, I left Uravakonda. After I came here, 
many people from Bangalore and Mysore started visiting 
this place in their cars. Maharani of Mysore, coffee planter 
Sakamma and Desaraj Arasu, the maternal uncle of Mysore 
Maharaja were among those who used to come here. One 
day they prayed, “‘it is difficult for us to come here often. 
Hence, please come and settle in Mysore. We shall build a 
big mansion for You.” I told, “I don’t want palatial buildings. 
I want to be here.” That night, mother Easwaramma came to 
Me with tears in her eyes and said, “Swami, people want to 
take You here and there for their selfish purposes. If you 
leave Puttaparthi, I will give up my life. Please promise me 
that You will remain in Puttaparthi for ever.” I gave her My 
word that I would never leave Puttaparthi. This is why I 
have constructed many buildings in the Ashram for the com- 
fort and convenience of devotees. 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 261 


The Birth Of Prasanthi Nilayam 


When I made it clear that I would not leave Puttaparthi, 
Sakamma and the maternal uncle of Mysore Maharaja de- 
cided to build a Mandir, a little away from the village. They 
acquired ten acres of land here and started the construction 
work. An ardent devotee by name Vittal Rao volunteered to 
oversee the construction work. He was an officer of the For- 
est Department during the British regime. He is the father of 
Jayamma (Prof. Jayalakshmi Gopinath) who spoke earlier. 
He supervised the construction work. R.N. Rao from Ma- 
dras, Neeladri Rao, the son-in-law of Pitapuram Maharaja, 
the son-in-law of Baroda Maharaja, all of them took active 
interest in the construction work. As all of them joined hands, 
the Mandir was constructed in a very short period. As it was 
wartime, it was very difficult to procure iron for the con- 
struction work. They overcame all such hurdles with sincer- 
ity and devotion. They prayed that I should not go there till 
the construction was over, lest I may be put to inconvenience. 
Such was their love for Me. 


I always fulfil My promise made to devotees. What- 
ever I do is for the happiness of devotees. I don’t need any- 
thing for Myself. I don’t have any desires. 


They worked day and night, made payments to the 
labourers, and saw to it that the construction was completed 
successfully. Jayamma was very young at that time. Every 
Sunday Vittal Rao used to come here in his car to pay wages 
to labourers. Jayamma would insist that she be allowed to 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 262 


accompany him. Vittal Rao was very fond of his daughter. 
He used to get food prepared in Bangalore itself and bring 
his daughter along with him. She has been serving Swami 
for the last 60 years. She came to Me when this body was 
17 years old. Now this body is approaching its 77th Birth- 
day. She would visit Prasanthi Nilayam very frequently and 
would learn Swami’s Bhajans and sing His glory. In this 
manner, she developed sacred feelings and intense devo- 
tion for Swami. One should have prapti (deservedness) to 
experience divine proximity. One cannot get it for the mere 
asking. It cannot be denied either. One gets it out of the 
merits accrued over past lives. Their family has been the 
recipient of bounteous grace. I was moved by her repeated 
reference to Venkamma Garu (Swami’s elder sister) in her 
speech. 


Sisters’ Seva Remembered 


Venkamma Garu used to cook food for Swami. 
Jayamma used to be with her always to learn cooking. They 
had such intimate friendship. Later Parvatamma Garu 
(Venkamma Garu’s younger sister) also came here. They 
used to bring food for Swami by turn, one in the morning 
and the other in the evening. They were concerned that it 
was not safe to allow others to prepare food for Swami. 
They extracted a promise from Me that I would eat the food 
prepared by them only. They served Me till their very last 
breath. They were in Manipal Hospital, Bangalore, at the 
time of their passing away. 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 263 


Venkamma was taken from here to Bangalore in an 
unconscious state. She had never opened her eyes. I went 
to her and called, ‘Venkamma’. She instantly opened her 
eyes and saw Swami. She offered her Namaskar to Me by 
taking My hands close to her eyes. She shed tears and left 
her mortal coil. 


The same happened in the case of Parvatamma also. 
She was also unconscious when she was taken to 
Bangalore. I went to her and called out her name. She im- 
mediately opened her eyes, shed tears and breathed her last. 
So long as they were alive, they served Swami by bringing 
food everyday, morning and evening. Such intimate rela- 
tionship with the Lord is the result of merits of past lives. It 
cannot be acquired by human effort. They never cared for 
their ill-health and continued to serve Swami with love. 
Their lives were sanctified. 


Even to this day, food is received from their houses. 
Seshama Raju’s son lives here. Easwaramma’s son 
Janakiramaiah (younger brother of Swami’s physical body) 
also stays here. You all know him. His wife prepares and 
brings food for Me; likewise Parvatamma’s daughter also 
brings food for Me. In this manner, they are serving Swami 
everyday. I do not take food at night. Every morning, they 
bring food for Me. Such is the intimate relationship that 
Swami has with this family. Some incarnations were due to 
the prayers of their parents; but, in Swam1’s case, it is differ- 
ent. I decided that, so and so should be the father and so and 
so should be the mother. This body has not taken birth in the 
ordinary mortal way. 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 264 


Promise To Subbamma Fulfilled 


Though Karnam Subbamma was not physically re- 
lated to this body, emotionally, she was closely attached to 
Swami. She used to think of Swami day in and day out. 
She requested Me to stay in her house. She was prepared to 
vacate the house for My sake. Many relatives argued with 
her, “Being a Brahmin, how are you allowing a Kshatriya 
to stay in your house?” She said, “I don’t go to anybody’s 
house. None of you need come to my house. It is enough if 
I have Swami with me.” Such was her devotion and deter- 
mination. She had only one desire. She prayed, “I should 
see your beautiful form when I leave my body.” I said I 
would certainly fulfil her desire. 


Once I went to Madras acceding to a devotee’s prayer. 
Subbamma was in Bukkapatnam at that time. She was stay- 
ing with her mother. By the time I returned from Madras, 
Subbamma had breathed her last. When I came here, people 
came running to Me and said, “Swami, Your Subbamma 
passed away last night.” Immediately, I turned the car and 
went to Bukkapatnam straightaway. Her body was kept in 
the verandah, covered with a cloth. The entire household 
was grief-stricken. Once Swami makes a promise, He will 
certainly fulfil it under any circumstances. I removed the 
cloth covering the body. As she had passed away the previ- 
ous night, ants were crawling all over her body. I called 
out, “Subbamma’”. She opened her eyes. This news spread 
like wildfire within no time. The people of Bukkapatnam 
started crowding the place telling each other that Subbamma 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 265 


was brought back to life. Subbamma’s mother was hun- 
dred years old at that time. I told her to bring a glass of 
water with a Tulasi leaf soaked in it. I put Tulasi leaf in 
Subbamma’s mouth and made her drink some water. I said, 
“Subbamma, I have kept up My promise. Now, you may 
close your eyes peacefully.” She said, “Swami, what more 
do I need? I am leaving blissfully.” Shedding tears of joy, 
she held My hands and breathed her last. This is how I 
keep up My promise under any circumstances. In this man- 
ner, I never go back on My promise. Words are inadequate 
to describe Subbamma’s service. During the Krishna Ava- 
tar, mother Yashoda could love and serve Krishna more 
than mother Devaki. 


Peaceful End Of Chosen Parents 


In those days, Easwaramma and Subbamma used to 
converse with each other through the window in the wall 
separating their houses. They could not visit each other’s 
house because their husbands were not on speaking terms. 
But Easwaramma had a cordial relationship with Subbamma. 


The parents of this body were chosen by Me. Pedda 
Venkama Raju used to help the devotees visiting Swami. 
He used to run to Bukkapatnam even for a coconut or pro- 
visions required by the devotees. One day, he came to the 
Mandir and expressed his desire to talk to Me. I had al- 
ready called a group for an interview. I took him inside. He 
said, “Swami, I should not leave behind any debt. I had a 
small shop. I might have forgotten to return a paisa or two 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 266 


to someone. Hence, I request you to distribute food to the 
poor on the 12th day after my demise.” He took out some 
money and placed it in My hands, saying, “It is my hard 
earned money. You may use it for feeding the poor. He also 
mentioned that he had kept a few bags of rice and jaggery 
required for that purpose. After this, he went home, slept 
and died peacefully. 


Easwaramma also had such a sacred end. She used 
to follow Me wherever I went. She came to Brindavan to 
attend the Summer Course. She felt very happy seeing so 
many students. She even served water to them during their 
lunch. She used to say “It is because of Swami that we are 
able to witness such a grand event.” One day breakfast was 
served to the students as usual. Easwaramma too had her 
breakfast. Venkamma, who used to look after her needs, 
was by her side at that time. Easwaramma was pounding 
betel nut in a mortar. I could hear the sound from upstairs. 
All of a sudden, she cried out, “Swami, Swami, Swami.” I 
said, “I am coming, I am coming.” I came down immedi- 
ately and she breathed her last. She had absolutely no suf- 
fering at all, not even a mild headache. Their lives were 
sanctified as they were selected by Swami. 


Help Ever Hurt Never 


Ramesh and Suresh considered Swami as their very 
life breath. Though they were very young, they had intense 
love for Swami. Knowing that I did not have money with 
Me, Ramesh got two pairs of dresses stitched for Me and 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 267 


kept them in My desk with a note, “If you do not accept 
them, I will give up my life.” I refused them saying, “Our 
friendship and love should not be built on the basis of giv- 
ing and taking. Ours is heart to heart relationship with pure 
love. We should share only love. There should be no mate- 
rial transaction”. Right from then till this day, I never ac- 
cepted anything from others. I always conduct Myself in 
accordance with the principle of Help ever, Hurt never. This 
has been My motto. I never harmed anyone. I derive great 
joy in helping others. That is why I tell the devotees to 
always pray, Loka Samasthah Sukhino Bhavantu (May all 
the people of the world be happy!) All should be happy, 
healthy and blissful. With such sacred motive, I have been 
spreading the message of love to the entire world. My stu- 
dents are My biggest property. The students of the Primary 
School, Higher Secondary School and the Institute are al- 
ways with Me. They do not leave Swami and Swami can- 
not be without them. My life is for the sake of humanity at 
large. The happiness of people is the happiness of Swami. 
I have no interest in celebrating My Birthdays. But the devo- 
tees would not leave Me. They want to have different cel- 
ebrations, but I do not want any. I consider your birthday 
as My Birthday. The day you are happy is truly My Birth- 
day. Though bodies are different, you should not give room 
for any differences. All are one, be alike to everyone. The 
relationship that Swami has with the devotees is not of a 
worldly nature. It is relationship based on Divine love. 


Annunciation Message, 20-10-2002, Prasanthi Nilayam. 


18 


Unity In Diversity - The Fundamental 
Truth 


Life in the world is impermanent. So are youth and 

wealth. Wife and children are also not permanent. 

Only truth and good name are permanent. 
(Sanskrit verse) 


N this world everything is bound to change, be it 
happiness or sorrow, peace or restlessness. 


Man is unable to understand his true nature. He iden- 
tifies himself with the body which is transient. He is not 
merely a vyashti jeevi (individual), he is a samashti jeevi 
(social being). He does not want to lead a lonely life. The 
Purusha Sukta declares: Sahasra seersha purusha 
sahasraksha sahasra pad (God has a thousand heads, eyes 
and feet). Man is unable to realise that he is samashti swarupa 
(cosmic form). He is under the delusion that he is a vyashti 
swarupa and thereby subjects himself to suffering. 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 270 


Give Up Negative Qualities 


The main principle of the culture of Bharat is to under- 
stand and experience unity in diversity. But, man today 
visualises diversity in unity. He has forgotten the principle of 
equality and, consequently, becomes restless. Unity in diver- 
sity is the fundamental truth that one has to recognise. Since 
time immemorial, the Bharatiyas have been making concerted 
efforts to understand this truth and experience it. 


Nobody has been able to understand the inner mean- 
ing of the Vedic teachings. However, a little knowledge can 
be gained by going through the sacred texts and listening to 
the teachings of scholars. In ancient times, even the demons 
used to study the Vedas. However, they could not compre- 
hend the truth contained in the Vedas and hence led a life of 
untruth. Demons like Hiranyaksha and Hiranyakasipu were 
highly learned and well-versed in various disciplines of 
knowledge. They could reach up to the moon, the sun, and 
even the stars and could understand their functioning. But 
they could not comprehend the latent positive principle in 
their own self, as their mind was filled with negative thoughts. 
The demon Narakasura belonged to the same category. He 
had mighty power and knowledge, but they proved futile 
because of his negative qualities. One may be highly de- 
voted, one may have mastered the Vedas, but all these will 
be of little consequence if one doesn’t give up negative quali- 
ties. 


Saint Thyagaraja was an ardent devotee of the Lord. 
In one of his compositions, he extolled the Lord thus: “Oh 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 211 


Krishna! You are beyond all description and human com- 
prehension. Is it possible to estimate Your glory and 
splendour? I have been waiting for Your grace. Oh Lord! 
Listen to my prayer and redeem me. You are the one who 
brought back to life the dead son of Your Guru, Sandeepani. 
You are the one who humbled the serpent Kaliya, freed 
Vasudeva and Devaki and saved Droupadi from humilia- 
tion. You fulfilled Kuchela’s desires; You made ugly-look- 
ing Kubja beautiful. You protected the Pandavas and saved 
the 16,000 Gopikas. You are beyond all description and 
human comprehension. Krishna, it is not possible for even 
Brahma to describe Your glory. I have been praying for 


Es 


Your grace.’ (Telugu Song) 


Chaitanya’s Message To Mankind 


Once Chaitanya Mahaprabhu sought his mother’s 
permission to go and pursue his studies. Then his mother 
said, “My dear one, there are various types of education in 
this world, but they are meant only for a living and not for 
life. Only the adhyatmika vidya (spiritual education) is true 
education. It is immortal and has no limitations. It is change- 
less in all the three periods of time. Make efforts to acquire 
such education.” From that day onwards, Chaitanya went 
about propagating the efficacy of chanting the divine name 
in each street and in every village. He chanted the name of 
Lord Krishna at all times and under all circumstances. His 
message to mankind was simple, yet profound. 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 212 


There is no charity greater than feeding the 
hungry, 

There are no greater gods than parents, 

There is no greater Japa (chanting) or Thapa 
(penance) than adherence to truth, 

There is no greater Dharma than compassion, 

There is no greater gain than the company of 
the good, 

There is no enemy greater than anger, 

There is no disease like being a debtor, 

There is no wealth greater than good reputation, 

Bad reputation is death itself, 

There is no ornament better than the chanting of 

Gods Name. (Telugu poem) 


Man should give up enmity and develop amiable re- 
lation with his fellow-beings. This is the most essential 
education that he has to acquire. It is a sign of delusion and 
a demonic trait to develop hatred towards others and lead a 
life of selfishness. Why does Purusha Suktam declare 
sahasra seersha Purusha ...? It means that God is not a 
separate entity. He is samashti swarupa (the cosmic form). 
He is present in all beings. When God is so close to him, 
why does man suffer from delusion and face hardships in 
life? God is permanently installed on the altar of human 
heart. He is all-pervasive. Man can certainly see Him, touch 
Him and also speak to Him. But, he lacks such determina- 
tion and yearning for God. Hence, he suffers. 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 213 


Chaitanya prayed to Lord Narayana thus: “Oh Lord, 
You are all-pervasive. You are the master of all beings. You 
control the entire universe. You are the very life principle. 
I do not aspire to attain Vaikunta or Kailasa, or Swarga 
(heaven) nor do I crave for liberation. Bless me with love 
so that I can love You.” When Chaitanya prayed in this 
manner, an ethereal voice said, “Tathastu’’ (so shall it be). 
The worldly education one may be well-versed in and the 
immense power one may be endowed with, are bound to 
disappear with the passage of time. Love alone is immor- 
tal. Hence, one should consider love as one’s very life. 
Chaitanya prayed to Krishna to bless him with such eternal 
love. Kailasa, Vaikunta and Swarga are like branch offices 
of God. Chaitanya was not interested in attaining them. He 
recognised that hridaya (heart) is the correct address of God. 
He prayed, “Oh Lord, I know that You are installed on the 
altar of my heart. Kindly, bless me with such experience.” 


The Significance Of Deepavali 


Lord Krishna, accompanied by Sathyabhama, went 
to wage a battle with the demon Narakasura. A fierce battle 
ensued and the demon died at the hands of Sathyabhama. 
Being the all-powerful one, Krishna could have killed 
Narakasura without Sathyabhama’s help. Then why did He 
take her help? Narakasura, being a wicked demon, did not 
deserve to even die at the hands of Krishna. As he had sub- 
jected thousands of women to untold suffering, Krishna 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 274 


decided that he should be killed by a woman. Narakasura 
had imprisoned thousands of princesses who were great 
devotees of the Lord. They were the very embodiments of 
love and contemplated on Him incessantly. After slaying 
Narakasura, Krishna granted them freedom. It is in this con- 
text that Saint Thyagaraja extolled the Lord saying, “You 
have protected the sixteen thousand Gopikas.” 


It is always dangerous to be in the company of the 
wicked. Hence, it is said, Tyaja durjana samsargam; Bhaja 
sadhu samagamam; Kuru punyam ahorathram (give up bad 
company; join the company of the noble and perform meri- 
torious deeds day and night). One should resolve to follow 
such sacred path and propagate the principle of love to one 
and all. 


What is the inner significance of the slaying of 
Narakasura? ‘Narah’ means the immortal atmic principle. 
When the qualities of an asura (demon) enter nara (man), 
he becomes Narakasura. In such a person, you find only 
bad qualities and evil feelings. He does not join the com- 
pany of the noble. He does not make efforts to reach God. 
He makes friendship with only wicked people. Such a men- 
tality is the consequence of evil deeds over a number of 
births. Today man is under the delusion that he is highly 
educated. In fact, it is not vidya (education), but only avidya 
(ignorance) that he has acquired. How can one be called 
educated if one does not have a good conduct and does not 
join good company? Ravana had acquired all types of 
knowledge as Rama. But unlike Rama, he joined bad com- 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 210 


pany, entertained bad thoughts and indulged in wicked 
deeds. Hence, people revere Rama and censure Ravana. 
One is revered or ridiculed on the basis of one’s conduct. 
One should not lead a self-centred life. Wherever a good 
activity is taking place, wherever a prayer meeting is held, 
take part in them. But there are some people who partici- 
pate in bhajans and do not join good company. What is the 
use of such a life? In this context, Sage Purandaradasa said, 


“In spite of having eyes, people have become 
blind as they are not interested in seeing your 
auspicious form. In spite of having ears, people 
have become deaf as they are not interested in 
listening to Your nectareous words. Though 
they are in the company of God, they aspire to 
lead a worldly life.” (Telugu Poem) 


Man should understand the truth that God is present in 
all beings and conduct himself accordingly. That is his pri- 
mary duty. He should not only contemplate on divinity but 
also sing His glory. There was a grand celebration in the king- 
dom of Narakasura when he was slain. So long as he was alive, 
the hearts of people were engulfed in darkness. When he was 
ultimately killed, there was joyous celebration all around. With 
his death, the darkness of ignorance and hatred was dispelled. 
People symbolically celebrated the occasion by lighting lamps. 
Just as bats find their way into a house engulfed in darkness, 
so wicked qualities enter the heart filled with darkness of ig- 
norance. Only bats like to live in darkness, not human beings. 
You should not live like bats, in darkness of ignorance. 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 276 


Some people appear to be of sathwic (pious) nature 
externally, but they are full of wicked qualities. You should 
beware of them. 


Sathsangatwe Nissangatwam, Nissangatwe 
Nirmohatwam, Nirmohatwe Nischalatattwam, Nischa- 
latattwe Jivanmukti 


(Good company leads to detachment, detachment 
makes one free from delusion, freedom from delusion leads 
to steadiness of mind and steadiness of mind confers lib- 
eration.) (Sanskrit sloka) 


You should not be in bad company even for a mo- 
ment. In olden days, people distanced themselves from 
demons and demonic behaviour. Hiranyakasipu tried his 
best to stop his son Prahlada from chanting the divine name 
of Lord Narayana. But Prahlada was always immersed in 
the contemplation of the Lord. Prahlada was dear to Lord 
Narayana, whereas his father Hiranyakasipu was dear to 
demons. He was an emperor. What sort of an emperor was 
he? He was an emperor of wicked qualities and evil deeds. 
Follow the ideal set by Prahlada and sanctify your time in 
the contemplation of the Lord. In the present day world, 
demonic activities are on the rise. One cannot stand such 
sights, nor can one bear to hear about them. Why should 
you give scope to such ghastly events? Install God in your 
heart. It is said, Easwara sarva bhutanam (God is the 
indweller of all beings). Develop such firm faith. Yad 
bhavam tad bhavathi (as you think so you become). 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 2A7 


Dear Students! 


Today is the day on which Naraka, the demon was killed. 
What does this event signify? It signifies killing the demon in 
man. ‘Nara’ means man and ‘asura’ means demon. This de- 
mon is present in every human being. It is not necessary to 
acquire great astras and sastras (weapons) to kill this demon. 
Man is called ‘nara’ because there is atma in him. That atma is 
the embodiment of love. It is possible to kill demons only 
through love. Therefore, realise the atma tathwa and develop 
love. This is true bhakti (devotion). 


Embodiments of Divine Atma! 


We are celebrating such a sacred event of killing the 
demon Narakasura as a festival by preparing so many deli- 
cious dishes and feasting on them. But, we are not making 
any effort to understand the inner meaning of this sacred 
event. In order to understand the sanctity of this great event, 
we must join satsanga (good company). You should not 
lead a life of selfishness. That is the life of a vyashti (indi- 
vidual). That is a wasteful life. It is only in samashti (com- 
munity) life, can you realise divinity. You must lead a happy 
life by identifying yourself with samashti (society). In fact, 
samashti is the embodiment of divinity. The Vedas have 
also advocated this community life by proclaiming 
“Sahasra seersha Purusha ...”. What is the purpose of 
human life? To eat, drink and roam about? No. No. The 
birds, beasts and animals also do that. That is not what is 
expected of a human being. The human values inherent in 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 218 


us must be given expression to. They have to be propa- 
gated. They must become part and parcel of our daily life 
and reflect in our behaviour. If they are merely propagated 
without being reflected in our behaviour, it becomes a fu- 
tile exercise. Therefore, we must realise the inner meaning 
of the various festivals and act accordingly. 


The human birth is most sacred. It is said, ‘“Jan- 
thunam narajanma durlabham (out of all the living beings, 
human birth is the rarest). The word ‘manava’ (human be- 
ing) also means one who is sacred. Why are we resorting to 
debasing such a sacred human being? Man today advocates 
several good and sacred things, but, when it comes to prac- 
tice, he backs out. That is the result of his past sins. When a 
conflict arises between precept and practice, man should 
stand up to the situation with courage and make an effort to 
tread the sacred path. You will, in your day-to-day life, en- 
counter several people with bad qualities and bad behaviour. 
Do not join their company. Offer them a namaskar (saluta- 
tion) and move away. Even Saint Thyagaraja prayed, “Oh 
Rama! For those who have faith in you, I offer my saluta- 
tions.” He offered salutations to both the good and evil 
people. A question may arise here, as to why we should 
offer our salutations to the evil people. We salute the good 
people, not to lose their company. We also salute the evil 
people with a request that they move away from us. We 
must join the company of good people, cultivate good quali- 
ties and lead a good life, thus sanctifying our life. 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 219 


Faith Should Be Consistent 


History is replete with the stories of several demons 
with evil qualities. Kamsa was one such demon, who was a 
contemporary of Lord Krishna. He was forewarned by an 
ethereal voice that the child born to his sister would kill him. 
Thereupon, he grew angry and pulled his sister Devaki out 
of the chariot and tried to kill her, then and there. But, her 
husband, Vasudeva prevented the situation by assuring Kamsa 
that he would see that no harm is done to him. He also rea- 
soned with Kamsa, “How could you believe the words that 
the eighth offspring of Devaki would kill you? Even if you 
believe those words, it is not time yet. Please wait till the 
eighth child is born to Devaki. Why do you attempt to kill 
the just married Devaki now itself? Please do not commit 
such a sin.” On hearing Vasudeva’s advice, wisdom dawned 
on Kamsa to a certain extent. He waited till the eighth child 
was born to his sister, Devaki, somehow. But, he was not 
having peace of mind during that period. Meanwhile, he killed 
several newborn babies both of Devaki as well as others in 
his kingdom. He did not believe the divine voice that he had 
danger to his life only from the eighth child to be born to 
Devaki. That was the degree of his faith in divinity! His was 
a ‘demonic faith’. It is not correct to develop faith in one 
aspect of God and lose in another. Your faith must always be 
steady and total in all respects. A small example. 


Some ten years ago, a gentleman came here and pro- 
claimed that Sri Sathya Sai Baba was God. Not only that, 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 280 


he also proclaimed and propagated that not only Sri Sathya 
Sai Baba, but every living being was permeated by divin- 
ity. After some time, when some of his desires could not be 
fulfilled, he propagated that Baba was not God. The same 
individual proclaimed at one time that Baba was God and 
at another time that He was not God. How should we be- 
lieve such a person with a double tongue? This type of 
double-speaking is a demonic quality. 


For those who say ‘yes’, I say ‘yes’. For those who 
say ‘no’, I say ‘no’. ‘Yes’ and ‘no’ are related to you, but 
for Sai, everything is ‘yes’, ‘yes’, ‘yes’. (Telugu poem) 


For Me, all are good. There are no bad people. Those 
who develop negative feelings without enquiring into the 
good and bad of things in this objective world, will only 
spoil their own life. So far as I am concerned, I love every- 
body. All are equally dear to Me. Some people may have 
some doubts. But, they must be made to see reason with a 
proper explanation and counselling. As far as possible, you 
should not give room for doubts; for, so long as doubts 
persist, you will not have peace of mind. Cultivate love. 
When your heart is filled with love, everything is love only. 
There will be no scope for hatred at all. Where there is no 
hatred, there will be no anger. When there is no anger, there 
will be no scope for violence. Hence, 


“Where there is faith, there will be truth; 
Where there is truth, there will be peace; 
Where there is peace, there will be bliss; 
Where there is bliss, there will be God.” 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 281 


First and foremost, cultivate faith. Further, there 
should be harmony between your thoughts, words and 
deeds. Where there is no harmony between these three, your 
behaviour would be demonic. A true vyakti (individual) is 
one who is pure in thought, word and deed and who main- 
tains perfect harmony between these three. Who is a vyakti? 
One who has manifested his latent sakti (power) in all as- 
pects. You must develop such a sakti. You speak of devel- 
oping energy, but you are becoming allergic to noble 
thoughts. What happiness do you derive out of such 
behaviour? All your sankalpas (resolutions) are becoming 
a futile exercise. 


Cultivate Love 
Dear Students! 


First and foremost, develop love. It is easier to culti- 
vate love than all other qualities. Chaitanya Mahaprabhu 
prayed to Lord Krishna, “I do not want Vaikuntha or Kailasa. 
I want only your prema. Please give me a small place in 
your prema samrajya (kingdom of Love). I will be satisfied 
with that.” There is nothing in this world which cannot be 
achieved with love. What is Narakasura Vadha? It is de- 
stroying evil qualities and demonic nature in man with the 
weapon of Love. 


You must develop good thoughts, good feelings and 
good behaviour. It is only for this purpose the human birth 
is given. Man is born not for eating and roaming about. 
Even the birds, beasts and animals do the same. Human 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 282 


birth is noble, sacred and sanctified. Therefore, every hu- 
man being must make an effort to free himself from the 
demonic qualities. Only then human beings will become 
the embodiments of divinity. Divinity expresses itself 
through such human beings. You should never give scope 
for any demonic deeds. Always cultivate good feelings, 
good thoughts and good behaviour. Do not be carried away 
by others’ opinions — either good or bad. Develop your own 
line of thinking, based on your conscience. Develop self- 
confidence. “Where there is self-confidence, there will be 
self-satisfaction. Where there is self-satisfaction, there will 
be self-sacrifice. And , through self-sacrifice comes self- 
realisation.’ Self-confidence is the foundation for the build- 
ing; it remains below the surface of the earth. Self-satisfac- 
tion represents the walls; self-sacrifice, the roof and self- 
realisation, the life. Without the foundation of self-confi- 
dence, self-realisation cannot be achieved. Therefore, build 
up your self-confidence slowly. In this process, “start early, 
drive slowly and reach your goal of self-realisation safely.” 


Today, several people wish “Good morning, good 
night’, etc., when they come across somebody. This is not 
our culture. This is an alien culture. Instead, if you say 
‘namaskar’, how happy you as well as the other person 
will feel? Today, even to say ‘namaskar’ has become bur- 
densome for people who consider themselves modern. What 
is this “Good morning’ and ‘Good evening’? Even a rustic 
is able to say ‘namaskar’. If you delve into the scientific 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 283 


truth, there is nothing like morning and evening or sunrise 
and sunset. All these changes are happening due to the earth 
rotating around itself. At least from today, children! respect 
your parents. Love your parents. Enjoy the love of your 
parents. It is only those who experience the love of their 
parents will have a bright future. Those who make their 
mothers feel sad, will lead a life of difficulties and suffer- 
ing. Therefore, never cause any pain to your parents under 
any circumstances. Make them happy. Only then you will 
feel happy and, in turn, your children will make you happy. 
Give happiness and take happiness. Happiness 1s not a one- 
way traffic, it is a two-way process of give and take. Speak 
good words. Develop samyak drishti (sacred vision). Lead 
a life of purity. Make your life sanctified. 


Deepavali, 4-11-2002, Prasanthi Nilayam. 


19 


Responsibility Of Women: 
Character Building 


Divinity shines resplendently in the entire uni- 
verse and the universe is encompassed by di- 
vinity. There is an intimate and inseparable re- 
lationship between God and the universe. Lis- 
ten to this truth, Oh valorous sons of Bharat! 
(Telugu poem) 


ROM time immemorial, Bharat demonstrated 

the pristine values of friendship and harmony. 
Bharat is the very birthplace of spirituality, virtues, char- 
ity and righteousness. It is the land of peace and pros- 
perity. Since ancient times Bharatiyas made intense ef- 
forts to establish these values upon the earth. 


The Glory That Is Bharat 


There 1s no country equal to the land of Bharat in 
proclaiming and propagating Truth. There are many in 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 286 


Bharat who have made great progress in the field of spiri- 
tuality. This is the sacred land which was ruled by Lord 
Rama. This is the very land where Lord Krishna taught the 
Bhagavadgita. This is also the land where sage Vyasa taught 
the Vedas and scriptures. It is the land where sage Valmiki 
composed the Ramayana and taught the principles of truth 
and righteousness to mankind. There is absolutely no equal 
to this country in spiritual values. Having been born in this 
sacred land of Bharat, and having been called Bharatiyas, 
the people of Bharat are now not coming forward to propa- 
gate the ideals that this country stands for. Bharatiyas should 
respect and revere their culture. They should follow their 
culture and set an ideal to others. 


The wind that blows in Bharat is suffused with truth. 
The very dust that rises from our feet is full of dharma. The 
life of Bharatiyas is one of forbearance. The river Ganga 
that flows in this land is permeated with love. Why has 
Bharat, which is the fountainhead of Truth, Righteousness, 
Peace, Love and Non-violence, come down to such a de- 
plorable state in spite of the fact that from ancient times, 
Bharatiyas have demonstrated great ideals? 


“Forbearance is the real beauty in this sacred land 
of Bharat. Of all the rituals, adherence to truth is 
the greatest penance. The nectarous feeling in this 
country is like the feeling of love towards one’s 


ea 


mother.’ 


(Telugu Poem) 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 287 


Fortitude is the greatest virtue in this land; peace is 
the protective shield. What a pity it is that we who have 
been born in this land of Bharat, are unable to uphold our 
own heritage of cultural values? Young boys and girls should 
study not to eke out a livelihood but with the sole purpose 
of demonstrating and propagating the ideals the country 
has stood for since ancient times. Modern boys and girls 
study for the sake of short-term benefits and not with an 
objective of experiencing and enjoying the tradition and 
culture of Bharat. 


If women go out for jobs who will take care of 
the homes? 

When husband and wife go out to offices who 
will do the household work? 

If women go out to teach others’ children who 
will look after their own children? 

Just like men if women also go to work who will 
cook food in the kitchen? 

Earning money may solve financial problems but 
how will it resolve domestic problems? 

It seems unalloyed happiness is not the lot of 
womanhood. 

(Telugu poem) 


Home Is Women’s Primary Responsibility 


Today, women, because they are educated, compete 
with men to take up jobs. There is nothing wrong in going 
for a job. However, they must take care of their home needs 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 288 


before taking up a job. When wife and husband go to of- 
fices, who will look after their children at home? As the 
mother is not at home to guide them properly, the children 
go astray. If both the parents go out for jobs, they may be 
able to satisfy their desire for money, but there is every 
possibility of their children getting spoiled as there will be 
nobody at home to discipline them. Whatever moral values 
you have learnt, you have to teach your children. Whatever 
you have studied will have value only when you care for 
your children’s progress. Education is meant to bring out 
the innate potential of an individual. 


Women should recognise their responsibilities and 
conduct themselves accordingly. There are many ideals set 
by women in this regard. Rajeswari Patel said, many women 
in the past developed virtues in them and led ideal lives. 
Savitri was exemplary in her conduct. Women of those days 
would not only discharge their household duties diligently 
but also would bring up their children in the most ideal 
manner. They would teach their children not merely by 
precept but by practice. However, we do not find many 
such ideal mothers today. They are interested in earning 
money rather than moulding their children into ideal citi- 
zens. They would have helped the nation to a great extent 
if only they could bring up their children in an ideal way. 
What is the point in women taking up jobs and earning 
money when their children are going astray with none to 
restrain them? So, first of all, women should look after their 
home and children properly. They should devote sufficient 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 289 


time to perform their household duties. The educated 
women of today employ a cook and a servant-maid to per- 
form the household chores. They spend much of their earn- 
ings in paying salaries to them. 


Chandramathi was a woman of sterling character. She 
always followed her husband, Harishchandra. When they 
were passing through difficulties, she infused courage in 
him saying, “Oh king, you are highly intelligent and edu- 
cated. You should never give scope to weakness and waver 
from your chosen path. We are swimming in the ocean of 
truth. We should not give up our resolve till we reach the 
shores.” In this manner, women of those days would en- 
courage their husbands to follow the path of truth. Women 
of Bharat always upheld our sacred culture. Sita did not 
shed tears even in extremely trying circumstances. Though 
she was surrounded by demons, she was never afraid of 
them. She spent her time in the contemplation of her hus- 
band, Lord Rama, and thus set an ideal. The same can be 
said of Damayan-ti. She was one of virtues. With her strong 
determination, she helped her husband regain his kingdom. 
In this manner, women of those days earned a name for 
themselves with their sterling character and ideal mother- 
hood. Today’s women should make them role models. 


Earn The Wealth Of Virtues 


The happiness that one derives from virtues is far 
superior to the happiness that one gets from the possession 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 290 


of wealth. Unfortunately, the educated youth are striving 
for wealth, physical strength and friendship. But all these 
have little value without the wealth of character. For men 
or women, character is the foundation. If one lacks charac- 
ter, one becomes feeble in all other respects. People of those 
days strove for noble character. They were prepared to give 
up their very lives for a righteous cause. Women strove to 
uphold the honour of their husbands. The strength of an 
individual lies in his character, not in the wealth he earns. 
One should be prepared to face any hardship to lead a vir- 
tuous life. The country is in dire straits due to the absence 
of men and women of character. Materialistic wealth is not 
what we need today. We need to earn the wealth of virtues. 
Wealth cannot confer true happiness on you. 


Women should develop the wealth of virtues and also 
safeguard the honour of their husbands. Both men and 
women should have good character. Without good charac- 
ter, all your learning will prove futile. 


“In spite of his education and intelligence, a fool- 
ish man will not know his true Self and an evil- 
minded person will not give up his wicked quali- 
ties. Modern education leads only to argumenta- 
tion, not to true wisdom. What is the use of acquir- 
ing worldly education if it cannot lead you to im- 
mortality? Acquire that knowledge which will make 
you immortal.” 


(Telugu poem) 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 29 


Modern education can help you only to eke out a 
livelihood. It is meant for a living and not for life. In fact, it 
is responsible for the present decline of morality in society. 
In olden days, people gave topmost priority to truth and 
righteousness. They considered divine love as their very 
life. The women of Bharat sacrificed their lives for the sake 
of truth. 


This land of Bharat has given birth to many noble 
women like Savitri who brought her dead husband 
back to life; Chandramati who extinguished wild 
fire with the power of truth; Sita who proved her 
chastity by coming out of blazing fire unscathed and 
Damayanti who reduced an evil-minded hunter to 
ashes with the power of her chastity. This land of 
piety and nobility attained plenty and prosperity and 
became the teacher of all the nations of the world 
because of such women of chastity. 

(Telugu poem) 


From time immemorial, the sacred land of Bharat 
has occupied the exalted position of a teacher to the rest of 
the world. It has been extolled as karma bhumi, thyaga 
bhumi and yoga bhumi (the land of action, sacrifice and 
spirituality). You have to discharge your duty. You cannot 
progress in life if you do not follow the path of karma. 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 292 


Time Is Verily God 
Embodiments of Love! 


You are wasting a lot of time in meaningless pur- 
suits. ime wasted is life wasted. Our ancients never wasted 
even a minute. They considered God as the embodiment of 
time and extolled Him thus: Kalaya Namah, Kala Kalaya 
Namah, Kaladarpa Damanaya Namah, Kalateetaya 
Namah, Kalaswarupaya Namah, Kalani-yamitaya Namah 
(salutations to the embodiment of time, to the one who has 
conquered time, to the one who transcends time and to the 
one who ordains time). 


Why have you forgotten the truth that time is verily 
God? You eagerly await a Sunday thinking that you can 
relax and enjoy. In fact, you should feel sad that you are 
wasting time without doing any work on a Sunday. You 
have to utilise your time in a proper way. If you do not 
have any work, undertake social service. Help your fel- 
lowmen. Be prepared to make any sacrifice for the sake of 
your motherland. The Bhagavadgita says, Karmanyeva- 
dhikarasthe ma phaleshu kadachana (you have a right over 
action but not on the result). You have to sanctify your 
karmas (actions). People talk of punya karma (meritorious 
deeds) and papa karma (sinful action). When the feelings 
are pure, karma becomes sanctified and the work will be 
transformed into worship. Life becomes meaningful only 
when you make proper use of time. Kaaya (body) has been 
given to perform karma (action). Every karma is associ- 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 29 


ated with a karana (cause) and kala (time). It is the pri- 
mary duty of man to understand the principles of kala, 
karma, karana, karthavya (duty) and act accordingly. This 
is the main teaching of Bharatiya culture. It is its pristine 
culture which has been safeguarding Bharat since ancient 
times. What is culture? You think it is a way of life. But it is 
not so. Indian culture is something that transforms your 
life into an ideal one. Today we do not find many who are 
interested in teaching about the greatness of Indian culture. 
Even if people are ready to teach, few are interested in lis- 
tening to them. Even if they listen, they are not prepared to 
put it into practice. Some people want to practise but lack 
proper support and encouragement. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Perform all your actions with purity of heart. Ac- 
tions performed without a pure heart are futile. Even if a 
little work is done with a pure heart, it becomes fruitful. 


Develop Self-Confidence, Maintain Self-Respect 
Embodiments of Love! 


This day (19th November) is being observed as 
Ladies Day. What does it mean? You think that this day is 
meant to do some sacred acts, listen to Swami’s discourse, 
etc. It is not merely that. You should spend time in a sacred 
manner. What you learn today should be an ideal for your 
lifetime. Develop self-confidence. Under any circumstances 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 294 


uphold your self-respect. What is the use of living a life 
bereft of these two? You may not have money or strength 
and you may be put to disrepute, but always maintain your 
self-respect. Abraham Lincoln lived a life of self-respect 
under all circumstances. His mother taught him, “People 
may mock at you and ridicule you but never be perturbed. 
Always keep up your self-respect.” Lincoln followed her 
teachings implicitly. He studied under streetlights as there 
was no light at home. Ultimately, he became the President 
of America. It was only because of his self-confidence and 
self-respect that he could occupy such an exalted position. 
The teachings of mother play a vital role in shaping the 
future of her children. She should make every effort to drive 
away bad qualities from her children and infuse human val- 
ues like sathya, dharma, santhi, prema and ahimsa in them. 
There are many who give speeches at length about the im- 
portance of these values in our daily life, but how many are 
translating them into action? Very few. They do not utter 
truth nor do they perform righteous deeds. Our ancients 
never deviated from the path of truth and righteousness 
under any circumstances. Sathyannasti paro dharma (there 
is no dharma greater than adherence to truth). The Vedas 
teach, Sathyam vada, Dharmam chara (speak truth, prac- 
tise righteousness). Your thoughts, words and deeds should 
be in harmony. It is said, The proper study of mankind is 
man. Today nobody knows what man has in his mind as his 
thoughts, words, and deeds are in total variance. He is wast- 
ing his life with such unethical behaviour. The tongue is 
given to speak truth. 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 295 


“O tongue, the knower of taste! You are very sa- 

cred. Speak the truth in the most pleasing manner. 

Chant the Divine Names of Govinda, Madhava and 

Damodara incessantly. This is your foremost duty.” 
(Sanskrit verse) 


The tongue which is meant to utter sacred words, is 
being used to criticise others. One cannot describe in words 
the fate of such a person. Our ancients had so much love 
for their motherland that they wanted to be born again and 
again in this sacred land of Bharat. But today people have 
neither deshabhimana (love for the country) nor 
dharmabhimana (love for righteousness). Instead they are 
developing dehabhimana (love for the body). Body is like 
a water bubble. How long can you protect it? It will burst 
sooner or later. Hence, develop atmabhimana (love for the 
atma), which alone can protect the entire world. Develop 
faith that the same atma exists in you and all others. When 
you have such strong faith, the whole nation would pros- 
per. One with atmabhimana is a true human being. If one 
does not have atmabhimana, one’s life is wasted. 


Embodiments of Love! 


This day (November 19th) is very sacred. Griham 
Ammayi, the mother of this body, used to speak to all with 
love. She could never withstand the suffering of others. 
She would come upstairs and plead with Me, saying, 
“Swami, they are in a sorrowful state. Please call them and 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 296 


talk to them.” Her heart was filled with compassion. That 
is why her fame has spread so much. In order to attain a 
good name, you have to utter sacred words and help oth- 
ers. Whenever mother Easwaramma came to Me with such 
a plea, I used to pretend to be angry and chide her, saying, 
“Why are you coming here with recommendations? I don’t 
want to listen to them’’. But she would persist and continue 
to plead, “Swami, please take pity on them. They are in 
dire need of Your help. Please talk to them once.” I used to 
be happy thinking, “How compassionate and kind-hearted 
she is!” Hri + daya = hridaya. That which is filled with 
compassion is hridaya (heart). But, today man does not 
possess such a compassionate heart. He utters harsh words 
and thereby put to disrepute. One should talk softly and 
sweetly. Never hurt others’ feelings with harsh talk. 


Lead An Exemplary Life 
Embodiments of Love! 


Primarily, women should keep their tongue under 
check. As men are involved with multifarious activities, it 
may be difficult for them to control their tongue. Hence, it 
is the duty of women to look after the home diligently and 
conduct themselves in a pleasing manner. Treat the guests 
in a cordial manner and to the extent possible, extend your 
help to those who are in need of it. Today people do only 
lip service, they do not translate their words into action. 
You should empathise with those who are in difficulties 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 297 


and try to give them solace. You should comfort and con- 
sole them with soothing words. Those who talk harsh words 
are verily demons. If you hurt others’ feelings, you will be 
hurt twice as much. You cannot escape from the conse- 
quences of your actions. You have to bear this truth in mind. 
Your life will be sanctified when you conduct yourselves 
in such a manner as not to hurt others. People aspire to 
attain liberation. What is liberation? Help ever, hurt never. 
That is true liberation. To get rid of moha (attachment) is 
true moksha (liberation). Do not try to find faults with oth- 
ers. If you point an accusing finger at someone, remember 
that three fingers are pointing at you. Sathyam kantasya 
bhushanam (Truth is the true ornament to the neck), 
Hasthasya bhushanam danam (charity 1s the true ornament 
to the hand). Your hands are useless if they do not perform 
acts of charity. You have to sanctify each limb of your body 
in sacred activities. Your eyes should look at only sacred 
things. Do you know what an enormous power is latent in 
your eyes? There are crores of light rays in them. In olden 
days, people used to invoke the grace of sun god to have a 
better vision. When you perform Suryanamaskar (worship 
of sun god) and invoke his grace, the light rays in your 
eyes will become more effulgent. On the other hand, if you 
look for mistakes in others, the sun god will withdraw his 
rays from your eyes making you blind. Hence, make proper 
use of the limbs given by God. 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 298 


Embodiments of Love! 


These teachings are simple to practise in your daily 
life. Just because they are simple, do not take them lightly. 
Though they appear to be simple, they lead you to libera- 
tion. It is your good fortune (adrishtam) that you are blessed 
with eyes to see. What is adrishtam? Adrishtam means that 
which cannot be seen. You may not be able to see the re- 
sults of your meritorious deeds. But they confer on you all 
the happiness and comforts in due course of time. That is 
Adrishtam. Many things that follow you cannot be seen by 
the naked eye. 


Embodiments of Love! 


This land of Bharat is highly illustrious one. It has 
given you the wealth of vijnana, sujnana and prajnana. 
But the unfortunate ones are unable to receive them. The 
Upanishads extol manava (man) in several ways. Manava 
means one who is sacred, one who is endowed with infi- 
nite power and one who imparts wisdom. But man is un- 
able to understand the meaning of his own name and is 
taking to wrong path. Your fortune or misfortune depends 
on your actions. Without realising this truth, you are in- 
dulging in evil deeds. You feel sorry when the consequences 
of your sins haunt you. What is the use? You have to be 
careful right from beginning not to commit sin. You have 
to make every effort to earn divine grace. Whatever action 
you may perform, do it as an offering to God. Only then 
will your life be sanctified. What you have to acquire is not 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 299 


worldly wealth and comforts. You have to earn the wealth 
of sujnana, vijnana and prajnana which will follow you 
eternally. When you acquire such true and eternal wealth, 
you would have acquired God’s grace. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Many women have been eagerly awaiting Novem- 
ber 19th to celebrate Ladies Day. It is really your good for- 
tune to have such a noble thought. Give up all negative 
thoughts and develop sacred feelings. Lead an exemplary 
life. The Upanishads have accorded a great value to human 
life. You should live up to it. The Upanishads are the store- 
house of knowledge. The Vedas contain mantras like 
Purusha Suktam, Sri Suktam, etc. One may have mastered 
the Vedas, but if one does not study the Upanishads, all his 
learning will prove futile. That is why people start the study 
of the Upanishads after they complete the study of Vedas. 
The Upanishads take you closer to God. I wish that you 
follow the teachings of the Upanishads and manifest your 
latent divine power. I bless you all and bring My discourse 
to a close. 


Ladies’ Day, 19-11-2002, 
Prasanthi Nilayam 


20 
Character - End Of True Education 


No trace of peace anywhere; 
Truth has become equally scarce; 
Fearsome weapons are stocked up galore; 
Others abound who cover with dread; 
Self love, the cause for this wicked furore; 
Such is the truth of Sais word. 
(Telugu poem) 


Embodiments of Love! 


DUCATION is increasing day by day, but there is 

no commensurate transformation in human 
behaviour as a result. What is the kind of education do we 
need? Today, academic excellence in education has increased, 
but its salutary effect in human behaviour is decreasing. 


A Harmonious Blend Of Secular And Spiritual 
Education Is The Need Of The Hour 
Dear Students! 


Today, the education being pursued by you is only 
secular (i.e., value neutral). Mere secular education is not 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 302 


enough. It must be supplemented by spiritual education. 
You must develop the principle of love. You must follow 
the path of truth. True education is that which is suffused 
with truth and love. Without truth, love is ineffective and 
devoid of value. Secular education is for making a living, 
whereas spiritual education is for reaching the goal of life. 
Therefore, it is the duty of students as well as educators to 
harmonise the secular education with spiritual education. 
Today, the world has recognised the importance of harmonious 
relationship between secular and spiritual education. 


The whole world has started imparting spiritual edu- 
cation along with conventional curricula. People have 
realised the truth that spirituality is not a modern discov- 
ery, but ancient wisdom. However, the importance of this 
principle has been confined to only propounding and teach- 
ing of spirituality. Actually, there is a decline in the prac- 
tice of spirituality in daily life. Therefore, practical educa- 
tion is most important today. Education without practice 
would lead to unrest. Modern studies in institutions is re- 
ferred to as education. But, spiritual education that has its 
effect on one’s heart, is “educare’. ‘Educare’ means bring- 
ing out the latent divinity in a human being and establish- 
ing it as an ideal to the whole world. Modern education 
ends with mere bookish knowledge. It is confined to what 
is contained in the books. Educare, however, is not related 
to the books. It is related to teaching about the source of all 
knowledge, that is latent in the heart of a human being. 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 303 


Therefore, underlying such type of education is the prime 
necessity, today. People are pursuing higher education in 
the secular field. That is not enough. They have also to 
pursue spiritual education which teaches human values like 
truth, righteous conduct, love, etc., which bring about a 
transformation of the heart. 


A harmonious blend of secular and spiritual educa- 
tion is ideally suited to the present-day world. One is an 
inner awakening and the other is an external teaching. Secu- 
lar teachings are related to the physical world. They are the 
negative aspect; whereas teachings related to the inner 
awakening are positive. Take for example, love. Who can 
define the form of love? The best way to define love is to 
love others and be loved by others and thereby experience 
the bliss of love. Such teachings related to the inner awak- 
ening are the urgent need of the hour. Educare is that which 
establishes love and kinship between human beings. To- 
day, nobody knows what is there in the mind of another 
individual; not to speak of the individual whose thought, 
word and deed are not in harmony. He thinks something, 
speaks something else and does something that is totally 
different. This is not the characteristic of true education. 
What you think, you speak; what you utter, you perform in 
action. Since there is no unity between thought, word and 
deed, man today is not rising to the level of a mahatma 
(noble soul). He is becoming a duratma (wicked person). 
It is said: 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 304 


Manasyeka Vachasyekam Karmanyekam 
Mahatmanam 

Manasyanyat Vachasyanyath Karmanyanyath 
Duratmanam 

(those whose thoughts, words and deeds are in com- 

plete harmony are noble ones; those with whom 

they are at variance are wicked ones). 


Villages Foster Love And Kinship 


It is the so-called ‘educated elite’ who are the greater 
criminals than the unlettered masses. It is they who are caus- 
ing great damage to the country. The uneducated villagers 
are leading respectable lives and are setting examples to 
others. For instance, those who are educated and consid- 
ered to be great intellectuals are leading luxurious lives in 
cities. On the other hand, those considered to be rustics 
and unlettered simpletons are living in the villages. They 
are leading a very simple, happy and contented life. Today, 
you will find that several schools, colleges and universities 
are established in cities. You will also find constant unrest 
and agitations in the campuses of these educational institu- 
tions. On the other hand, there are hardly any such agita- 
tions in the villages, where such institutions of higher edu- 
cation are non-existent. What could be the reason for this 
situation? More of this so-called modern education! 


You go to villages and observe. The moment you 
enter a village, the simple villagers enquire, “Oh brother! 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 305 


Where do you come from? What is your country, etc.?” 
They talk to you with respect and reverence and enquire 
after your welfare. But, in the towns and cities, even a fa- 
ther and son do not enquire the welfare of each other. They 
go about their daily routine in a most mechanical way, with 
no concern for each other. The reason for this situation is 
modern education. It is said, The end of education is char- 
acter. Since people have lost their character nowadays, re- 
spect and reverence have also declined. Even parents con- 
tribute to this situation. Parents in villages send their chil- 
dren to cities for education. They expect their children to 
pursue higher education and earn degrees. Their intentions 
are, no doubt, good. But, the children take to bad ways, 
while in cities. While they were in villages, they used to 
respect elders and were obedient to their parents. Once they 
entered cities in pursuit of higher education, they lost all 
the good qualities of respect, reverence, character and hu- 
mility acquired at home. Students have now forgotten the 
value of a life of sanctity. They do not hesitate to smoke in 
front of even their parents. Bad habits are on the increase. 
But, the situation is somewhat different in the villages. The 
children in the villages behave with restraint in the pres- 
ence of elders and parents. The healthy parental control is 
still surviving in the villages. No such control, however, 
exists in towns and cities. Youths smoke and offer ciga- 
rettes to their friends, they go to cinemas and indulge in 
ever so many bad habits. There is none to restrain them and 
wean them away from bad habits. What is the reason for 
this behaviour? Modern education. They have no respect 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 306 


for elders, parents and society. When someone points out 
their mistakes, they begin to argue saying, “Why should I 
fear? It is my will, I smoke my cigarette.” 


Education Sans Good Behaviour Is Useless 


A small example. Once, an Indian and a foreigner 
were travelling together in a railway compartment. The 
Indian was a chain-smoker. Not only that, he was puffing 
the smoke on the face of the foreigner. The foreigner toler- 
ated it for sometime and when he could not bear it any- 
more, he told the Indian, “My dear son! I am not feeling 
well. I cannot bear cigarette smoking. If you want to smoke, 
please go to the toilet.” The Indian who was brought up 
with modern education replied, “If you cannot tolerate my 
smoking a cigarette, you may go to the toilet. [have bought 
the cigarette and I will smoke freely. I am at liberty to smoke 
and puff the smoke as I please.” Thus, he began quarrelling 
with the foreigner. The foreigner was helpless. After some- 
time, he went to the toilet and returned. In the meanwhile, 
the Indian student threw out the shoes of the foreigner from 
the compartment. The foreigner saw this but thought that it 
was not wise to argue with this arrogant boy. He, therefore, 
went up to the upper berth and stretched himself. Now it 
was the turn of the Indian boy. He went to the toilet. Before 
he returned, the foreigner threw away the coat of the In- 
dian boy, to teach him a lesson. The boy returned from the 
toilet and enquired where his coat was. The foreigner re- 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 307 


plied that it had gone in search of his shoes, which were 
thrown out of the compartment by the boy. Then the boy 
realised his mistake. As you are aware, for everything, there 
will be reaction, resound and reflection in this Kali age. 
When you speak softly and sweetly to others, you will re- 
ceive the same in return. If you are rude to others, others 
will also be rude towards you. Every individual, irrespec- 
tive of his age and country, must, therefore, speak softly 
and sweetly. Whether one is educated or illiterate, one must 
speak softly and sweetly. He must have humility. 


What is education? 


“Hear ye the word true of Sai. 
Culture, conduct, truth, faith, devotion 
and discipline 
These are education true, 
All else is trash.” 
(Telugu poem) 


Man does not consider himself duty-bound today. 
Performance of one’s own duty is discipline. What is the 
use of education without discipline? Education without 
knowledge is useless and knowledge without education is 
foolishness. Therefore, no purpose is served by pursuing 
such foolish and useless education. One must cultivate good 
behaviour also with high education. But, what we find to- 
day is high academics and degenerated behaviour. There- 
fore, you must acquire high education, but lead a simple 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 308 


life. That is true education. Once, Mahatma Gandhi was 
shedding tears while holding a book. He had read that book 
and found it to be trash. Meanwhile, a Britisher came there 
and asked Gandhiji why he was shedding tears. Gandhi re- 
plied that the book he was holding did not promote charac- 
ter building, which he believed was the heart of education. 
There is a vast difference between modern education and 
ancient wisdom. The time in which you are pursuing your 
education may be modern, but your behaviour should al- 
ways be in accordance with ancient wisdom. Only then will 
your education command respect. 


You must respect your parents. If an elderly gentle- 
man visits your house, welcome him with reverence and 
respect. Speak to him sweetly and softly. When that gentle- 
man enquires the whereabouts of your father, do not brush 
him aside saying, “Go and find out.” That is not the reply 
you have to give. Politely tell him, “Sir! My father is in the 
drawing room, I shall call him.” When you thus speak 
sweetly and softly, the visitor will have a good opinion about 
you. He would think that you are the worthy son of a wor- 
thy father. You must protect the honour and prestige of your 
father. How? With your good behaviour and sweet and soft 
words. Otherwise, the visitors would form opinion, “The 
father is a good and respectable person, but this son of that 
father is a bad fellow. He is rude and arrogant. He is nota 
worthy son.” Therefore, what we have to learn today is to 
cultivate humility, in spite of our modern education and 
living in a modern age. 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 309 


Who is a student? A student is one who is acquiring 
education and who conducts himself with humility, obedi- 
ence and discipline. He, who has no obedience and disci- 
pline is not a student, but a stupid. There must be calm and 
serene atmosphere in campuses where a number of students 
pursue their education. Today, elders hesitate to go to places 
where there are students; the reason is, the elders are afraid 
that these students might create trouble. This was not the 
situation in earlier days. The students of those days used to 
conduct themselves with humility. They had a sense of dis- 
crimination, acquired through education. In modern edu- 
cation, honesty and integrity, duty, discipline and devotion 
are woefully lacking. What is the use of such education? 
In olden days, a student used to be initiated into learning 
with a sacred prayer to God “Om Namah Sivaya! Om Namo 
Narayanaya!” The elders in the neighbourhood were in- 
vited for the ceremony and their blessings for the child 
obtained. In contrast, today, a child is initiated into learn- 
ing with a nursery rhyme “Ba Ba blacksheep”, with the 
result, he would ultimately become a black sheep in soci- 


ety. 
Keep A Watch On Your Words 


Dear students! You are pursuing your education in a 
sacred atmosphere. You must continue to develop this at- 
mosphere later in your life. Modern science is, of course, 
great. But, your senses are at a low level. Along with sci- 
ence, the senses must also be raised to a higher level. To- 
day, we are leading a high level life, keeping our senses at 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 310 


low level. This should not be what is meant by ‘educare’. 
Educare is bringing out the latent divinity in a human be- 
ing. Whatever words you speak, you must watch whether 
they are the result of your education or educare. Today, 
nobody is keeping this watch. I often refer to the spelling 
of the word, WATCH. The spelling consists of five letters, 
namely, WATCH. These letters stand for: 


Ww - Watch your Words 

A - Watch your Actions 

T - Watch your Thoughts 
GC - Watch your Character 
H - Watch your Heart 


The real watch is when you keep a watch on your 
words, actions, thoughts, character, and heart; not the one 
you tie to your wrist. The wrist-watch may go for repair, 
but the word ‘watch’ will never get spoiled. It will always 
bring purity of thought, word and deed. How great these 
words are! Education in the olden days contributed to 
making man a noble and ideal human being. 


Then, about cleanliness and purity. These two are 
most important aspects of education. Students must take 
good care in respect of personal hygiene, involving regular 
bath, neat and clean dress, etc. “Cleanliness is godliness”. 
Therefore, be clean and pure. Lead a happy and contented 
life. Always help others. Help Ever, Hurt Never. Surely, 
you can pursue modern education. But, along with it, you 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 311 


must also learn ancient wisdom. There must be a harmoni- 
ous blend of these two. Pursuit of scientific knowledge is, 
of course, necessary. But, today, we are understanding sci- 
ence in a perverted way. Science starts at a particular point 
and ends at a different point. It is not a full circle; whereas, 
spirituality is a full circle, ending at the point of origin. 
That is why it is said, 


Poornamadah poornamidam 
Poornat poornamudachyate 
Poornasya poornamadaya 
Poornameva avashishyate 


(That is full, this is full. When the full is taken out 
of the full, what remains is again the full.) 


Rise To The Level Beyond The Senses 


Science starts with an enquiry. “What is this? What 
is this? On the other hand, spirituality begins its quest with 
the enquiry “What is that? What is that?” The enquiry “What 
is this?” indicates nearness, nearness to the senses. This is 
science. In contrast to this, the enquiry “What is that?” in- 
dicates distance, 1.e., distance from senses. That is spiritu- 
ality. 

A small example. You all have come here from far- 
off places like Zambia, East Africa, etc., to have the darshan 
of Sai Baba. Since you are living at such distant places, 
you develop great love for Sai Baba and yearn to have His 
darshan. The same eagerness will not be there to see a 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 312 


person in a neighbouring village. It is natural to develop in- 
terest in an object that is far away. What is that “that’’? “That” 
means, that which is beyond the senses, namely, spirituality. 
“Below senses” is dirty. We should not aspire for that. We 
must rise to the level of beyond senses. Only then can we 
lead a sacred life. Today, students are below the senses. They 
are becoming slaves to the senses. This is not proper educa- 
tion. You must become a “Master of Senses”, not merely a 
“Master of Science”. You must make the senses your ser- 
vants. You should not become a servant of the senses. 


You all know about Queen Kaikeyi in Ramayana. 
She was an adept in asthras and Sasthras (all kinds of weap- 
ons). She was the daughter of the king of Kekaya king- 
dom. She was the youngest and dearest queen of King 
Dasaratha. She brought along with her, a servant called 
Manthara to serve her in the palace. But, in course of time, 
she allowed Manthara to become her mentor and she be- 
came her servant. Ultimately, she yielded herself to 
Manthara’s advice and made her life most miserable. She 
lost her husband, King Dasaratha, who died unable to bear 
the pangs of separation from his beloved son, Sri Rama. 
She had also to face the anger of her own son, Bharatha, 
who did not like the idea of Rama being sent to the forest 
and his becoming king in Rama’s place. Everyone in the 
kingdom hated her for sending Rama and Sita to the forest. 
That is why, it is said that a servant should be kept as a 
servant and a master should remain a master. You are the 
master and your senses are the servants. 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 313 


Follow The Principle Of Simple Living And High 
Thinking 


‘Master the mind and be a mastermind.” That is the 
quality ofa student. Only then can you acquire true higher 
education and share it with others too. I can teach you at 
great length about education, but time is a constraint. What 
I teach the students centres round the principle of “simple 
living and high thinking”. I Myself follow this principle. It 
is not education in terms of degrees that is important; cul- 
ture is important. If we develop culture, we can acquire 
any amount of purity and sacredness in our life. The aim 
of all this training being given to you, is to make you self- 
reliant. You must attend to all your personal chores your- 
self. For example, you must clean your dinner plates, wash 
your clothes, etc., by yourself. This is the duty of a real 
student. If you cultivate such good habits, what more is 
required? This is simple living and high thinking. You 
must lead a noble life, based on this principle. 


I am also advising Jumsai that this principle of self- 
help must be implemented in all the schools run by the In- 
stitute of human values. Students of the institute must be- 
come self-reliant. The place of their study, the place of 
their stay, the book racks, etc., must always be kept clean 
by the students themselves. No separate servants must be 
engaged for this purpose. I often tell the students a joke — 
“The vegetable purchased is worth two annas; but the 
charges paid to the porter for carrying the vegetables are 
four annas.”” Will you ever pay a higher amount towards 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 314 


porter charges, than the cost of the vegetable itself? You 
should not waste your money in such ways. Misuse of money 
is evil. The money you spend in your student life is con- 
tributed by your parents. They earned it by their sweat and 
blood. Each rupee of such amount must be treated as a drop 
of their blood. Curtail your expenditure and pursue higher 
education. 


Today, several students wish to go to foreign coun- 
tries for higher education. How much money is required 
for this purpose! What do you do, after reaching the for- 
eign country, spending such a huge amount? You are not 
concentrating on your studies. On the other hand, you spend 
your time in ever so many activities, wasting your valuable 
money. If you are short of money as a result of this waste- 
ful expenditure, you resort to cleaning of cups and plates in 
a restaurant, to supplement your income. Instead of clean- 
ing cups and plates in a foreign country, why don’t you do 
it in your own country and in your own home? By doing 
so, you will be helpful to your parents. Your parents will 
feel happy. Dear students! Make your parents happy. Make 
your teachers happy. You serve them. Only then, will you 
be able to receive good education from the teachers. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Realise the truth that real education is that which 
teaches humility. It is only when you cultivate this quality 
of humility, can you become ideal students and serve your 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 315 


country well. You keep yourself away from places of vio- 
lence, for, if you go there, you will also receive injuries to 
your body. If you can, try to control such violent incidents, 
otherwise, keep yourself away from them. Try to establish 
a peaceful atmosphere everywhere. 


Dear Students! 


You are full of noble qualities. You are strong in body 
and mind. Along with that, try also to develop good char- 
acter. There is no use developing friends’ circle, wealth and 
strength, without developing character. You become ideal 
students and propagate the principles of Sathya Sai Educa- 
tion in the world and earn respect from the world. 


Discourse on 20-11-2002, 
Prasanthi Nilayam. 


21 


The Best Way To Love God Is To Love All 
And Serve All 


Those who could teach the essence of Vedanta to 
even the ancient Rishis 

Those who could make the inert stones dance by 
their sculptural skills 

Those who could make the heads of the enemies 
roll like rubber balls with their sharp swords 

Those who could rule the entire world with their 
sovereign authority 

Are there in the land of Bharat. 

Of what use it is? 

Not one of them is prepared to listen to the 
heart rending cries of the common people. 

(Telugu poem) 
Dear students! 


Wo. is meant by ‘education?’ What kind of 
education we must pursue? What should be 


the educational standards? What type of education 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 318 


contributes to the human development? What benefits do we 
derive from the present system of education? A real 
student is one who contemplates on these five issues and 
understands them thoroughly. Vijnana (higher knowledge) and 
prajnana (supreme wisdom) are not merely products of edu- 
cation. Man can acquire these sacred powers only by culture 
and refinement gained through education. What is culture? 
Culture is the conscious effort put in by a man to achieve a 
transformation in his daily life from untruth to truth; from non- 
conformance to conformance to scriptural authority and from 
evanescence to eternity. It is a spiritual journey towards divin- 
ity. Where is such divinity? It is in every human being as the 
embodiment of truth. What you have to protect today is not 
your country, but Sathya (truth) and Dharma (righteousness); 
they, in turn, will protect the country. Only then, the whole 
world will enjoy peace and prosperity. The entire universe is 
based upon sathya and dharma. 


The creation emerges from truth and merges into truth, 
Is there a place where truth does not exist? 
Visualise such pure and unsullied truth. 

(Telugu poem) 


The life of every human being is based upon Truth. 
Truth and righteous conduct alone are protecting the uni- 
verse. But, unfortunately, man is unable to recognise this 
fact and is leading a miserable life. 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 319 


Education Is For Achieving The Goal Of Love! 
Embodiments of Love! 


Education is not an exercise. Nor is it meant to make 
a living. It is for the purpose of achieving the goal of life. 
Dear Students! You are born, brought up and living in this 
country of Bharat. But, you are unable to recognise the 
underlying philosophy for which this sacred country stands. 
The land of Bharat is a karma bhumi (field of activity) in 
which you perform the sacred duty enjoined upon you. It is 
a land of virtue where you accumulate punya (merit) by the 
diligent performance of your kartavya (duty). What is the 
intimate relationship between this sacred land and God? 
This is hand; this is leg; this is head; this is stomach — all 
these are parts of the body. There is humanness in the body. 
That humanness is a part of society. That society is a part 
of nature. Nature, in turn, is associated with the Paramatma 
(supreme being). Thus, prakriti (nature) 1s an anga (part) 
of the Paramatma (supreme being). It is only when man 
recognises the nature of these parts and sub-parts (anganga) 
and conducts himself accordingly, he will be able to under- 
stand divinity. 


Embodiments of Love! 


If you seriously contemplate, you will understand 
that divinity keeps humanity going. Without divinity, man 
cannot live even for a moment. Man thinks, out of his ego, 
that he can live by himself. But, this is not true. Merely by 
spending some time, life is not fulfilled. When you enquire 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 320 


into the matter whether duty comes first or right comes first, 
several people insist upon right getting priority. Where did 
the right come from? When you perform your duty, its fruit 
in the shape of right accrues to you. How can a child exist 
without the mother? Therefore, right is not the first priority. 
In fact, man has no right at all. When he performs his duty, 
the result of that action comes as right. When you enquire 
into the fact, whether rain comes first or the flow of water, it 
becomes clear that flow of rain water follows rain. Without 
rain, there cannot be a flow. Here, flow can be compared to 
right and rain to duty. 


Dear Students! 


You are putting a lot of effort in your study to ac- 
quire high academic qualifications. In spite of all this ef- 
fort, you are not having peace of mind. It is said, “Secular 
education is for happiness in the mundane world and spiri- 
tual education is for happiness in the other world.” In order 
to acquire spiritual education, one must spend some time 
in enquiry. Spiritual knowledge cannot be acquired with 
secular education. It is said, Adhyatma vidya vidyanam 
(among various branches of knowledge, spiritual knowl- 
edge is the best) and “Saa vidya yaa vimuktaye” (true edu- 
cation is that which liberates mankind). Therefore, stu- 
dents must first begin to enquire “Who am I’? They must 
also realise the fact that right carries responsibility also with 
it. Your parents have aright. When you protect their rights, 
they in turn will discharge their responsibility towards you. 
In Indian culture, first place has been given to the mother 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 321 


and father by proclaiming Matrudevo bhava (revere your 
mother as God) and Pitrudevo bhava (revere your father as 
God). 


Today, scientific knowledge is considered to be great. 
How did science acquire this greatness? Science deals with 
the physical aspect of the universe. It strives to explore the 
secrets of the universe, and not beyond. But, there is a knowl- 
edge beyond this which forms the basis for its creation, ex- 
istence and dissolution. That is spirituality. Without that spiri- 
tual basis, science has no effect. Churchill, the late Prime 
Minister of England, once said, “Man has conquered all, but, 
he has not conquered himself.” Man today is making efforts 
to explore everything in the world, but, he is unable to realise 
his own nature. What is the use of such knowledge? There- 
fore, man must begin enquiry into himself as to who he is, 
what is his nature, what latent powers he has, etc. In the 
olden days when the convocations were being held, the teach- 
ers used to teach the students such noble principles as 
Mathrudevo bhava, Pitrudevo bhava, Acharyadevo bhava, 
Atithidevo bhava (revere your mother, father, preceptor and 
guest as God). First, itis mother, who gave you birth. Then, 
she shows you the father. The father takes you to the Guru 
and finally the Guru leads you to God. Unfortunately, today, 
there are very few Gurus who lead you to God. That is a 
different matter. First and foremost, the mother who is re- 
sponsible for your very birth in this world, is forgotten to- 
day. Similarly, the motherland where you are born is also 
neglected. 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 322 


Dear Students! 


Today, you take degrees from this Institute of Higher 
Learning and set your foot in the wide world. There are about 
two hundred universities in India. Several thousand colleges 
are functioning under those universities. Every year, these 
universities award degrees to several thousand students and 
send them into the wide world. But, what these students are 
doing in the outside world? How do these highly educated 
people make their living? Students are taught education in 
these universities to make a living. It is not possible for all 
these degree holders to get jobs. Therefore, these educated 
people migrate to foreign countries. Having gone there, not 
all these people are able to make a decent living. They, there- 
fore, undertake some menial jobs to supplement their income. 
The question is, why not they do the same service in their 
own country, Bharat. Today, the educated people are not serv- 
ing their motherland. They do not serve their country, but 
are prepared to undertake any type of job in a foreign coun- 
try. No, no. This is not proper. This is not the purpose for 
which you acquired education. You should serve your own 
country with all your energy. Your entire life must be de- 
voted to serve the country in which you are born and brought 
up. Being educated, you must face the battle of life with 
courage and valour and ultimately emerge victorious. 


Today’s students are not prepared to do hard work 
with patience and perseverance. Work is important. To pur- 
sue education and obtain degrees is not important. It is 
more than fifty years since India attained independence. 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 323 


Several thousands and lakhs of students have acquired 
higher qualification, during these fifty years and odd. But, 
what are they doing? They are not rendering service to 
society. They do not live up to the glory of this country. 
First and foremost, one must realise the sacredness of this 
great country, 1.e, Bharat. How can one who cannot pro- 
tect his own home, protect another’s? 


Serve Your Motherland 
Dear Students! 


Give up the idea of going to foreign countries for 
higher education or jobs. Even if you are not able to get 
any employment in your country, remain here and serve 
the country. You serve the society. Bring honour and glory 
to your motherland, Bharat. Attain the glory that “this stu- 
dent is a hero in action and sadhana.” You all know about 
Abdul Kalam, President of India, and the chief guest of 
today’s function. I may tell you that he has not gone to a 
foreign country in search of a job or money. He is a great 
scientist. All the scientific knowledge he has acquired was 
from the Indian Universities only. What is there in other 
countries, that which is already not here? It is said, Yanna 
Bharate, thanna Bharata, meaning that which is not here 
in Bharat is not there in other countries. All the power and 
all the glory is in India only. What can you do in a foreign 
land that is dry, leaving such a great country like India, 
which is shining in glory, honour and prestige in the world? 
You are making use of all your education and energies for 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 324 


the development of a foreign country. Why don’t you in- 
stead make use of them for the development of your own 
country? Why don’t you serve the people of your own 
country? You will attain glory only when you make use of 
your education for protecting your motherland. You must, 
in the first instance, work hard. You must become heroes 
in action. It does not behove of you to spend your time in 
idle talk, without involving yourself in some solid work 
for the benefit of the nation. Bend your body and work 
hard to attain glory. A seed that is sown in the soil, loses its 
shape to ultimately become a gigantic tree. That tree yields 
sweet fruits. On the same analogy, it is only when you de- 
stroy your ego and lose your identity, the real fruit of your 
actions comes out. Therefore, remove your dehabhimana 
(attachment to the body) and develop deshabhimana (at- 
tachment to the country). Today, you will not find 
deshabhimana anywhere. Several students, today, are not 
aware of the National Anthem and how to sing it. But, sur- 
prisingly, they are fully aware of the cinema songs in great 
number. Why don’t you learn to sing the National Anthem 
and try to understand the glory and characteristics of Bharat 
embedded in that song? 


Develop Self-Respect, Cultivate Human Values 


Dear Students! 


You must protect the honour of this great country. 
You must develop self-respect. One who has lost self-re- 
spect, cannot attain glory. Self-respect comes only out of 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 325 


spiritual sadhana. Today, students wish to achieve wealth, 
physical strength and friends’ circle. What about charac- 
ter? Of what use is it to have the above three, without char- 
acter? Whenever they come across somebody, they wish 
him “hello” and try to make friendship. This is only a “hello, 
hello” friendship; but, inside, everything is hollow. There- 
fore, you must give first preference to character. When you 
respect others, others will respect you. You complain that 
others are not respecting you. But, did you enquire into 
yourself whether you are respecting others? You serve oth- 
ers; others will then serve you. What you expect from oth- 
ers must be extended to others first. Only then there will 
be reaction, reflection and resound. You must respect your 
neighbours and enquire into their welfare. You may have 
wealth; you may be great; you may be leading a comfort- 
able life. But, all these things will not be of any value if 
you do not have character. 


Dear Students! 


You must cultivate the human values of Sathya (truth), 
Dharma (right conduct), Santhi (peace), Prema (love) and 
Ahimsa (non-violence). How can you call yourself a human 
being, without cultivating human values? It is only because 
of the human values, you are considered to be a human be- 
ing. You do not have the human quality of respecting others; 
then how can you expect others to respect you? The human 
values are divine qualities. Anything can be achieved with 
these qualities. 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 326 


Embodiments of Love! 


“Love” is a quality permeating every living being. 
Truth is verily the embodiment of divinity. It is in you, 
with you, around you, everywhere protecting you always. 
You need not search for God in some distant place. Truth 
is the very embodiment of God. Do not ever move away 
from Truth, even in times of danger to your life. Hold on to 
Truth steadfastly at all times. 


Realise The Principle Of Unity 
Embodiments of Love! 


One may be a big person and another a beggar. But, 
the Truth that is underlying in both these persons is the 
same. If you realise that truth, all will become one. That 
type of unity must be achieved. When you realise the prin- 
ciple of unity in all human beings, you can realise true di- 
vinity. You observe the principle of unity in diversity ex- 
pressing itself in the universe. For example, there are sev- 
eral types of bulbs here in this Sai Kulwant Hall. But, the 
electric current flowing in all these bulbs is the same. In- 
dian culture has proclaimed one ideal “Sarvam khalvidam 
Brahma” (verily all this is Brahman). That is the Truth. 
When you realise that truth, all comforts and happiness will 
accrue to you. You need not have to struggle for them. Learn 
to speak good words. Never hurt anybody with harsh words. 
Speak softly and sweetly to make all people happy. 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 327 


Emulate The Self-Confidence Of Abraham Lincoln 
Embodiments of Love! 


Good words bring good actions. You cannot always 
oblige; you can always speak obligingly. When you thus 
speak obligingly, how much your status grows! The soci- 
ety will respect you. I have often quoted the example of 
Abraham Lincoln, the late President of America. In his 
childhood days, Lincoln did not have enough money to 
prosecute his studies. He was so poor that he used to sit 
under the streetlight in the bazaar and read. He used to bor- 
row books from his classmates and read them during night 
times and return them the next morning. One day, his friends 
made fun of him saying how could this beggar pursue his 
education. Lincoln felt very sad and humiliated. He came 
home, crying. His mother tried to comfort him with sooth- 
ing words. She enquired: “My dear son! Why are you cry- 
ing? What is the reason?” He replied: “Mother! I don’t 
have any money even to drink a cup of tea. I realise the 
situation in our house. I am aware that you and father can- 
not afford spending money on my education.” Thus, Lin- 
coln struggled hard in his childhood days and studied well, 
with self-confidence and self-respect, with the moral sup- 
port extended by his mother. He did not hesitate to supple- 
ment the family income by doing some painting work and 
boot polishing. Nevertheless, throughout his educational 
career, he sustained his self-respect. By doing so, he earned 
a good name in society. In the meanwhile, he could secure 
a small job. With the meagre income from that job, he used 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 328 


to support his father and mother. The good name he earned 
in the society commanded their respect and love for him. 
In due course, elections came. His well-wishers and sup- 
porters advised him to contest in the elections. They as- 
sured him of their support and votes. On their advice, he 
contested in the elections and got himself elected to the 
position of the President of America. How could a poor 
carpenter’s son with no money even to pursue primary edu- 
cation, become the President of the United States of 
America? It is only because of the self-respect and self- 
confidence he assiduously cultivated right from his child- 
hood. Therefore, Dear Students! Do not ever give up self- 
respect, wherever you are and whichever circumstances you 
are placed in. Always assure yourself, “I am man, I am not 
animal.” Man today is playing with the fire of sensual plea- 
sures. But, how long you can continue like this? There is 
absolutely no purpose in indulging in this game. All your 
wealth and pleasures will disappear in a trice. It is only 
self-respect that will continue to be your companion 
throughout your life. Therefore, cultivate the divine qual- 
ity of self-respect,. Only then can you achieve the highest 
honour of the country. 


This evening, our students will present a drama. It is 
really a presentation based upon the story of the life of 
Abraham Lincoln. In this drama a student wished to study 
medicine. He wanted to become a doctor. He worked hard, 
studied under streetlights even and got admission into a 
reputed medical college. He had to pay 5 lakh rupees as 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 329 


fees which he could not afford. As he was feeling depressed 
and dejected, his father consoled him saying, “My dear son! 
Do not worry. God is there to fulfil your wish. He protects 
all people at all times.” These words of wisdom made an 
indelible mark on his heart. Next day he sat in the college 
garden and started writing a letter to God explaining his 
desire and his inability to fulfil his desire. “Oh God! People 
say you are omnipresent; my father also told me the same 
thing. I have full faith in the words of my father. If You are 
really omnipresent, why don’t You manifest before me and 
fulfil my desire?” Thus, while he was writing this letter, 
the bell rang and he hurriedly got up to leave for his class- 
room. In the process, the letter slipped from his book. He 
did not notice it. A rich person who came to the garden 
after some time noticed the letter. He picked it up and read 
it. He was very much moved by the determination of the 
boy to pursue medical education and his inability to do so 
due to financial constraint. He, therefore, went straight to 
the Principal of the Medical College, showed him the letter 
written by the boy addressed to God and paid the entire 
fees for all the five years in one lump sum. He requested 
the Principal not to reveal his identity to the boy till he 
completed his studies. The Principal called the boy and told 
him, “My dear son! Don’t worry about paying fees. Some- 
body has already paid your fees. You have absolute faith in 
God. You are sure to complete the course and come out in 
flying colours with God’s grace.” When he completed his 
medical education and became a doctor, his friends con- 
gratulated him, saying, “You will become a great doctor 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 330 


and earn a lot of money.” Then the boy said, “I am not 
interested in earning money. The purpose of my pursuing 
medical education is for serving the people. My life is dedi- 
cated to the service of society. Just as I studied this course 
paying no fees, similarly, I wish to serve the people with- 
out taking any fees from them.” Do you find such boys 
nowadays? Very rarely. You cannot admit your child in any 
school without paying fees. Even advance reservation is 
made in a school, for a newly born child. You book a seat 
by paying Rs. 20,000 to 30,000. But, faith can work won- 
ders. For a person who has self-confidence and absolute 
faith in God, anything is possible. Faith is the key. Without 
faith, how can one live in this world? 


“People have lost their eyes of faith. They have be- 
come blind in this world.” (Telugu poem) 


There is no use of opening your charma chakshu 
(physical eyes). Open your jnana chakshu (inner eye). Only 
then, you will achieve the desired result. 


Embodiments of Love! 


You studied in Swami’s institution for a long time. 
Did you ever spend any money for your education here? 
Tell me honestly. I am always worried whether you had to 
spend money on any occasion during your stay in this in- 
stitution. I am revealing a small incident that had 
happened sometime ago. Normally, I will not reveal such 
things. Usually, during examination time, students study 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 331 


the whole night, keeping the lights on. One day, the 
warden advised the students to limit the period of their study 
during night, since the charges for electricity were gradu- 
ally on the increase. The students did not pay heed to the 
advice and continued to study for long hours in the night. 
Consequently, the electricity bill came to a huge amount. 
Meanwhile, exactly two months before the examinations, 
the Electricity Department disconnected power supply to 
the hostel due to non-payment of the bill. They cannot be 
blamed, for, it is their duty. There were no lights in the 
hostel rooms. Students were feeling a lot of inconvenience. 
The warden came to Me and explained their plight. I en- 
quired from him why he did not bring it to my notice ear- 
lier. The warden replied, “Swami! You are spending so much 
amount on the education of the students. You are taking so 
much responsibility. How can I add some more burden? 
With that intention, I did not bring it to your notice.” I en- 
quired from him the amount of the bill. He replied that it 
came to Rs. 70,000/-. Thereupon I advised him, “Go im- 
mediately and pay the entire amount. Ask the Department 
people to restore the power supply immediately. Do not 
reveal to the students anything of what transpired between 
you and Me.” Thus, I always look to the convenience and 
welfare of the students. 


Sri Sathya Sai Deenajanoddarana Pathakam 


Today, I have given a cheque for sixty lakh rupees to 
Paramahamsa, to be deposited in the names of the sixty 
children adopted under the scheme of “Sri Sathya Sai 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 332 


Deenajanoddharana Pathakam’’. Some time ago, I happened 
to read a report about a mother who committed suicide af- 
ter giving poison to her three children. She resorted to such 
a gruesome act as there was nobody to look after them af- 
ter her husband’s death. I felt very sorry reading this news. 
Our country, Bharat, has earned the appellation Annapurna 
(Goddess of food). In such a sacred land, how can we re- 
main a mute witness to people dying of hunger and pov- 
erty? Hence, I decided to undertake a project under which 
poor children who lost their father, in some cases both par- 
ents, are adopted and provided the basic necessities of food, 
raiment and shelter. Their education is also taken care of. 
These children are selected from Bukkapatnam, 
Kothacheruvu and Puttaparthi Mandals. They belong tovery 
poor families who are finding it hard to feed themselves. 
We told the children, “We will give you food, shelter and 
also education. We will make you self-reliant. You need 
not worry.” 


Within a short period of one month, I got houses con- 
structed for them. One lakh rupees are being deposited in 
the name of each child. By the time they complete their 
education, this money will get multiplied into three to four 
lakhs. They can lead a comfortable life. When this was told 
in the beginning, people could not believe it. How can they 
believe? They were carried away by untruth. When truth 
was conveyed to them, they were not prepared to believe 
it. 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 333 


The children are being looked after very well. 
Paramahamsa is taking care of them with all love. Every 
day, the children are brought here in a bus for Swami’s 
darshan. They are extremely happy. All of them are learn- 
ing even the Vedic mantras. Whenever I ask them, “Are 
you happy?” they say, “Yes Swami. When You are looking 
after us like a wish-fulfilling tree, how can we be other- 
wise?” They are so happy because they are being looked 
after with love. Money cannot give such happiness. In this 
manner, we are performing many sacred activities. I am 
not interested in publicising them. Some people may not 
believe this, but I am not bothered. I will not give up My 
resolve. We should serve the poor and needy. We should 
strive for their uplift. After all, they are also human beings 
and we should treat them as our own. 


Students! 


Having completed your education, it is time for you 
to go back to your respective places; take up suitable jobs 
and serve your parents. Once in a while, you can come here 
to recharge your batteries. Otherwise, you may forget what- 
ever you have learnt here. Your stay here becomes meaning- 
ful only when you practise what you have learnt here. 


(Swami asked Mr Raghupathy Rao to get up.) He 
lost his father when he was very young. He came here with 
his mother. I gave her a job in the Anantapur Hostel. After 
some time, she also passed away. Then I brought this boy 
here and educated him. He has completed his MBA and is 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 334 


presently working as a lecturer in our Brindavan Campus. 
He pursued his education with sraddha (sincerity). I have 
been looking after many such students. This is My duty, 
because all are Mine. I belong to them and they belong to 
Me. As they are being looked after with such love, they are 
shaping into ideal citizens. Here is the best example. He is 
a very good boy. He would never talk back to elders and 
would never ask anything from others. In the beginning I 
told him, “If you need anything, do not ask others. Come to 
Me straight and I shall give you.” 


The reason why IJ am telling you all this, is you should 
also undertake such sacred work. Service to society is very 
important. The best way to love God is to love all and serve 
all. Let others think whatever they like, you should hold on 
to this sacred path. Serve your parents. Never hurt their 
feelings. This is the essence of education. 


Education confers humility which in turn bestows 
deservedness. Deservedness confers all types of 
wealth through which man can attain happiness 
here and hereafter. (Telugu Poem) 


Humility is the hallmark of education. Give up ego 
and serve the society with self-confidence. Students who did 
not have even a naya paisa with them are now earning thou- 
sands of rupees every month. They are good boys. So, they 
will not have any problem. I will take care of their future. I 
told this boy that he could go out and take up a job, if he 
wished so. But he did not want to go anywhere. So, I gave 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 335 


him a job here with good salary. Whoever it is, I do not want 
anybody to work here without taking salaries. People out- 
side may not be aware of this. I do not take even a naya paisa 
from them. I undertake good work and, hence, whatever I 
require will come to Me of its own accord. Lakhs of devo- 
tees are coming here. Did I ask anybody for anything? Never. 
There are many devotees who are coming here for more than 
forty years. But, I have not asked them for any favour. I shall 
never ask. I shall not give up My resolve and shall continue 
the good work with firm resolve. My Mission is bound to 
succeed. It will never fail. 


Children should be looked after well. Young men and 
women should be moulded into ideal citizens. For Me, there 
is no greater happiness than this. Children are My prop- 
erty. | am happy if they come up in life and earn a good 
name for themselves. I do not expect anything else. 


Students! 


Today you are receiving your degrees. The 
university gives you a degree in education whereas I give 
you a degree in Educare. The degree I confer on you is 
related to atmananda. That is educare. Discharge your duty 
sincerely and I shall take care of your requirements. Do not 
give room to laziness. Laziness is rust and dust. Realisation 
is best and rest. Be prepared to proceed along the path of 
self-realisation. 


I am very happy that our President Abdul Kalam has 
come here and participated in the Convocation as the Chief 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 336 


Guest. He has immense love for the nation. He is a Muslim 
by birth. But, he does not have any differences whatsoever. 
He loves all and treats all equally. He learnt all his knowl- 
edge being in India itself. He is a scientist par excellence. 
There are many scientists in the country. But what is the 
use? As the poem goes, “Twinkle twinkle little star, how I 
wonder what you are?”, they are attracted by foreign lands. 
But Abdul Kalam is not such a person. He does not have 
even a trace ofahamkara (ego). His pure heart is his most 
beautiful alamkara (ornament). He is a paragon of virtues. 
That is why he could become the President of this country. 
I wish that he brings back the pristine glory of Bharat dur- 
ing his tenure. 


Benedictory Address to 21st Convocation, 
22-11-2002, Prasanthi Nilayam. 


22 


Listen To The Master Of The Universe 
And Transform Yourselves Into Ideal 
Human Beings 


“Who makes the sun rise in the morning and set in 
the evening with utmost regularity every day? Why 
does the stars glitter only at night and hide them- 
selves during the day? How is it that the wind, with- 
out taking rest even for a moment, blows incessantly 
and sustains the living beings? Who makes the riv- 
ers flow perennially making pleasant sounds of 
ripple and gurgle? Who is the cause of delusion in 
creation? How do you find differences based on 
money, religion, community and nationality? Who 
is the Master and under whose sovereignty all these 
marvels are taking place? Come, listen to His words 
and obey His command.” 


(Telugu poem) 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 338 


Embodiments of Love! 


VERY man, every living being, aspires to attain 
Ane and happiness. Everyone is trying to know the 
objective of life. But they are not able to succeed in their 
endeavour. One in a million will persist with strong deter- 
mination and he will not give up till he realises the goal. 
Ordinary mortals will not make any efforts in this direction 
as they think it is something beyond their reach. They spend 
their lives in the pursuit of physical and ephemeral plea- 
sures. They are under the delusion that food, raiment and 
shelter are the three main objectives of human life. Their 
life centres round their wives and children. They fail to 
realise that there is a higher purpose in life than this. 


Experience Of Non-Dualism Is Wisdom 


People pursue various paths to experience everlast- 
ing bliss. The Taittiriya Upanishad gives the analogy of a 
bird in this context. The head of this bird is called sraddha 
(sincerity). The right and left wings are compared to ritham 
and sathyam, respectively. The body symbolises 
mahattattwam and the tail, yoga. What is ritham? 
Trikalabadhyam ritham (ritham remains unchanged in the 
three periods of time past, present and future). Sraddha is 
very important. Sraddhavan labhate jnanam (with sincer- 
ity, wisdom is won). In the Bhagavadgita, Krishna said, 
“One with sraddha can attain Me.” He further declared, “I 
am the very embodiment of sraddha.” One without sraddha 
cannot accomplish even a small task. Especially, in the field 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 339 


of spirituality, sraddha is very essential. Strong and unwa- 
vering faith leads to sraddha. The Upanishads have ex- 
pounded the principle of sraddha in varied ways. Wisdom 
attained through sraddha is tharakam (liberation). Lack of 
sraddha is marakam (bondage). The eternal principle of 
tharaka must be understood, practised and propagated. This 
is the fundamental teaching of Taittirtya Upanishad. 


Embodiments of Love! 


The Taittirtya Upanishad emphasises the need to de- 
velop sraddha in all walks of life. In spirituality sraddha is 
the tharaka mantra. It is eternal and immortal. Man can 
attain jnana (wisdom) only when he purifies his heart by 
developing the five aspects, namely, sraddha, sathyam, 
ritham, yogam and mahattattwam. Jnana is not textual 
knowledge. Advaita darshanam jnanam (experience of non- 
dualism is wisdom). There is an underlying principle of non- 
dualism in the apparent dualism. This is the fundamental 
truth that Taittirrya Upanishad teaches. 


When Adi Sankara was proceeding on his Jaitra Yatra 
(victory march), he met a great scholar by name Mandana 
Mishra in the northern part of India. Sankara entered into a 
scholarly debate with him. Ubhaya Bharati, the wife of 
Mandana Mishra, was also a great scholar. She was well- 
versed in the principles of ritham, sathyam, mahattattwam, 
etc. It was decided that Mandana Mishra would take to 
sannyasa if he were to be defeated in the debate. Sankara 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 340 


chose Ubhaya Bharati to be the adjudicator of the contest. 
As the debate was in progress, she listened to the arguments 
and counter arguments with utmost concentration. She was 
impartial in her judgement and declared Sankara to be the 
winner. Being one of wisdom, she did not feel dejected that 
her husband was defeated in the debate. Mandana Mishra 
took to sannyasa in accordance with the terms and condi- 
tions of the debate. Ubhaya Bharathi, being his ardhangi 
(better half), followed suit. Both husband and wife re- 
nounced the world and propagated the path of wisdom. Hu- 
man life has no value if one does not acquire wisdom. 


Wisdom Enters When Ego Exits 


It is said that Annam Brahma; Raso Vishnuhu; Bhokta 
devo Maheswarah (food is Brahma; the essence is Vishnu; 
the one who partakes of it is Maheswara). These three cor- 
respond to body, mind and action, respectively. 


Manasyeka Vachasyekam Karmanyekam 
Mahatmanam 


(those whose thoughts, words and deeds are in com- 
plete harmony are noble ones.) 


The oneness of thought, word and deed is ritham. 
They represent the Trinity of Brahma, Vishnu and 
Maheswara. Hence, everyone must strive for the purity of 
these three. Take for instance a glass chimney placed over a 
lamp. After sometime, a thin layer of soot gets accumulated 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 341 


over the glass. Consequently, light becomes dim. It is only 
when you clean the glass, can you see the light clearly. This 
is what you are supposed to do. The soot that you find over 
the glass can be compared to ego that envelops your mind. 
It is because of ego that you are not able to visualise the 
divya jnana jyoti (divine flame of wisdom). How does ego 
enter your mind? It enters your mind when you give up the 
path of truth. You become egoistic when you do not know 
your true self and develop worldly thoughts and feelings. 
In order to drive away ego, you should keep your worldly 
thoughts and feelings under control. It is impossible to ac- 
quire wisdom without getting rid of ego. To have the vision 
of the effulgent light of atma, you have to remove the soot 
of ego covering your mind. This was the teaching of Ubhaya 
Bharati. 


She was living in a hermitage on the banks of the 
river Ganga, imparting spiritual teachings to women. Many 
women had become her disciples. Every day in the morn- 
ing, they used to go the Ganges to have a bath. On the way, 
there lived a sannyasi whom people called Brahma Jnani. 
Truly, he was a renunciant and one of wisdom. However, 
he was very much attached to a small earthen pot in which 
he used to preserve water. One day, he was lying down us- 
ing the pot as a pillow, lest somebody might steal it. Ubhaya 
Bharati who was on her way to Ganges with her disciples 
observed this and remarked, “Though he is one of wisdom, 
there is a small defect in him. He has renounced the world, 
but is attached to his earthen pot which he is using as his 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 342 


pillow.” The Sannyasi overheard their conversation and 
became angry. When Ubhaya Bharati and her disciples were 
coming back from Ganges, he threw away the pot on the 
road, just to show that he was not attached to it. Seeing this, 
Ubhaya Bharati said, “I thought there was only one defect 
in him: abhimana (attachment). Now I realise that he has 
another defect: ahamkara (ego). How can one with aham- 
kara and abhimana be a Jnani (one of wisdom)?” It was an 
eye-opener for the Sannyasi. 


Women Are Embodiments Of Virtues 


Ubhaya Bharati toured the length and breadth of the 
country preaching and propagating the path of wisdom. 
Women are by nature the embodiments of vijnana, sujnana 
and prajnana. They are the repositories of all virtues. But 
due to the impact of Kali age, women are being looked down 
upon. It is a grave error. They must be treated with due 
respect. Today women compete with men to take up jobs. 
However, they must take care of their home needs before 
doing so. 


“Tf all the womenfolk go to work, who will take care 
of the homes? If husband and wife both go to office, 
who will run the household? If women go out to 
teach other children, who will teach their own chil- 
dren? If women go out like men holding books in 
their hand, who will work in the kitchen? Earning 
money may solve some financial problems, but how 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 343 


will it solve domestic problems? If you seriously 
think about it, there is no happiness for woman hold- 
ing office.” (Telugu poem) 


If women also go out and earn money, the finan- 
cial constraints may be overcome, but there will be a lot 
of problems on the home front. Women are the personi- 
fications of courage and determination. They put up with 
all hardships with fortitude and safeguard the honour of 
their family. They live up to the reputation of a Grihini 
(housewife). 


Man has to follow the path of truth to acquire wis- 
dom. It is said, Sathyam bruyath, privam bruyath, Na 
bruyath sathyvamapriyam (speak truth, speak pleasantly and 
do not speak unpalatable truth). These three correspond to 
moral, dharmic and spiritual values, respectively. Every- 
thing is contained in truth. You don’t need to visit temples 
in search of God. Truth is verily God. It is all-pervasive. It 
confers plenty and prosperity on all. Hence, follow the path 
of truth. Practise righteousness. Acquire wisdom. For all 
this sadhana, partaking of proper food is the first step. Pu- 
rify the food by offering it to God. Annam Brahma. Con- 
sider food as verily the form of Brahma. Raso Vishnuhu. 
The essence of food that spreads to all parts of your body is 
Vishnu swarupa. Bhokta devo Maheswarah. The partaker 
of food is the very embodiment of Siva principle. When 
man develops such sacred feelings, he becomes Siva Him- 
self. 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 344 


Siva Stands For Renunciation 


Siva symbolises complete sacrifice and renunciation. 
In this world everyone has dehabhimana (body attachment) 
However, Siva has absolutely no body attachment. He has 
only atmabhimana (love for the self). 


He has abundant hair with the moon adorning His 
head, the cool water of the Ganga flowing between 
the matted locks, with His radiant eye of wisdom in 
the middle of the forehead and the purple neck 
gleaming like the sheen of a blackberry. He wears 
serpent bracelets and a snake belt, His entire body 
is smeared with Vibhuti, His forehead is adorned 
with a kumkum dot, His ruddy lips glow with the 
Juice of the betel, diamond-studded gold earrings 
dangle from His ears and His whole swarthy body 
glows with divine effulgence. 

(Telugu Poem) 


Once Parvati approached Lord Siva and expressed 
her desire to have a house built for themselves. She said, 
“Oh Lord, You go from house to house begging for alms 
and are not concerned to provide a dwelling for us. Without 
a proper shelter, how can we live together?” Siva pacified 
her, saying, “Parvati! What is the use of building a house? 
Rats will make it their home before we even enter it. In 
order to control the rats, we need to have a cat. Then we 
will have to buy a cow to provide milk for the cat. In this 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 345 


manner, our requirements will get multiplied and we will 
lose our peace of mind. Hence, do not entertain such de- 
sires.” Siva has no body attachment. He is the personifica- 
tion of renunciation. Total renunciation leads one to wis- 
dom. This is the teaching of Lord Siva to mankind. 


What is wisdom? Purity of thought, word and deed 
is true wisdom. Your body, mind and actions must be pure. 
On this basis it is said, The proper study of mankind is man. 
It means that the unity of thought, word and deed is true 
humanness. It is very simple and easy to practise. But no 
one is making any effort in this direction. Though Ganges 
is flowing nearby, people do not take a dip in it and clean 
their body. People do not make use of the conveniences 
available to them. This is utter laziness and a sign of thamo 
guna. You have to get rid of this animal quality, develop 
humanness in you and rise to the level of the divine. 


Food decides Your Actions 
Embodiments of Love! 


Strive to attain purity of heart. Let this be your fore- 
most endeavour. With purity of heart, you can achieve any- 
thing. In order to attain purity of heart, you have to partake 
of sacred food. One who cooks food should have sacred 
feelings. In olden days, orthodox Brahmins used to insist 
on partaking of food prepared by their wives only. The rea- 
son being, housewives wish for the well-being of the entire 
family and prepare food. On the other hand, if you employ 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 346 


cooks, God alone knows with what feelings they prepare 
the food! The unsacred thoughts of the cook enter the food, 
which, in turn, poisons your mind. Annam Brahma (food is 
God). Hence, it should be prepared with sacred feelings. 
Mere physical cleanliness will not suffice; the mind also 
should be pure. You should see to it that the vegetables used 
for preparing food are procured in a righteous manner. For 
example, husband brings vegetables from the market. He 
might have misused his position of authority and brought 
them without making payment or the vendors themselves 
might have procured the vegetables by unfair means. When 
such vegetables are consumed, your mind gets polluted. You 
do not realise that the food you eat is responsible for the 
actions you perform. Unsacred food makes you do unsacred 
deeds. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Have your food only after praying and offering it to 
God. Only then the food will become sanctified and 
illumine your intellect. Once there lived a sannyasi in a her- 
mitage near Sivananda’s ashram. He was a pious soul. One 
day an aged businessman donated money to prepare food for 
the ashramites on the eleventh day after the demise of his 
young wife. The businessman, being rich, somehow had en- 
ticed the girl’s father with money and married his young 
daughter. She spent her time languishing over her fate in the 
businessman’s house. Disgusted by leading such a life, one 
day she jumped into the Ganges and ended her life. The busi- 
nessman was doing the obituary rites on the eleventh day. 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 347 


There was a convention in the ashram that cooked food was 
not accepted. So, the businessman gave the required amount 
for preparing the food. The pure-hearted sannyasi partook of 
the food along with other inmates of the ashram. He could 
not get proper sleep that night. He saw a young girl in his 
dream. He thought to himself, “I never had any such thought 
nor do I have a craving for sensual pleasures. Then, why do 
I get such bad dreams?” He got the same vision even in his 
meditation. So, he went to his Guru by name Satchidanandam 
and explained his predicament: “Swami, why am I getting 
such unsacred visions?” The Guru told him not to worry. He 
sent word for the businessman, spoke to him and found out 
the reason behind the untimely death of his wife. He under- 
stood that she was appearing in the dream of the sannyasi as 
he had partaken of the food prepared as part of her obituary 
rites. From that day, the sannyasi stopped eating food and 
lived merely on fruits and milk. Bhikshannam 
deharakshanartham (food is essential to sustain the body). 
Acar needs petrol to run. In the same way, the body requires 
food to sustain it. So, one has to eat something or the other to 
sustain the body. Sometimes, you get bad dreams and bad 
visions during meditation. This 1s the result of unsacred food. 
You have to enquire before cooking whether the provisions 
were got through sacred means. Only then the food becomes 
fit for consumption. 


Before partaking of food, you should pray, 


Brahmarpanam Brahma havir 
Brahmagnou Brahmanahutam 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 348 


Brahmaiva thena ganthavyam 
Brahma karma samadhina. 


If you pray with sacred feelings, the food gets sanctified. 


At one time, King Vikramaditya convened a big con- 
ference. He posed a question, “Is buddhi (intellect) or medhas 
(intelligence) greater?” The participants said that medhas was 
greater. But Vikramaditya did not subscribe to their viewpoint. 
He said that buddhi was greater because it was very sacred as 
it contained the knowledge of the Self. Buddhigrahya 
matindriyam (intellect transcends mind and senses). 


Embodiments of Love! 


Before partaking of food, chant the sacred mantra. 
Then no unsacredness would enter your heart. Annam 
Brahma; Raso Vishnuhu; Bhokta devo Maheswarah (food 
is Brahma; the essence is Vishnu; the one who partakes it is 
Maheswara). These three correspond to body, mind and 
action, respectively. Purity of thought, word and deed is 
true wisdom. You don’t need to undertake any other spiri- 
tual practice. People undertake various sadhanas. But they 
confer only temporary satisfaction. On the other hand, when 
you have purity of thought, word and deed, you experience 
eternal happiness. 


Never Stray Away From The Path Of Truth 
Embodiments of Love! 


Ritham is that which is changeless in the three peri- 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 349 


ods of time — past, present and future. That is true wisdom. 
That which undergoes change is marakam and that which 
is changeless is tharakam. 


“Understand the principle of Tharakam with the 
grace of Sadguru and find the difference between 
eternal and ephemeral. Know the secret of 
Tharakam (Soham) which the Jivatma (individual 
soul) repeats without a break in all the three states 
of Jagrat (waking), Swapna (dream) and Sushupti 
(deep sleep).” (Telugu song) 


You may belong to any religion or community; you 
have to understand this tharaka mantra. Today people call 
themselves devotees, but their actions do not match their 
claim. Their thoughts, words and deeds are filled with un- 
truth and unrighteousness. Their love is tainted with selfish- 
ness and self-interest. They pose as devotees, go round the 
world and indulge in all sorts of evil deeds. Ex-ternally, they 
look to be pious, but inwardly they are filled with evil pro- 
pensities. They ruin their lives for the sake of money. You 
should beware of such people and keep them at a distance. It 
is a sin to even look at their faces. 


Some devotees said, “Swami, we want to attend Your 
Birthday celebration, but we are unable to get leave. So, we 
have decided to apply for sick leave and come.” Then I told 
them, “It is not the right thing to do. It does not matter, if 
you are unable to come, but do not tell untruth.” Observe 
sathya vratam (vow of truth). Only then can you have 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 350 


the vision of Sarveswara (Lord of the universe). You can 
purify yourself through prayer. Wisdom will dawn on you 
through prayer and that prayer is Annam Brahma; Raso 
Vishnuhu; Bhokta devo Maheswarah. No other spiritual 
practice is required. 


Nine paths of devotion have been prescribed for spiri- 
tual aspirants. They are: sravanam (listening), kirtanam 
(singing), Vishnusmaranam (contemplating on Vishnu), 
padasevanam (serving His Lotus Feet), vandanam (saluta- 
tion), archanam (worship), dasyam (servitude), sneham 
(friendship), atmanivedanam (self-surrender). You should 
develop friendship with God. If God is your friend, the whole 
world will be under your control. But today the unfortunate 
ones are losing their friendship with God. It is not easy to 
make friendship with God. But you have to make every 
effort in this direction. Once you develop friendship with 
God, you have to take full advantage of it through sadhana. 
Do not waste time in idle talk. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Speak truth always. This is what you have to learn 
today. Truth is the basis of your life. Truth is verily God. 
Hence, never stray away from the path of truth. 


I Am The Embodiment Of Eternal Bliss 
Students ! 


Having pursued your education here and having lis- 
tened to Swami’s teachings, you should transform yourself 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 351 


into ideal human beings. People from far-off lands wait for 
a chance to come here. Having been blessed with the sa- 
cred opportunity of constantly living in the Divine Pres- 
ence, make full use of it. Never use harsh words. Never 
speak untruth. Sometimes, telling truth may lead to danger. 
In such a situation, speak neither truth nor untruth; remain 
silent. You should transcend the dualities of truth and un- 
truth. As you are all in the prime of your youth, this is the 
best time to embark on the sacred path. Start early, drive 
slowly, reach safely. 


I am not at all interested in celebrating My Birth- 
days. Devotees wanted to arrange various programmes on 
this occasion. But I did not permit them. As many of you 
have gathered here, this meeting is taking place, otherwise, 
I have no interest in even this meeting. To Me, every day is 
a festival day. I am always blissful. I am the embodiment 
of eternal bliss. What type of bliss? It is not something which 
others give. I don’t wait for others to give Me bliss. My 
bliss originates from within. 


Nityanandam, Parama Sukhadam, Kevalam 
Jnanamurtim, Dwandwateetam, Gagana Sadrisham, 
Tattwamasyadi Lakshyam, Ekam, Nityam, Vimalam, 
Achalam, Sarvadhee Sakshibhutam, Bhavateetam, 
Trigunarahitam (God is the embodiment of eternal bliss, 
He is wisdom absolute, the One without a second, beyond 
the pair of opposites, expansive and pervasive like the sky, 
the goal indicated by the mahavakya tattwamasi, eternal, 
pure, unchanging, the witness of all functions of the intel- 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 352 


lect, beyond all mental conditions and the three gunas of 
sattwa, rajas and thamas). 


I am beyond all attributes. Believe it or not, I am 
bliss personified. If you think otherwise, the defect lies in 
you. Whatever I do is for your own good, for your welfare 
and for your happiness. Lead a blissful and unblemished 
life. That is what I desire from you. I have no worries or 
suffering at any point of time. Why should I worry when I 
have everything? I have no desires. Whatever I tell, what- 
ever I do is good for you, not for Me. I have come for your 
sake. Hence, make full use of Me. I am always ready, pro- 
vided you develop sacred thoughts. Lead a divine life. Some- 
times, I do not talk to you. You think, “We might have com- 
mitted some mistake. That is why Swami is not talking to 
us.” But truly speaking, it is not My nature to look for de- 
fects in others. My vision is highly sacred. I always see 
good in you. The bad you see is your own imagination. 
Because there is bad in you, you are seeing the same in 
others. But to Me, even bad appears as good. Hence, do not 
entertain any doubts regarding Swami. Samsayatma 
Vinasyati (one with doubts will perish). Have firm faith. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Welcome your guests and give them due respect. Give 
your love to all. Feed the hungry. Only then can you have 
peace of mind. Harmonise your thought, word and deed. 
There is no greater wisdom than this. Practise ritham. This 
is the path of tharakam (liberation). If you waver from time 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 353 


to time, you are the most unfortunate one. Waywardness is 
the nature of a monkey mind. You belong to mankind. Hav- 
ing been born as a human being, you should develop steadi- 
ness of mind. Mankind symbolises tharakam. Monkey mind 
stands for marakam (bondage). 


Embodiments of Love! 


On this Birthday, you have to learn something very 
important, i.e., do not waste your time in idle talk. Time 
once lost cannot be regained. Consider truth as God. 
Sathyannasti paro dharmah (there is no Dharma greater than 
adherence to truth). Hence follow the path of truth and prac- 
tise righteousness. 


Divine Birthday, 23-11-2002, 
Prasanthi Nilayam. 


23 


Love And Morality — 
The Need Of The Hour 


Abandon pride and all endear, 

Shed anger and shed all care, 

Restraint on hankering is the way to wealth, 

Shunning greed is the royal road to joy. 
(Sanskrit verse) 


Embodiments of Love! 


N this world every object has got five aspects, 

namely, Sath, Chith, Ananda, Rupa and Nama (be- 
ing, awareness, bliss, form and name). Being, awareness 
and bliss are the three permanent attributes of every jiva 
(individual). Name and form are transitory. Man has for- 
gotten his true self and is leading his life believing the name 
and form to be real and the ephemeral world to be eternal. 
God is beyond all attributes and feelings. It is rather strange 
that man attributes qualities and feelings to Him. It is most 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 356 


essential for every individual to know the infinite love, truth 
and compassion of God. Though man is essentially divine, 
he is conducting himself like a demon as he has forgotten 
his innate divinity. Every man is endowed with the qualities 
of deeksha (determination) and dakshata (dexterity). One 
who makes use of these virtues for noble causes alone is a 
true human being. 


Man’s True Nature Is Sathyam, Jnanam, Anantam 


The cosmic power lies in the navel of God. Hence, 
He is known as Hiranyagarbha. As He is full of divine 
effulgence and radiance, He is said to be the very personifi- 
cation of beauty and splendour (soundarya-vanthudu and 
tejomayudu). The life of a human being is the noblest be- 
cause he is endowed with the principle of Hiranyagarbha. 
God is also known as Prajapathi as He is the creator of the 
entire universe. In order to understand the principle of di- 
vinity, you have to understand the inner meaning and sig- 
nificance associated with each name of God. God has vari- 
ous names and each of them has a profound inner meaning. 
That is why our ancients used to name their children by one 
or the other name of God. 


Today man is in search of God and is enquiring into 
the nature of divinity. When God is within, where is the 
need to search for Him? God is the embodiment of love. 
Truth is His very swarupa and swabhava (form and innate 
nature). Sathyannasti paro dharma (there is no dharma 
greater than adherence to truth). But today man is unable to 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 357 


understand the meaning of truth. He considers untruth to 
be truth in order to satisfy his desires. Firstly, man should 
endeavour to understand his true nature which is sathyam, 
jnanam and anantham (truth, knowledge and infinitude). 
God has gifted man with the Vedas, sasthras, puranas and 
itihasas to open his eyes to the truth that he is essentially 
divine. In this world every man is endowed with truth, righ- 
teousness and love. He is the embodiment of sath, chith 
and ananda. These attributes are verily divine. Sath is that 
which is changeless and eternal. Chith is chaitanya (aware- 
ness). Atma is another term for God. Brahma is its syn- 
onym. It is present in every man in the form of chaitanya. 
One who understands this principle of chaitanya alone is a 
true human being. Sath, chith, ananda and sathyam, jnanam, 
anantham; are different words, but they have the same 
meaning. 


In this world, we find various schools of thought, 
like atheism, dualism, non-dualism, qualified non-dualism, 
etc. The divine name of Kesava is the most important of 
all. The essence of all philosophies is contained in this. It 
consists of three syllables, namely, Ka + esa + va, which 
represent the divine trinity of Brahma, Easwara and Vishnu, 
respectively. Hence, Kesava symbolises the principles of 
creation, sustenance and dissolution. Man can understand 
his true self ifhe contemplates on the divine name of Kesava 
and understand its significance. 


Our ancient sages undertook deep investigations and 
enquiry in order to understand divinity.Ultimately, they 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 358 


declared to the world, Vedahametham Purusham 
mahantham adityavarnam thamasah parasthath (1 have 
visualised the Supreme Being who shines with the 
effulgence of billion suns and who is beyond thamas —the 
darkness of ignorance). They exhorted man to make ef- 
forts to have the vision of divinity. From then on, man started 
believing in God. But, with the passage of time, his faith 
started diminishing. He is subjected to grief because of his 
disbelief in God. 


He who is known as Allah by Muslims, 
As Jehovah by Christian aspirants, 
As the Lotus-eyed Lord by the worshippers of 
Vishnu, 
As Sambhu, by those who revere Siva, 
In whatever way He is worshipped, He gladly 
responds, 
Grants the grace of fame and fortune, 
And showers happiness and joy. 
He is the One, The Supreme Self. 
Know Him as Paramatma. 
(Telugu poem) 


God is one; He has many names. Different religions 
have come into existence, but all of them lead to the same 
divinity. 


Religions are many, but goal is one. 
Clothes are many, but yarn is one. 
Jewels are many, but gold is one. 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 359 


Cows are many, but milk is one. 
Beings are many, but breath is one. 
Castes are many, but humanity is one. 
(Telugu poem) 


Therefore, if everyone enquires into his true nature, 
he can experience truth. 


Early Days Of Jesus Christ 


Jesus was a noble soul. He declared that he was the 
son of God, but he never said that he was God. When Jesus 
was born, three royal wise men from the east were guided 
by a star to a cowshed in Bethlehem where the baby Jesus 
lay in a manger. He was radiating divine effulgence. The 
first of them said, “This child will love God.” The second 
said, “He will be loved by God.” The third said, “He will 
love one and all. He is not different from God.” The one 
who loves God is the messenger of God; the one whom 
God loves is the son of God; the one who understands the 
principle of unity becomes one with God. This is the inner 
meaning of the statements given in the Bible. The one you 
think you are, the one others think you are and the one you 
really are. You should understand the import of these state- 
ments. 


The child was brought up by mother Mary and his 
father was working as a carpenter. It was the time of a fes- 
tival in Jerusalem and the child Jesus was taken there along 
with his parents. They lost the child in the crowd and could 
not find him anywhere. Mother Mary naturally was very 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 360 


much worried. Finally, they went to the temple to pray. To 
their astonishment, they found young Jesus coming out of 
the temple. All the while the child had been in the temple, 
listening to the holy discourse of the Rabbi of the temple. 
The anxious mother took hold of her child and started ask- 
ing him several questions as to what he was doing all the 
while. The child replied, “Mother, why were you afraid? 
All the while I was in the hands of God. I have been listen- 
ing to the words of God expounded by the Rabbi in the 
temple.” Thus, the child was God-minded from a very young 
age. 


After some time, father Joseph passed away. Mary 
told her son, “Now that your father passed away, you should 
continue your father’s profession, so that we may earn our 
livelihood.” But the boy was not inclined to continue in his 
father’s profession. The mother was also not interested to 
oppose the natural inclinations of young Jesus. One day, 
young Jesus went to a lonely hilltop. The mother was very 
much worried, nay, depressed due to the absence of her 
son. Jesus was sitting and meditating on God all the while. 
After some time, he returned. As he was returning, he ran 
into a group of worried men on the coast of the sea of Ga- 
lilee. When young Jesus enquired from them the cause of 
their worry, they said that they were fishermen and that for 
quite some time past, they were not able to catch any fish 
in their nets. Jesus said, “Follow me; are there any waters 
that do not have fish?” He took them along with him in 
their boats to the middle of the sea and asked them to cast 
their nets at a particular spot. To their utter astonishment and 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 361 


great joy, the fishermen found that their nets were full with 
fish. This event created a lot of faith in the minds of the 
fishermen. Hence, faith is indispensable for humanity. 


Where there is faith, there is love; 
Where there is love, there is truth; 
Where there is truth, there is peace; 
Where there is peace, there is bliss; 
Where there is bliss, there is God. 


Sacred Teachings Of Jesus 


Jesus could instill such great faith in those people. 
One of those fishermen was named by Jesus as Peter. He 
developed intense love and faith towards Jesus. From then 
on, the fishermen regularly used to take Jesus out on their 
fishing expeditions and after their return in the evening, 
Jesus used to expound spiritual matters to them. When 
Peter’s father passed away, his mother was filled with sor- 
row, but Jesus consoled her by telling, “Death is but a dress 
of life. Wherefore do you shed tears? Death is like chang- 
ing one’s dress. Therefore, stop grieving. These physical 
bodies come and go, so do not waste your thought on these 
ephemeral things. The indweller (dehi) who lives inside 
this body is the true divinity.” 


“The body is made up of five elements and is bound 
to perish sooner or later, but the indweller has nei- 
ther birth nor death. He has no attachment what- 
soever. Truly speaking, the indweller is verily God 
Himself who is in the form of the Atma.” 

(Telugu poem) 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 362 


In this manner, Jesus preached and instilled confi- 
dence in the people around him. Thus, the fishermen’s com- 
munity was spending its time happily in the company of 
Jesus. At that time, one Mathew, who was a tax collector 
for the Romans, used to visit them on official work and, 
during his visits, he also used to listen to Jesus and take 
notes of his teachings. Finally, he became a disciple of Jesus. 


After a while, Jesus started facing obstacles and op- 
position to his preachings. Anyone donning a physical body 
cannot escape such vicissitudes of life. Without hardships 
man cannot exist. Death follows birth and with the same 
certainty misery follows happiness. Sukhadukhe 
samekruthwa labhalabhau jayajayau (one should remain 
equal-minded in happiness and sorrow, gain and loss, vic- 
tory and defeat). Pleasure is an interval between two pains. 
Human life is for the purpose of investigating the supreme 
reality and not merely for eating, drinking and procreation. 
Every human being must make an effort to know his inner 
nature and understand his true identity. Jesus was preach- 
ing such sacred truth and, therefore, he became very popu- 
lar among his contemporaries. Becoming popular in the 
world automatically begets jealousy and envy. Jealousy, 
pomposity and egoism are evil traits which will ultimately 
lead to ruin. None will pardon people with such traits. 


You should not rebuke or ridicule others. Human- 
ness will blossom in man only when he develops equal- 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 363 


mindedness. Today man is subjected to untold suffering 
because he lacks human values. That which has the innate 
capability to burn is called fire. In the same manner, only 
the one with human values is a human being. One bereft of 
human values is not a human being at all. You may be highly 
educated and occupying an exalted position, but if you lack 
human values, you will be considered inhuman. Hence, 
drive away evil qualities in the first instance. 


Shun Jealousy, Develop Noble Qualities 


Today the Messengers of Sathya Sai (old students’ 
association of Anantapur Campus for girls) are celebrating 
their anniversary. They should not give scope to evil tenden- 
cies like asuya (jealousy), krodha (anger) and dwesha (ha- 
tred). Their members who are working in overseas countries 
are leading exemplary lives. Today you have heard the 
speeches made by our former students from Japan and 
America. Their thoughts and feelings are noble. Their speech 
is full of sweetness. The girl from Japan who spoke earlier is 
the holder of a Ph.D. degree. They are highly qualified, yet 
they conduct themselves with humility and obedience. Their 
devotion and surrender is worthy of emulation. What is the 
use of high academic qualifications and doctorate degrees if 
one does not give up wicked traits like jealousy and carrying 
tales against others? I really detest such behaviour. With love, 
enthusiasm and sacred feelings, you have established an 
organisation in the name of Sathya Sai for doing service to 
humanity. No doubt, a lot of good work is being done; but 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 364 


take care that the noble feelings do not degenerate into ill- 
feelings. I do not attach much importance to the work. What 
is important to Me is your qualities. Wherever you may be — 
whether in the forest or in the sky, whether in the towns or in 
the villages, you must develop noble qualities. Jealousy is a 
very bad quality. For people with jealousy, life will not go 
smoothly. Jealousy in fact is a living death. Added to this, if 
you have another bad quality of carrying tales, you are bound 
to suffer. Why do you criticise others? Instead criticise your 
own bad qualities. Remove your own ill-feelings and bad 
thoughts. You should not attribute bad qualities to others and 
spread such slander. In spite of My repeated advice, there is 
no transformation in many people. I am disgusted with their 
behaviour over the last five-six years. What is the use of 
establishing organisations? You have Sathya Sai Seva 
Samithis and Bhajan Mandalis. You are undertaking social 
service, conducting study circles. But no purpose is served if 
such service is not backed by love in the heart. Love is God. 
Live in love. Instead people are developing hatred against 
one another. Such people deserve exemplary punishment, 
for, others are also getting spoiled on account of such wicked 
people. I am prepared to give you anything, even My life, 
provided you get rid of your evil qualities. When you take 
the name of Sathya Sai, how nobly should the organisation 
function! How much respect should you command in soci- 
ety! Whoever establishes an organisation in the name of Sathya 
Sai must adhere to the principle of truth. Functioning under 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 365 


the banner of Sathya Sai, if you deviate from the path of truth, 
what purpose does it serve? It is only when you cultivate love 
and tread along the path of truth and morality, will the 
organisation develop and prosper. Therefore, at least from to- 
day develop the qualities of truth, love and morality. This is 
your first and foremost duty. It is not proper to undertake de- 
monic activities in the name of divine organisation. 


God is worshipped by several names, such as, Sathya 
dharma parayanaya namah, Sathya swarupaya namah, 
Prema swarupaya namah, etc. There is a lot of meaning in 
these names. He is the embodiment of love. In fact, human 
beings themselves are embodiments of divine love. Love 
is their chief quality. Life has no meaning if you do not 
cultivate love. Carrying tales against somebody and back- 
biting are qualities to be condemned. In the past women 
were free from evil traits. But now even women are no 
exception to these diseases. What a shame! In My opinion, 
this is a distortion which is the result of modern education. 


“In spite of his education and intelligence, a fool- 
ish man will not know his true self and a mean- 
minded person will not give up his wicked quali- 
ties. Modern education leads only to argumenta- 
tion, not to total wisdom. What is the use of ac- 
quiring worldly education if it cannot lead you to 
immortality? Acquire the knowledge that will make 
you immortal.” 


(Telugu poem) 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 366 


No purpose is served with an education coupled with 
evil qualities. What is important is not education, but good 
qualities, character and conduct. 


If you associate yourselves with people with evil 
propensities, you too will become evil. Tyaja durjana 
samsargam; Bhaja sadhu samagamam; Kuru punyam 
ahorathram (give up bad company; join good company and 
perform meritorious deeds day and night). These three prin- 
ciples are most important for a human being. Karna was a 
great warrior in the Mahabharata. In fact, he even excelled 
Arjuna in this field. In spite of all this, why did he earn a 
bad name? It was because of his association with evil- 
minded people like Duryodhana and Dussasana. At last, he 
met with a miserable death in the battlefield. None of the 
great asthras he had mastered could come to his rescue. 
Therefore, all your education will be of little use if your 
mind is not channelled in the right direction. Hence, Stu- 
dents — Boys and Girls! Cultivate noble qualities. There is 
no use acquiring wealth without virtues. 


“Excessive wealth gives rise to ego which in turn 

paves way to many wicked qualities. When wealth 
leaves you, ego also evaporates and as a result the 
evil qualities disappear.” 


(Telugu poem) 


Greatness does not lie in acquiring wealth. Cultiva- 
tion of noble qualities is of paramount importance. Talk 
less. For, the more you indulge in loose talk, the more you 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 367 


are prone to bad qualities. There is no point in joining a 
service organisation if you do not cultivate virtues and trans- 
form your behaviour into a good one. Some people talk 
sweetly, but in their heart of hearts, they are vicious. Such 
dichotomy will lead you nowhere. You must first develop 
softness and sweetness in your heart. It is said, hrid + daya 
= hridaya. Your hridaya (heart) must be full of daya (com- 
passion). You deserve to be called a manava only when 
your heart is filled with love and compassion. 


Emulate The Noble Qualities Of Jesus 


Jesus Christ developed such noble qualities. He gave 
protection to several poor and destitute people with a lov- 
ing heart. In fact, several such people sought refuge in him. 
In the process, he had to face the wrath of several enemies. 
You should help people even if you have to undergo some 
difficulties. Never indulge in reviling others, for the same 
atma is permeating every living being. If you abuse others, 
it amounts to abusing your own self. If you do not like 
them, keep yourself away from them, but never abuse them. 
Any amount of good work done by you will be of no use, if 
you do not give up bad qualities. If you cannot do good to 
others, at least speak good words. You cannot always oblige, 
but you can speak always obligingly. If you find someone 
suffering, try to help him. Today it is his turn, but tomor- 
row it could be yours. Always keep this in mind. Nobody 
can escape from pain and suffering. Always pray for the 
welfare of all. It is only in this context, the universal prayer 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 368 


of Loka samasta sukhino bhavantu (May all the people of 
the world be happy!) is addressed. 


Your heart should be transformed into hiranya- 
garbha. It is only when you cultivate good feelings, can 
you become a good person. You need not be a great man, 
but you should aspire to become a good man. You must 
earn the love of one and all. One of the prayers addressed 
to God is Hiranyagarbhaya namah. God is loved by ev- 
erybody. He is always happy and blissful. He has no hatred 
towards anybody. Whatever He does is for your own good. 
Everyone must cultivate such divine love towards others. 
Always tread the path of truth and morality. A nation with- 
out morality is bound to degenerate and disintegrate. It is 
not enough if you have patriotism; along with it you should 
have morality too. Merely giving lectures on morality will 
not suffice; it must permeate every activity undertaken by 
you. 


Acquire Goodness Along With Greatness 
Embodiments of Love! 


God is not moved simply by sweet words. You must 
translate those sweet words into action. You may be a great 
hero in giving lectures on a platform, but if you are a zero 
in putting them into action, it will be of no use. You must 
become heroes in practical life. That is what gives Me hap- 
piness. Jesus Christ and Mohammad were highly noble. 
How could they acquire such greatness and goodness? It 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 369 


was only by their good deeds. Therefore, you must acquire 
goodness along with greatness. In fact, goodness is greater 
than greatness. Several great souls took birth in this land of 
Bharat. Saint Thyagaraja in one of his famous kirtans sang, 
“Endaro mahanubhavulu, andariki vandanamulu ...”’ (there 
are several great souls, I prostrate before all of them). A 
great saint, Thyagaraja himself exhibited such humility. He 
was a great composer too. In one of his Airtans, he described 
the greatness of God thus: “You are beyond all description 
and human comprehension. Is it possible to estimate Your 
glory and splendour? I have been waiting for Your grace. 
Oh Lord! Listen to my prayer and redeem me. You are the 
one who brought back to life the dead son of Your precep- 
tor. You are the one who suppressed the serpent Kaliya, 
freed Vasudeva and Devaki and saved Droupadi from hu- 
miliation. You fulfilled Kuchela’s desires, You made ugly- 
looking Kubja beautiful. You protected the Pandavas and 
saved the 16,000 Gopikas. You are beyond all description 
and human comprehension. Krishna, it is not possible for 
even Brahma to describe Your glory. I have been praying 
for Your grace.” (Telugu song). When sublime feelings 
spring forth from the depths of one’s own heart, they ex- 
press themselves as great devotional poetry. 


Pray For The Welfare Of Others 
Embodiments of Love! 


Today, you do not find peace anywhere in the world. 
You see only pieces! In fact, people are breaking their heart 
into pieces. How then can peace be acquired? There is only 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 370 


one solution to this problem. Love God. Have faith in God. 
Surrender unto Him. Dedicate your whole life to God and 
carry on every activity of yours as an offering to Him. Let 
all your activities be helpful to others. Help ever, hurt never. 
You cannot say that you are leading a problem-free life. 
Who knows what is in store for you the next moment! If 
you wish to be always happy, pray for the welfare of oth- 
ers. This is the real sadhana. Spirituality does not mean 
simply doing bhajans and performing some acts of wor- 
ship. Cultivate noble qualities. Always be helpful to others 
and earn a good name. Jesus earned such a good name by 
sacrificing his body on the cross. You also must be pre- 
pared for such a great sacrifice. If you give up thyaga (sac- 
rifice) and indulge in bhoga (sensual pleasures), you will 
end up with voga (disease). In fact, thyaga is true yoga and 
bhoga is roga. Do not become a victim of roga. Develop 
thyaga and achieve yoga. 


Purify Your Hearts With Selfless Love 
Dear Students! 


Whoever has acquired the quality of love will never 
be hated by others. Even the wild animals will not harm 
you when you have love. The great rishis of yore spent their 
lives peacefully in dense forests amidst wild animals. The 
wild animals fought among themselves, but they did not 
cause any harm to these rishis. What is the reason? The 
rishis possessed one single weapon of love which protected 
them from these wild animals. In fact, these wild animals 


Sathya Sai Speaks - Volume - 35 371 


also used to love these great rishis. What man has to ac- 
quire is this great weapon of love. Love alone can protect 
us, not atom bomb or hydrogen bomb. Consider My own 
example. I have one and only one weapon, that is love. 
Because of this, millions of people from every nook and 
corner of the globe gather around Me. Did I ever send any 
invitation to you? No. It is only My pure and unsullied love 
that draws you here. In fact, My heart itself is a very pow- 
erful magnet. Because of the power of love in that magnet, 
all these ‘iron filings’ are attracted to this place. In order to 
be attracted by the magnet, the iron should be free from 
rust and dust. Some people think, “Swami calls Himself a 
powerful magnet, but He is unable to attract us.” The fault 
lies in them only. Their hearts are rusted. They will be at- 
tracted by the magnet of Swami’s love only when they 
cleanse their hearts. How can you remove the ‘rust and dust’ 
accumulated in the heart? Only by rubbing and polishing it 
with love. Be they Indians or foreigners, everybody has to 
purify his heart with love and that love must be totally self- 
less. When you cultivate such selfless love, you can attract 
the whole world. Se/fis lovelessness and love is selfless- 
ness. Therefore, lead a life full of love. 


Christmas, 25-12-2002, 
Prasanthi Nilayam 


