SATHYA SAI SPEAKS 


VOLUME - 39 


Discourses of 
BHAGAWAN SRI SATHYA SAT BABA 
(DELIVERED DURING 2006) 





PRASANTHI NILAYAM 


SRI SATHYA SAI BOOKS & PUBLICATIONS 
TRUST, 
Prasanthi Nilayam-515 134, 
Anantapur District, Andhra Pradesh - India. 
STD: 08555 ISD: 0091-8555 
Phone: 287375 Fax: 287236 


li 


Sri Sathya Sai Books & Publications Trust, 
Prasanthi Nilayam (India.). 


All Rights Reserved 


The copyright and the rights of translation in any language are 
reserved by the Publishers. No part, passage, text or photograph 
or Artwork of this book should be reproduced, transmitted or 
utilised, in original language or by translation, in any form or 
by any means, electronic, mechanical, photo copying, recording 
or by any information, storage and retrieval system except with 
the express and prior permission, in writing from the Convener, 
Sri Sathya Sai Books & Publications Trust, Prasanthi Nilayam 
(Andhra Pradesh) India except for brief passages quoted in 
book review. This book can be exported from India only by 
the Publishers - Sri Sathya Sai Books and Publications Trust, 
Prasanthi Nilayam (India). 














International Standard Book No. 978-81-7208-505-6 
978 - 81-7208 - 528-5 (Set) 





First Edition : 


Published by : 

The Convener, 

Sri Sathya Sai Books & Publications Trust, 
Prasanthi Nilayam, India - Pincode 515 134 
STD: 08555 ISD: 0091-8555 

Telephone: 287375 Fax: 287236 

Email: enquiry@sssbpt.org 


Printed at: 

Omkar Offset Printers, 

No. 3/4, I Main, 

New Tharagupet, Bangalore-2 
Ph : 26708186, 26709029 


ili 


Publisher’s Note 


The various festivals that punctuate the Indian 
calendar in a year invariably bring with them refreshing 
showers of Wisdom in the form of Discourses from the 
Divine. This invaluable gift of grace unfailingly reaches 
millions all over the world, soothing the drooping hearts 
and rejuvenating the palsied nerves of the listeners and 
readers alike. 


The present compilation of 19 such discourses 
delivered during the year 2006 which constitute the 39" 
volume of 'Sathya Sai Speaks' is yet another instalment of 
His benediction. Moral reconstruction of human society 
being the avowed mission of the Avatar, these discourses 
richly contribute to a strong ethical fabric of human 
society. Though some of them are couched in a language 
for the younger generation, they are bound to impact the 
manners and habits of the grownups as well. 


This compilation does not include the ten discourses 
delivered during Ati Rudra Maha Yajna in August 2006, 
as they have been clubbed together and published as a 
separate book. 


The Book Trust hopes that the readers will receive 
this volume with the same warmth and delight with which 


the earlier ones were received. 


With pranams at the Lotus Feet, 


Convener, 


Sri Sathya Sai Books & Publications Trust, 
Prasanthi Nilayam. 


10. 


11. 


12. 


Table of Contents 
Discharge Your Duties With 
A Sense Of Surrender To God ........c eee cece 1 
Control Of Senses Is The Real Sadhana.......... 17 


Limit Not The All Pervading Brahman With 
Manis: A tid) F ORS otis -ceecsceacct ssstcnnceceoncene aT 


Atma Is The Nameless, Formless Divnity ....... 55 


Experience The Sweetness Of Rama’s Name 71 


Happiness Is Holiness ............ccceecccceeereeeeeneeeees 87 
Do Not Burden Yourself 

With Limitless Desires .......... cc ceeeeeeeccceceeeeeeeees 107 
Mother’s Love Has Immense Powert.............. 121 


Attain Enlightenment By 
KRGHOUnCII® IDESIEGS cist.cciatezreciueivecesaiecasemiees 137 


Selfless Service To Society 
BS IS SA 1 sce srscrrems asia piuetesiaonensedaanentagents 151 


The Youth Should Follow The Path 
Of Sathya And Dharma... essen: 161 


Develop Broad-Mindedness 


vi 


13. 


14. 


15. 


16. 


17. 


18. 


19. 


And Live In Bliss .0......cccecc cet eececceeseccecssessescees 


Give Up Selfishness And Strive For 
Del R CASA OM cscs Saratetcatasiddvedeniadésvantante antes 


Love Of God Is True Education........0000...00. 
Expel The Six Enemies And Elicit Values... 
Cultivate Sacred And Noble Thoughts........... 
Put Human Values Into Practice... 


Service To Society Is Service To God........... 


Earn Eternal Peace With Eternal Truth.......... 


1 


Discharge Your Duties With 
A Sense Of Surrender To God 


God is love and love is God. True spiritual 
discipline lies in developing love to love relationship. 
Dear children! Hold on to this principle of love and 
demonstrate the ideal of unity. 

(Telugu poem) 


Dear Students! Boy And Girls! 


lie is said Daivam manusha rupena (God 
incarnates in the form of human being). That 
is why human birth is considered to be highly sacred. 
God incarnates in human form to redeem mankind. Do 


2 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 


not be under the mistaken notion that God is confined 
to a specific form. Divinity is not a separate entity. 
It is immanent in humanity. The human form is a 
conglomeration of five elements, namely, earth, water, 
fire, air and ether. The divine power which makes 
the five elements function is referred to as the atma. 
What is the form of atma? Many people often ask 
this question. In fact, it transcends name and form. 


Distinction Between Education And Educare 


Merely having a human form does not make one 
a human being; it is the conduct and behaviour that 
matter. In the same manner, mere acquisition of bookish 
knowledge does not make one truly educated. Such 
worldly education is negative in nature. One must 
make a distinction between education and educare. 
Whereas education is information-oriented, educare is 
transformation-oriented. Education is limited to physical 
and mental levels. Just as the rivers like Krishna and 
Godavari have their source in the ocean, education has 
its roots in educare. Physical and worldly knowledge 
corresponds to education. Educare is related to our 
inner feelings and purity of heart. Our mata, pata and 
bata (speech, song and way of life) should originate 
from the heart. That is the essence of educare. Even if 
you acquire a number of degrees, if you lack purity of 
heart, you cannot be called truly educated. Nowadays 


Discharge Your Duties With A Sense Of Surrender To God 3 


very few make efforts to understand what educare is. 
Only those endowed with practical knowledge and 
wisdom will be able to understand and appreciate the 
concept of educare. Others will be deluded by high 
academic degrees. They are interested only in acquiring 
bookish knowledge and disseminating the same. Such 
vain pursuits will not entitle them to be called really 
educated. It is common now-a-days for students to 
acquire various academic degrees such as B.A., M.A., 
C.A., Ph.D., etc. However, those who understand the 
real purpose of education and its inner significance are 
rare. Once you understand the purpose of education 
and act accordingly, your life will be redeemed. You 
should not entirely depend on what your teachers 
teach in the classroom. You have to understand the 
nature of your body, mind, senses and intellect to be 
able to realise your inner self. 


Every individual has three attributes, namely, 
satwa, rajas and tamas. They represent the Trinity 
of Brahma, Vishnu and Maheshwara. Satwa guna 
corresponds to the inner purity. Rajo guna is reflected 
in our actions. However, the fundamental truth is 
that atma has complete control over all the senses 
and functioning of the human body. You perform 
various tasks. You participate in sports and games. All 
these represent rajo guna. These days people teach 
parartha (spiritual values) without giving up swartha 
(selfishness). This is a grave error. You should give 


4 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





up swartha in the first instance and consider parartha 
as the basis of all your endeavours. Develop faith in 
God. God is the adhara (support) and everything else 
is adheya (supported). Divinity is one. The Veda has 
therefore declared: Ekoham bahusyam (the One willed 
to become many). The names and forms may vary, 
but the inherent divine principle is one and the same. 
For example, this hall is decorated with a number of 
bulbs. But the electric current that flows through them 
is the same. Similarly, sweets may be many, but the 
essential ingredient in them, that is sugar which imparts 
the sweetness is the same. Often times, we merely go 
by the names and forms, forgetting the reality. 


Everything Originated From The Atma 


A human being should essentially have three 
qualities—nischalathwa, nirmalathwa and nirmohathwa 
(steadiness, purity and detachment). One who has 
these three qualities is verily God Himself. You do 
not need to enquire from others whether you are 
good or otherwise. Your conscience is the judge. You 
should think of God always. There have been many 
divine incarnations in the past, but the inherent divine 
principle in all of them is one and the same. Just as 
sugar assumes the form of a variety of sweets, divinity 
incarnates in various forms. People worship God, sing 


Discharge Your Duties With A Sense Of Surrender To God 3) 





His glory thinking that He is present in some distant 
place. In fact, the panchabhutas (the five elements) 
are the very manifestations of God. Your heart is 
the temple of God. Hence, fill your heart with love. 
One bereft of love cannot be called a human being. 
Consider the five elements as divine and put them to 
proper use. 


Who has given you life? What is the source from 
which it has manifested? Have you acquired it by some 
spiritual practice? No! God gives you life and He is 
the one, who sustains it. He is present in every living 
being in the form of atma. Everything has originated 
from the atma. Students study a number of textbooks 
and acquire high academic qualifications. What is 
the source of all their knowledge and learning? It is 
nothing but divinity. But, man due to his delusion is 
unable to realise this truth. First and foremost, develop 
firm faith that God exists. When He incarnates in 
the human form, He conducts Himself like a human 
being. Only then can man understand divinity and the 
sacredness of human birth. 


Educare is related to bhava (feeling), whereas 
education is related to bahya (external). The education 
you acquire should be beneficial to society. You should 
utilise your knowledge and intelligence for the benefit 
of society. Keep your emotions under check. Do not 
fret and fume like Durvasa who had no control over 


6 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





his temper. Only the one who has complete control 
over himself is a true human being. 


The atma represents the oneness of all beings. 
Ultimately, everything merges in the atma. 


Religions are many but goal is one. 
Clothes are many but yarn is one. 
Jewels are many but gold is one. 
Cows are many but milk is one. 
(Telugu poem) 


Unfortunately, today instead of visualising unity 
in diversity, man sees diversity in unity. That is the 
cause of all his suffering. The principle of atma is the 
basis of all creation. You may forget anything but not 
the atma. The five elements that are immanent in you 
are nothing but the manifestations of atma. Merely 
rotating the beads of a rosary does not constitute japa. 
One should transcend the worldly and physical plane 
of existence. That is true japa. One who realises the 
source of his being is truly human. You may study 
Bhagavad Gita and learn all the slokas by heart. But 
that does not make you a scholar. It is enough if 
you are able to put at least one s/oka into practice. 
With the help of letters of the alphabet a,b,c,d ... any 
number of books can be written. Hence, the letters 
in the alphabet form the basis for any book, be it 


Discharge Your Duties With A Sense Of Surrender To God 7 





Ramayana, Mahabharata or Bhagavata. Likewise, the 
atma is the basis for everything. Once you understand 
the principle of atma, you would have understood 
everything else. It is only to impart such knowledge 
that we have established educational institutions. In our 
schools and colleges, character, virtues and conduct 
are given utmost priority. One should have the desire 
to tread the right path in life and attain God. One 
should accept everything as the Will of God. When 
you develop purity of heart, you will be successful 
in all your endeavours. 


In the name of meditation, people sit cross-legged 
and with closed eyes. How can such practices lead you 
to Divinity? When you close your eyes, you cannot 
see even the person standing in front of you, leave 
alone seeing God. In fact, God is present in you. 
A true vyakti (individual) is one who manifests the 
avyakta (latent) divinity. If you understand the principle 
of atma and make sincere efforts, you can certainly 
experience atmasakshatkara (realisation of the Divine). 
You may do japa or tapa, but if you lack purity of 
heart, all your spiritual practices will prove futile. 
Whatever may be the practice you undertake, you 
should always focus your mind on the atma only. 


Strive To Attain The State Of ‘Die’ Mind 


Manishi (man) is one who is endowed with manas 


8 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





(mind). Manishi is also known as manava. What is 
the inner meaning of this term? ‘Ma’ means maya 
(ignorance), ‘na’ means nasthi (without) and ‘va’ 
means varthinchuta (to conduct oneself). A human 
being is one who overcomes maya and conducts 
himself without ignorance. Education is meant to 
help you overcome delusion. One who transcends the 
mind is a Paramahamsa (a realised soul). We are not 
simply manavas (mere mortals). We are verily the 
embodiments of Madhava (immortal divine principle). 
We should have faith in God and face the challenges 
of life with courage and valour. Only then do we 
deserve to be called a human being. The mind is 
meant to contemplate on God. One who knows the 
value of a diamond will preserve it safely and make 
proper use of it. Likewise, the one who realises the 
power of mind will not let it go astray. One should 
strive to attain the state of ‘die’ mind (annihilation 
of the mind). It is possible only by contemplating on 
God incessantly. It is said, Mano mulam idam jagat 
(mind is the basis for the entire world). If you do 
not control your mind and get carried away by its 
vagaries, what will be your fate? It is only through 
mano nashana (annihilation of the mind) can one 
become a Paramahamsa. Never follow the mind. The 
mind by nature is highly sacred, but due to the impact 
of modern education it has become unsteady like a 


Discharge Your Duties With A Sense Of Surrender To God 9 





monkey. What is the use of going through voluminous 
books without understanding the nature of the mind? 
When you learn the alphabet from A to Z, you should 
also learn the meaning of words. What is the use of 
reading words without understanding their meaning? 
Here, students learn the Vedas. It is said, Anantho 
vai Vedah (the Vedas are infinite). They are endowed 
with infinite power. 


Have Unflinching Faith In God 


When you read the Bhagavad Gita, you should 
make efforts to understand its teachings and put them 
into practice. Otherwise, there is little meaning in 
going through the Bhagavad Gita or giving lectures 
on it. No benefit accrues from merely repeating the 
slokas like a parrot without understanding them. The 
Vedas have been handed down from generation to 
generation by noble souls. They contain the eternal 
truths. But, in the name of modern education, people 
are neglecting them. One may like it or not, but the 
study of the Vedas is very essential for one and all. 
It is not enough if you merely read the Vedas, you 
should also understand the teachings contained therein. 
Man has forgotten his true Self. He is trying to acquire 
education without knowing his own reality. As a result, 
he reposes faith in everything else except God. You 
should never forget the fundamental principle, namely, 


divinity. 


10 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





Dear Students! 


You are able to understand and acquire worldly 
and secular knowledge. But it is not easy for all to 
understand the inner reality. The names and forms of 
individuals may appear to be different, but essentially 
all are one. The innate reality 1s adhara and the 
external names and forms are only adheyas. Knowing 
the adheya without understanding the adhara will serve 
no purpose. Even while dealing with physical matters 
we should have spiritual outlook. Hence, develop faith 
in God in the first instance. Anything can be achieved 
with unflinching faith in God. Discharge your duties 
with a sense of surrender to God. That is the essence 
of true education. Education does not mean mere 
acquisition of bookish knowledge. True education is 
beyond bookish knowledge. 


Students! Embodiments Of Love! 


First of all, you have to realise that divinity is 
present everywhere. Let all your actions be pleasing 
to God. You have come from God and are living in 
God. All your actions should therefore be dedicated to 
God. When you follow such a sacred path, you will 
ultimately merge in God. God is bhavapriya (lover 
of inner feelings) not bahyapriya (lover of external 
form). He sees the feeling behind your actions. The 


Discharge Your Duties With A Sense Of Surrender To God 11 





world is interested in bahyam (outward show), but 
God is interested in your bhavam (feeling). Hence, 
purify your feelings in the first instance. 


You ask others, “Who are you?” But have you ever 
enquired into yourself, “Who am I?” True education 
lies in knowing the answer for this question. What is 
the use of knowing about others if you don’t know 
your own reality? That is not true education at all! 
A true spiritual aspirant is one who understands and 
experiences the principle of oneness. You say, “She is 
my mother’, “He is my father”, so on and so forth. 
Such physical relationship is related to the mind. If 
you take the physical relationship to be real, you will 
never understand the truth. You say, “I am Ramaiah.” 
It is the name given to the body. But you are not the 
body. You should say with firm conviction, “I am I.” 
However, when you call yourself Ramaiah, you should 
act according to your name. Once you understand your 
reality, you will experience everlasting bliss. Many 
students have gathered here. But not all are studying 
the same subject. You are pursuing various courses 
such B.A., M.A., M.Sc., etc. You should understand 
the purpose of education. Nowadays several students 
aspire to go abroad after completing their studies. 
They forget the very purpose of education, and are 
enamoured by worldly attractions. 


12 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





One should have single-minded devotion towards 
God. Your faith should be total and unconditional. If 
your faith is unsteady with ‘bumps and jumps’, you 
will be confused and will become restless. Keep your 
desires under control. Limitless desires will take you 
away from divinity. Annihilation of desires will lead 
you to the principle of unity. You should develop 
virtues and lead a good life. Understand the purpose 
of education and act accordingly. Only then will your 
birth as a human being be meaningful. One electric 
bulb can provide illumination to many. Likewise, a 
heart filled with love can illumine many lives. The 
educated people should not look down upon the 
uneducated. If they are truly educated, they will treat 
everyone equally and develop unity. Where there is 
unity, there is purity. When we have purity, we can 
experience divinity. Love is the basis for unity. Devoid 
of love differences are bound to crop up. 


Students ! 


Having joined our institution if you merely 
acquire degrees without developing virtues, we will 
not be happy. You should develop purity within and 
purity outside. Only then can you earn a good name 
in society. People will praise you saying, “So and so 
is a good boy, he minds his own business and does 
not involve himself in unnecessary activities.” Such 


Discharge Your Duties With A Sense Of Surrender To God 13 





good persons can bring about transformation in society. 
Being students, you should follow the code of conduct 
prescribed for the state of Brahmacharya. On the 
contrary, if you succumb to the vagaries of the mind 
and move about without any restraint, people will call 
you a rowdy. When you are good in thought, word 
and deed, everyone will talk high of you. 


You Are Not Different From God 
Embodiments Of Love! 


There is love in one and all. There is none bereft 
of love in this world. Develop love. Let people speak 
what they want. Do not be perturbed by criticism. 
If someone criticises you loudly, it goes into thin 
air, if he criticises within, he will only be the one 
who will be affected by it. In this manner, you 
should neither be elated by praise nor depressed by 
criticism. If you want to attain God, there should 
be harmony in your thoughts, words and deeds. It 
is said, Manasyekam vachasyekam, karmanyekam 
mahatmanam, manasyanyath vachasyanyath, 
karmanyanyath duratmanam. (Those whose thoughts, 
words and deeds are in perfect harmony are noble 
ones; those who lack harmony of these are wicked.) 
It is not enough if you have good command over 
language and speak eloquently about Divinity. You 


14 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





should also put into practice what you speak and 
experience divinity. You may be able to attract people 
with powerful speech, but what is the use if you do 
not translate your words into action. 


When Jesus was born, three Arabian kings came 
to see the child. Seeing the divine effulgence of the 
child, the first king exclaimed, “He is the messenger of 
God.” The second king said, “He is the son of God.” 
The third king proclaimed, “He is verily God Himself.” 
All the three statements are true. Never think that you 
are different from God. You should transcend duality 
and understand oneness with divinity. Whatever may 
happen, do not deviate from the path of oneness. You 
should have unwavering faith. Install these teachings 
firmly in your heart and put them into practice in 
your daily life. Even after you go back to your room, 
ruminate over what is being taught here. 


With prayer to God, you can achieve anything in 
life. I want you to pray. I want you to stand united 
like brothers and sisters and earn a good name. Only 
then will the purpose of establishing colleges here 
be fulfilled. I am always with you, in you, above 
you, around you. Make efforts to instill such faith 
and devotion in your fellow human beings. That will 
make Me very happy. 


Discharge Your Duties With A Sense Of Surrender To God 15 





Today is Sankranti, which marks the commencement 
of Uttarayana, the auspicious and sacred time. At 
least from today onwards, develop noble feelings. 
Follow the sacred path. Then your future will 
certainly be safe and secure. I hope I am not causing 
inconvenience to you by speaking at length. When 
I see all of you, My heart overflows with ananda 
(bliss). Happiness lies in union with God. Hence 
contemplate on God incessantly. Never give scope 
for anxiety or worry, thinking “examinations are 
approaching. How am I going to face them? Will 
I pass in the examinations?” Do not give scope for 
despair and despondency with such negative attitude. 
Have faith in God. Do your duty and face any situation 
with courage. Then, the result is bound to be good. 
Love is everything. Love is God. Live in love. 


Makara Sankranti, 14-1-2006, Prasanthi Nilayam 


16 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





Realise God through 
intense Love 




















The only easy and sure means for ordinary 
people to realise God, without regard to their 
caste, nationality, sex or any other qualification, 
and without their having to practise various 
austerities and penances, is intense devotion 
and love for God. The Gopikas experienced 
the continuous presense of God within and 
without. They showed that such sublime 
love was possible for ordinary persons with 
little knowledge of the scriptures or spiritual 
disciplines. They demonstrated the inextricable 
link between the Divine and the individual. 


- Baba 


2 


Control Of Senses Is The Real 
Sadhana 


Embodiments Of Love ! 


Y blessings to you all. I am happy that you 

all have studied here right from the Primary 
School stage up to the 12™ standard and obtained 
good marks and earned good name for yourselves. 
With good character up to the Primary School stage. 
But after you left the Primary School you yourself 
can imagine what change has come about in you. As 
long as you were in the Primary School, your had 
developed many good qualities like love, compassion, 
kindness and joy. You were all moving like brothers 


18 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





with mutual love and affection. Your speech, your 
play, your songs were all full of sweetness. But, the 
moment you joined the Higher Secondary School, the 
quality of purity in your thoughts, words and deeds 
deteriorated. I am not saying that all the boys who 
took to wrong ways and are spoiling their mind. 
You can judge for yourself how pure is your mind. 
Humanness consists of five components - the gross 
body, mind, intellect, consciousness and the senses. If 
a human being is to attain liberation, he has to cleanse 
his mind first. It is a serious mistake to desire for that 
which does not belong to him. Whenever the mind 
desires for something, one has to enquire first whether 
that particular object belongs to him or someone else. 
When you know for sure that it belongs to someone 
else, you must be careful to divert your mind from 
that object. The mind has to be kept absolutely pure 
and sacred. One should not taint the mind with the 
impurities of conflict and agitation. You all have to 
develop such kind of jnana, right from this early age. 
Unfortunately, today you are all spoiling your life by 
cultivating desires for all and sundry things. This is all 
madness and delusion. Whatever you do, you must do 
it with a sense of dedication and surrender to God. All 
the work you undertake must by carried out with this 
spirit. Sarva karma Bhagavad prityartham (all actions 
must be done to please God). In fact, what you think 


Control Of Senses Is The Real Sadhana 





to be yours is not yours. First and foremost enquire 
into yourself, “Who am I?” The entire universe, right 
from the microcosm to the macrocosm, is permeated 
by Divinity. Sugar, sand, an ant, a mosquito or an 
elephant - all are embodiments of Divinity. God is 
assuming all these forms like different characters in 
a drama. There is nothing in this universe which is 
not permeated by God. Everything in this universe 
is God. Everything in this universe is God. The 
entire creation is an embodiment of Divinity. In fact, 
He dons allthe characters in this cosmic drama. All 
dialogues and songs are His only, Yet, the characters 
He dons appear to be different. Hence, whatever we 
say-everything is God. One has to realise this truth 
and conduct himself accordingly. 


Cultivate Faith In The Unity Of Divinity 


Unfortunately, today some people take to wrong 
ways due to the effect of bad qualities, bad practices, 
bad thoughts and bad looks. Whomever you come 
across, treat them as embodiments of Divinity. 
Whatever you say, it must reflect Divinity. When you 
conduct yourself in such a manner, that itself is mukti 
(liberation). One has to cleanse his five sense. One 
should conduct himself in such a manner that neither 
he hurts others nor is hurt by others. The words you 
make use of must be sacred. You should not covet 


20 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





others’ property or develop a desire for it. One has 
to cultivate faith in the unity of Divinity, Some boys 
are not able to develop such universal outlook. They 
are languishing in a feeling of separateness. They 
distinguish between people as “mine” and “thine”. 
The ancient history of India is replete with instances 
of the ill-effects of such divisive tendencies. 


You all know about the history of Kauravas and 
Pandavas in the great epic Mahabharata. The Kauravas 
were one hundred in number and were the sons of 
King Dhritarashtra. The Pandavas were five in number. 
They were the sons of Pandu, the younger brother 
of King Dhritarashtra. There ensued a fierce battle 
between the Kauravas and the Pandavas. But, who was 
at fault in this battle? In fact, Dhritarashtra and Pandu, 
both were the sons of the same father. They were 
brothers. Their kingdom was one. But, their thoughts 
and aspirations were different. A malicious desire for 
annexing the entire kingdom for themselves on the part 
of the Kauravas resulted in evil thoughts and divisive 
tendencies. Similarly, in the Ramayana there were two 
brothers -Vali and Sugriva. They were also brothers 
born of the same father. But, some unfortunate and 
selfish interests on their part resulted in a fierce battle 
between the brothers. While Vali the valiant king was 
enjoying regal comforts in the city of Kishkindha, 
his younger brother Sugriva had to languish in the 


Control Of Senses Is The Real Sadhana 21 





hills and forests. 


There is no use doing japa and tapa for months 
and years without giving up divisive tendencies. 
Such fapas converts itself into mere tamas. Several 
people give up their sadhana in the middle with a 
sense of frustration and despair, thinking that God is 
not merciful enough to reveal Himself before them 
in spite of doing japa for long years. If you wish 
to have the vision of God, first and foremost you 
must develop a sense of oneness with God. In fact, 
your own mind is an embodiment of Divinity. People 
often question, “Where is God?” “Who is God?, etc.” 
I would say, “ Your mind is God.” It is said, Mana 
eva manushyanam karanam bandhamokshayo (mind is 
the cause for bondage as well as liberation of man). 
Both bondage and liberation occur due to the mind 
only. Hence, mind is God. Similarly, the intellect 
is God, so also the chittha (consciousness). It is a 
common sight to see people praising a person of sharp 
intellect as an intellectual. But, God alone is the true 
intellectual. We have to dedicate our chittha to God. 
Once a great devotee sang, “Oh! God! Let me offer 
my worship to You with chittha suddhi” (Purity of 
consciousness). Hence, you should all pray to God 
with purity of consciousness. 


Just as the mind, intellect and chittha are 
the embodiments of Divinity, so also the senses. 


22 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





Hence, one should not taint one’s senses with the 
arishadvargas (the six inner enemies of lust, anger, 
greed, delusion, pride and jealousy). Kama signifies 
the desires, which you can divert towards God and 
pray that you want only God and none else. You love 
God alone. Such love only will be sanctified. To love 
people on the basis of their name and form cannot 
be termed as real love. That is only worldly love. 
When you love God, everything will be added unto 
you. All your desires must be God-oriented. Every 
desire of yours must be to please God. Suppose you 
love someone, do not treat him as a mere mortal. 
On the other hand, you must be able to visualise the 
divinity in him. 

There is no object other than the panchabhuthas 
(the five elements of air, water, earth, fire and ether) 
in this universe. You will not find a sixth element, 
however much you may try and explore. For example, 
this is a hand consisting of five fingers. There is no 
sixth finger. In case someone has a sixth finger, he 
will be taken to the doctor for removing it by surgery. 
Similarly, we all have five senses. What is mukti 
(liberation)? Liberation is control of the senses. Unless 
one controls his senses, liberation is not possible. 
It is foolish to think that God is somewhere in a 
distant place. Strictly speaking, who is God? The 


Control Of Senses Is The Real Sadhana 23 





panchabhuthas are embodiments of Divinity. 


Strive To Achieve Sense Control 


If is only the senses that bring us good or bad. 
Hence, controlling the senses should be our top priority. 
You often express your inability thinking “Swami ! 
is it possible for us?” I am emphatically saying that 
it is possible, provided you make an effort with firm 
determination. When you are able to please God and 
obtain His grace, sense control is not a big task for 
you. The senses are very trivial things. Unless you 
are able to control the senses, you do not deserve to 
be called a human being. It is said, Jantunam nara 
janma durlabham (of all living beings, human birth 
is the rarest). To be born as a human being is a rare 
gift of God. Having obtained this rare gift, one should 
strive to achieve sense control. Even if you succumb 
to the wishes of even one of these five senses, you 
will stoop down to the level of an animal. It is said 
Kaivam manusha rupena (God is in the form of a 
human being). Having attained such a rare and sacred 
birth of a human being, how foolish it is to say that 
you cannot control your senses? One who succumbs to 
the wishes of the senses is a rakshasa (demon), verily 
! In fact, such a person is worse than a rakshasa. One 
has to evolve himself into a noble human being. You 


24 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





may be fond of your wife and children. But on that 
basis, you cannot denigrate others. You should not 
entertain a feeling that so and so is mine and others 
are different. All are embodiments of Divinity! All are 
children of God. There is such an intimate relationship 
between people in this world. Whatever object you 
come across in this world, it belongs to God only. It 
does not belong to any particular individual. In every 
object, every being, Divinity is immanent. Divinity is 
present in every grain of sand and every particle of 
sugar. It is said, Viswam Vishnu swarupam (the entire 
universe is the embodiment of Lord Vishnu). The 
whole universe comes under one family. Hence, one 
has to cultivate such universal love. That is real atmic 
love. It is only when you cultivate such love, you 
deserve to be called a human being. Only then can you 
visualise the atma tathwa. Devoid of love, if you go 
on cultivating evil qualities like anger, hatred, jealousy 
and a feeling of difference between one another, you 
will be worse than animals. Beasts and animals fight 
among themselves. If you also fight like them, what 
difference is there between you and the animals? In 
fact, anger and hatred are not the qualities of a human 
being. The feeling of difference originates in human 
beings when man considers himself as different from 
God. Where there is a feeling of difference, there 
hatred raises its head. Whatever activity you undertake, 


Control Of Senses Is The Real Sadhana 25 





it must be done in a spirit of dedication to God. 
We extol Lord Easwara as Hiranya garbhaya namah 
(1 offer my pranams to the golden-wombed Lord). 
He is the embodiment of gold. Here gold signifies 
immutability. You are all golden children. But, you 
forget your real nature and associate yourself with 
dust and rust. Hence, great souls have to take birth 
in this world now and then to cleanse you and make 
you realise your innate divinity. However, when some 
great soul embarks upon such a mission, some people 
doubt his effort saying, “It is all his foolishness. Can 
earth become gold? Can sand become sugar?” Modern 
man is full of doubts and doubts! What could be the 
reason for these doubts? It is only when one thinks 
that he is separate from God that doubts arise. 


The Omniscient Gods Is Always Steady 


It is a well known fact that a vessel filled to the 
brim will be steady. Similarly, God is omniscient and 
hence He is steady always. Many people who come 
here have several experiences. (Swami called a student 
onto the dais). I am aware of the past, present and 
future of every individual, irrespective of caste, religion 
and place of birth. Some people who come here have 
several experiences. (Swami called a student onto the 
dais). I am aware of the past, present and future of 
every individual, irrespective of caste, religion and 


26 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





place of birth. Some people who come here may think, 
“Perhaps Swami does not know who I am.” But, there 
is nothing that I do not know. Even though I know 
everything, I pretend as if I do not know. (Pointing 
to the student) The parents and brothers and sisters 
of this boy visited Prasanthi Nilayam sometime ago. 
I called all of them for an interview and promised to 
the father, “My dear! The mother of these children 
may not survive for long. In fact, she may breathe 
her last even before you reach your village. You don’t 
worry. I will take up the responsibility of all your 
children.” The children started crying. I told them,” 
Don’t cry . Why fear when I am here? I will look 
after everything.” From that day onwards, I have been 
looking after their welfare, as promised. The girls are 
all married. All the children have been provided with 
their requirements. None of them faced any difficulty. 
There is one boy among our Band group. That boy is 
the youngest of all the brothers. He was very young 
when he came here along with his parents sometime 
ago. I called him and told him, “My dear! You don’t 
need to worry for anything. I am your father, mother 
and everything. I will look after you in every aspect.” 
Whenever he came here, I used to call him and talk 
to him instilling a sense of security and confidence in 
him. Now all the members of the family are happily 
living. This boy was very young then. Now, he has 


Control Of Senses Is The Real Sadhana 27 





grown up. Thus, I have been showering My love and 
grace on one and all, whether I talk to them particularly 
or not. What is My property? Love! Love! Love! 
I have no anger whatsoever on anyone, at any time. 
It is only to correct an erring individual, I pretend to 
be angry. But I have no anger on anyone. My entire 
body is suffused with pure love. It is said, Easwara 
sarva bhutanam (God is the indweller of all beings). 
Who is Easwara? Easwara is not merely the one who 
is portrayed as wearing rudraksha garlands around His 
hands and serpents round His neck. It is only a form 
that is created for the common man to comprehend 
divinity to some extent. The various names and forms 
like Easwara, Vishnu, Parvati, Lakshmi, etc., were 
created to enable the common man to worship God in 
some form or the other. In fact, every human being is 
an embodiment of Easwara. There is nothing in this 
world which is not permeated by Easwara. The earth 
is Easwara. This handkerchief is also an embodiment 
of Easwara. All names and forms originated from 
Easwarathwa. 


In fact, it is only the one who has gained control 
over the five senses that can comprehend Divinity. 
Divinity is not limited to one name and from. People 
say then had the vision of Rama, Krishna, etc., but it 
is only their imagination! However, Divinity is only 
one and that has been named as Easwara. Unable to 


28 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





comprehend Divinity, people ascribe several names and 
forms to it and get deluded, Today, it is the devotees 
who change their chosen deities frequently, But, God 
does not change. God is one. He is permanent. Real 
sadhana is gaining control over the five senses. One 
has to undertake such type of sadhana instead of 
engaging himself in Japa, dhyana, etc. For example, 
even if you are engaged it japa and dhyana closing 
your eyes, your ‘monkey mind’ will be roaming about 
all the three worlds. People do not realise this truth 
and engage themselves in different types of sadhana. 
There is nothing but Divinity in this world. Whatever 
you see, whatever you hear, everything is permeated 
by Divinity 


Do Not Get Attached 


Once the Pandavas were Performing the Rajasuya 
Yajna. At the conclusion of the ritual, Sri Krishna 
was honoured by the Pandavas in the presence of 
all kings in the court. Sisupala could not bear with 
this honour bestowed on Sri Krishna. He reviled 
Lord Krishna. Severely criticising Him for various 
omissions and commissions. One of the points of his 
criticism was that Krishna stole the saris of women 
who were bathing in a lake. The Pandavas could not 
bear these insinuations heaped upon their dear Lord 
Krishna. They felt humiliated. Krishna then tried to 


Control Of Senses Is The Real Sadhana 29 





reason with them saying, “He did so out of ignorance. 
I am beyond praise or scorn. I am the eternal witness 
to everything that goes on in this world. You should 
not, however, respond to that criticism and start 
paying him in his own coin. Do not ever get attached 
to anyone deeply. It you lead a life of detachment 
thus, I will be with you constantly guarding you and 
guiding you.” 


Divinity never encourages differences among men. 
God is Love and Love is God. There are several 
thousands of people gathered in this Hall. However, 
the love that is permeating every individual is only 
one. There may be differences in the names and forms 
of people and their relationships, but the Divinity 
permeating all people is one and the same. Hence, all 
should lead a life filled with love like brothers and 
sisters. In educational institutions where the system of 
co-education is in vogue, the boys and girls should 
move like brothers and sisters. Nowhere should any 
difference on account of gender raise its head. When 
the children get into the Higher Secondary stage, these 
differences crop up. You should not give scope for such 
things. Whoever entertains such differences, is sure 
to foil in the examination, the examination of ‘pure 
love’. There is nothing great in passing examinations 
in the worldly sense. Everyone can pass, provided 
one puts in a little effort. There 1s no use passing a 


30 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





worldly examination, while at the same time failing 
in pure and unsullied love for a fellow human being 
who is none other than God. He who has passed the 
examination of divine love is the most successful 
person in life. 


All are God’s children. All are reflections of the 
Hiranyagarbha present in the human body. Hence, from 
now onwards all of you should live like brothers and 
sisters with mutual love and affection. Then only you 
deserve to be called ideal students. But, I do not find 
in the present day students such feeling of kinship. 
Instead they are cultivating differences such as, “I 
am different” and “You are different.” You should 
not, under any circumstances, cultivate anger and 
hatred. Anger should be controlled and hatred given 
up. Your safety and welfare lie in controlling anger. 
It is common knowledge that when the controls in a 
railway station are not functioning properly, the trains 
moving on the track derail. In such a situation, the 
controller in the railway station is held responsible. 
Similarly, the mind is the controller for all thoughts 
and feelings arising in us. Hence, if the mind is kept 
in control, the entire body comes under our control. 


You are all embodiments of pure gold. You are 
all golden children. Your words are sweet. Let your 
conduct also be sweet in comformity with your words. 
Wherever you go, as students of Sri Sathya Sai 


Control Of Senses Is The Real Sadhana 31 





educational institutions, you must display an exemplary 
conduct and behaviour. Merely because you wear 
white dress, you do not deserve to be called students 
of Sri Sathya Sai educational institutions. In keeping 
with your white dress, Keep your mind pure and your 
heart sacred. Only then will you become ideal students. 
Swami will constantly be with such students, guarding 
and guiding them. I will give them everything. In fact, 
I am protecting several people in several ways; but, 
no one has realised this point till today. 


Develop Equal - Mindedness 


Your own atma is divinity. That is Easwara. One 
has to develop firm faith in that feeling. How can you 
be called a human being if you do not develop such 
faith? Love is God; live in love. Your love should not 
be limited to an individual or some family members. 
You must share it with all. If only you develop such 
broad-mindedness, you can become a leader and set 
and ideal to others. (When Swami enquired of the 
students whether they had faith in Swamis words, 
all of them unanimously responded by saying loudly, 
“Yes Swami |’). It is not enough if you just pay lip 
service by saying ‘yes’. The conviction must come 
from the depth of your heart. You commit a mistake 
and say ‘sorry’. That is not enough. You should desist 


32 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





from repeating the same mistake. Truth is the very 
life-breath for a human being. Truth is God. Do not 
speak untruth. If only you follow truth in your life 
steadfastly, you can achieve everything. Truth is like a 
shield that will protect you. Truth is your support. If 
you give up such a noble quality of truth and speak 
untruth, how can you be called a human being? You 
should never give scope for falsehood in your life. 
God is the only leader for the entire universe. God 
is the only leader and judge. It is only God who 
can decide justice or injustice, You should not forget 
such an omnipresent, omnipotent and omniscient God. 
Do not entertain feelings of difference like “mine” 
and “thine”. Develop equal -mindedness. May all 
people live together happily and bring good name for 
themselves and the country (Bhagawan created a gold 
ring with a green stone embedded in it and presented 
it to the student standing in front of Him). Everyone 
should thus earn the grace of God. The green colour 
is a sign of peace and welfare. I wish that all of you 
should earn such peace, welfare, love, devotion and 
geace of God. It is only when you drive away the 
bad qualities in you, that you will be able to live in 
the divine presence. May you make proper use of the 
punchabhutas (the five elements of earth, water, fire, 
air and ether). May you control your panchendrivas 


Control Of Senses Is The Real Sadhana 33 





(five senses). Then God will be constantly with you 
guarding and guiding you. Divinity cannot be attained 
merely by offering prayers and doing bhajans. Along 
with these sadhanas, you must also develop a pure 
heart and offer it to God. Let your mind, intellect and 
chittha be constantly associated with God wherever you 
are and whatever work you are undertaking. Then your 
very mind, intellect and chittha will be transformed into 
Divinity. When God is present right in front of you 
in the form of panchabhutas, where is the need for 
searching for Him separately? There is no scope at all 
for such a feeling! It is a serious mistake to think that 
God is separate from the panchabhutas. Considering 
God as your everything and sole refuge, dedicate 
your senses to Him. This is an easy method to reach 
God. When you follow such an easy path, you will 
attain moksha (liberation). After all, what is moksha? 
Moha kshaya is moksha (coming out of delusion is 
liberation). There is no use chanting “Ram, Ram, 
Ram.... “when your mind is full of moha (delusion). 
Whatever work you undertake, do it with a sense of 
Bhagavad prityartham (to please God). Whomever you 
come across, consider him as an embodiment of God. 
Even the beggar standing in front of your door is an 
embodiment of God. He may be a beggar from the 
point of view of the physical body. But, he is really 


34 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





an embodiment of Divinity from the atmic sense. 
Whether one is a king or an emperor or a beggar, 
the same Divinity permeates every individual. May 
you dedicate your lives to win the love of God and 
His grace. Undertake every activity as an offering to 
God. Even your reading of your text books can be 
done with such a sense of Dedication to God. You 
will surely pass your examinations in Ist class. I am 
happy that you are all good boys. But, one caution- 
You must exhibit the same good behaviour in your 
Higher secondary School, as in the Primary School. 


Let Me remind you that the teachers in the Higher 
Secondary School will not hesitate to punish you 
whenever necessary if you go wrong. They have 
nothing against anybody, but they are duty bound 
to put you on the right track. If a teacher shirks 
his responsibility and condones your bad behaviour 
without giving a punishment, then he is a ‘guddi 
Guru’ (blind teacher). He cannot be called a Guru 
in the real sense. The role of a headmaster in the 
school is also important. In fact, he is the *head’ for 
all the teachers. Hence, he should oversee the work 
of all the teachers. 


Education does not mean simply reading of books. 
One cannot become great by acquiring an academic 


Control Of Senses Is The Real Sadhana 35 





degree. In fact, degrees are not great; Divine is great. 
Hence, develop such divine nature. Only then will your 
life become sanctified and your education meaningful. 
Your parents will also be happy. You might be aware 
that your parents have admitted you in Sri Sathya Sai 
educational institution with great hopes. You should 
not disappoint them. You must earn the praise of your 
father, mother, teacher and God-all the four. Make 
your life meaningful and sacred by good thoughts, 
feelings, practice and behaviour. 


Discourse on 23-2-2006, Prashanthi Niliyam 


36 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





Follow Your Conscience 



























Do not shape your conduct with an eye on 
the opinion of others. Instead, follow bravely, 
gladly and steadily, the sweet and pleasant 
promptings of your own sathwic manas, your 
own awakened conscience, your own inner self. 
Associate yourself with those who are richly 
endowed with Truth. Spend every second of 
your life usefully and well. If you possibly 
can, render service to others. Engage yourself 
in nursing the sick; but when thus engaged in 
service, do not worry about either the result, 
or the act of service, or the person to whom 
it is rendered. The service is made holy and 
pure if you ignore both the good and the bad, 
and keep on silently repeating in your heart 
the mantra that appeals to you. 


- Baba 


3 


Limit Not The All Pervading Brahman 
With Names And Forms 


Is it possible to build a temple for the One who pervades 
the entire Brahmanda (cosmos)? Can anyone give a name 
to the One who is present in all beings? Is it possible 
to give a bath to the One who is present in all rivers? 
Can anyone offer food to the One who has the entire 
Brahmanda in His stomach? Man out of his ignorance ts 
unable to know this truth. He is under the delusion that 
he is Naswara (tmpermanent). In fact, he is not Naswara, 
but Easwara Himself for the entire world. 


(Telugu poem) 
RAPANCHA is the name we have given 


to the apparent world. It is called prapancha 
as it is constituted by the panchabhutas (five elements), 


38 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





namely, earth, water, fire, air and ether. ‘Pra’ means 
to manifest, to blossom. Hence, prapancha means 
the manifestation of not only the five elements, but 
also the five life principles, namely, prana, apana, 
vyana, udana and samana. They form the basis for 
the entire world. The principle of Brahmatathwa is 
present in all the five elements as the undercurrent. 
It is eternal and immortal. The term Brahma refers to 
the divine principle which pervades the panchabhutas, 
pancha kosas and pancha pranas. But man out of 
ignorance attributes a particular form to Brahma and 
offers his prayers. Names and forms are transient. 
Brahmatathwa, which is the basis of all names 
and forms is the only permanent entity. Out of our 
ignorance and limited understanding we confine such 
a cosmic principle of Brahman to a tiny form and 
worship it. We should worship the cosmic form of the 
divine. Brahmanda (cosmos) is the very form of God. 
Brahman pervades the anda, pinda and Brahmanda. 
Anda is the combination of padartha (matter) and 
prana (life principle). Pinda is that which is born out 
of the mother’s womb. Ultimately, they become one 
with the Brahmanda. 


See God In All Embodiments Of Love 


Love is the basis for Brahmanda. Without prema 
(love), there is neither prakriti (nature) nor prapancha 


Limit Not The All Pervading Brahman With Names And Forms 39 





(world). The world is sustained by the principle of 
love which is uniformly present in the five elements. 
You may worship Divinity in a number of ways, but 
all your worship will prove futile, if you forget the 
principle of love. 


The five elements are responsible for the 
sustenance of human life and the world at large. 
Everything will come to a standstill even if any one 
of the five elements is missing. We hear the sound 
with our ears. We see the world with our eyes. In 
this manner, we are able to experience the world 
through the five senses. They prove the existence of 
the world. Man has forgotten the divine principle of 
love and is striving to attain ananda (bliss) through 
mean and worldly pursuits. It is said, Jantunam nara 
janma durlabham (out of all living beings, human 
birth is the rarest). In fact, human being is essentially 
divine. 


Dharma, artha, kama and moksha are prescribed 
as the four goals of human life. But, man today has 
given up dharma and moksha. He is running after 
artha and kama (wealth and desire). God has created 
this world. Your wife, children, friends and foes are 
all created by God. It is not enough if you maintain 
good relationship with your wife, children and friends. 
You must be able to see God in all. That is your 


40 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





primary duty. Your wife, children, friends and even 
foes are all the very embodiments of Brahman. Even 
God had to fight the enemies sometimes. However, in 
spite of their animosity towards God, they ultimately 
merged in Him owing to His grace. In this world, 
there is no place where God does not exist. He is 
present everywhere. 


Sarvatah panipadam tat sarvathokshi siromukham, 
sarvatah sruthimalloke sarvamavruthya tishthati (with 
hands, feet, eyes, head, mouth and ears pervading 
everything, He permeates the entire universe). 


The people around you may not be able to see 
what you do, but He is watching you. Others may not 
hear what you speak, but He is listening to you. He 
is the eternal witness. Unfortunately, you are unable to 
realise this truth. Some people argue, “How can you 
say that God is present everywhere when we do not 
actually see Him? How is it possible for Him to hear 
our prayers?” In fact, sound is the very form of God. 
There is no place where there is no sound. He can 
hear everything since sound is His own form. Light 
pervades the entire world. God can see everything 
in this world as the very light is His vision. Hence, 
never be under the mistaken notion that God does 
not know what is happening. Do not doubt or deny 
His existence just because He is not visible to the 
naked eye. How does sankalpa (will) originate? Will 


Limit Not The All Pervading Brahman With Names And Forms 41 





it originate in your hridaya (heart)? It happens as 
per the Will of God. There may be ups and downs 
from the worldly point of view, but divine principle 
always remains steady. 


The loka (world) and Lokesha (God) are 
inseparable. The creation and the creator are one. There 
is an intimate and inseparable relationship between 
the two. Atma is the name given to the principle of 
divinity. It has no specific form. It pervades the entire 
world in the form of sankalpa (will). It is a grave 
error to attribute a particular name and form to the 
atma. It is essential that we understand the oneness of 
atma and experience the same. Everything is divine. 
Sarvam khalvidam Brahma (verily, all this is Brahman). 
As you are unable to comprehend the divine principle 
in totality, you confine God to a specific name and 
form such as Rama, Krishna, Vishnu, etc., and worship 
Him. A potter makes the idols of Rama, Krishna, etc. 
However, it is only the clay that takes the forms of 
various deities. The same clay is moulded into various 
forms. 


Jewels are many but gold is one. 
Cows are many but milk is one. 
Beings are many but breath is one. 


(Telugu poem) 


As you are unable to understand the principle of 


42 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





unity, you are deluded by the apparent diversity. 


Embodiments Of Love ! Consider The World As 
The Very Form Of God 


No one can describe God as having this form or 
that form. He permeates the entire universe. Without 
name there can be no form and vice versa. The 
principle of divinity is represented by a name and a 
form. Every object and every being in this prapancha 
(world) is the manifestation of divine love. Hence, do 
not see the world merely from the physical point of 
view. Consider the world as the very form of God 
and the manifestation of divine love. Because of 
your limited understanding, you confine such an all 
pervading divine principle to a name and a form. Yad 
bhavam tad bhavati (as 1s the feeling, so is the result). 
God responds according to your feelings towards Him. 
If you have purna bhakti (unwavering devotion) and 
love God with all your heart, He will confer on you 
purna ananda (supreme bliss). God transcends the 
dualities of birth and death, happiness and sorrow. You 
may think that even God has pain and suffering. But, 
from God’s point of view, pain does not exist at all! 
It is an aspect of divinity. Bliss also is an aspect of 
divinity. God is beyond pleasure and pain, merit and 
sin. Happiness and sorrow are of your own making. 
Pleasure is an interval between two pains. 


Do not consider God as a separate entity. 


Limit Not The All Pervading Brahman With Names And Forms 43 





Unfortunately, people are unable to understand the 
principle of divinity and hence indulge in all types of 
imaginations. God is one. The Veda declares, Ekam 
sath viprah bahudha vadanti (truth is one, but the 
wise refer to it by various names). However, when the 
situation demands, divine incarnations appear on earth 
and play a role in the cosmic drama. When Droupadi 
was humiliated by Duryodhana and Dussasana in 
the royal court, Bhima was seething with anger. He 
wanted to crush them to pulp. But, even under such 
circumstances, God did not kill them. It is most 
essential you understand that everything happens as 
per His will. Whatever happens is for your own good. 
With such firm conviction, you should accept pleasure 
and pain, good and bad with equanimity. It may be 
difficult for you to bear misfortunes. You should pray 
to God to grant you the necessary strength to bear 
them. You may have difficulties today, but tomorrow 
it will be different. Difficulties are like passing 
clouds. They will certainly give way to happiness. 
Man always strives for happiness. How can he attain 
it? True happiness lies in union with God. In fact, 
God is beyond happiness and sorrow. Whatever you 
may do, He says, “Jathastu” (So shall it be). He 
showers His blessings on you saying, “Let it be 
for your own good.” You will be free from sorrow 
once you understand the Bhagavadtathwa (nature of 
divinity). If you are undergoing difficulties, do not get 
disheartened. Have faith that God is making you go 
through the ordeal for your own good. Happiness and 


44 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





sorrow coexist. You cannot attain happiness without 
undergoing difficulties. 


Embodiments Of Love! Be Attracted Only Towords 
God And None Else 


Do not attribute multiplicity to divinity. Consider 
everyone as the embodiment of divinity. Install such 
sacred feeling firmly in your heart. Treat even the 
person who hates you as your own. Having attained 
human birth, you should be able to withstand pain 
and suffering with courage and fortitude. Be convinced 
that they are good for you. All that God has created 
is good. In God’s creation, everything is good and 
sacred. There is nothing which will cause sorrow and 
misery. In fact, misery arises out of man’s delusion. 
The delusion is because of his identification with the 
form. What is the meaning of the term Manava? ‘Ma’ 
means Maya, ‘Na’ means without and ‘Va’ means 
Varthinchuta (to conduct oneself). Therefore, Manava 
is one who conducts himself without maya. If you 
fall a victim to maya, you will never be able to 
understand marmamu (reality). In fact, maya is man’s 
own making. It arises out of his imagination. 


However much one may try, it is not possible 
to know God in totality. Once mother Kunti said to 
Krishna, “Oh, Krishna! Though You are verily God, 
sometimes we are deluded to think that You are also 
a human being like us.” Saint Thyagaraja too echoed 
the same feelings in the following verse: 


Limit Not The All Pervading Brahman With Names And Forms 45 





Oh, Lord! You answered the prayers of Droupadi 
and saved her from humiliation. You made ugly-looking 
Kubja_ beautiful. You protected the Pandavas. Is it 
possible to estimate Your glory and splendour? You 
are beyond all description and human comprehension. 
Krishna, it is not possible for even Brahma to describe 
Your glory. 

(Telugu song) 


Good and bad lie in your mind; they are not 
outside. Hence, correct your feelings in the first 
instance. Get rid of all animal qualities so that 
humanness can blossom in you. If you notice even 
a trace of hatred in yourself, drive it away at once. 
Having attained human birth, it is shameful on your 
part to have evil qualities like hatred. Do not fall a prey 
to infatuation. You should be attracted only towards 
God and none else. You love your son because you 
consider him to be your reflection. In fact, the one 
who loves you, the one who hates you, the one who 
criticises you, all are your own reflections. At one 
time, one may be angry and later the anger may give 
way to love. People are carried away by the vagaries 
of the mind. Being deluded by the names and forms, 
they are unable to know the transient nature of the 
world. Truly speaking, you have neither friends nor 
enemies. It is only your love or hatred that is reflected 
from outside. God does not give you happiness or 
sorrow; they are of your own making. They originate 


46 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





from you. 


Never Deny God 
Embodiments Of Love! 


God is present everywhere in the form of five 
elements. Everyone is endowed with five elements and 
everyone is an embodiment of love. All are one. There 
is no second entity. Wherever you see, there are five 
elements. You do not find a sixth element anywhere. 
The principle of love present in you represents 
Easwarathwa and Brahmatathwa. It is merely bhrama 
(delusion) to think that Brahma is separate from you. 
Everything is Brahman. Everything is the manifestation 
of atma and ananda. That is why God is extolled 
as Nityanandam, paramasukhadam kevalam 
jnanamurtim (God is the embodiment of eternal bliss, 
He is wisdom absolute). Even the karma (action) that 
you perform is the manifestation of Brahman. When 
you perform your action with such divine feelings, 
they will yield good results. Never criticise God. 
Never deny Him. Everything is the manifestation of 
Brahma, Vishnu and Maheswara. All are divine. This 
is what you have to learn on this auspicious day of 
Sivaratri. There is nothing other than divinity in this 
world. The principle of divinity present in a grain of 
sand and in a big /addu is one and the same. Once 
you realise this truth, you become Brahman verily. 


Limit Not The All Pervading Brahman With Names And Forms 47 





You do not need to search for Brahma elsewhere. 
You are Brahman, you are Vishnu, you are Siva, you 
are the very embodiment of the divine Trinity. It is 
only your feeling that assumes the form of Brahma, 
Vishnu and Maheswara. 


You are subjected to unrest and suffering because 
of your dualistic feeling. You perceive unity as diversity, 
instead of visualising unity in diversity. Number one 
is the basis for all other numbers. Likewise, names 
and forms vary, but all are essentially one. There is 
no second person. Other than divinity, there is no 
second entity in this world. Many spiritual aspirants 
and yogis have made concerted efforts to understand 
the principle of divinity. They ultimately realised 
Ekam sat viprah bahudha vadanti (truth is one, but 
the wise refer to it by various names). As you have 
not understood this truth, you are deluded by the 
apparent duality. You should understand the spiritual 
Mathematics in order to know that divinity is one. It 
is most essential that you understand this principle of 
oneness and conduct yourself accordingly. When you 
understand this oneness, you will experience divinity. 
You will realise that the individual is not different 
from God. When you put a zero after the numeral 
1 it becomes 10; put one more zero it will become 
100. In this manner if you go on adding zeros, the 
value also increases to 1000, 10,000, and so on 
and so forth. Zeros gain value only when they are 


48 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





positioned next to the numeral one. ‘I’, ‘my wife’, ‘my 
children’, ‘my property’, etc., all these are like zeros. 
They will have value only when they are associated 
with God who is like numeral one. The entire world 
is like a zero. It has emerged from the Hero, God. 
It is because of your delusion that you mistake zero 
for Hero. So long as you are immersed in delusion 
you will never be able to realise divinity. Delusion 
gives rise to doubts which will rob you of your bliss. 
They will poison your mind and put you to danger. 
Hence, never entertain doubts with regard to Divinity. 
Strengthen your faith in God. 


A car can run smoothly only when there is air 
in all its four tyres. Even if one tyre is punctured, it 
may lead to accident. The human body is like a car. 
Mind is the steering wheel. Dharma, artha, kama and 
moksha are its four tyres. They should be filled with 
the air of faith. Even if one of the tyres is punctured, 
your life will be put to danger. Your mind should be 
steady and under control. Only then can you reach 
the goal of life, i.e., moksha (liberation). 


Keep Your Mind Under Control 
Embodiments Of Love! 
The entire world is pervaded by the five elements. 


You should maintain perfect balance and harmony 
among them. When you are riding a cycle, if you 


Limit Not The All Pervading Brahman With Names And Forms 49 





do not maintain proper balance, you will fall down. 
Likewise, you can lead the life of a true human being 
only when you have proper balance of mind. If you 
lack proper balance of mind, your humanness will be 
ruined. It is said, Jantunam nara janma durlabham 
(out of all living beings, human birth is the rarest). 
Having been blessed with such precious human birth, 
what a shame it is if you behave like an animal! You 
should live like a human being. Keep your mind under 
control. This is My message to you on this holy night 
of Sivaratri. Understand that you are born as a human 
being, not as an insect or a worm. Neither are you an 
animal, nor a bird nor a beast. You should understand 
the meaning of the term manava. ‘Ma’ means not 
and ‘nava’ means new. You are not here for the first 
time. You are not new to this earth. You have gone 
through a number of births before attaining this human 
birth. Give up all your old and mean qualities and 
start your life afresh. Human life is highly sacred 
and mysterious. Only God can unravel its mystery. 
Visweswara (the Lord of the universe) permeates the 
entire viswa (universe). He transcends all description. 
He is present in you in the form of atma. There is 
only one path for the realisation of atma. Give up the 
feeling of ‘mine’. You say ‘this is mine and that is 
mine’. Once you get rid of such worldly attachment, 
you will develop purity, steadiness and selflessness. 


50 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





You will be free from suffering, worries and anxiety. 
Ultimately, you will attain moksha (liberation). Having 
attained manavathwa (humanness), you should make 
efforts to rise to the level of Madhavathwa (divinity). 
That is your goal. What is the use if you remain in 
manavatwa forever? You should develop sanmathi (pure 
mind) to rise to the level of divine. Unity confers 
purity which will in turn lead to divinity. Hence, all 
of you must stand united. You belong to the human 
race. You belong to one family. Hence, you must 
conduct yourself like brothers and sisters. Absence of 
such spirit of unity will diminish purity and take you 
away from divinity. 


Embodiments Of Love! 


Being students of Sathya Sai College, you must 
set an example to others with your spirit of unity. 
You deserve to be called Sai devotees only when 
you develop unity. Love God with all your heart. 
Love for God will transform your heart. It will drive 
away hatred and other evil qualities. You can achieve 
anything through love. 


(Bhagawan sang the Bhajan “Prema muditha 
manase kaho...” and continued His discourse) 


Embodiments Of Love! 


Since time immemorial, the divine name of Rama 


Limit Not The All Pervading Brahman With Names And Forms 51 





has been protecting the devotees and leading them on 
the right path. One can very well imagine the divine 
potency of Rama’s name as it has remained etched 
in the hearts of people through all the ages. This in 
itself is a mystery. Thousands of years have passed 
since the advent of Rama, yet His name remains 
ever fresh and ever new. One may be on the top of 
the mountain or in a village or in a city, everyone 
derives immense delight in singing the name of Rama. 
Ramayathi ithi Ramah (that which delights is the 
principle of Rama). 


Beware Of The Words You Utter 


Once in the court of Krishnadevaraya, there was 
a debate in which the eight scholars of the royal court 
popularly known as the ‘Ashta Diggajas’ participated. 
Krishna devaraya wanted to know who among them 
was the best. He wanted them to frame a meaningful 
sentence consisting of five letters, each letter having the 
same meaning in five different languages. “Whoever 
comes out with an answer to this question by seven 
tomorrow morning will be suitably rewarded”, he 
added. 


Since his house was far away, Tenali Ramakrishna 
decided to spend the night in his brother-in-law’s 
house. When he was provided with a comfortable bed 


52 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





for the night, Ramakrishna refused to sleep on it. He 
said, “I have to think of an answer to a question put 
by the king by tomorrow morning. A bed like this is 
certain to put me to sleep in no time. So, provide a 
cot for me in the cow shed.” 


As he was lying on the cot, at one o’clock in the 
night, one of the cows in the shed gave birth to a calf. 
Ramakrishna called out to inform his brother-in-law 
about this. His brother-in-law wanted to know which 
cow had given birth, since he had given different names 
to his cows, like Parvati, Lakshmi, and Saraswati. He 
asked Ramakrishna, “Ye Aav Ra Bava’ (which cow 
is that, Oh! brother-in-law). 


When Ramakrishna heard this, his joy knew no 
bounds, since he had found an answer to the king’s 
question. So, he repeated the phrase again and again. 
His brother-in-law thought that Ramakrishna was be- 
having in this strange manner due to lack of sleep. 


The next morning, Ramakrishna went to the royal 
court and found that no one else had a solution to 
the question. All others were convinced it was not 
possible to frame such a sentence. “Ye Aav Ra Ba Va” 
is the answer, he said. Everyone was intrigued. Then 
he explained, “ ‘Ye’ in Marati, ‘Aav’ in Hindi, ‘Ra’ 
in Telugu, ‘Ba’ in Kannada and ‘Va’ in Tamil convey 
the same meaning, 1.e., ‘come’.” Five languages are 


Limit Not The All Pervading Brahman With Names And Forms 53 





represented in this sentence. 


Students! 


The words you utter sometimes convey different 
meanings. Hence, you should be very careful while 
speaking. Develop virtues and lead an ideal life. Only 
then will Swami be pleased with you. If you make 
Me happy with your ideal conduct, I will confer 
much more happiness on you. Your happiness is My 
happiness. Wherever you go, earn a good name for 
yourself. Your character is very important for Me. 
Hence, make every effort to mould your character and 
be an ideal to others. This is the message I would 
like to give you on this auspicious day of Sivaratri. 
The day on which you experience eternal bliss is 
Sivaratri for Me. 


Once Thyagaraja performed a musical concert 
at Thanjavur. Many eminent musicians and scholars 
were present in the concert hall. In the beginning 
of the programme Thyagaraja offered salutations to 
all of them through his famous composition, Endaro 
mahanubhavulu, andariki vandanamulu (there are many 
great souls who have had the divine experience; I 
prostrate before all of them). Everyone was blissful 
listening to his melodious singing. He demonstrated 
by his example that one should pay his respects to 
everyone in the assembly before addressing them since 
there was divinity in all of them. Many years ago, in 


54 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





Prasanthi Nilayam, a scholar was invited to address 
a congregation. While commencing his speech, he 
addressed the audience thus: “Brothers and Sisters 
except one!” Then he explained that his wife was 
also present among the audience. Even while addressing 
a congregation he was remembering his wife. 
One should not observe such differences while 
addressing a public gathering. One should offer his 
salutations to one and all. 


Embodiments of Love! 1 shower My blessings 
on all of you on this holy night of Sivaratri. Sing 
the divine name throughout the night. To the extent 
possible, spend the night in contemplating God. Only 
then can you experience divine bliss. You can even 
witness the manifestation of divine effulgence. Sing 
the divine name wholeheartedly. You may sing any 
name, but you should understand its inner meaning. 


For example, ‘Digambara’ is one of the names 
of Lord Siva. Digambara in common parlance refers 
to the one who is naked. But if you enquire into the 
inner meaning, you will know that ‘Digambara’ is the 
One who has dikkulu (four sides — East, West, North, 
South) as His ambara (vesture). There is a possibility 
that people misunderstand this word and think that 
Siva does not wear anything on His body. Hence, it 
is better that you do not use this word in bhajans. 

Sivaratri, 26-2-2006,Prasanthi Nilayam 


4 


Atma Is The Nameless, 
Formless Divnity 


RAUPADI’S father Drupada organised a 

swayamvara (ceremony to select a groom 
by the bride) to perform her marriage. Thousands of 
youths, princes and kings came to his court to win the 
hand of Droupadi in this swayamvara. Just as King 
Janaka had declared that he would give his daughter 
Sita in marriage to the prince who could string the bow 
of Lord Siva, King Drupada arranged a matsyayantra 
(a device with the replica of a fish). The condition 
of the contest was that whosoever was able to hit 
the eye of the fish that was revolving high above on 
a pole with an arrow by looking at its reflection in 


56 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





water below would be successful in winning the hand 
of his daughter. 


Extraordinary Qualities Of Draupadi 


Many valorous youths and princes who were 
confident of their victory tried their luck without any 
success. This was not an ordinary test that everyone 
could succeed. Many thought that it was easy, but in 
reality it was not so. When no one could succeed in 
the contest, the entire assembly fell into a stunning 
silence. The Pandavas were present incognito in this 
assembly. Lord Krishna, who was also present, looked 
at the Pandavas and smiled noticing that the Pandavas 
spoke to each other in whispers. Arjuna then walked 
majestically towards the matsyayantra, smiling all the 
way. He was totally calm and composed. Looking at 
the reflection of the fish in water, he shot an arrow. 
When it hit the target successfully, the entire assembly 
went into raptures. All the people looked at Arjuna 
in admiration with great delight. King Drupada then 
asked his daughter Droupadi to garland Arjuna. 


At that time, the Pandavas were staying in the 
house of a potter. When they went back to that house 
along with the bride, their mother Kunti was inside 
Even before entering their house, they announced to 
their mother that they had received a very valuable 
fruit. Their mother replied from inside the house that 
they should share the fruit equally between themselves. 
The Pandavas always obeyed the command of their 


Atma Is The Nameless, Formless Divnity 57 





mother and honoured every word that she uttered. 
They went inside and offered their salutations to their 
mother and vowed to follow her command religiously. 
In this way, Droupadi became the wife of all the 
five Pandavas. The Pandavas dutifully accepted the 
command of their mother. But, how could the world 
accept this? It is the duty of the children to obey 
the command of their parents, irrespective of the fact 
whether the world accepts it or not. People, however, 
accepted this in view of the intimate relationship that 
existed between the five brothers. 


When can one consider a woman as one’s wife? 
Not merely because one is married to her. One can 
call her as wife only when one considers her as half 
part of his body. Many people questioned Krishna 
how Droupadi could be called a pativrata (chaste 
wife) when she was the wife of five husbands. Then 
Krishna described her qualities which earned her this 
noble status. 


She dutifully obeyed the command 

of her husbands. 

She would never say to any one of them 
That she had no time to serve him. 

She was satisfied with whatever 

She got in life. 

She was the supreme example of chastity, 
And none could match her in this respect.” 


(Telugu poem) 


58 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





She never asked for anything beyond the means of her 
husbands. A true chaste woman is one who conducts 
herself according to the condition of her husband. The 
husband should also recognise the qualities of his wife 
and have equal concern for her. Only then can both 
of them lead a virtuous and noble life. 


Looking at her virtuous conduct and her power 
to control the five senses, Dharmaraja told Droupadi, 
“You do not merely belong to us; you are the 
embodiment of primal energy.” Her father Drupada 
had also held this view and considered her as the 
embodiment of divine energy. Only those who 
achieve control over the five senses and the five 
elements can know the reality of the world and 
conduct themselves in a righteous manner. One who 
has complete control over one’s senses can achieve 
the greatest heights in life. 


Droupadi was endowed with great power of 
discrimination and she could discriminate between 
what was good and what was bad. Both good and 
bad are present in this world just like darkness and 
light. She encouraged all those who were virtuous 
and imparted sacred teachings to evil-minded people 
to transform them. Not only she had control over 
the five senses and five elements, she had thorough 
knowledge of pancha kosas (five sheaths of the soul) 


Atma Is The Nameless, Formless Divnity 59 





and pancha pranas (five life-breaths) also. She could 
differentiate between atma and anatma (Self and non- 
Self). Thus, she set an ideal to the world and earned 
a good name. 


Droupadi taught that one should do one’s duty 
with dedication. She exhorted all to exercise control 
over their desires and discriminate between good and 
bad, imbibing all that was good and giving up all 
that was bad. One should never forget to perform 
good actions and discharge one’s duties, she advised. 
Everyone should discharge one’s duty with dedication 
and should not interfere in the duties of others, she 
counselled the people. “You may have wife and 
children. It is your duty to fulfil your responsibility 
towards them, but at the same time all your desires 
should be directed towards the path of goodness and 
righteousness”, she said. Thus, she became an ideal 
to the world and showed the path of truth to one and 
all. One can attain Dharma only by following the path 
of Sathya. Sathyannasti paro dharma (There is no 
Dharma greater than adherence to truth). There can 
be no Dharma without truth. It is the path of truth 
that leads one to God. 


Follow The Path Of Sathya And Dharma 


Everyone should perform his duty meticulously 
and adhere to dharma. Even an ant follows its Dharma. 


60 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





Wherever it finds food, it carries it to its place and 
consumes it. It does not harm anybody nor does it 
steal anything from anybody. All the birds and animals 
follow their natural dharma and conduct themselves 
accordingly. The path of Dharma is the same for 
cheema (ant) and Brahma. The same principle of 
truth is present in both. This truth was propagated 
by Droupadi. She also taught that one should not 
become a victim of the six inner enemies, namely, 
kama (desire), krodha (anger), Lobha (greed) moha 
(attachment), mada (pride) and matsarya (jealousy). 


Anger is the greatest enemy of man. One with 
anger cannot follow the path of Dharma. This is 
contrary to human nature. One should not unnecessarily 
show anger towards others. 


One with anger will not be successful 
In any of his endeavours. 

He will commit sins and will be 
Ridiculed by one and all. 

His own people will abandon him. 
He will lose all wealth and respect. 
His anger will ruin him completely. 


(Telugu poem) 


Hatred is another great enemy of man. Whom 
should you hate? Should you hate those who oppose 
you or those who have harmed you or those who 


Atma Is The Nameless, Formless Divnity 61 





dislike you? No; none of these. You should hate only 
the evil qualities. You should extend your love and 
support to those who follow Sathya and Dharma. If 
you hate Sathya and Dharma, you are not a human 
being at all. Truth is the basis of all virtues. By 
following the path of truth, Droupadi could experience 
peace and love. She taught that one should refrain 
from violence. One should not indulge in violence 
through one’s actions, words and even thoughts. By 
following the path of truth, Droupadi set the greatest 
ideal to the world. 


As You Sow, So Shall You Reap 


By exercising sense control, man can achieve 
great heights in life. Damayanti was a woman of great 
virtues like Droupadi. She earned this name as she 
was endowed with dama (sense control). The senses 
are wayward by nature, and it is difficult to control 
them. Man should, however, do his best to control 
them and put them to right use. Why has God given 
you ears? Is it to hear vain gossip? Never listen to 
anything that is bad. Listen to all that is good. Why 
has God given you tongue? It is not merely to satisfy 
your sense of taste. It has been given to sing the glory 
of God. Just as the tongue accepts all that is tasty and 
palatable and rejects all that is bad and unpalatable, 
man should accept all that is good and reject everything 


62 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





that is bad. 


People think that it is God who is the cause of 
their happiness and sorrow. But it is not really so. 
Each one is responsible for his actions and reaps 
their consequences, good or bad. God is the eternal 
witness and does not interfere in this. He gives 
neither happiness nor sorrow. If you talk endearingly 
to someone, he will also speak to you in the same 
loving manner. But if you talk in an arrogant way, 
you will get a similar response. As is the action, so 
is the reaction. The reaction, reflection and resound 
are based on your own thoughts, words and actions; 
God is not responsible for them. If you stand before a 
mirror, you will see your own reflection. In whatever 
way you speak to others, you will have the resound 
in the same way. Whatever thoughts you have in your 
mind, they will be reflected back to you. It is therefore 
essential for man to know whether his thoughts and 
actions are good or bad. Whatever good or bad you 
experience is the result of your thoughts, words and 
actions. When any bad thought comes into your mind, 
give it up immediately. If you conduct yourself in this 
manner, you will become a true devotee of God and 
achieve liberation. 


Everyone has to face the consequences of his 
actions, whoever he may be. No one can know what 
lies ahead for him in future. But this much is sure 
that everybody has to reap the consequences of his 


Atma Is The Nameless, Formless Divnity 63 





actions. Even the mighty Rama suffered the pain of 
separation from His consort Sita and cried like an 
ordinary person.” 

(Telugu song) 
Young Men! 


Good and bad coexist. It is not possible for 
anyone to separate them. When you cultivate more 
of goodness, the bad in you will become absolutely 
insignificant. There is no need to use any force to 
drive away all that is bad. When you forget bad, 
goodness will develop in you in full measure. This 
is the message I would like to give on this day. Do 
not think that the New Year will give you some 
new fruits. The fruits that you earn will be based 
on your qualities and actions. All that you think will 
be reflected back to you. Everything is the result of 
your thoughts. 


World Is Reaction, Reflection And Resound 


Once there was a cowherd who used to take 
cows for grazing to a place surrounded by three 
mountains. One day when the cows were grazing, 
he sat down under a tree and started singing a song 
in praise of God. As he sang the song, he heard its 
echo. He thought that someone was imitating his song 
to tease him. Therefore, he shouted in anger at the 
invisible intruder, and heard its resound in the same 


64 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





angry tone. In this state of anger, he went home and 
did not even take his food. His mother asked him 
why he was so upset. He narrated what had happened. 
Next day, his mother accompanied him and came to 
know that it was his own echo which was the cause 
of his trouble. In the same manner if you criticise or 
abuse anybody, all that will come back to you. The 
world is nothing but reaction, reflection and resound. 
Whatever you do will come back to you, and nothing 
else. This is the divine law. Those who are full of 
love will see love everywhere. Those who are full of 
hatred will see enemies all around. Therefore, love 
and hatred do not come from outside. They have their 
origin within you. The good and bad you experience 
arise out of your own feelings. God is not responsible 
for any of these. God is nirguna, niranjana, sanathana 
(attributeless, pure, eternal). It is only your feelings 
that change. God is changeless. 


Students! 


All your feelings are reflected back to you. 
Everything is within you. Whatever you experience is 
the reaction, reflection and resound of your thoughts 
and feelings. You see somebody laughing and think 
that he is laughing at you. But how can you conclude 
in this manner? Once a famous wrestler was doing 
exercise on a road early in the morning. At that time, 
a woman was coming from a village to sell milk 


Atma Is The Nameless, Formless Divnity 65 





and curd. When he looked at her, he felt she was 
laughing at him. The wrestler became angry and said 
to the woman, “How dare you laugh at me? Do you 
know who am I? Are you aware of my strength?” 
The woman replied, “I am not laughing at you. You 
are so strong that you can stop a speeding car with 
one hand. What is the use of your physical strength 
if you lack forbearance?” All our notions are based 
upon our deluded feelings. 


Be Good, Do Good, See Good 
Students! 


No doubt, your inner feelings are good. But they 
undergo change depending upon what you see and 
hear. It is the external impulses that are responsible for 
changes in your thoughts and feelings. Truly speaking, 
there is no human form. In fact, there is no form at 
all. It is because of your illusion that you see a form 
and give a name to it. It is a sign of foolishness to 
think so. You may think that you are highly educated 
and very intelligent. But how can you call yourself 
so if you are ignorant of your true Self? You can be 
called truly educated only when you know your real 
nature. If you do not know your own truth, how can 
you know the truth of others? 


First of all, you should control your mind. Only 
then can your worship and prayer be fruitful. The 
mind is the root cause of the world. Manah eva 


66 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





manushyanam karanam bandhamokshayo (mind is 
the cause of bondage and liberation of man). It is 
comparatively easy to control the body, but not the 
mind. When Pramila, the ruler of women’s kingdom, 
captured the Aswamedha horse and defeated Arjuna 
in the battle, Arjuna told her that she could arrest his 
body but not his mind. It may be possible to capture 
the whole world with army, weapons and bombs, but 
it is not possible for anyone to capture the mind. 
When you gain control over your mind, everything 
else will come under your control. Therefore, you 
should make all efforts to control your mind. Then 
you are sure to become an ideal and great person. 
First and foremost, you should know your mistakes 
and try to rectify them. Only then can you aspire to 
become a mumukshu (spiritual aspirant). Knowingly 
or unknowingly, you may have committed some 
mistakes. Once you know your mistakes, you should 
have repentance. Repentance is true atonement. This is 
the royal path which leads to divinity. There is little 
use in performing puja (worship), vratas (rituals) and 
yajnas without repentance and atonement. 


Jantunam nara janma durlabham (out of all living 
beings, human birth is the rarest). It is not easy to 
attain human form. Man is not a mere mortal. He 
is verily divine. Daivam manusha rupena (God is 
in the form of a human being). If you do or think 
something bad, you are not divine. First of all, you 


Atma Is The Nameless, Formless Divnity 67 





should become a good person. Be good, do good, see 
good. This is the way to God. 


Develop The Qualities Exemplified 
By Rama And Sita 


Students! 


First of all, you have to control your mind. Offer 
your mind to God. He can do everything for you. 
Have deep devotion to God with firm faith that He 
is everywhere. 


Do not doubt that God is here and not There. 
Wherever you search for Him, He is there. 


(Telugu poem) 


Where is God? Sarvatah panipadam tat sarvathokshi 
siromukham, Sarvatah sruthimalloke sarvamavruthya 
tishthati (with hands, feet, eyes, head, mouth and 
ears pervading everything, He permeates the entire 
universe). Many people are not able to recognise 
this truth. God is present in all beings, be it a small 
insect like an ant or a big animal like an elephant or 
a lion. He is present in a particle of sand and also 
in a particle of sugar. 


Discharge your duty earnestly with devotion to God. 
Put your knowledge into practice and earn a good 
name. I never prevent anyone from pursuing his 
studies. But along with acquiring secular knowledge, 
you should acquire spiritual knowledge also. Proper 


68 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





enquiry of the mind and purity of heart are very 
essential. 


Students! 


You have completed the academic year, and you 
will now go home for vacation. You will be looking for 
your results and searching your roll number in the list 
of successful candidates. More than searching your roll 
number, search your heart. If you have really written 
well, you are sure to find your roll number. On the 
other hand, if you have not written your examination 
well, you should not be delighted even when you find 
your roll number in the list of successful candidates. It 
is not the number of marks that are important. What 
is important is that you should become number one 
man (loud applause). 


This morning, our students sang the song 
conveying the message that one should have a son 
like Rama and a daughter like Sita. You may aspire 
to have a son like Rama and a daughter like Sita. 
But, how is it possible when you have the demonic 
qualities of Ravana and Surpanakha? If you want a 
son like Rama, you should follow Dharma like Him. 
If you aspire to have a daughter like Sita, you should 
have the virtues as exemplified by Sita. Whatever form 
you aspire for, you should cultivate the same type of 
qualities corresponding to that. Only then can you attain 
harmony, tolerance and peace. Where is peace? Peace 
lies in the control of the senses. If you are not able 


Atma Is The Nameless, Formless Divnity 69 





to control your senses, you cannot attain peace; you 
will get only pieces. If you want to be peaceful, you 
have to imbibe the qualities of quietude and composure. 
Let anybody criticise, abuse or hurt you; you should 
maintain your composure. When someone criticises 
you, do not take it to heart. Think that his tongue 
has produced some sound. You have nothing to do 
with it. If you receive the abuses hurled at you, you 
will be affected by them. Otherwise, you will not be 
disturbed. Even if somebody beats you, think that he 
has beaten your body and not you. In fact, none can 
ever harm or hurt you, because you are not the body. 
If you have such a firm conviction, then you will not 
have anger or hatred towards even those who abuse 
or assault you. Therefore, firm conviction is most 
essential for peace. 


Offer Your Heart To God In Prayer 


Droupadi had deep devotion for Krishna. She 
prayed to Him, “Oh, Krishna! I worship You day 
and night. Oh, Lord! Be compassionate and protect 
me. If You are compassionate towards me, then I 
will not be bothered about any other thing in life.” 
Droupadi faced many challenges and ordeals in life, 
but her devotion towards Krishna remained unaffected. 
Thyagaraja said, “Oh, Lord! I have been praying to 
You incessantly. Why are You depriving me of Your 
love and compassion? What is that I have not offered 


70 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





to You?” 


“T have surrendered my wealth, 
My family and everything to You. 
Now, please come to my rescue. 
I seek refuge only in You.” 


(Sanskrit s/oka) 


Mere words are not enough when you pray; you 
should offer your heart to God in prayer. 


Man has a name and a form, but the atma 
transcends both. It has neither a name nor a form. 
People like some particular names and forms. One 
cannot have faith in many names and forms, but one 
can surely have faith in the formless principle of the 
atma which is present in all. Na atma sakshi (my 
atma is the witness) is a common saying in Telugu, 
which shows that people have faith in the atma. That 
is why atma is the common name for all. Some may 
pray to Rama, others may pray to Krishna. Names 
and forms are many, but Divinity is one. atma is the 
nameless, formless divinity. When you worship such 
a formless and nameless divine principle, you will 
certainly attain Divinity. 


Ugadi 30-3-2006, Prasanthi Nilayam 


5 


Experience The Sweetness Of 
Rama’s Name 


HIS motherland of Bharat has given birth to 

many noble souls who attained great name 
and fame in all the continents of the world. Many 
sages and seers of Bharat have been sanctifying their 
time by propagating Rama tathwa (principle of Rama) 
since ancient times. The Ramayana belongs to Treta 
Yuga. Though thousands of years ha ve passed, yet 
the Ramayana is being read with reverence in every 
village and every hamlet. 


Do As You Say 


People, young and old, chant the sacred name of 
Rama even now with great devotion. They may forget 
any other name, but not the Rama nama (name). Be 


72 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





he a millionaire or a pauper, everyone takes refuge 
in the divine name of Rama in times of difficulty. 
In Bharat, it is hard to find anyone who does not 
contemplate upon or chant the name of Rama. Many 
sages in the past did penance and undertook several 
kinds of vows to spread the glory of Rama nama 
in the world. However, Rama never wished or told 
anybody to chant His name or contemplate upon it. 
He, in fact, declared that all were the embodiments 
of divinity. 


The foremost teaching of Rama was that one 
should follow sathya. Taking sathya as the basis, one 
should sustain and promote dharma (righteousness). 
Dharma is not confined to any particular place or 
country; it is present in all. It is born out of sathya 
(truth). In fact, dharma cannot exist without sathya. 
What is dharma? Dharayati iti dharma (that which 
sustains is dharma). Some people wrongly limit 
dharma to mere feeding of the poor or acts of charity. 
Dharma should flow from one’s own heart. Then, it 
should be put into practice. Do as you say. That is 
man’s foremost duty. There should be perfect harmony 
between one’s words and actions. On the other hand, if 
one says one thing and does something contrary to it, 
it connotes adharma (unrighteousness). Moreover, one 
should carefully analyse and weigh the pros and cons 
before saying something. Manasyekam vachasyekam, 
karmanyekam mahatmanam (Those whose thoughts, 


Experience The Sweetness Of Rama’s Name 73 





words and deeds are in perfect harmony are noble 
ones). You say that you are a human being. But, you 
are entitled to be called a human being only when 
your thoughts, words and deeds are in harmony. 
Rama achieved unity of thought, word and deed. In 
contrast, Ravana’s thoughts, words and deeds were at 
variance with each other. Manasyanyath vachasyanyath, 
karmanyanyath duratmanam (Those who lack harmony 
of thoughts, words and deeds are wicked). 


Develop Your Innate Qualities 


There has naturally been a conflict between Sathya 
(truth) and Asathya (untruth), Dharma (righteousness) 
and Adharma (unrighteous-ness). Rama scrupulously 
followed Sathya, whereas Ravana resorted to Asathya. 
There is no Dharma greater than adherence to Sathya. 
Hence, we should adhere to truth even in trivial 
matters. We should never resort to untruth to escape 
from a difficult situation. 


The creation emerges from truth 
And merges into truth ; 
Is there a place in the cosmos 
Where truth does not exist? 
Visualise this pure and unsullied truth. 
(Telugu poem) 


In fact, truth is the foundation of the entire creation. 
If for any reason this foundation is disturbed, the 


74 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





whole world will collapse. What is the reason for all 
the trials and tribulations of man today? It is because 
man has forgotten truth. He is facing humiliation and 
disrepute because he is indulging in injustice and 
falsehood. Hence, one should not resort to untruth 
under any circumstances. One should speak only truth. 
Sathya is a small term. But it connotes Sat (changeless 
divinity). Since we try to change this changeless truth, 
we undergo changes and distortions. 


Dear Students! 


You are all young. If you follow truth right from 
this young age, you will surely become an ideal to 
the entire country. What is truth? God’s word is truth. 
Hence, when you speak with the feeling sarvam 
Bhagavad preetyartham (everything is to please God), 
then everything will become truth. Every thought and 
feeling emanating from man is a reflection of his inner 
truth. Unfortunately, it gets converted into falsehood 
by the improper use of the tongue. The tongue is 
one of the five senses. These senses are the cause 
of changes in us. They are responsible for the sin or 
merit that we earn. 


The panchabhutas (five elements) pervade the 
entire universe, right from the earth to sky. There is 
no sixth element other than these five elements in the 
universe. The same five elements are found in every 


Experience The Sweetness Of Rama’s Name 75 





human being in a subtle form. One has to realise this 
truth and conduct oneself accordingly. Sathya (truth), 
Dharma (righteousness), Santi (peace) Prema (love) 
and Ahimsa (non-violence) that are present within 
you have to be nurtured and developed. Sathya is the 
path. Dharma follows it. Prema is the experience. It 
is only then that Ahimsa manifests. Himsa (violence) 
is not limited to harming or hurting others; acting 
contrary to one’s words is also Himsa. There can 
be no greater ahimsa than using our tongue in a 
sacred manner. 


Santi (peace) is not to be found somewhere else. 
It is very much within us. There are many distaiet 
qualities present within us. It is for us to make good 
use of these qualities. You may ask, “Why does not 
God change our nature?” No, God does not at all 
interfere; He is a witness of everything. It is not for 
God to tell you what is good and what is bad. Your 
own thoughts and feelings tell you what is good and 
what is bad. If you eat a cucumber, you will get the 
belch of a cucumber. Hence, what is there in you 
will be reflected outside. Whatever bad you see in 
others, it is nothing but the reflection of your own 
thoughts. Some people are constantly immersed in 
worldly thoughts. Such people can never be happy. 
Only those attain the state of bliss whose mind is 


76 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





steady, without any thoughts. Some people consider 
themselves very intelligent and keep enquiring deeply 
into their accumulated bookish knowledge. This type 
of pedantry is like allergy. Once this allergy starts 
spreading, their energy is sapped. Unfortunately, today 
we are developing allergy, not energy. Do not keep 
deliberating upon whether something is good for 
you or not. Everything is good. Whatever happens, 
consider that it is good for you. When you develop 
such an attitude, everything will turn out to be good 
for you. 


Embodiments Of Love! 


Love all. Hate none. Do not misunderstand others. 
Some people develop misunderstanding even about 
God! It is the worst of sins. Hence, do not entertain 
such misconceptions. If by any reason such thoughts 
enter your mind, consider them as your enemies and 
drive them away. Be loving and cheerful always. It 
is only love that protects and sustains you. You are 
yourself the embodiment of love. Where there is love, 
there hatred cannot enter. 


Embodiments Of Love! 


Human body is a miniature world. It is constituted 
by panchabhutas (five elements), panchendriyas (five 
senses) and pancha pranas (five life-breaths) which, 
in turn, are born out of truth, are sustained by truth 


Experience The Sweetness Of Rama’s Name 77 





and ultimately merge in truth. Hence, one should 
follow truth earnestly. Since people distort truth, they 
lose their purity. The main reason for the impurity of 
one’s heart is one’s tendency to distort truth. Hence, if 
one wishes to maintain purity and sacredness of one’s 
heart, one has to speak truth. If you are wedded to 
truth, whatever you say will come right. 


Some people complain, “Swami! Though we are 
treading the path of truth, untruth still troubles us. What 
could be the reason for our predicament?” The question 
can be answered by a simple example. While the pure 
and crystal clear Ganga river flows, some streams and 
rivulets formed by the rain water join it during its 
course, thereby polluting the river. However, one has 
to be careful not to allow any impurities to join the 
pure and unsullied truth of one’s heart. It is because 
of the weakness of our senses that various impurities 
enter our heart and pollute it. These impurities are the 
six inner enemies of man. The purity of nectar can 
be destroyed even by an atom of impurity. Once a 
music director composed a song : 


“T am aware, You are like the moon 
In the distant sky; 
Yet my mind tries to grab You; 
I don’t know why.” 
(Telugu song) 


In fact, where is the moon? Not in the distant 


78 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





sky. Our mind itself is the moon. We are unable to 
gain control over the mind because of these six inner 
enemies coming in our way. Is it not a fact that even 
the bright light of the moon on a full moon night is 
not visible if the clouds come in its way? The moment 
the clouds move away, the moon is visible. Similarly, 
you have to do constant namasmarana in order to 
drive away the clouds of these six inner enemies. 


Follow The Ideals Set By Rama 


Today we are celebrating Sri Rama Navami. 
On this sacred day, we should resolve to follow the 
teachings of Rama. Sathya and Dharma are the two 
main teachings of Rama. Do not consider yourself 
as a mere human being. Develop full faith that you 
are none other than Rama! People often say, “Only 
my Atmarama knows it!” Thus, our atma itself is the 
embodiment of Lord Rama! The atma has no specific 
form. The same atma that pervades the entire universe 
took a form and incarnated as Rama. Similarly, Dharma 
took the form of Lakshmana who constantly followed 
Rama. Lakshmana considered Rama as his very life- 
breath. Rama was everything for him. 


During the exile of Rama, Lakshmana and Sita, 
once Lakshmana ventured into a particular part of 
the forest. Soon he was beset with evil thoughts. As 


Experience The Sweetness Of Rama’s Name 79 





soon as he returned, he told Rama, “Oh! Rama! Why 
are we undergoing all these troubles? Why should the 
innocent mother Sita be put to these ordeals? Come! 
Let us go back to Ayodhya, this very moment.” Sita 
was surprised at the sudden change in the attitude of 
Lakshmana. Since Rama knew everything, He called 
Lakshmana to His side smilingly and made him sit 
near Him. Immediately, Lakshmana realised his fault. 
With great agony, he enquired from Rama, “Dear 
brother! How come these evil thoughts entered my 
mind? Never before such a thing had happened to 
me.” Rama then explained, “Dear brother! This is 
not your fault. This is the region of a demon. Hence, 
all evil thoughts entered your mind.” Tell me your 
company, I shall tell you what you are. As is your 
company, so are your thoughts. Hence, keep yourself 
away from bad company. Join the company of good 
and noble souls. Then, you will get good thoughts. As 
are your thoughts, so shall be the result. Yad bhavam 
tad bhavati (as are the feelings, so is the result). 


When Kausalya was shedding tears after Rama left 
for the forest, Sumitra tried to comfort her, saying, 
“Dear sister! Why do you cry? Is it because Rama 
is going to the forest? No, no. You are mistaken that 
Rama would live in the forest, while we would enjoy 
royal comforts in Ayodhya. In fact, wherever Rama 


80 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





lives is Ayodhya and the rest is nothing but a forest. 
We should lead our life with equanimity, remaining 
equal-minded in happiness and sorrow. Happiness 
and sorrow come one after the other. We should not 
be affected by them. We should neither be elated by 
happiness nor depressed by sorrow. Can there be a 
human being in this world without happiness and 
sorrow? Rama is, in fact, omniscient and omnipotent. 
No harm can ever befall Him from wild animals or 
demons in the forest.” 


Kausalya was also worried about Sita since she 
was accompanying Rama to the forest. Rama had 
tried to dissuade her from going to the forest, saying, 
“Sita! The forest is full of thorny bushes and wild 
animals. You will be put to a lot of difficulties in the 
forest.” Sita then reasoned with Rama, “Oh! Rama! 
You are the protector of the entire world. Can You not 
protect Your own wife from the wild animals? You 
are omnipresent, omnipotent and omniscient. I am sure 
that none of these wild animals can cause any harm 
to me when You are with me. I have no such fear.” 
Rama felt very happy to hear these words of Sita. 


When Sita was abducted by Ravana, both Rama 
and Lakshmana became very much worried about 
her. Seething with anger over Ravana’s mean act, 
Lakshmana approached his elder brother Rama and 


Experience The Sweetness Of Rama’s Name 81 





said, “Dear brother! Give me Your permission. I will 
reduce all these wicked demons to ashes.” Rama 
counselled patience and said, “Lakshmana! We don’t 
need to do any such thing. The demons will destroy 
themselves on their own. In fact, they will become 
victims of their own evil qualities.” Subsequently, 
Ravana was killed by Rama and His army of Vanaras. 
Rama then explained to Lakshmana thus: “Lakshmana! 
People behave in a particular way and reap the 
consequences of their actions, depending upon their 
prarabdha (destiny) and their qualities. We need not 
be too much concerned with that. As long as one 
is attached to worldly objects and thinks in terms 
of mine and thine, one will be afflicted by sorrow. 
Hence, one has to treat the worldly objects with the 
attitude, “these are not mine; all these are the property 
of the Divine,” 


All acts should be performed to please God. If 
one develops ego with thoughts of ‘I’ and ‘mine’, one 
is sure to perish. You say ‘this is mine’ and ‘that is 
mine’. In fact, what really belongs to you - the body, 
the mind, the intellect or the senses? You say ‘this is 
my body’, ‘this is my mind’, ‘this is my intellect’, 
etc. But, none of these belongs to you truly. The body 
which you consider as belonging to you will leave you 
in a moment, even without your knowledge. Similarly, 


82 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





the mind roams about like a monkey. Is it possible to 
restrain this mad monkey? Do not say, ‘I am this or 
that’. Say, ‘I am I’. This is your correct description. 
The correct answer to the question ‘Who are you?’ 
is ‘I am I’. Rama did not criticise or harm anyone. 
Then, who will have hatred towards Him? Good acts 
of Rama brought good results to Him. Thus, when 
we do good to others, there is no possibility for us 
to undergo sorrows and difficulties. If we still feel 
we are put to difficulties, the fault lies with us. God 
is not responsible for our sorrows and difficulties; it 
is the waywardness of our senses that is responsible 
for them. So, we should control our senses. If we are 
able to control our senses, everything else will come 
under our control. That is the essence of the teachings 
of Rama. The Ramayana is not merely the story of 
Rama. In fact, it is the story of every human being. 


Sweetness Of Ramanama Never Diminishes 


We blame God for our problems and difficulties. 
But, God loves one and all equally. He has no hatred 
towards anyone. He is always cheerful and smiling. 
A smiling countenance is the natural quality of a 
divine being. Where there is a smile, there can be 
no hatred at all! People with such divine attributes 
do not get disturbed under any circumstances. Hence, 
be always smiling and cheerful. Never put on a 


Experience The Sweetness Of Rama’s Name 83 





‘castor-oil face’. Some students are very much worried 
about examinations; they want them to be delayed 
or postponed. However, the sooner you write the 
examinations and pass them, the quicker will you 
move onto the higher class. Instead of examination 
worry, you should make hurry to go to the higher 
class. There is no worry in this hurry. 


Come! Oh, devotees! Come! 

Take the sweet of Ramanama. 

Do not buy and eat other sweets 

Out of ignorance. 

They will spoil your health. 

By mixing the wheat flour of 

The essence of the Vedas 

With the milk of Vedic declarations, 
Adding the sugar of Subuddhi (virtues) 
And the ghee of Nibaddhi (truth), 
Removing the dirt of Abaddhamu (falsehood), 
Our ancient Rishis have prepared this 
Most delicious sweet of Ramanama. 


(Telugu song) 


Your health will be spoiled by eating all kinds 
of sweets sold in the marketplace. Those sweets may 
be tasty, but are harmful to you. Instead, take the 
sweet of Ramanama that has been prepared by our 


84 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





great Rishis. It has a wonderful effect on your mind. 
It can never become stale or spoiled. The more you 
eat this sweet of Ramanama, the more joy will you 
derive from it. It is sweeter than sugar and tastier 
than curd. 


The divine name of Rama is full of sweetness 
and it remains sweet forever. There have been many 
incarnations of God on earth. But the divine name 
of Rama has remained eternal. Since ancient times, 
Ramanama has remained as the taraka mantra (mantra 
that liberates) for one and all. Right from children 
to elders, everyone can derive the bliss of chanting 
Ramanama. Age is no obstacle in experiencing the 
sweetness of Ramanama. There is immense sweetness 
in this name. We should never give up such a sweet, 
nectarous and blissful Ramanama even for a second. 
Unfortunately, today people are neglecting the chanting 
of Ramanama. It is their misfortune. 


Lead An Ideal And Exemplary Life 


When Mirabai was asked to leave the Krishna 
temple in the palace by the Maharana, she was full 
of anxiety, thinking, “How can I leave my dear Lord 
Krishna and go away!” But her unflinching faith in 
Krishna developed the firm conviction in her, “Krishna 
Himself would come along with me.” She prayed to 


Experience The Sweetness Of Rama’s Name 85 





Lord Krishna, “Oh, Lord! I obtained the precious pearl 
of Divine Name after a great effort. Please bless me 
that I do not lose this invaluable pearl.” Chanting the 
name of Krishna incessantly, she reached Dwaraka. 
However, she found the doors of the temple closed. 
Unable to bear the agony of separation from her dear 
Lord Krishna any more, she banged her head against 
the doors of the temple. Lo! and behold! The doors of 
the temple opened and Lord Krishna appeared before 
her. After having Darshan of her dear Lord, Mirabai 
merged in Him. 


We have to broaden our heart. This does not refer 
to the physical heart. If the physical heart is enlarged, 
it requires surgery by the doctors. Broadening one’s 
heart implies the quality of large-heartedness. Some 
people sit here stretching their legs and occupying a 
lot of space. Instead, if people sit closely, some more 
devotees can be accommodated. We can help each 
other by caring and sharing. 


Dear Students! 


The summer vacation has started. From tomorrow 
onwards, you will be going home to spend your 
vacation with your parents. Spend your time happily 
with your parents. Contemplating upon the happy time 
you have spent here learning many sacred teachings, 


86 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





make your parents also happy. If you are happy, they 
will also be happy. Never make your parents unhappy 
by your conduct. Your parents occupy an important 
place in your life. It is your foremost duty to make 
them happy. It is not enough if you look after your 
own comfort and welfare. First and foremost, the 
parents are to be made happy. Life is not confined to 
khana (food), peena (drink), sona (sleep) and marna 
(death). We are not born to eat and roam about and 
enjoy comforts. We are born to serve our parents and 
make them happy. If you make your parents happy 
now, your children would make you happy in future. 
Lead an ideal and exemplary life. Only then will your 
life be sanctified and the education acquired by you 
in Sri Sathya Sai educational institutions will become 
meaningful. I wish that all of you should earn name 
and fame as the students of this great institution. 


- Rama Navami 7-4-2006, Prasanthi Nilayam 


6 
Happiness Is Holiness 


ORD KRISHNA made this divine declaration: 

Mamaivamsho jivaloke Jivabhuta sanathana 
(the eternal atma in all beings is a part of My Being). 
Hence, do not feel that you are different from God. 
God resides in you. In fact, you are God. 


Nothing Is Permanent In This World 


You think you are a human being because you 
are endowed with a human body, but the atma 
that indwells a all manifests your divinity. There 
are thousands of bulbs that have been put up for 
decoration. Their colour and wattage may differ, but 


88 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





the electric current in all of them is one and the same. 
Like the current that makes all the bulbs shine, the 
atma present in all human beings makes them see, 
hear and work. But today man is caught in worldly 
affairs and is ignoring spirituality. If you have spiritual 
vision, you will know that it is the same God who 
is present everywhere. Everything from earth to sky 
is nothing but God. Even this flower, this tumbler, 
this microphone and the tablecloth that you see here 
are all aspects of divinity. Divinity pervades each and 
everything in this universe. But you see differences 
due to your faulty vision. 


Change is the nature of the five elements, and 
not of God. There are only five elements in this 
universe; there is no sixth element. Our human form 
is a combination of the five elements and is sustained 
by them. Man has relationship with the five elements 
so long as the body lasts. Once the body perishes, 
he has nothing to do with even one of them. These 
elements are present in man in the form of his senses 
of sound, sight, touch, taste and smell. Our senses are 
responsible for good and bad, merit and sin. Good and 
bad are not given by God; they are the consequences 
of man’s own actions. Sometimes you think that God 
has given you suffering and sometimes you feel God is 
responsible for your happiness, but God neither gives 


Happiness Is Holiness 89 





happiness nor suffering. These are all man’s illusion. 
Man suffers due to his own evil qualities like jealousy, 
hatred, anger and pomposity. Where does anger come 
from? It comes from within us because of our wrong 
food and evil thoughts. Desire arises because of your 
covetous nature. kama, krodha, lobha, moha, mada 
and matsarya (desire, anger, greed, attachment, pride 
and jealousy) all arise from us. 


You think God has a form. But God is formless. 
God is positive and man is negative. Negative comes 
and goes, but positive is permanent. Repose your faith 
in the positive and not in the negative. Everything 
in this world comes and goes like passing clouds. 
A boy gets married to a girl. But before marriage, 
where was the boy and where was the girl? Their 
relationship developed only after marriage. But even 
that is not permanent. There is nothing in human life 
that is permanent. Everything is temporary; it comes 
and goes. If man wants to become eternal, he has to 
develop atma viswasa (faith in the Self). You may 
come and go, but I am with you forever. Divinity 
is changeless. Instead of aspiring for the changeless, 
man is running after all that is fleeting and temporary. 
All that we desire in this world is subject to change. 
Bodies are subject to change. You may see a body 
today and may not see it tomorrow. There is nothing in 
this world that is permanent. There is only one entity 


90 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





that is permanent about whom it is said, Sarvatah 
panipadam tat sarvathokshi siromukham, Sarvatah 
sruthimalloke sarvamavruthya tishthati (with hands, 
feet, eyes, head, mouth and ears pervading everything, 
He permeates the entire universe). There is only One 
that is present always, but during our short life-span 
we develop many illusions. 


Pray To God Desirelessly 


We celebrate New Year and feel very happy. In 
fact it is not new; it is just a change of time. Today is 
the beginning of Chaitra (a month in Indian calendar). 
Next month 1s Vaishakha. In this way, many Chaitras 
and Vaishakhas have come and gone, but nothing is 
permanent. Why should we bother about all that is 
impermanent and passing? A fruit is at first unripe and 
after some time it becomes fully ripe and ultimately 
it decays. Similarly, human body is subject to change; 
it has childhood, youth, old age and ultimately death. 
So, there is nothing in this world that is permanent. 
Whatever you see in this world is just temporary and 
passing. There is only one thing that is permanent and 
you have to pray for that. But whom are you praying 
for? You are praying for yourself, not for God. In 
fact, you are praying to yourself because God is in 
you. Because of your identification with the body, you 
think you are a devotee and God is separate from 


Happiness Is Holiness 91 





you. There is no difference between the devotee and 
God. Whatever you see, it is God; wherever you go, 
God is there; whatever you do, it is for God. God 
is present even in a particle of dust. When the wind 
blows, the dust goes up. When there is no wind, the 
dust comes down. In the same way, when man has 
desires, he is engulfed in delusion. When he is without 
desires, his delusion is also subdued. Sometimes man 
is peaceful and at other timer he is agitated. These 
states of man are the result of his food, his habits and 
worldly relationships; they are not caused by God. God 
has nothing to do with that. God is eternally present 
and the five elements are also present forever. Even 
after man dies, the five elements continue to have 
their existence. The consciousness present in all the 
five elements in man is responsible for all his body 
functions. 


When a man is newly married, he loves his wife 
very much. His love is so intense in the beginning that 
if she is about to put her foot on a thorn, he pulls her 
away with great concern, saying, “There is a thorn, 
there is a thorn.” After some time, when the same 
situation arises, he merely cautions her, “Be careful, 
there is a thorn.” When more time has elapsed, he will 
resort to scolding, “Don’t you have eyes? Can’t you see 
the thorn?” The love that is there in the beginning gives 
way to anger with the passage of time. Worldly love 


92 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





is subject to change. Even the love between husband 
and wife and mother and child undergoes changes with 
the passage of time. Everything is temporary in this 
world. It is impermanent and it comes and goes. We 
are happy when we gain something; we are grieved 
when we lose anything. Loss and gain are the cause 
of our happiness and sorrow. But profit and loss are 
only relative terms. 


Embodiments Of Love! 


There are no permanent relationships in this world. 
So long as the body lasts, the relationships exist. When 
the body is lost, the relationships are also lost. There 
is one thing that is permanent in this universe and that 
is what you have to aspire for. Human life is given 
to man to know himself and to realise God. People 
worship God and pray to Him. When their desires 
are fulfilled, they are very happy. If their desires 
are not fulfilled, they change even the photo of the 
deity in their altar. If we worship God only to fulfil 
our desires, then it is not true worship. Our love and 
devotion for God should be changeless. It should not 
change under any circumstances. Love is the very form 
of God. Love is God. Live in love. Love is present 
in all. Even the person whom we think as wicked 
has love for his wife and children. If you have love 
in your heart, you will find love everywhere. If you 


Happiness Is Holiness 93 





love a dog or a cat, they will also reciprocate your 
love. You will not have fear of even wild animals if 
you do not harm them. Yad bhavam tad bhavati (as 
is the feeling, so is the result). Everything depends 
on our feelings. 


Desires Are The Cause Of Man’s Suffering 


All of us should consider our body as only an 
instrument to discharge our duties. Never think that 
this body is permanent and you have to accumulate 
wealth to maintain it. It is merely a waste of time and 
effort when you try to accumulate worldly possessions. 
Everything else is temporary except love and truth. 
Sathyannasti paro dharma (There is no dharma greater 
than adherence to truth). There are many types of 
duties that we have to perform with the help of the 
body. But our foremost duty is to develop love. Where 
there is love, there is bliss. True relationship exists 
only when there is love. Where there is no love, bliss 
cannot exist there, can there be true relationship. God 
is the embodiment of bliss. Nityanandam, parama 
sukhadam, Kevalam jnanamurtim, dwandwateetam, 
Gagana sadrisham, tathwamasyadi Lakshyam, ekam, 
nitvam, vimalam, Achalam, sarvadhee sakshibhutam, 
bhavateetam, trigunarahitam (God is the embodiment 
of eternal bliss, He is wisdom absolute, beyond the 
pair of opposites, expansive and pervasive like the sky, 
the goal indicated by the mahavakya tathwamasi, One 


94 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





without a second, eternal, pure, unchanging, witness 
of all functions of the intellect, beyond all mental 
conditions and the three attributes of sathwa, rajas 
and tamas.) Man should develop the divine quality 
of love and not the worldly relationships. 


Suppose a person has delicious dishes and fruits 
before him which he loves to eat, he will get happiness 
when he consumes them. If at that very moment he 
gets the sad news of the tragic death of his son in 
an accident in the bazaar, he will run to see his son 
and throw away all the dishes, because his love for 
his son is more than his love for food. When the food 
is before him, he thinks that his entire happiness lies 
in consuming it. Where has the love for food gone 
now? In a similar way, man develops love for many 
things in this world. In fact, there is nothing in this 
world which you should desire for. Desires are the 
cause of all the suffering of man. As the Saying goes 
‘Less luggage more comfort.’ When there is luggage, 
you cannot escape from trouble. Here luggage refers 
to worldly relationships and desires. Only when you 
get rid of worldly bondage can you be happy. There 
is nothing in this world that you should desire for. 
If any worldly desire crops up in your mind, give it 
up at once. Giving up of desires is true renunciation. 
Less luggage, more comfort makes travel a pleasure. 
You can have real happiness only when you reduce 


Happiness Is Holiness 95 





your luggage. There are so many millionaires in this 
world. But, are they able to live forever? They come 
and go like passing clouds. You find clouds only in 
the sky. Without sky there can be no clouds. So long 
as you have body consciousness, you will have the 
clouds of desires. 


Everybody Has To Leave The World Empty- 
handed 


Embodiments Of Love! 


You should have body consciousness only to 
discharge your duties. You have to do your duty. 
Duty is God. You should not develop undue worldly 
relations. But, you are developing more and more 
desires and more and more greed. You have to reduce 
the luggage of your desires. You may accumulate any 
amount of luggage, but it is not going to be permanent. 
Alexander, the great emperor, conquered different 
parts of the world and came to India with a desire to 
conquer this country. On his return journey, he suffered 
a grave illness. Sensing that his end had approached, 
he called all his ministers and generals and told them 
that he was not going to live any more. He instructed 
them to take his body to his country after his death. 
He further told them to expose his hands out of the 
bier with his palms upwards and take the funeral 
procession to all the streets of the city. This was to 


96 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





tell the people of the world that in spite of his great 
conquests in the world and a great name and fame, 
Alexander left the world empty-handed. This is true 
of all of us. Whatever we may accumulate, we have 
to go empty-handed only. In the ultimate analysis, all 
the worldly possessions are useless. Then why should 
we worry about all that is useless? Do your duty 
making best use of the present; do not unnecessarily 
worry about what is to come in future. 


Many things happen in this world; God is the 
witness of all that happens. God is always blissful; 
He has no suffering, no difficulty, no worry. God 
is not the cause of the difficulties and sufferings 
of anybody. He has no desires. You may think that 
God has desires, but in reality He has none. He is 
gunatita (beyond attributes), trigunarahita (devoid of 
the three qualities of sattwa, rajas and tamas). You 
become the victim of delusion as you are bound by 
these three qualities. If someone dies, people lament 
over his death for a few days and then they forget. 
In this manner, nothing is permanent in this world. 
However, we have to do what we are supposed to do. 
You wear a shawl when it is cold. As soon as the cold 
is gone, you remove the shawl. Likewise, you don the 
vesture of human body and nourish it for performing 
your worldly duties. Ultimately, you have to give up 
this body. 


Do All Actions To Please God 


Happiness Is Holiness a6 





Embodiments Of Love! 


You do all kinds of worship, penance and yajnas, 
but what is the use of all this? They cannot protect and 
sustain you if you are bereft of the divine quality of 
love. It will be just a waste of time and energy. What 
you have to nourish and develop is love. If you have 
love, you can conquer anything. Except love, there 
is nothing that can nourish and sustain you. Develop 
self-confidence. When you have self-confidence, you 
will attain self-satisfaction which will lead you to 
self-sacrifice and ultimately to self-realisation. What 
is the meaning of self-realisation? It means to realise 
one’s Self. You keep asking everybody, “Who are 
you?” But you do not ask yourself, “Who am I?” 
Am I the body, am I the mind, am I the intellect, 
am I the chittha, am I the senses? When you say, 
‘my body’, you are different from the body. Body is 
like a water bubble, mind is like a mad monkey. Do 
not follow the body, do not follow the mind. Do not 
think that the body is permanent. But so long as you 
have the body and mind, you have to use them to 
perform your duties. If your mind is not sound and 
steady, none of your endeavours will fructify. Hence, 
first and foremost control the mind. Who is man? One 
who is endowed with mind is man. Do not allow your 
mind to become a monkey mind. Understand that you 


98 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





belong to mankind. So, you have to conduct yourself 
with kindness and compassion. 


You are running after all that is false and 
ephemeral giving up all that is true and eternal. In 
Kali Age, everything is becoming business. Wherever 
people go, whatever they do, they do it with a business 
motive. Even trivial matters have become business 
activity. How long can you do this business? It is all 
useless. Man should learn to give; he should not try 
to grab all that comes his way. Body is given to man 
to do good to others. Paropakaraya punyaya, papaya 
parapidanam (one attains merit by serving others and 
commits sin by hurting them). Do not always accept 
the service of others; rather, try to serve others to the 
extent possible. When you serve others, think that you 
are serving God. Do all actions to please God. All 
your actions will become meaningful only when you 
do them with the motive of pleasing God. Never do 
anything with a selfish motive. Today you are here. 
Tomorrow you may be somewhere else. Nothing is 
permanent. Only love is permanent in this world. Fill 
your life with love. You can love others only when 
you have love within you. Your innate love is your 
divinity. If you have love in your heart, nobody will 
hate you. Others will hate you only when you have 
selfish desires. Never hate anybody, never feel jealous 


Happiness Is Holiness 99 





of anybody and never get angry with anyone. 


Embodiments Of Love! 


You have come all the way from distant places 
because of your love for Swami. Preserve this love 
forever and live in the presence of God. Never forget 
this love which is in you, with you, below you, above 
you, around you. Do not think that God is separate 
from you. He is the witness of everything. People go 
to temples with trays full of flowers and fruits. 


Is it possible to limit the One to a temple 
Who pervades the entire cosmos? 
How can one offer food to the One 
Who has the entire cosmos in His belly? 
How can one give a bath to the One 
Who is present in all rivers? 
(Telugu poem) 


Worry Is A Mentally Created Fear 


People offer food to God and afterwards consume 
it themselves! God does not want anything. God 
has no desires at all. Sometimes, God may act in 
a way which makes you think that He has desires. 
But God has no desires at all. He has no bondage 
either. Whatever He does is for your sake. Whatever 
He says, does and thinks is for your sake. Pray for 
the welfare of all. Loka samasta sukhino bhavantu 


100 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





(May all the people of the world be happy!). Do 
not wish any harm even to your enemy. Love Ever, 
Hurt Never. Do not do anything that is contrary to 
the principle of love. Love is God. Live in Love. 
Consider love as God. Salute whomever you come 
across, even if he be your enemy. Love even your 
enemy. Whomsoever you salute, it will reach God, 
for God is in all. With these sacred feelings, do not 
have hatred towards anyone. 


All that has to happen will happen. Do not 
worry about it. Past is past, forget the past. Future is 
uncertain, do not brood over it. Present is important, 
live in the present and be happy. Do not worry about 
past and future. Where is the past? Many people have 
passed away. Has any of them come back? None. 
Similarly, we do not know anything about future. 
Why should we worry about it? You should try to 
seek happiness in the present. When you have such 
an attitude, you will never worry about anything in 
life. What is the shape of worry? It is a mentally 
created fear. We should never worry. A true devotee 
will not have any worries. You cannot call yourself 
a true devotee if you are beset with worries. Hurry, 
worry, and curry are the cause of heart diseases. One 
should therefore avoid hurry, worry, curry. 


All of you are the embodiments of love and 


Happiness Is Holiness 101 





divinity. You are Atmaswarupa (embodiment of the 
atma). For the sake of identity, you have a name, 
but in reality, all of you are the embodiments of the 
atma. Only the atma is eternal. 


Today marks the beginning of the Tamil New Year. 
People of Kerala celebrate it in a traditional way by 
having the holy vision of Vishukkani in the morning. 
They will have delicious dishes and all merriment. It 
is a festive occasion for the farmers who bring home 
the harvested grain. It is, in fact, a holy day for them 
as they reap the fruit of their hard labour after toiling 
hard from morning to evening in their fields all the 
year round. The farmers lead a very hard life. This 
is the time of their rejoicing as the harvested grain 
ensures them freedom from all worries and makes 
them happy and blissful. Happiness is true holiness. 
True bliss lies in cultivating the principle of love and 
leading a life of contentment. We should always be 
contented. When there is no contentment, worries raise 
their head. All troubles are created by worrying. 


Live Always In Bliss 
Embodiments Of Love! 


The day you are happy is the holy day. Love is 
divine. Suffuse your love with the principle of divinity. 
Keep your heart filled with love forever. Then every 
day will become a New Year for you. What is New 


102 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





Year? The celebration of New Year does not lie in 
eating payasam (sweet pudding) and other delicious 
dishes. The day you are filled with bliss is the New 
Year. Always live in bliss. If difficulties confront 
you, drive them away. In fact, suffering and troubles 
have no real existence. Then why are you worrying? 
Develop the attitude of detachment. Then you will have 
no suffering and no worry. Remind yourself, “I am a 
human being. These difficulties and suffering do not 
belong to me.” If you develop real body detachment, 
you will not be affected by any affliction. Physical 
ailments like stomachache, headache or body pain are 
natural to the body. Why should you worry about that 
which is natural? You suffer because you develop too 
much attachment to the body. However, you have to 
take care of the body to the extent that you are not 
dependent on others. You should realise your true 
nature. Regulate your diet and habits. Since you have 
too many desires, you have all the problems. If you 
eat too much, you will have to suffer from indigestion. 
Hence, control your craving for food. Eat moderately 
and maintain good health. That is what I advise the 
children always. 


Get up early in the morning 

At the crowing of the cock; 

Have a bath after your morning ablutions, 
Wear a proper dress. 


Happiness Is Holiness 103 





Eat properly and moderately. 
Go to school and study diligently. 
Earn a good name. 
(Telugu poem) 


Develop good health, cultivate good habits, have 
good conduct and earn a good name. If you have 
all these, you will not need anything else in life. Do 
not run after medicines and doctors for your small 
problems. If a medicine cures one disease, it will 
create another. Many doctors have made the medical 
profession also a business. What are you going to 
achieve if you lead a life full of worries? Nothing at 
all! Some doctors may exaggerate even your minor 
ailments as cancer and ulcer. In such cases, even if 
you do not have such a disease, worry caused to 
you by the imaginary disease may lead to it. The 
more you worry about it, the more would be your 
suffering. Therefore, do not worry about your small 
physical problems. If you lead a life of moderation 
and maintain a healthy lifestyle, you don’t need to be 
at the mercy of doctors. 


Embodiments Of Love! 


Stop the habit of worrying. Even an intelligent 
student will not be able to write his examination well, 
if he becomes nervous in the examination hall due to 


104 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





his doubts, though he may know the answers to the 
questions. Doubts are the cause of your worry. You 
have to face all difficulties because of your habit of 
worrying. You should work hard without worrying 
for anything. When you lead such a straightforward 
life, you will not have to run after anybody and beg 
for favours. Experience the bliss that is within your 
heart without making a show of it to others. Have 
belief in that which ought to be believed. Have love 
for that which ought to be loved. You have to love 
only one thing and that is God. Once you have love 
for God, you will have everything in life. On the 
one side is the world and on the other, God. You 
cannot have both simultaneously. It is like riding on 
two horses which is sure to prove dangerous. Focus 
your mind only on God and have total faith in Him. 
Ekam Sat viprah bahudha vadanti (truth is one, but 
the wise refer to it by various names). You should 
always think of God, both in pleasure and pain. If 
you aspire to have happiness and bliss, you should 
desire only for God. Do not worry too much about 
your difficulties. If you have love for God, all your 
difficulties will vanish in a trice. All difficulties are 
like passing clouds. 


Swami loves His students very much. Once it so 
happened that a student was trying to tie buntings on 


Happiness Is Holiness 105 





a door while standing on a steel stool. As he saw Me 
coming, he felt nervous and fell from the stool. Both 
the stool and the boy fell on Me and My hip bone 
was fractured. Doctors advised rest for three to six 
months. But I told them that I did not need rest even 
for three minutes. What is this body for? It is for 
helping others. The body needs balance. There would 
be difficulty in walking when the balance is lost. But 
I do not care even for balance. It is temporary and 
will become all right on its own. I am able to walk 
with the support of boys. We should not worry about 
small problems. Do your duty. Then everything will 
become all right. Develop love. 


Embodiments Of Love! 


Do not forget the principle of love. Love God. It 
is nothing great if you help someone who has helped 
you. Greatness lies in helping those who have done 
harm to you. 


Tamil New Year and Vishu, 14-4-2006. Kodaikanal 


106 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





























True Spirit of Ugadi Celebration 


You may have celebrated many Ugadi 
(Telugu New Year day) festivals in your life. 
Certain traditional practices go with every 
festival, such as having a sacred bath, wearing 
new Clothes, cleaning the house and decorating 
it with buntings of green leaves. Greatness 
lies in purifying our thoughts, not merely 
the transient human body. The significance 
of a festival does not lie merely in wearing 
new Clothes but in cultivating new and noble 
thoughts. The house should be decorated not 
merely with buntings of green leaves but with 
everyone. Only then would you be celebrating 


the festival in its true spirit. 


- Baba 


7 


Do Not Burden Yourself 
With Limitless Desires 


Sathya, Dharma, Santi, Prema are the pillars of 
Sanathana Dharma. Without imbibing these values, the 
acquisition of all education, performance of all acts 
of charity and undertaking of all spiritual practices 
is of little worth. What else is to be conveyed to this 
assembly of noble souls? 

(Telugu poem) 
Embodiments of Love! 


HAT is the meaning of Avatar (incarnation 
of God)? It connotes the combination of 
Divine consciousness with human consciousness. 
Man is the combination of body, mind, intellect and 


108 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





consciousness. God, who is the embodiment of love, 
assumes human form to establish identity with man so 
as to bring about transformation in him through love. 
God descends on earth and involves Himself in the 
affairs of the world to teach and guide man and to 
put him on the right path. Here is a small example. 


Do Not Superimpose Human Qualities On 
Avatars 


Once the Gopikas approached Yashoda and 
complained to her, “Mother! Krishna came to our 
house and broke our pots of curd and milk.” Some 
other Gopikas came and complained to Yashoda that 
Krishna entered their house at midnight and tied the 
plaits of one Gopika with that of the other. When 
Yashoda chided Krishna for these mischievous acts, 
Krishna said to His mother, “Mother! You know that 
I was sleeping by your side all through the night. 
Then you tell me, how could I go to their houses at 
midnight?” Yashoda realised that what Krishna said 
was true. Obviously, the Gopikas were telling lies, 
she thought. There is a difference between human 
consciousness and divine consciousness. If the divine 
pranks of child Krishna were to be analysed from the 
spiritual angle, the earthen pots represent the human 
body. Hence, breaking of the pots renotes denouncing 
dehabhranti (delusion caused by body attachment). Not 


Do Not Burden Yourself With Limitless Desires 109 





realising this deeper meaning behind the seemingly 
childish pranks of Krishna, the Gopikas complained 
against Him to Yashoda. 


Later, the Gopikas realised the true nature of 
Krishna and prayed to Him, “Oh! Krishna! You are 
the embodiment of bliss, free from trigunas (satwa, 
rajas and tamas) and duality and beyond the ken of 
human mind. It was our mistake to superimpose human 
qualities on You. Whatever complaints we made against 
You to Your mother were caused by our ignorance. 
Oh, Swami! Kindly pardon us and take us into Your 
fold.” Krishna then pardoned all of them and explained 
to them the principle of oneness, saying, “You are not 
different from Me. You and I are one.” Thus, when 
we develop faith in the principle of oneness, our lives 
will be sanctified. 


Man is endowed with the body and the mind, both 
of which breed kama and krodha (desire and anger). 
But God has neither desire nor anger. God does not 
have even an iota of worldly desires or aspirations. 
Whatever God does, sees and says is all for the good 
of the devotees, and not for Himself. When God 
incarnates on earth in human form, He behaves like a 
human being only. He may make somebody cry, make 
some other laugh and indulge in playful pranks with 
yet another. Seeing all these seemingly human acts, 
people are deluded to treat the avatar as an ordinary 


110 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





human being. In fact, what could be the reason for 
God to descend on the earth with a human form? It 
is only to set an ideal for man and lead him on the 
path of righteousness. 


Unity And Equality Are The Hallmarks Of 
Human Society 


When someone asks your name, the usual reply 
would be: “My name is Ranganna or Somanna’”, etc. 
But, these names are given to you by your parents. 
They are not your true names. In fact, when someone 
asks your name, you should reply, “I am I’. This is 
your true name. This ‘I’ is present in every individual. 
That is the atma tathwa (principle of the Self). 
Excepting this, all other names are only imaginary. This 
implies that God is immanent in every human being, 
nay, every living being. All are the embodiments of 
God. Ekoham bahusyam (the One willed to become 
many). It is the One that has assumed all forms. 
Aham Brahmasmi (1 am Brahman). This should be 
the realisation of each individual. This realisation is 
the basis of the unity of vyashti (individual), samashti 
(society), srishti (creation) and Parameshti (God). 
Without srishti, there can be no samashti, and without 
samashti, there can be no vyashti. But who is vyashti? 
He is the embodiment of divinity which is present in 
all. Therefore, society, which is the conglomeration of 


Do Not Burden Yourself With Limitless Desires 111 





individuals, is the collective form of divinity. Hence, 
all are equal in society. No distinction can be made 
as high or low. Whomever you ridicule, it amounts 
to ridiculing yourself. It is only your reflection that 
you see in him. It is only the resound that you hear. 
One has to realise this truth and develop the feeling 
of oneness. The names Rama and Krishna were given 
to the avatars by their parents. When God incarnated 
in the past, He did not proclaim that He was Rama or 
Krishna. These names were given to the avatars after 
their incarnation and not before. Names and forms 
are merely the marks of distinction of individuals in 
society. 


You need not search for God anywhere. When 
someone asks you, “Where is God?”, you should say 
with confidence, “I am God.” People build temples 
and buildings with brick and mortar and install idols 
of God in them. In fact, God is firmly installed in 
the hearts of all human beings, nay, all living beings. 
It is only to explain this truth that Lord Krishna in 
the Bhagavad Gita declared, Mamaivamsho jivaloke 
Jivabhuta sanathana (the eternal atma in all beings 
is a part of My Being). It is possible to realise this 
truth by adhering to the five human values of sathya 
(truth), dharma (righteousness), santi (peace), prema 
(love) and ahimsa (non-violence). Where are these 
human values? They are not outside. All of them are 


112 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





within you only. It is most unfortunate that you search 
them outside, while they are very much within you. As 
long as you search for the reflections outside, you will 
not be able to recognise the object within. Divinity is 
immanent in you. Hence, you should consider yourself 
divine and proclaim, “I am God”. Then, you will not 
have any fear or anxiety or delusion. So long as you 
do not realise your divinity within, you cannot get rid 
of body attachment. 


There is no need to go on pilgrimages to search for 
God. God is present everywhere. Sarvatah panipadam 
tat sarvathokshi siromukham, sarvatah sruthimalloke 
sarvamavruthya tishthati (with hands, feet, eyes, head, 
mouth and ears pervading everything, God permeates 
the entire universe). Wherever you see, God is present 
there. There is no place where God is not present. 
There is no form which does not belong to Him. Man 
searches for God, thinking that He is at some distant 
place. But God is in front of you, behind you, beside 
you. All are the embodiments of God. However, you 
do not consider the people around you as embodiments 
of divinity. You look at their form and consider them 
as mere human beings. Forget the form. Be firmly 
established in the feeling that wherever you see it is 
God only. It is only He who provides everything for 
our sustenance. Hence, whatever work you undertake, 
consider it as God’s work and dedicate it to Him. 


Do Not Burden Yourself With Limitless Desires 113 





If you perform your actions as an offering to God, 
they will turn out to be pure and sacred. God is not 
somewhere in a distant corner. You are God. You 
are society. You are the world. You are the sky. You 
are the earth. You are the stars. You are everything. 
Hence, develop the feeling, “I am everything.” You 
see duality in the world since you go by names and 
forms. If you see beyond names and forms, you will 
find unity everywhere. 


All of you are the embodiments of the atma. 
Being the embodiments of the atma, why should you 
search for the atma elsewhere? What is the meaning of 
atma? The atma denotes consciousness. Consciousness 
pervades everything. As long as there is consciousness 
in the body, it is nourished and protected. When 
consciousness leaves the body, it loses all its worth. 


Develop Purity And Goodness 


Supposing a boy and a girl decide to marry. After 
the marriage, the girl refers to him as her husband. 
Similarly, the boy refers to her as his wife. But, for 
how long? Only for some specific period, 1.e., as long 
as they live together. Later, if either of them dies, 
one will not have any relationship with the other. 
Who is the husband and who is the wife? All these 
relationships are imaginary and transitory. Similar is 


114 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





the relationship between the mother and the son. The 
son addresses her as mother for a number of years. But 
when she leaves her mortal coil, the son wails over 
the dead body of his mother, saying “Oh! Mother! You 
have left me!” In fact, where has his mother gone? The 
physical body which he referred to as mother all these 
years is very much in front of him. If the physical 
body were to be really his mother, he could have as 
well kept it in his house; is it not? But, will he do so? 
Not at all! He takes the body to the cremation ground 
and cremates it. Hence, all these bodily relationships 
are only illusory and not real. These are like passing 
clouds. Only the atma is eternal. Whatever may 
happen to the physical body, the atma does not undergo 
any change. 


All are the embodiments of God. Since we 
are deluded to think that God is separate from us, 
we undertake various spiritual practices to attain 
God. We think that sravanam (listening), kirtanam 
(singing), Vishnusmaranam (contemplating on Vishnu), 
padasevanam (serving His Lotus Feet), vandanam 
(salutation), archanam (worship), dasyam (servitude), 
sneham (friendship), atmanivedanam (self-surrender) 
are the sadhanas we are required to perform. But, 
what is sadhana? sadhana = sa + dhana. The letter 
‘sa’ in the word sadhana implies salokya (perception 
of the Divine), sameepya (proximity to the Divine), 


Do Not Burden Yourself With Limitless Desires Ls 





sarupya (identification with the Divine) and sayujya 
(merger in the divine). This is the dhana (wealth) man 
has to acquire and treasure. But, man today is craving 
for dhana (money) forgetting this ‘sa’ consisting of 
salokya, sameepya, sarupya and sayujya. Every activity 
in the world today is centred around dhana. Supposing 
you request someone to sing a song or do some work 
for you, he will immediately start bargaining the 
amount you will pay for his services. Every activity 
of man has become business today, so much so that 
business has entered the field of spirituality also. 
There is no necessity to purchase God with money 
which, of course, you cannot. In fact, you yourself are 
God. You yourself are the divine principle. You are 
endowed with immense divine power. But you have 
to keep your mind steady. Let it not jump from one 
thought to another. If you write correct answers in 
your examination, you will get correct marks. If you 
have a good mind, everything will turn out to be good. 
But if there are bad thoughts in your mind, the result 
will also be bad. First and foremost, understand the 
nature of your mind. You can understand the secret 
of human life only when you understand your own 
mind. Be Good, Do Good, See Good. Then everything 
will become good in your life. Be always good and 
tread the right path. Do not follow the wrong path by 
imitating others. Follow your conscience. If your heart 
is pure, everything will become pure and sacred. 


116 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





Keep Your Desires Under Control 
Embodiments Of Divine Atma! 


There is a limit for everything in this world. 
There is nothing without limit. In fact, the world is 
a ‘limited company’. What will happen to the limited 
company if it violates its limits? Hence, everyone 
should conduct himself within his limits. When a 
doctor prescribes a particular medicine to a patient, 
he also indicates the dosage. If the patient takes the 
medicine without regard to the dosage and exceeds the 
limit, he may contract another disease. Similarly, God 
has set a limit for every individual. But modern man 
has limitless desires. It is necessary that he keeps his 
desires within limits. He will be put to great danger 
if he exceeds this limit out of his ego. Whether it 
is the individual or society or the world, all should 
observe the prescribed limits. 


Man is born with many relationships, like father, 
mother, relatives and friends. All these are created by 
the world. When he gets married, he has a wife. Later, 
he has children. Thereafter, he has grandchildren. Thus, 
his relations go on increasing without any limit. As 
the relations grow, his desires also grow without limit. 
Man will be happy if he reduces his desires. Less 
luggage, more comfort. Reduce your luggage. Develop 
courage and confidence. These are not the qualities 
you can borrow from others. You yourself have to 
develop them with patience and perseverance. 


Do Not Burden Yourself With Limitless Desires 117 





Embodiments Of Love! 


Sanctify your life by developing sense control. 
It is only because people have no control over their 
senses and no limit to their desires that there is a lot 
of unrest and agitation in society. Such people roam 
about freely in society like animals. You should not 
become animals. Whenever some evil thoughts arise in 
you, you should remind yourself that you are a human 
being and not an animal. Anger is an animal quality. 
When animals get angry, they fight with one another. 
Unfortunately, today human beings are also fighting 
among themselves like animals. In a way, animals are 
better than man today. Animals have a reason and 
a season, but man has no reason, no season. Thus, 
man today is behaving worse than animals. Being a 
human being, you should cultivate human qualities. In 
fact, a human being should not get angry at all! Even 
if anger overpowers you, you should try to become 
calm and quiet. Do not lose your cool. When you 
cultivate calmness, you will never become agitated 
and restless. 


Peace is within you. It cannot be found outside. 
Outside, there are only pieces. Similarly, happiness is 
not outside. Many people come to Swami and pray, 
“Swami, I want peace of mind.” I tell them that they 
have to search for peace within themselves. I am 


118 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





always full of peace and bliss. What is the reason 
for loss of peace in man today? His desires are 
the basic cause of his restlessness. Where there are 
desires, peace disappears from there. Therefore, reduce 
the luggage of your desires. Then you will have less 
burden in life. 


Do Not Allow Evil Qualities To Enter Your 
Heart 


Embodiments Of Love! 


All of you know that man has to adhere to the 
path of truth. He should never adopt the path of 
untruth under any circumstances. Whatever happens 
in your life, think that it is good for you. Even if 
someone criticises you, you should think that it is 
good for you. If you consider everything good, then 
everything will become good for you. God is not 
outside, He is within you. Similarly, Sathya, Dharma, 
Santi, Prema, Ahimsa are not outside. They are within 
you. When you get angry, you lose your peace. 
Therefore, you should always remain peaceful and 
blissful. Being a human being, you should have human 
qualities. A true human being is one who is suffused 
with sathya, dharma, santi, and prema. When you 
develop these human qualities, you will enjoy peace 
at all times. Then you will always have a smile on 


Do Not Burden Yourself With Limitless Desires 119 





your face. But when the mind is disturbed, you 
cannot have peace. 


You are not a mere human being. There is divinity 
immanent in you. Realise this truth. As long as you 
consider yourself as an ordinary human being, you 
cannot escape from restlessness. Changes occur in you 
due to your food and conduct. Sometimes, some bad 
qualities like anger and jealousy arise in you. But you 
should not give scope to these evil qualities. Suppose, 
you build a house and fix doors in it. Simply because 
you have fixed doors in your house, will you allow 
all sorts of animals and insects like donkeys, pigs, 
snakes and scorpions to enter your house? Not at all! 
Even if they try to enter, you will at once close the 
door. Similarly, control is the door of your heart. If 
you close the door of the heart on evil qualities, they 
cannot enter it. You should not get angry with anyone, 
nor criticise or harm anyone. If, for any reason, such 
circumstances arise, control yourself. When anger 
overtakes you, put it down immediately considering 
it as your enemy. It is said, anger is your enemy, 
patience is your shield of protection, happiness is your 
heaven. Fill your heart with love and compassion. 
If you have love in your heart, you will see God 
everywhere. Bereft of love, you will see only devil. 
When you develop firm faith that God is in you and 


120 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





you are God and that your body itself is the temple 
of God, then there will be no scope at all for anger, 
jealousy, pride, etc., to trouble you. Hence, Bangaru! 
Develop love and compassion. 


God is your sole refuge 

Wherever you maybe, 

In a forest, in the sky, in a city or in a 
Village, on the top of a mountain, 

Or in the middle of deep sea. 


(Telugu Poem) 


Truth is unchangeable, irrespective of time and 
place. Wherever you are, truth is truth, love is love! 
If you have love, truth will automatically become 
part of you and vice versa. You are all born with 
love. But unfortunately as you grow up, the love in 
you gradually starts declining and hatred and jealousy 
begin to increase. Jealousy is a very bad quality. It 
will harm not only others, but it will cause harm 
to you as well. Hence, do not at all give scope for 
such evil qualities. Strive to cultivate good qualities 
like love and truth. Then only can you experience 
uninterrupted peace. 


Discourse on 2-5 2006, Whitefield, Bangalore. 


8 


Mother’s Love Has Immense Power 


When man emerges from the womb of his mother, 
one does not find any garland around his neck. There 
are no jewels made of pearls nor are there glittering 
gold ornaments. There are no chains studded with 
precious stones like emeralds and diamonds. But 
there is one garland around his neck. Brahma strings 
together the consequences of his past deeds into a 
heavy garland and puts it around his neck at the 
time of his birth. 

(Telugu poem) 


Embodiments of Love! 


HAT we have to understand today is that 
we are born with a garland of karma 


122 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





around our neck. Brahma strings together every single 
action of ours, be it good or bad, to make this heavy 
garland. Hence, before performing any action, we have 
to enquire whether it is good or bad. 


Make Sacred Use Of Your Senses 


There is always a reward for our good deeds, 
whether we aspire for it or not. Likewise, we cannot 
escape from the dangerous consequences arising out 
of our seeing, thinking, hearing, talking and doing all 
that is bad. 


Do you know the purpose for which 

The eyes are given to you? 

Is it to look at anything and everything 

That you come across? 

No, no, you are endowed with eyes 

So that you may attain the vision of the 

The Lord of Kailasa. 

Do you know the purpose for which 

The mind is given to you? 

Is it to wander in the lanes and bylanes? 

No, no, the mind is given to you 

To experience bliss by contemplating on 

The beautiful form and name of God. 
(Telugu song) 


Mother’s Love HAS Immense Power 123 





In this manner, you have to enquire what is good 
and what is bad and act accordingly. No one can escape 
from the consequences of his actions. Everyone born 
in this world has to experience both good and bad. 
Some noble souls understand this truth, experience 
the bliss of treasuring in their mind all that is good 
and ignore all that is bad. Sometimes your vision is 
polluted by seeing bad things and bad people. In such 
a situation, you should at once exercise caution and 
remind yourself that eyes are given to you to have the 
vision of noble souls and not to look at all sorts of 
people around you. Some people indulge in evil talk 
and criticise others. It is the worst of sins to criticise 
others. Instead of criticising others, criticise your own 
evil qualities. How can you acquire merit when you 
criticise others? You will earn only sin. 


The world has acquired the name prapancha 
as it is the manifestation of the panchabhutas (five 
elements). Man today is misusing them. He thinks it is 
quite natural for him to exploit them to his maximum 
advantage. But it is most unnatural and unsacred. It 
may seem to be good and natural for the time being 
but later on he will be faced with insurmountable 
difficulties. These five elements are present in every 
human being in the form of the senses of sabda, 
sparsha, rupa, rasa and gandha (sound, touch, form, 
taste and smell). Your life will be redeemed only 


124 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





when you make proper use of the five senses and the 
five elements. Never use your senses in an unsacred 
manner. Today people are interested in seeing wrong 
things. They are all ears when someone indulges in 
vain gossip and evil talk. Never lend your ears to evil 
talk and get carried away by it. God has blessed you 
with two eyes and two ears so that you may see His 
beautiful form and hear His sweet and sacred name. It 
is only when you adhere to these principles can you 
lead the life of a true human being. Human birth is 
highly sacred. Jantunam nara janma durlabham (out 
of all living beings, human birth is the rarest). It has 
been called rare and precious because you can perform 
sacred deeds in it. But, if you do not sanctify your 
five senses and make proper use of the five elements, 
your life as a human being becomes unsacred and 
meaningless. Of what use is such a life? It is, in fact, 
a living death. Hence, it is very essential for boys and 
girls as also for elders to follow the right path and 
make proper use of the five senses. 


Human life is highly sacred. What is the meaning 
of the term manava (human being)? Ma - maya 
(delusion), na - without, va - varthinchuta (to conduct 
oneself). Hence, true humanness lies in transcending 
maya and following the righteous path. Man is not 
new to this world. He is ancient and has been here 
many times before. It is unfortunate that he is yet 


Mother’s Love HAS Immense Power 125 





to understand the true significance of human life in 
spite of passing through a number of human births. 
He spends his entire life in eating, drinking, sleeping 
and enjoying worldly pleasures. Is this the purpose of 
life? Even the birds, beasts and animals do the same. 
Then, on what basis can man consider himself to be 
superior to animals? If you fight with your fellow 
beings and hurt them, then your behaviour is no better 
than that of wild animals. It cannot be called human 
behaviour. Do not hold others responsible for your 
suffering and point an accusing finger at them. 


Students Should Follow Noble Ideals Of Indian 
Culture 


Embodiments Of Love! 


When you are born from your mother’s womb, 
you are free from delusion. But as you grow up, you 
are overcome by delusion. Your desires also grow 
in number. You should exercise control over your 
desires. In fact, there should be a limit for everything 
in life. But man today is conducting himself without 
any restraint. World today has provided man with 
many modern means of comfort in life. No doubt, 
they have made his life easy and comfortable, but 
at the same time these very things are leading him 
on the unsacred and sinful path. You are aware that 
having a cell phone has become an obsession with 


126 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





modern youth. Even the government is encouraging 
the use of cell phone as it is considered to be the 
most convenient way of communication. But no one 
is enquiring into the negative impact it has on the 
students. Once you have a cell phone, you can talk 
to anyone, anything, anywhere and at any time. When 
youth are given such freedom, they are bound to misuse 
it and ruin themselves. Even innocent youth are lured 
on the wrong path by the use of cell phones. If you 
do not put the students on the right path and do not 
inculcate virtues in them, these gadgets and means 
of comfort will certainly spoil their minds, and they 
will commit grave mistakes. It will take quite some 
time for them to rectify their mistakes and walk on 
the Godward path. 


Modern students are highly intelligent. Their 
intelligence should be properly channelised. They 
should be made aware of what is important for 
them in life. That is the type of education we have 
to give them. But, due to the impact of western 
culture, students are being given such education that 
has no relevance to their life. Under the influence of 
western culture, they are developing limitless desires, 
unnecessary relationships and are crossing the limits 
of propriety. Indian culture is highly sacred and 
noble. It has demonstrated high ideals for the rest of 


Mother’s Love HAS Immense Power 127 





the world to emulate. Unfortunately, the Bharativas 
have forgotten their own culture and have become 
slaves to western culture. The difference that should 
be observed between men and women with regard 
to their conduct is totally forgotten. The history of 
Bharat is replete with examples of women who have 
demonstrated great ideals. Since time immemorial, the 
culture of Bharat has stood as a beacon light, showing 
the path of redemption to the people of the world. 
But these days, leaders themselves are unaware of our 
glorious culture. Bharat is the birthplace of men and 
women of great virtues who made great sacrifices to 
uphold this ancient culture. This is the land ruled by 
the noble king Harishchandra who considered truth as 
his very life-breath. This is the land that gave birth 
to Sita who proved her chastity by coming out of 
blazing fire unscathed. People today have forgotten the 
ideals as exemplified by noble and virtuous women 
like Droupadi, Savitri and Damayanti who proved that 
women were in no way inferior to men in terms of 
courage, determination and power. Hence, one should 
never look down upon women. They are endowed 
with infinite divine power. 


“Forbearance is the real beauty, 

In this Sacred land of Bharat. 

The nectarous feeling in this country, 
Is the feeling of Love towards one’s 


128 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





mother.” 


(Telugu poem) 


There is no love greater than mother’s love in this 
world. It is imbued with immense power. But such a 
sacred principle of mother’s love is being neglected 
today. Mothers are being treated like servants. When 
parents grow old, they should be looked after with 
love and care. Instead they are being sent to old 
age homes. One who ill-treats his parents is bound 
to suffer a similar fate at the hands of his children. 
Yad bhavam tad bhavati (as is the feeling, so is the 
result). Whatever actions you do, they will come back 
to you as reaction, reflection and resound. Love your 
mother. Then you will be loved by all. As is the seed, 
so is the sapling. Hence, first and foremost, develop 
sacred and selfless love. When people share their love 
with each other, the whole world will be replete with 
love. But do not taint your love by selfishness and 
self-interest. 


Love Is The Foremost Quality Of A Human 
Being 


Everything in this world is subject to change 
except truth. There is none in this world who can 
change truth. Humanness is sustained by the twin 
principles of love and truth. Both are essential for 


Mother’s Love HAS Immense Power 129 





humanness to blossom. People have to open their eyes 
and recognise this fact. But they have become narrow- 
minded today. They should develop broad-mindedness 
and strive for the welfare of society and the nation 
at large. Bulbs may vary in size and shape but the 
electric current passing through them is one and the 
same. The physical bodies are like bulbs and the atmic 
power is the current that illumines them. Here you 
find a number of bulbs illuminating this place. When 
you put off the main switch, the light goes out from 
all the bulbs. Likewise, when the divine principle is 
withdrawn, all beings will become lifeless. The same 
truth is declared by Lord Krishna in the Bhagavad 
Gita: Mamaivamsho jivaloke jivabhuta sanathana (the 
eternal atma in all beings is a part of My Being). 
The same divine spark is present in all. When God 
says that you are a part of His Being, should you not 
cultivate divine qualities? Should you not behave like 
a divine being? Everyone born in this world is an 
aspect of divinity. Considering each being as divine, 
offer your salutations to him. There is nothing wrong 
in doing so. If you want to be respected by others, 
first of all you should respect them. You should love 
everyone. Only then will your life become a shining 
example for others to emulate. 


Human life is highly sacred. The principle of love 
immanent in man is infinite. None can describe the 


130 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





power of love. It is impossible. But worldly love has 
limitations. It diminishes with the passage of time. 
Take, for instance, the case of a newly married couple. 
In the first week of the marriage, the husband cannot 
bear separation from his wife even for a moment. If 
the husband happens to notice a thorn on the way, 
he at once pulls her aside with great anxiety, lest the 
thorn should prick her foot. A month after the marriage, 
he merely cautions his wife if he notices a thorn. Six 
months after the marriage, if a similar situation arises, 
he shouts at his wife, “Don’t you have eyes? Can’t 
you see the thorn?” Worldly love undergoes change 
in this manner. Due to the influence of modern times, 
the situation has become such that married couples 
resort even to divorce. But in olden days, people were 
not so fickle-minded. Their love for each other was 
steady right from the beginning till the end. 


Steady and changeless love is true atmaprema 
(divine love). Worldly love is only dehaprema (physical 
love). It is tainted by desires and body attachment. 
Love with desires is like a passing cloud. Divine love 
alone is eternal. Why do you give up such an eternal 
love and crave for physical and momentary love? 
Even the elders and parents are not able to guide the 
children on the right path. In fact, the elders themselves 
are under the influence of modern times more than 
the youngsters. The elders cannot set ideals to the 


Mother’s Love HAS Immense Power 131 





youth and the youth do not strive for transformation. 
The Vedas say: Matru devo bhava, Pitru devo bhava, 
Acharya Devo bhava, Atithi devo bhava (revere your 
mother, father, preceptor and guest as God). But these 
days we do not find such respect and love among 
children towards their parents. In this way, they are 
losing their humanness even. Man is endowed with 
a pure intellect and a sense of discrimination. One 
who makes proper use of his intellect is a true human 
being. It is a sign of foolishness to be carried away 
by the tide of time in the name of modernism. 


When there is transformation at the individual 
level, only then there can be transformation at the 
national level. The progress of a nation depends on 
the character of her men and women. But these days, 
the Bharatiyas have forgotten humanness and are trying 
to imitate the western culture. It is not the right thing 
to do. You have a culture of your own and they have 
theirs. Do not imitate the culture of others. Adhere 
to your culture and traditions. Do not change your 
culture to suit your whims and fancies. 


Embodiments Of Divine Atma! Embodiments Of 
Love! 


Love is the true human quality. Consider love as 


132 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





your very life-breath. One without love is no better 
than one without life. Considering love as the basis of 
your life, follow the path of truth. Then you will not 
only find fulfilment in life, you will also attain purity 
and ultimately divinity. Wherever you are, whatever 
may be the situation, never deviate from the path of 
love and truth. Do not try to distort truth in order to 
fulfil your desires. When you say, “I want this”, you 
give expression to your compulsive desire. You will 
have satisfaction in life if you accept whatever Nature 
has to offer you. On the other hand, if you transgress 
the laws of Nature to fulfil your desires, you will ruin 
yourself. Leave aside your likes and dislikes. 


Fulfil Noble Desires Of Your Mother 


You are born from your mother’s womb. Hence, 
you should express your gratitude to her and bring her 
a good name. In a village, near the city of Kolkata, 
there lived a noble soul by name Ishwarchandra 
Vidyasagar with his mother. They were very poor. 
His mother used to do odd jobs to earn a meagre 
income. They did not even have proper food to eat. 
She would prepare one roti (bread), give half of it to 
her son, and she would eat the other half. Sometimes, 
she would starve giving to her son whatever little 
food she prepared. Vidyasagar used to study under 
streetlights at night as they could not afford to have 


Mother’s Love HAS Immense Power 133 





even a lamp in their house. He worked hard day and 
night and passed his examinations. In the beginning, 
he secured a small job and the salary he earned was 
sufficient for both of them to lead a comfortable life. 
One day, his mother was going to a fair. Vidyasagar 
felt sorry to see her wearing an old Sari. He told her, 
“Mother, today being a festival day, all are wearing 
new clothes. Why don’t you also wear a new Sari?” 
He went to the bazaar and bought a white sari and 
requested his mother to wear it. But she told him, 
“Son! I have three desires. I will wear this new sari 
only after they are fulfilled.” 


Gradually, Vidyasagar earned a promotion in 
his job and his salary also increased. One day, he 
approached his mother and requested her to express 
her desires. She said, “Son, the children of our village 
are going to the neighbouring town to attend school. I 
am pained to see children walking such long distances 
carrying a heavy load of books. So, please construct a 
small school in our village.” Accordingly, Vidyasagar 
established a school in the village. He asked her, 
“Mother, are you happy now?” She said, “Son, I have 
two more desires. I feel pained to see the women of 
our village trekking long distances to fetch water. I will 
be happy if you can get a well dug in our village.” 
Vidyasagar immediately got a well dug and fulfilled 


134 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





his mother’s desire. After some time, she told him, 
“Son, you have provided water to the village and also 
established a school for children. But it is the lack of 
medical facilities in our village that is troubling my 
mind. Please build a small hospital here.” As per her 
wish, he constructed a small hospital. She was highly 
satisfied. It was only then that she wore the new white 
sari bought by her son. 


Gradually, Vidyasagar’s name and fame spread 
far and wide. People used to gather in thousands to 
listen to his speeches. (Bhagawan here narrated the 
incident how Vidyasagar carried the suitcase of an 
I.C.S. officer to the place of his lecture, teaching a 
lesson of self-reliance and humility to the officer.) 


Vidyasagar fulfilled all the three desires of his 
mother. Sathya Sai also fulfilled the wishes of His 
mother (loud applause). One day, I found mother 
Easwaramma in a rather pensive mood and asked 
her the reason. She said, “Swami, I am pained to 
see small children of our village walking all the way 
to Bukkapatnam to attend school. Please construct a 
small school in our village.” Fulfilling her wish, I 
established a small school in Puttaparthi. After some 
time, she said, “Swami, people of our village are very 
poor. They cannot pay for the medical expenses to 
doctors in Bukkapatnam, where they are forced to 


Mother’s Love HAS Immense Power 135 





go even for a minor ailment. Therefore, please build 
a small hospital in our village.” Accordingly, I got a 
small hospital built. Her third wish was to provide 
drinking water to the village. She pointed out that the 
women had to undergo great hardship to get water 
from the Chitravathi river which had almost dried 
up. To fulfil her desire, I provided drinking water not 
only to Puttaparthi but to other surrounding villages 
also. The small school that I established is now a big 
university. The small hospital that I constructed has 
become a super speciality hospital. 


Mother Easwaramma shed tears of joy when she 
saw that her desires had been fulfilled in a grand man- 
ner. She led a life of happiness and contentment and 
breathed her last peacefully. It is the foremost duty of 
children to fulfil the wishes of their mother and make 
her happy. Serve others to the extent possible. You need 
not take up any service activity beyond your means 
and capacity. If you find your neighbours suffering, 
give them solace. Help them to the extent possible 
and make them happy. This is what I expect you to 
learn today. On the occasion of Easwaramma Day, I 
exhort all of you to practise these three principles of 
service, experience bliss and share it with all. 


Easwaramma Day-6-5-2006, 
Brindavan (Whitefield), Bangalore 


136 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 
































Love All, Serve All 


In all religions birthdays of great 
personalities are celebrated, but the ideals 
for which they lived are not remembered and 
followed. If you do not care to follow their 
teachings, the celebrations lose their meaning 
and become artificial observances; it is not 
doing justice to the great men whose birthdays 
you celebrate. Jesus taught people to love all 
beings and serve all with compassion. It is 
only by practising these ideals that you can 
truly celebrate his birthday. You must live in 
love and lead a life of selfless service based on 
love. This is the only right way of celebrating 
the birth of Jesus. 


- Baba 


9 


Attain Enlightenment By 
Renouncing Desires 


All the names and forms are but the manifestations 
of the Supreme Being who is Existence Knowledge 
Bliss Absolute and non dual. He is the embodiment 
of Sathyam, Sivam, Sundaram (Truth, Goodness, 
Beauty). 

(Sanskrit verse) 
Embodiments Of Love! 


N this sacred day of Buddha Purnima, we 

talk about Buddha and purnima (full moon). 
But we seldom enquire into Buddha’s teachings, his 
virtues and the exemplary way in which he led his 
life. 


138 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





King Suddhodhana and his wife Mayadevi 
performed many spiritual austerities such as japa, 
tapa, vratas and yajnas for years together with the 
aspiration to have a son. They also consulted many 
astrologers. Suddhodhana had no peace of mind as 
the worry of not having an heir to the throne haunted 
him day and night. At last their prayers were answered 
when Mayadevi gave birth to a son at Lumbini. 
Unfortunately, Mayadevi died soon after giving birth 
to her son who was named Siddhartha. Gautami, the 
second wife of Suddhodhana, brought up the child with 
loving care like her own son. That is the reason why 
he was also called Gautam. The astrologers predicted 
that Siddhartha would not rule the kingdom; he would 
leave the kingdom and become a renunciant. The 
prediction of the astrologers was always ringing in the 
ears of Suddhodhana and caused him anxiety every 
as he watched his son grow. He took all precautions 
to see that his son did not step out of the palace 
and get into the company of others lest he should be 
influenced by them. Thus, he protected his son from 
the influence of others for twenty long years. 


Siddhartha’s Yearning For Ultimate Truth 


One day, the parents of a girl came to Suddhodhana 
and expressed their wish to give their daughter in 
marriage to his son Siddhartha. The name of the 


Attain Enlightenment By Renouncing Desires 139 





girl was Yashodhara. Suddhodhana accepted their 
proposal and performed the marriage of Siddhartha 
with Yashodhara. Owing to their loving insistence, 
Siddhartha continued to stay with his parents in the 
palace even after the marriage. One year after the 
marriage, he begot a son who was named Rahul. 
Both the husband and wife spent their time happily 
with their son. 


In spite of all the comforts of the palace and 
happy married life, Gautam’s mind became restless 
when he saw people afflicted with old age, disease 
and death after he ventured out of the palace one 
day. One night, there was a sudden transformation in 
his mind. As his wife was fast asleep, he got up at 
midnight, caressed his son and left for the forest. He 
had to undergo numerous hardships and difficulties in 
the forest. But he faced all ordeals with forbearance 
and determination. His parents were immersed in 
sorrow, unable to bear the pangs of separation from 
their son. Though Siddhartha was also undergoing a 
lot of anguish, he marched on his path of attaining 
self-realisation. 


During the course of his journey, he once met 
a holy man. The holy man told him that the cause 
of his anguish was actually within him, and it was 
his anguish that was coming in the way of his self- 


140 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





realisation. So saying, he gave him a talisman for 
protection and asked him to wear it around his neck. 
(At this point of time, Bhagawan materialised that 
talisman and showed it to the congregation amidst 
thunderous applause). This was the talisman given by 
the sage to Siddhartha. When Siddhartha put it around 
his neck, all his anguish disappeared instantaneously. 
Till the last moment of his earthly sojourn, Buddha 
had the talisman around his neck. When he shed his 
mortal coil, the talisman disappeared. 


Siddhartha started doing intense penance which 
went on for a long time. He kept questioning himself, 
“Who am I? Am I the body? Am I the mind? Am I 
the Buddhi (intellect)? Am I the Chittha (mind-stuff)?” 
He came to the conclusion that he was none of these. 
Ultimately, he experienced the truth, “I am I”. 


Recognise The Unity Of All Creation 


The Vedas declare, Aham Brahmasmi (I am 
Brahman) and Jat Thwam Asi (That Thou Art). Even 
these two Vedic declarations state two things: I and 
Brahman, That and Thou. True wisdom lies in seeing 
oneness. Advaita darshanam jnanam (experience of 
non-dualism is true wisdom). It is a sign of ignorance 
to see duality ignoring the underlying unity. Duality 
is not the truth. In this manner, Buddha enquired 


Attain Enlightenment By Renouncing Desires 141 





deeply and ultimately got the experience of “I am 
I’. That is true realisation. You may do penance for 
many years, you may do meditation and perform many 
yogic practices. But all these spiritual practices give 
only temporary satisfaction, not everlasting bliss. Some 
people talk about meditation. Even Buddha advocated 
the practice of meditation. What is that you have to 
meditate upon? What is meant by meditation? Does 
it mean concentrating upon a particular object? No, 
no. That is not meditation at all. To contemplate upon 
the principle of “I am I” is true meditation. No other 
sadhana (spiritual practice) can match this. 


So long as you have the dualistic feeling of “you 
and I’, you cannot experience unity. Buddha recognised 
the principle of unity and based his life on this truth. 
Under the direction of many yogis, he had performed 
various kinds of meditation and penance, but ultimately 
he found them to be a mere waste of time as none 
of these could lead him to the ultimate experience 
of oneness. He regretted having wasted his time in 
such a manner. One should find fulfiment in life by 
making proper use of time. This is the primary duty 
of man. 


Embodiments Of Love! 


Many people perform different types of spiritual 
practices such as japa and dhyana without recognising 


142 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





the principle of unity. The tongue utters the name 
of Rama but there is void in the heart. This is just 
waste of time. Instead of wasting your time in such 
a manner, undertake social service, seeing God in 
everyone. That is true spiritual practice. Recognise 
the innate divinity of all beings. 


In creation, there appear to be two entities, you and 
I. But you and I are in reality one. Vyashti (individual) 
is a part of samashti (society), and samashti is a part 
of srishti (creation) which emerges from Parameshti 
(God). this Parameshti is Parabrahma tathwa (principle 
of Brahman). That is the fundamental basis of the entire 
creation. In this way, you have to recognise the unity 
of all creation. Only then can you attain Parameshti or 
the principle of Brahman. Everyone has to repeatedly 
remind himself, “I am Parameshti, | am Parameshiti.”’ 
All are the embodiments of the atma and all are 
sustained by the atma. Buddha experienced the unity 
of all creation. There was total transformation in him 
once he attained the vision of ekatma (oneness of the 
atma). He realised that all worldly relations like mother, 
father, wife, children were false. He transcended body 
consciousness. That is why he earned the appellation 
Buddha (the enlightened one). Man should use his 
buddhi (intelligence) to understand this principle of 
unity. Buddhi is of two types. The buddhi that sees 
diversity in unity is worldly intelligence. Man should 


Attain Enlightenment By Renouncing Desires 143 





develop adhyatmic buddhi (spiritual intelligence) in 
order to realise the underlying unity of all creation. It 
gives you the experience of the atmic principle which 
is the same in the entire creation. Buddha attained the 
vision of the atma. after this experience, he went on 
teaching that there existed only one divine principle 
in the world. 


Buddham saranam gachchhami, 
Sangham saranam gachchhami, 
Dhammam saranam gachchhami. 


Buddha taught that the principle of unity of the 
atma was the only true principle in the world. One 
who realised it by using his spiritual intelligence was 
true Buddha, he said. Other than the atma nothing 
existed in this world. 


In this transient and ephemeral world, there is 
one thing that is true and eternal. That is divinity. 
That is what everyone should aspire to attain. Sathyam 
saranam gachchhami (I take refuge in truth). Ekam 
saranam gachchhami (1 take refuge in the principle of 
oneness). Everything is the manifestation of divinity 
in this world; there is no second entity other than 
divinity. It is the divine principle that governs the entire 
world. Having realised this truth, Buddha, along with 
his disciples, went from village to village to propagate 


144 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





it. He never felt the need to take rest. He thought 
that it was his duty to share this supreme knowledge 
with his fellowmen. Even his father Suddhodhana 
came to him. He also recognised this truth and was 
transformed. What did Buddha teach? Buddha taught 
that everyone was endowed with the same principle 
of divinity. Ekam Sat viprah bahudha vadanti (truth 
is one, but the wise refer to it by various names). 
The same message was conveyed by Lord Krishna 
in the Bhagavad Gita when He said that all beings 
were His own reflection, and no one was different 
from Him. Buddha had to undergo great hardships 
to realise this truth. Many noble souls who were the 
contemporaries of Buddha acknowledged the greatness 
of Buddha. They said that Buddha had experienced the 
truth which they were unable to realise. As he gave 
up all desires, Buddha became an epitome of total 
renunciation. There was nothing in him except love. 
He considered love as his very life-breath. Bereft of 
love, the world would turn into a void. 


Try To Understand The Profundity Of Buddha’s 
Teachings 


When you offer your salutations to someone, 
understand that you are saluting your own self. That 
someone is none other than your own reflection. See 
others just as you see your own reflection in the 


Attain Enlightenment By Renouncing Desires 145 





mirror. This is the message conveyed by the mahavakya 
(profound statement), Aham Brahmasmi. Names and 
forms may be different, but all beings are part and 
parcel of the same divine principle. You may call 
this a handkerchief. You may call this a robe. But 
both are made out of cotton. Likewise, divinity is 
the underlying principle in the apparent multiplicity 
of this world. Many so-called scholars are preaching 
only multiplicity today. They claim to have mastered 
the scriptures and try to interpret them in their own 
way with their limited knowledge. Their interpretations 
do not correspond to the reality. They only add to 
confusion. 


Buddha taught that we should not have anger, 
we should not find others’ faults, we should not harm 
others, because all are the embodiments of pure, eternal 
principle of the atma. Have compassion towards the 
poor and help them to the extent possible. You think 
those who do not have food to eat are poor people. 
You cannot call someone poor just because he does 
not have money or food to eat. Truly speaking, 
nobody is poor. All are rich, not poor. Those whom 
you consider as poor may not have money, but all 
are endowed with the wealth of hridaya (heart). 
Understand and respect this underlying principle of 
unity and divinity in all and experience bliss. Do 
not have such narrow considerations as so and so is 


146 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





your friend, so and so is your enemy, so and so is 
your relation, etc. All are one, be alike to everyone. 
That is your primary duty. This is the most important 
teaching of Buddha. But people do not enquire into 
the teachings of Buddha and do not understand the 
sacredness of his heart. They only talk about his story. 
Truly speaking, Buddha is not just one individual. All 
of you are Buddhas. You will see unity everywhere 
once you understand this truth. There is unity in 
the apparent multiplicity. When you are surrounded 
by many mirrors, you see a number of reflections. 
Reflections are many but the person is one. Reactions, 
of yours. reflections, and resounds are many but the 
reality is one. When I am speaking here, My voice 
is heard through each and every loudspeaker in this 
hall. In the same manner, there exists the principle of 
unity in our hearts which we have to recognise. Man’s 
life finds fulfilment only when his mind experiences 
the principle of unity. There is no point in bringing 
about unity among people without uniting their minds. 
Manah eva manushyanam karanam bandhamokshayo 
(mind is the cause for bondage and liberation of man). 
You see someone and say he is a bad person; you 
see another person and call him good. But, in reality, 
good and bad are present in your mind and not in the 
people around you. You call this handkerchief white 
and this microphone black. The difference in colour 


Attain Enlightenment By Renouncing Desires 147 





is perceived by your eyes, but essentially black and 
white are one and the same. Everyone should make 
efforts to visualise unity in diversity. Only then can 
one experience divinity. 


The principles taught by Buddha have profound 
significance, but people are not trying to understand 
them. You might have observed that Buddha had curly 
hair on his head. One lock of hair was entwined with 
the other. There is an underlying message of unity in 
this. He had only one feeling in his heart, the feeling 
of love. He taught, Dharmam saranam gachchhami 
(I take refuge in righteousness), Premam saranam 
gachchhami (1 take refuge in love). Bereft of love, 
humanness has no existence. We should love all, 
irrespective of the fact whether one is a pauper or 
a rich man. Money should not be the criterion to 
share your love with your fellowmen. Money is not 
important. Money comes and goes, morality comes and 
grows. Do not hurt others. Help Ever, Hurt Never. 
Only then can you attain the state of Buddha. There 
is little use in giving lengthy lectures if you do not 
realise the principle of unity in divinity. You may call 
God by any name such as Rama, Krishna, Buddha, 
Sai, etc., but all of them embody the same divine 
principle. Keep the flower of oneness in the altar of 
your heart and let its fragrance spread everywhere. 


148 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





Spiritual practices such as japa and tapa will not yield 
the desired result unless you recognise the principle 
of unity. Many people count the beads of the rosary. 
But, what is the use of rotating the rosary if the 
mind also keeps going round the world? Understand 
that the mind is most important. You should have a 
steady mind. Only then will your life be redeemed. 
What is the use if your mind hovers around on each 
and every object like flies which hover on dirt as 
well as laddus? 


Do not allow your mind to vacillate between good 
and bad, unity and multiplicity. Focus it on all that is 
good and realise the principle of unity. That is the royal 
road which will lead you to the experience of truth. 
On the other hand, if you allow your mind to follow 
the crooked path, it will not lead you anywhere. 


Embodiments Of Love! 


The same divine principle of love is present in all 
of you. When you take to the path of love, you will 
become Buddha yourself. Today is Buddha Purnima. 
Purnima means full moon. The underlying message 
of Buddha Purnima is that the mind should shine 
with total purity like full moon. It should unite with 
its source, 1.e., the atma which is pure and effulgent. 
There is no darkness on the full moon night. On this 


Attain Enlightenment By Renouncing Desires 149 





auspicious day of Buddha Purnima, we should attain 
full purity of the mind. 


Purnamada purnamidam, 
Purnat purnamudachyate, 
Purnasya purnamadaya, 
Purnamevavashishyate. 


(That is full, this is full. When the full is taken 
out of the full, what remains is again the full.) We 
have to recognise this truth. 


Embodiments Of Love! 


It gives Me great joy to see that all of you have 
gathered here today. You are united with each other 
with the bond of love. Love is only one; it is not 
different in you, Me and others. You have unified 
your love with that of Swami. Love is one. Live in 
love. 


Buddha Purnima 13-5-2006. Brindavan, 
(Whitefield), Bangalore. 


150 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





Advent of Sai 



















This Sai has come in order to achieve the 
supreme task of uniting the entire mankind as 
one family through the bond of brotherhood; 
of affirming and illumining the inner reality of 
each being in order to reveal the divine which 
is the basis on which the entire cosmos rests; 
and of instructing all to recognise the common 
divine heritage that binds man to man, so that 
man can rid himself of the animal and rise to 


the divine which is his goal! 


- Baba 


10 


Selfless Service To Society Is 
True Sadhana 


All names and forms are the manifestations of 
the Supreme Being who is the embodiment of peace 
and auspiciousness. He is Existence, Knowledge, 
Bliss Absolute and non-dual. He is Sathyam, Sivam, 
Sundaram (Truth, Goodness, Beauty). (Sanskrit 
Verse) 


Embodiments Of Love! 


T makes Me immensely happy to see that you 

have been experiencing bliss during the last 

three days. Three days have passed like three minutes 

(loud applause). Your hearts are full of devotion, bliss 
and steadfast faith. 


152 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





Associate Yourself Only With Good Company 


Vyakti (individual) is a part of samashti (society). 
samashti is an aspect of srishti (creation) which has 
emerged from parameshti (God). It is therefore the duty 
of every individual to undertake sacred and selfless 
service of society. True society is constituted by such 
individuals. All actions of man should be devoted to 
the service of society. All are the members of the 
same society. Though the individuals are different, they 
are endowed with the same heart. Ekam Sat viprah 
bahudha vadanti (truth is one, but the wise refer to 
it by various names). Ekatma sarva bhutantaratma 
(one atma dwells in all beings). 


This is a blank paper. If you pack vegetables in 
it, it will acquire the smell of vegetables. If you pack 
fruits like plantain in it, it will acquire the smell of 
plantain. If you pack dry fish in it, it will emit the 
smell of dry fish. The paper has no smell of its own; 
it absorbs the smell of the substance that you pack in 
it. Man by nature is pure and sacred. But he acquires 
evil qualities by associating himself with bad company. 
It is said “Tell me your company, | shall tell you what 
you are.” Tell me the type of people you associate 
with, I can tell you the type of person you are. It is 
therefore necessary that you associate yourself with 
good people in all your activities. It is the company 


Selfless Service To Society Is True Sadhana 153 





that makes you good or bad. Therefore, keep away 
from bad company. Join the company of those who 
have a pure heart and sacred feelings. Man is a part 
of society. The evils that are present in the society 
are the result of evils of individuals who constitute it. 
Similarly, the evils of the society affect the individual. 
The entire creation is divine. All are essentially sacred. 
One’s behaviour may, however, undergo change due 
to the impact of the environment. 


Differences In Society Are Created By Man 


Man is endowed with panchapranas (five life- 
breaths), panchendriyas (five senses) and panchabhutas 
(five elements). The five elements are present in man 
in the form of the senses of sabda (sound), sparsha 
(touch), rupa (form), rasa (taste) and gandha (smell). 
We will have the type of experience according to 
the type of path we follow. Therefore, we should 
associate with good people, earn a good name and 
lead a good life. Fill your heart with pure and divine 
feelings. These are the qualities that Buddha was 
endowed with. Buddha declared: Dharmam saranam 
gachchhami (I take refuge in righteousness), Sathvam 
garanam Gachchhami (I take refuge in truth). All our 
endeavours should be based on sathya and dharma. 
Even if you come across bad people, see only good 
in them. The same God is the indweller of all beings. 


154 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





People attribute many names to God like Allah, Jesus, 
Rama, Krishna, etc., but God is one. Do not observe 
any difference between the different names of God. 
There are many sweets like /addu, jilebi, mysore 
Pak, but they have the same essential ingredient of 
sugar in them. Names and forms may vary, but the 
atma is the same in all. Rama and Krishna were not 
born with these names; they were given these names 
by their parents. God does not come down with any 
particular name. Nirgunam, niranjanam, Sanathana 
Niketanam, nitya, shuddha, buddha, mukta, nirmala 
swarupinam (God is attributeless, pure, final abode, 
eternal, unsullied, enlightened, free and embodiment of 
sacredness). It is the people who attribute names and 
forms to God and develop differences on that basis 
extolling one form and condemning the other. 


Do not be carried away by names and forms. Rely 
on the principle of the atma which is formless. The 
atma is the embodiment of bliss. Nitvanandam, parama 
sukhadam, kevalam jnanamurtim, dwandwateetam, 
gagana sadrisham, tathwamasyadi lakshyam, ekam, 
nityam, vimalam, achalam, sarva- dhee sakshibhutam, 
bhavateetam, trigunarahitam (The atma is the 
embodiment of eternal bliss, wisdom absolute, beyond 
the pair of opposites, expansive and pervasive like the 
sky, the goal indicated by the mahavakya Tathwamasi, 
one without a second, eternal, pure, unchanging, 


Selfless Service To Society Is True Sadhana 155 





witness of all functions of the intellect, beyond all 
mental conditions and the three attributes of sathwa, 
rajas and tamas.) Differences arise when we attribute 
different names to the atma. These differences are 
created by you, not by God. God is the embodiment 
of love and truth. Truth is God. Love is God. Live 
in Love. Fill your heart with love and lead a life of 
love. Love everyone because God is present in all 
in the form of love. There is no one in this world 
without love. Love may appear to have many forms, 
but in reality it is only one. 


Fill All Your Actions With Love 
Embodiments Of Love! 


Whomsoever you see, consider him as the 
embodiment of atmic principle. Do not be carried 
away by what others say. Whatever people may say 
about you, consider that it is good for you. When 
you develop your thinking like that, everything will 
become good for you. Even if someone criticises you, 
do not be afraid of it. Face it with courage. Fill your 
heart with courage. Walk on the path of truth and love 
with courage. Love is most sacred. It is the form of 
God. If you hate love, it is equivalent to hating God. 
There is no other name for God except love. 


156 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





Embodiments Of Love! 


In the last three days, the songs you sang and 
the activities you performed gave bliss to one and all 
(loud applause). You had waited for this opportunity 
for a long time and today your aspirations found 
fulfilment. Your love and your sadhana will never 
go waste. Love remains as love and truth remains as 
truth. Whatever activity you undertake, fill it with love. 
When you give food to a beggar, do it with love. Do 
not entertain disgust, anger or hatred towards anyone. 
If you perform all your actions with love, that is true 
devotion. Some people do japa, chanting Ram, Ram, 
Ram. As they turn the beads of the rosary, their mind 
also roams everywhere. That is no Japa. The name 
of Rama should fill your heart with delight. You will 
be able to visualise the divine form of Rama when 
you chant His name wholeheartedly with closed eyes. 
Prema mudita manase kaho Rama Rama Ram (Chant 
the name of Rama with heart full of love). The name 
of God should be imprinted on your heart. 


God is the embodiment of love and beyond all 
attributes. It is only your imagination that assigns at- 
tributes to God. Desire, anger, hatred, greed, jealousy 
and pride are your own creation; they have not come 
from God. God always blesses you with love. You 
look at an object and want to possess it. That is due 


Selfless Service To Society Is True Sadhana 157 





to your covetousness. God has nothing to do with it. 
God is absolutely desireless. Some people even try to 
hoodwink God by superimposing their desires on Him. 
They accuse God by attributing to Him what is not 
there in Him. In spite of that, God always loves you. 
Attain the love of God through love. Similarly, attain 
truth through truth. When you lead your life in such 
a manner, that is true sadhana. Going to a forest and 
sitting in solitude is not true sadhana. Live in society 
and serve it selflessly, thinking that you are serving 
God. When you serve somebody in distress, consider 
that you are serving God Himself. There is no place 
where God is not there. Everything is pervaded by 
divinity. There is divinity in this cloth, microphone 
and, in fact, in everything in this world. From the 
worldly point of view, you may call this a cloth, but 
when you develop divine vision, you will see God in 
everything. The cloth is made of threads and threads 
come from cotton. Without cotton, there can be no 
threads and without threads there can be no cloth. 
Just as cotton is the fundamental basis of cloth, God 
is the fundamental basis of this world. There is no 
place in this world where God is not there. Wherever 
you look, He is there. 


Recognise Your True Identity 


Embodiments Of Love! 


You are all embodiments of love; you are all em- 
bodiments of divinity. Do not go anywhere in search 


158 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





of God. When you close your eyes and enquire, you 
will see God in yourself. People undertake many kinds 
of spiritual practices. All these spiritual practices lead 
to the same goal. As all the rivers ultimately merge 
in the ocean, the prayers of all will reach God. Do 
not consider yourself merely a human being. You are 
the embodiment of love. When you ask someone his 
or her name, he or she may say Ramaiah or Laksh- 
mamma. They are not born with these names; they are 
given these names by their parents. All other names 
keep changing. There is only one name that does not 
change and that is ‘I’. When somebody asks you, 
“Who are you?”, you should say with conviction, “I 
am I’. You have no other name or form except this. 
You should develop this spirit of oneness. Do not 
identify yourself with the name given to your body. 
Your real name is ‘I’, ‘I’, ‘I’. ‘I’ is the ultimate real- 
ity which remains with you for ever. So long as you 
have the body, people may call you by your name. 
When the body is gone, what happens to the name? 
In fact, you are not one person; you are three: the 
one you think you are, the one others think you are, 
the one you really are. 


Embodiments Of Love! 


You are all filled with love, devotion and truth. 
Therefore, you are all embodiments of God. Never 
forget love. Imprint it on your heart and assimilate 


Selfless Service To Society Is True Sadhana 159 





it. Do not feel bad that Swami did not speak to you 
during the last three days. Swami was always ready to 
speak to you. But the organisers did not provide any 
opportunity for Swami to speak. Otherwise, I would 
have spoken to you on all these three days at length 
(loud applause). I am happy to receive the love of 
all of you. It is your good fortune that you are the 
recipients of My love. The bond of love is the only 
relationship between you and Swami. All are born in 
love, are sustained by love and live in love. Never 
forget love; imprint it on your heart. 


(Bhagawan sang the Bhajan, “Prema mudita 
manase kaho Rama Rama Ram ...” and continued 
the discourse.) 


It is out of love for you that I have given this 
discourse and sang the bhajan. Your love is reflected 
in Me and My love is reflected in you. I accept your 
love and shower My love on all of you. Love is most 
important for all. Love is the binding force between all 
of us. Without love there can be no relationship, not 
even between mother and child. The love that exists 
between you and Swami is greater than even the love 
that exists between a mother and her children. Swami 
wishes you a happy and blissful life. 


Kerala Youth Camp, 21-5-2006, 
Whitefield, Bangalore 


160 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





Shed the body consciousness 






















The Lords first foot covered this world 
and the second foot covered the other world. 
How huge the Lord’ foot would have been to 
cover the whole world! How can such a huge 
foot be kept on Emperor Balis head for the 
third step of land? The inner significance of the 
three steps is that the Lord entered Balis body, 
mind and soul as he offered them to Him. Once 
the ego or body consciousness is surrendered, 
there is no bar to ones realisation. It is the 
body consciousness that stands in the way and 
makes you forget God. Vamana opened Balis 


eyes to help him realise the Divine. 


- Baba 


11 


The Youth Should Follow The Path 
Of Sathya And Dharma 


All names and forms are the manifestations of 
the Supreme Being who is the embodiment of peace 
and auspiciousness. He is Existence, Knowledge, 
Bliss Absolute and non-dual. He is Sathyam, Sivam, 
Sundaram (Truth, Goodness, Beauty). 


(Sanskrit verse) 


HERE are four entities: vyashti, srishti and 

Parameshti (individual, society, creation and 
Creator). Srishti emerges from Parameshti. Samashti 
is a part of srishti and vyashti, a part of samashii. 


162 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





The Basis Of Creation 


Being its part, the individual should serve society. 
In fact, service to society is the most important duty 
of man. It can endow him with divine power. Service 
to society is, in reality, service to Divinity. For whose 
sake is the existence of man? It is for the sake of 
society. Similarly, society has its existence for the sake 
of creation. This is the basis of the entire creation. 
The creation is the manifestation of God. Man has 
a unique position in it. But what is the use if man 
behaves like animals and birds? Divinity is immanent 
in every being. The same truth was proclaimed by 
Lord Krishna in the Bhagavad Gita: Mamaivamsho 
jivaloke jivabhuta sanathana (the eternal atma in all 
beings is a part of My Being). Since every being is 
a part of the Divine, all should be respected, loved 
and adored. You should not hate anybody and should 
not create distance between one another. Just as all 
the parts of the body form one organism, similarly, all 
beings are like various limbs of God. When there is 
an injury in the leg, it is the eye that sheds tears. The 
same type of intimate relationship exists between God 
and all the beings as exists between different limbs of 
the body. You may ask why man faces troubles and 
difficulties when he enjoys intimate relationship with 
God. God is essentially the embodiment of immortality 
and bliss. He does not cause difficulties and problems 


The Youth Should Follow The Path Of Sathya And Dharma 163 





for anyone. Some people think that God is the cause 
of their problems and difficulties, but this is a big 
mistake. All your troubles are the result of your own 
actions; they are not given by God. 


Everyone has to face the consequences of 
His actions, whoever he may be. 


No one can know what lies ahead 
Of him in future. 


But this much is sure that everybody has 
To reap the consequences of his actions. 


(Telugu song) 


Our joys and sorrows are the reflection of our 
own actions; they are not caused by others. To blame 
others for our sorrows is a big mistake. Everything in 
this world is reaction, reflection and resound. Every 
man is his own witness. 


Acquire Education That Gives Knowledge Of 
The Self 


It is only the youth who are capable of protecting 
this world. It is the youth and youth alone who can set 
this world right. No nation can stand without youth. 
Sometimes, the elders underestimate the capabilities 
of the youth, thinking that they are inexperienced 
and young. But the youth are endowed with immense 


164 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





power. If they take a firm resolve, they are capable 
of achieving anything. If they realise their power, 
they can emancipate the nation. This does not need 
any education. What is education? Education means 
Vidya which connotes the knowledge of the Self. This 
is the foundation of all education. Today students 
are acquiring only bookish knowledge. Does a man 
become educated just by acquiring a college degree? 
Can a person who lacks wisdom and does not perform 
righteous actions be called educated? Education which 
does not confer wisdom is no education at all; it is 
only worldly and bookish knowledge. Modern youth 
are hankering after this type of education. They go 
to foreign countries like Germany, Japan and America 
to pursue this type of education. The education that 
is not there in Bharat is not available anywhere else 
(loud applause). Yanna Bharate, thanna Bharata (what 
is not there in Bharat cannot be found anywhere else). 
Some people have a mistaken notion that those who 
are educated abroad are great. In fact, many of them 
come back after acquiring evil qualities, evil thoughts 
and evil habits. 


In Bharat, the students acquire sacred education; 
it begins with the thoughts of God. Even an illiterate 
driver in Bharat salutes the steering wheel before 
starting the vehicle. Similarly, a musician offers 
salutations to the musical instrument before playing 


The Youth Should Follow The Path Of Sathya And Dharma 165 





on it. In fact, all type of learning in Bharat begins 
with the name of God and prayer to Him and every 
activity is done as an offering to God without any 
artificiality and ostentation. People educated abroad 
come back with big degrees. What is that degree? 
It is only a piece of paper. They do not understand 
the essence of education. The students of Bharat 
have a pure and sacred heart. I feel blissful when 
I see Indian students. One can see the goodness of 
education reflected on their faces. The Bharativas 
are not inferior in any way; they are endowed with 
immense sacredness. Every individual in Bharat is 
imbued with divine feelings. Forgetting this type of 
sacred education, people these days are running after 
worldly and materialistic education. Today there is an 
influx of gadgets like calculators and computers. They 
are mere yantras (machines). These yantras do not 
stand any comparison with mantra (incantation). The 
real mantra is the name of God which gives immense 
bliss. The Bharatiyas are not able to understand this 
truth because of their delusion. But their heart is very 
sacred. 


Bharat Is The Land Of Sacrifice 


People today are ruining themselves by craving 
for worldly and materialistic possessions. Even those 
responsible for conducting the affairs of the government 


166 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





are treading the evil path. They want only worldly 
type of education to be promoted in our country. 
They talk about science and technology. What is this 
technology? It is only trick knowledge. They say it is 
technology, but what they do is ‘tricknology’. Many 
people in Bharat are indulging in dirty business; 
they are cheating others and doing injustice to them. 
No Bharatiya should take to this type of business. 
Everyone should have divine feelings in his heart. 
All actions should be done to please God. When you 
start all your activities with prayer to God, you are 
sure to be rewarded with bliss. Today if you invite 
a music artiste to sing devotional songs, he will ask, 
“How much will you pay?” In this manner, all our 
activity has become business-oriented. Even food and 
drink have become a big business. The sacred land 
of Bharat is annapurna kshetra (land of plenty). The 
tradition of Bharat is to offer food free to every 
hungry person and water to every thirsty person. This 
sacred tradition seems to have disappeared these days. 
By imitating the culture of the West, the Bharatiyas 
today are casting a blot on the fair name of Bharat. 
It is the land of great culture. There is hardly any 
other country which can stand comparison with her 
so far as the sacredness of the culture is concerned. 
Having been born in this sacred land of Bharat, we 
should live like true Bharatiyas. The land of Bharat 


The Youth Should Follow The Path Of Sathya And Dharma 167 





which is known for tyaga (sacrifice) is being turned 
into a land of bhoga (pleasure) in mad imitation of 
western culture. That is why Bharat is facing many 
problems these days. What is needed in this country 
is not bhoga but tvaga. 


Imagine the great sacrifice of Sakkubai who 
renounced everything for the sake of God. Na karmana 
Na prajaya dhanena tyagenaike amrutathwamanasu 
(immortality is not attained through action, progeny 
or wealth; it is attained only by sacrifice). Money is 
the root cause of many evils. Money makes many 
wrongs. The first priority of the moneyed people today 
is to send their children abroad for education. Even 
elders are encouraging the youth to go to foreign 
countries for the sake of earning money. Too much 
money leads man to the path of evil. Money comes 
and goes, morality comes and grows. So, we have 
to develop morality. The very foundation of Bharat 
is based on sathya and dharma. This is what we 
have to propagate. The Bharatiyas should consider 
adherence to truth as the greatest dharma. sathya and 
dharma are most important in the life of man. The 
youth should strictly adhere to them. What is sathya? 
It is the harmony of thought, word and deed. Where 
these three are in harmony, sathya is present there. 
People speak something on the platform, they have 
something else in their mind, and their actions are 


168 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





entirely different from what they speak and think. 
This is the worst sin. 


Service To Society Is The Sign Of Nobility 
Embodiments Of Love! 


Your very form is love. Love protects the whole 
world. The five elements that constitute the universe 
are based on love. Only when love combines with the 
five elements does the universe come into existence. 
But love is not to be seen anywhere these days. Today 
there is lack of love even between mother and children. 
What happened to that love? We are bartering it for 
money. When money is lost, nothing is lost. Instead of 
putting our faith in money, we should have more faith 
in love and should develop love to love relationship 
with others. When you have this type of relationship 
based on love, love will develop more and more. Only 
then will we be able to love everybody. 


We should not observe such differences as so and 
so is mine and so and so is someone else. We should 
develop the feeling that I belong to all and all belong 
to me. All are the children of the same mother. Being 
the children of the same mother, all should live like 
brothers and sisters. There may be some differences, 
but they are temporary. They will come and go like 
passing clouds. The only thing that is permanent and 


The Youth Should Follow The Path Of Sathya And Dharma 169 





eternal is love. There is nothing great in acquiring 
education and amassing wealth. There have been 
many millionaires in this world, but what have they 
taken with them at the time of leaving this world? 
The great world conqueror Alexander did not carry 
anything with him when he left the world. 


Even King Harischandra, who strictly followed 
the path of truth, had to leave this world ultimately 
leaving behind his vast kingdom and riches. Emperor 
Nala, who reigned over a great empire, could not 
take with him anything when he passed away. Did 
King Mandhata, who adorned the Krita Yuga, carry 
any wealth with him when he left the earth? Is Lord 
Rama, who built the bridge across the ocean, present 
on earth today? 


(Telugu poem) 


You may earn any amount of money, but as long 
as you are alive you should give joy to others by 
undertaking acts of charity. Those who have money 
should look after the poor and sick people. Utilise 
all your earnings in a proper manner. Consider social 
service as service to yourself. Those who undertake 
social service are noble people. On the contrary, those 
who do not take to the path of service are wicked. 
When somebody salutes you, you also salute him. 
Do not consider that since somebody is your enemy 


170 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





you should not salute him. All are friends. Do not 
bear hatred or enmity toward anyone. Enmity is a 
wicked quality. Friendship is very important. You and 
I should become one. That is true maitri (friendship). 
All should become united. If you really want to see 
God, first see Him in everyone. The youth should 
greet and treat each other with love like brothers and 
sisters. But these days this type of relationship is not 
seen between people. They greet each other, saying 
“hello, hello”, but their heart is hollow without any 
feelings. Love everybody and develop faith in God. 
One without viswasa (faith) is actually without swasa 
(breath). Faith in God is our life-breath. If you want 
to develop faith in God, develop love. If you do not 
have love, you cannot be called a human being. 


Humanness Blossoms In A Pure Heart 
Embodiments Of Love! 


Develop love. When we come into this world, 
it only love comes with us. From love comes truth. 
When love and truth come together, humanness finds 
its sustenance. The mansion of human life can be 
built with self-confidence as the foundation, self- 
satisfaction as pillars and self-sacrifice as roof. Only 
then can you have self-realisation in life. If you want 
to have self-satisfaction, first have self-confidence. 
Without self-satisfaction, there can be no happiness. 


The Youth Should Follow The Path Of Sathya And Dharma 171 





How can one wthout self-confidence have confidence 
in others? People doubt anything and everything. 
Doubt endangers life. A person with doubts will 
not achieve anything in life. He will not have faith 
even in his wife and children. Therefore, first and 
foremost, develop faith. We think we are great and 
highly educated. But what is the use of this educa- 
tion? Even animals like goats and monkeys can learn 
many things. A monkey can be trained to ride a bi- 
cycle. Man is much superior to animals. His conduct 
should be such that manifests this superiority. It is 
said, Jantunam nara janma durlabham (out of all 
living beings, human birth is the rarest). Man should 
therefore not behave like birds, animals and insects. 
People distribute sweets when they beget children. 
What is so great about it? Even a pig can give birth 
to ten offspring. Give up all wicked qualities and lead 
an ideal and blissful life. Only then will humanness 
find fulfilment. 


Embodiments Of Love! 


Face all difficulties with forbearance. Accept all 
trials and tribulations with love. Accept both pleasure 
and pain with love. Fill you heart with love and not 
with the poison of evil qualities. Even poison becomes 
prasadam (sacred food) if it is offered to God. When 
Mira was given a cup of milk mixed with poison, she 
offered it to Krishna. Krishna accepted the poison and 


172 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





gave her the milk as prasadam. 


(Bhagawan sang the bhajan, “Prema mudita 
manase kaho Rama, Rama, Ram ...” and continued 
His Discourse.) Rama, Rama, Rama, in fact, con- 
notes prema, prema, prema. Rama and prema are one 
and the same. People adore many deities like Rama, 
Krishna, Sai, but the divine principle in all of them 
is the same. atma has neither a form nor a name. 
atma is also referred to as Brahma. Brahma sathyam 
jJagan-mithya (Brahman alone is real, the world is 
unreal). God has no attributes. He does not punish 
or harm anybody. He is present in your heart in the 
form of pure and unsullied love. Develop love more 
and more. That will protect you always. There is no 
other greater protection than this. There is no weapon 
more powerful than love. Everything is love. The very 
word love is suffused with sweetness. Treat each other 
with love, converse with each other with love, lead a 
life full of love and enjoy bliss. 


(Bhagawan referred to the drama “Ekalavya” 
which was to be enacted that evening and called 
upon the youth to follow the path of truth, obey the 
command of their preceptors and adhere always to 
righteousness like Ekalavya. Associate yourself only 
with Good Company. With this advice to the youth, 
Bhagawan concluded His discourse.) 


Karnataka youth camp 27-5-2006 
Whitefield, Bangalore 


12 


Develop Broad-Mindedness 
And Live In Bliss 


The Lord shines resplendently in the universe; so 
also the universe shines in the Lord. The relationship 
between the Lord and the universe is intimate and 
inseparable. What else is to be conveyed to you? 


(Telugu poem) 
Embodiments Of Love! 


HE people of Kerala celebrate the Onam 
festival today. Onam is very sacred, holy 
and divine. Several interpretations are given to the 
Onam festival. People celebrate the Onam festival by 
taking an oil bath and wearing new clothes. They also 


174 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





cook a variety of special dishes and partake of them. 
Thus, all members of the family enjoy the festival, 
feasting and wearing new clothes. Some people also 
visit temples on this occasion. Of all the temples in 
Kerala the temple of Bala (child) Krishna Guruvayur 
is very dear and important to them. Many people also 
do parayana (reverential reading) of the Ramayana 
on this day. All these sacred activities are the result 
of their faith and devotion to God. They celebrate 
the Onam festival by contemplating on God, visiting 
temples and by undertaking sacred activities. 


In the ancient times, Emperor Bali ruled the 
kingdom of Kerala. He treated his subjects as his own 
children and did a lot of service to them. The people, 
on their part, also loved and respected Emperor Bali. 
They led a happy and peaceful life, reposing their faith 
and hope in the emperor. Emperor Bali performed 
several yajnas and other Vedic rituals during his reign. 
Once, he commenced a great yajna. On that occasion, 
he announced his resolve to the people that whoever 
asked for anything would be granted without any 
hesitation.Having heard of this promise, Lord Vishnu 
assumed the form of Vamana (a dwarfish brahmin boy) 
and came to the yagasala (the pandal where the yajna 
was being performed), holding an umbrella made of 
coconut leaves. Ratnavali, the daughter of Emperor 
Bali was enchanted by the divine effulgence, radiance 


Develop Broad-Mindedness And Live In Bliss 175 





and aura surrounding the young boy. She thought to 
herself, “Aha! Who is this brilliant young boy radiating 
divine effulgence? What a great wonder! How nice 
it would be if I had a son like him!” Thus, while 
everyone in the yagasala was spellbound on seeing 
this divine child, Vamana entered the yagasala and 
went near the altar. On seeing Vamana, Emperor Bali 
stood up and extended a reverent welcome to him and 
made him seated in a proper seat and enquired, “Sir! 
May I know on what purpose you visited us? What 
can I do for you?” The young Vamana replied, “Oh, 
Emperor Bali! I just need three foot step length of 
land. I don’t need anything more.” Emperor Bali was 
taken aback and spontaneously agreed to His request 
saying, “Oh! Is that all? All right, take it.” Vamana 
expanded in His stature and with one foot reached out 
over the entire skies. When he set his second step, 
the entire earth was transcended. He then enquired of 
Bali, “Where do I put my third step?” Emperor Bali 
replied, “Swami! You asked for just three foot steps of 
land. But, you covered the entire sky and earth with 
just two steps. All my domain is already exhausted. 
You please bless me by putting your third step on my 
head. Vamana then placed his foot on Emperor Bali’s 
head and sent him down to the netherworld (Patala). 
You may have a doubt in this context as to how Bali 
could be pushed down to the netherworld by Vamana 
simply by placing his foot on Bali’s head. When the 


176 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





entire sky and earth could be covered with one step 
each, you can imagine how powerful and gigantic 
Vamana’s steps were! The third step was equally 
powerful and gigantic. Its impact could therefore push 
Emperor Bali down to the netherworld. 


Shun Anger And Ego 


There are other reasons too! Emperor Bali was 
no doubt a great devotee with humility. However, 
there was an element of ego in him. God will 
tolerate anything but not anger and ego. He will not 
appreciate these qualities. What is this ego? What 
for is this ego? Is it for physical beauty or strength 
of the senses or intellectual acumen or wealth? None 
of these is permanent. Ego breeds several other evil 
qualities. God has gifted every human being with 
such sacred and noble qualities as Sathya (Truth), 
Dharma (Righteousness), Santi (Peace), Prema (Love) 
and Ahimsa (Non-violence). Develop these qualities. 
These are the pancha pranas (five vital airs) for a 
human being. Anger, jealousy, hatred, etc., are evil 
qualities befitting an animal. How can a person with 
such animal qualities be called a human being? A 
human being is one who has good qualities. Follow 
truth. Truth is God. Cultivate love. Love is God. Live 
in love. Unfortunately, today people are not making 
efforts to manifest sacred and noble qualities that are 


Develop Broad-Mindedness And Live In Bliss 177 





inherent in them. Ignoring their innate nature, they 
lead a life with qualities acquired from outside. The 
human body is like an iron safe. The atma residing 
inside this iron safe is like a precious diamond. You 
are supposed to give value to the precious diamond- 
studded ornaments inside, not to the outer iron safe. 
There are invaluable ornaments like sathya, dharma, 
santi, prema and ahimsa inside the human body. The 
physical body which is made up of the five elements 
is bound to perish one day or the other. 


The body which is made up of five elements 
Is weak and is bound to disintegrate. 
Though hundred years of life-span 

Is prescribed, one cannot take it for granted. 
One may leave his mortal coil at any time, 
Be it in childhood, youth or old age. 

Death is certain. Hence, before the body 
Perishes, man should make efforts 

To know his true nature. 


(Telugu poem) 


People repose their faith in such a frail and 
impermanent physical body. This body is like a 
puppet with nine holes in it, and it may collapse at 
any time with a mere sneeze. Reposing their faith in 
such a perishable body, people forget the invaluable 
ornaments stored in it. That is the reason why they 


178 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





suffer mental agitation. You go to a millionaire and 
enquire, “Sir! You have everything in this world; but, 
do you have peace?” He will immediately reply, “I 
have everything in this world, but not peace.” Wherever 
you see in this world today, there are only ‘pieces’, 
not ‘peace’. Peace is very much in your inner self. 
Hence, search for it by inward journey. That is your 
duty. Unfortunately, you forget this sacred duty and 
desire for paltry and mean things. When you are able 
to manifest your own innate noble qualities, you can 
experience true and eternal peace. 


Bereft of truth, righteousness, love and peace 
The value of all your education is zero; 
Bereft of truth, righteousness, love and peace 
The sanctity of all your acts of charity and 
Kindness is zero; 

Bereft of truth, righteousness, love and peace 
The utility of all your positions of 

Power is zero; 

Bereft of truth, righteousness, love and peace 
The result of all your good deeds is zero. 


(Telugu poem) 


The five human values of Sathya, Dharma, Santi, 
Prema and Ahimsa are the true and lasting property 
of a human being. Since time immemorial, the 
people of Kerala possessed such sacred qualities and 


Develop Broad-Mindedness And Live In Bliss 179 





are worshipping God. What is the inner meaning of 
Vamana setting his foot on the head of Emperor Bali 
and pushing him down to the netherworld? The incident 
reveals the crushing of Bali’s ego. Having realised 
this inner meaning, the people of Kerala shed their 
ego. That is the reason why the State of Kerala has 
earned a good name as a land of peace, purity and 
greenery everywhere. 


Every human being has some desires. But, the 
people of Kerala do not have many desires. Their 
worldly desires are few. They always move with 
others amicably. Even if some differences crop up, 
they set them aside. They consider them as passing 
clouds. Truly, the people of Kerala are pure, selfless 
and steady in mind. Others have to emulate their 
qualities. In spite of their busy schedule, they do not 
forget to put on vibhuti on their forehead and visit the 
temple both in the morning and evening. People say, 
“Kerala is a communist State.” I do not subscribe to 
that view. It is not ‘communist’, but ‘come-you-next’! 
Their own sacred feelings have taken them nearer to 
God. The people of Kerala go to the temples on this 
auspicious occasion of ‘Onam’ and perform special 
pujas (worship). They go in large numbers to the 
Bala Krishna temple. They enjoy singing devotional 
songs. Due to the effect of modern age, of course 


180 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





some change has come in their attitude. It was not 
so before. They always used to be pure and steady 
in their heart. They always wished and prayed for 
the welfare of all people. They never developed any 
desires which, they knew, were not pleasing to God. 
The people of Kerala are broad-minded and they 
pray for the welfare of all people in the world (Loka 
samastha sukhino bhavantu). They are really good 
and noble. 


When Lord Vamana pushed Emperor Bali down 
to the netherworld, the people felt very unhappy 
thinking, “Oh, God! Our emperor is no longer with 
us; who will look after us from now on?” Emperor 
Bali then made a promise to his people that he would 
visit them every year on this day. That auspicious day 
of Emperor Bali’s visit to his kingdom every year 
is termed as “Onam”. He would visit his people on 
this day and bless them. Goodness will always yield 
good results. 


Character Is Real Education 


We should not develop obstinacy. One should 
develop a sense of discrimination and enquire into 
things objectively. If you behave foolishly, you will 
earn a bad name for yourself. Study well. Perform 
well in your educational career, but along with this, 


Develop Broad-Mindedness And Live In Bliss 181 





you should also develop good character and conduct. 
Character is real life; character is real education. 
Hence, one should develop good character. Students 
try to imitate one another. Mimicking others out of 
a false sense of values is bad. 


Dear students! You must move in good company 
to enable you to develop good character: 


Satsangatwe nissangathwam, 
Nissangatwe nirmohathwam, 
Nirmohatwe nischalatathwam, 
Nischalatathwe jivanmukti. 


(Sanskrit sloka) 


(Good company leads to detachment; detachment 
makes one free from delusion; freedom from delusion 
leads to steadiness of mind; steadiness of mind confers 
liberation.) 


It to said “Tell me your company, I shall tell 
you what you are”. Hence, first and foremost, move 
in good company. Then only can you become a 
good individual. We need not acquire goodness from 
somewhere. It is inherent in our nature. We have only 
to develop it. We have to make efforts to develop 
such goodness, just as a small sapling is nourished 
and nurtured to become a big tree. You must earn a 


182 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





good name to your parents, society and the country. 
The country of Bharat has another name “Hindu’’. It 
stands for the following qualities: 


H — Humility 

I — Individuality 

N — Nationality 

D — Devotion 

U — Unity 

It is only when we conduct ourselves in keeping 
with these ideals that we deserve to be called as real 
human beings. Having been born as human beings, 
it is a great sin to behave like animals. Whenever 
animal qualities raise their ugly heads, remind yourself, 
“T am not an animal; I am a human being.” You 
are a human being. Hence, develop human values. 
Unfortunately, today human values are very deficient in 
human beings. Wherever you see, animal qualities are 
rampant. Wherever you go and whomever you come 
across, there is only one desire for every individual — 
money, money and more money! Nowadays, everything 
is related with money only. Why is this craze for 
money? Money comes and goes, but morality comes 
and grows. Hence, cultivate moral values. Then only 
will you become real human beings. The people of 
Kerala are fostering moral values well. Of course, they 
also have a desire for acquiring wealth. But, when 
compared to others, their desire is less. 


Develop Broad-Mindedness And Live In Bliss 183 





From Goodness To Godness And Ultimately 
To World Peace 


Cultivate good nature, lead a good life and earn 
a good name for yourself. From goodness, one has to 
travel to ‘godness’ (Madhavathwa). First and foremost, 
ensure that the food you consume is good and Sathwic. 
Such food ensures good ‘head’ (mind). It is only when 
the ‘head’ (mind) is good, God will manifest before 
you. Thus, it is only when the food you consume is 
sattwic you will be able to realise God. Nowadays 
wherever you see, pollution is increasing. The air 
we breathe, the water we drink, the food we eat and 
the work we do — are all polluted. The Sadhana we 
have to undertake to cleanse this polluted atmosphere 
is Bhagawath Prarthana (prayer to God). It is only 
when we are able to remove this pollution and make 
our hearts pure, we deserve to be called as real human 
beings. Divinity can be attained only by purity. And, 
that purity can be achieved by unity. Unity, Purity and 
Divinity are interrelated. Hence, you should always 
remember the intimate relationship between these 
three. The country of Bharat will prosper only when 
such noble and sacred feelings manifest in you. The 
land of Bharat has earned a great name as ‘Punya 
Bhumi’ (the land of merit), “Zyaga Bhumi’ (the land 
of sacrifice) and ‘Yoga Bhumi’ (the land of spiritual 
practice), since ancient times. Unfortunately, today it 


184 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





is turning out to be a ‘Bhoga Bhumi’ (the land of 
worldly pleasures). What we need most today is a 
spirit of sacrifice. Then the question arises as to what 
is Tyaga? Tyaga is not going to the forest, leaving 
behind one’s wife and children and property. What is 
to be sacrificed is the result fruit of desires. That is 
the real sacrifice. We have to renounce indiscriminate 
desires. Then only will our heart become pure like a 
piece of white cloth. God desires only such a pure 
and sacred heart. God does not desire anything from 
you. He has no desires at all! It is only you who 
have desires. If you develop sacred desires, God will 
be happy. It is only then your family, society and the 
country will experience peace and happiness. First 
and foremost, peace should reign in your own house. 
Then, that peace should be radiated to the society. 
When the society becomes good, the country will 
prosper. If peace is to be established in the country, 
the individual should experience peace in the first 
instance. World peace is possible only when peace is 
established at the individual level. If there is no peace 
in the individual himself, how can there be peace 
in the world? 


Dear students! All of you must desire and work 
for establishing peace in the country. The greatness 
of Bharat is beyond words. It has been striving since 


Develop Broad-Mindedness And Live In Bliss 185 





ancient times to establish peace in the world. However, 
due to fascination for western ways, knowledge of 
one’s own religion and culture has declined. Peace 
has broken into pieces! You may learn any language. 
There is nothing wrong in it. But, you should not seek 
foreign habits at the cost of your own heritage. You 
must establish peace in your heart. You must always 
be happy and blissful. Sweet smile should dance on 
your lips. You should not put up a ‘castor oil face’ 
under any circumstances. You must always be smiling. 
When somebody sees you, he should also feel happy. 
Thus, you should always lead a happy and blissful 
life with a sweet smile on your face. You should be 
happy and at the same time make others happy. The 
people of Bharat led such blissful life with such noble 
qualities. There is, however, no dearth of such people 
even today. May be they are not wealthy economically. 
But there is no narrowness in their minds. When you 
develop broad-mindedness, you can achieve any great 
task. You must all realise the truth that this festival 
of Onam is observed for developing such broad- 
mindedness. You must experience bliss at the individual 
level and in the family and then share it with the 
society. Then all people will be happy. Happiness is 
union with God. You must realise such happiness. May 
all people be happy! May you all live like members 
of one family, sharing your love and happiness with 


186 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





one another! You must all live in unity, wishing each 
other, “Hello! Hello!” lovingly. You should not become 
separate, saying ‘goodbye’. You must become ‘good 
boys’. You must develop such sacred feelings. Time 
is very important. Time waste is life waste. Hence, 
you should not waste your time. There is still some 
programme to be covered. I will not inconvenience 
you by giving a lengthy discourse. 


Onam, 5-9-2006, Prasanthi Nilayam 


13 


Give Up Selfishness And Strive For 
Self-Realisation 


The physical world as perceived by the naked eyes 
is considered as truth. But it is only illusory. Divinity 
is the only reality. Unable to realise this truth, people 
are wasting their time. 


(Telugu poem) 


Embodiments Of Love! 


OD is only one, now and forever. Not realising 
this truth, you are wasting your precious 
time thinking that all that you see in this objective 
world is true. No! None of these objects is real. Truth 
is eternal, beyond the three periods of time - past, 


188 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





present and future. That is Divinity. How foolish it 
is to think that the worldly vision which is subject to 
change from time to time is real. You are a student 
today. Tomorrow you will become an officer in an 
organisation and after some years you will be a retired 
officer. Then, which is true? Is it the life as a student 
or as an officer or as a retired official? There is a 
boy and a girl, who wish to get married. Before their 
marriage, who is husband and who is wife? Once 
they are married, they are referred to as husband and 
wife. But, how long does this relationship last? It is 
only temporary. Thus, all that you see in this objective 
world and all the relationships between individuals are 
only temporary. They are never real and permanent. 
But, Divinity is not like that. Divinity is what it is - 
yesterday, today and tomorrow. It is Divinity always! 
Not reposing your faith in such a true and eternal 
God, you are deluded into thinking that what you 
see in this objective world is true. Hence, first and 
foremost try to recognise the eternal truth. It is only 
when you have recognised the Truth, you are deemed 
to have recognised everything else. All others are only 
transitory. The entire universe is subject to change. It 
is temporary and unreal. Today’s mountain may be 
reduced to a mere hillock tomorrow. Today’s rivulet 
may transform itself into a mighty river tomorrow. The 
country of Bharat was once beautifully described as: 
“lofty mountains, large rivers, huge trees with many 


Give Up Selfishness And Strive For Self-Realisation 189 





branches, which make it a beautiful country.” 


God Is The Only Changeless Principle 


People today repose their faith in that ephemeral 
and unreal world and forget God who is the 
embodiment of truth. That is the root cause for all 
sorrows and difficulties faced by humanity. You say 
you are encountering difficulties. From where did 
they come? Difficulties are the consequences of one’s 
past deeds and thoughts. Everything in this world is 
susceptible to change. It appears to be unchanging, but 
it is not true. God is the only changeless principle. 
We have therefore to install such a changeless and 
eternal God in the altar of our sacred hearts and offer 
our love to Him. Thereby, we can experience bliss. 
That is the foremost duty of a human being. What 
is human life, after all? Is it merely eating, drinking, 
sleeping and dying ultimately? By doing so, how can 
the human life be termed as sacred? Man, at the time 
of his birth is very pure and sacred. As he grows 
old, gradually he loses his purity. This is not proper. 
A human being has always to maintain his purity. 
Take for example, My case. I was born. I grew up 
to be a boy, youth and old person. But, the childlike 
simplicity and purity are always there in Me. I am 
always like a child. As age advances, there might be 


190 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





several changes in the physical body. They are all at 
the physical level. It is only out of our delusion that 
we are exposed to the arishadvargas (the six enemies 
of desire, anger, greed, delusion, pride and jealousy). 
As a result, we are unable to realise the atma (Self). 
It is said Jantunam nara janma durlabham (Of all 
living beings, human birth is the rarest). Having 
attained such a rare birth as a human being, we have 
to strive for self-realisation. We should not waste our 
energies in worldly pursuits. He who is a realised 
soul, is the liberated person in the real sense. Such 
a person constantly contemplates upon the atma. On 
the other hand, one who is constantly engaged in the 
pursuit of material comforts has his gaze fixed on 
the panchabhuthas (the five elements of earth, water, 
fire, air and space), pancha kosas (five sheaths of 
the soul) and panchendriyas (five senses). One who 
realises the truth that the physical body is ephemeral 
and the mind is like a mad monkey, will develop 
an insight into the inner Self. The physical body is 
like a water bubble. People know about it, yet they 
lead their lives reposing their faith in such a physical 
body. As long as one has attachment to the physical 
body, one has to experience sorrows and difficulties 
and sin and merit. 


The body is made up of five elements 
And is bound to perish sooner or later; 


Give Up Selfishness And Strive For Self-Realisation 191 





But the indweller has neither birth nor death. 
The indweller has no attachment whatsoever 
And is the eternal witness. 

(Telugu poem) 


Names And Forms Are Temporary And 
Unreal 


The dehi (Indweller) in the deha (physical body) 
is eternal. It is referred to as the atma. We identify 
the physical body with certain names. For example, 
the name ‘Anil Kumar’ is an identification for a 
particular form. Similarly, the name ‘Sathya Sai Baba’ 
represents this physical body. It is not possible to 
identify the physical bodies, without names. A human 
being lives in the world, donning a physical body 
that is ephemeral. All that we see in the objective 
world are the creation of our own mind. What we 
cannot see with our physical eyes is the truth. That 
is the atma. Hence, when someone enquires, “Who 
are you?”, you should reply “I am the atma.” You 
should not refer to the name given to your physical 
body. The name given to your physical body is the 
one that is given to it by your parents. The whole 
world calls you by this name only. It is not the name 
that is important. Both name and form are temporary 
and unreal. As long as you live in this world, they 
are relevant. The moment you depart from this world, 
none cares for them. 


192 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





For example, there is a millionaire. He has plenty 
of money and is, in fact, rolling in wealth. His end 
is nearing. He is undergoing great suffering. All his 
relatives surrounding him are restless. In fact, they are 
weeping. Exactly in that moment, wisdom dawns on 


him. He is reminded of Adi Sankara’s verse: 


Punarapi jananam punarapi maranam, 


Punarapi janani jathare sayanam. 


(Oh, Lord! I am caught up in this cycle of birth 
and death; time and again, I am experiencing the 
agony of being in the mother’s womb.) 


He has realised the fact that all his relatives and 
friends cared for him as long as he lived. He felt 
very sorry for his pitiable state and wailed, “My dear 
ones! All that I have earned during my life has been 
handed over to you. Even the palatial buildings and 
big mansions that I have built have also been handed 
over to you. My bank deposits have also been given 
away to you. Yet, you do not care to think about 
me and are worried about your own future.” True. 
People are worried only about wealth and property 
as long as they live in this world. They do not think 
at all about what will happen to the life principle 
after their death. As long as there is life-force in the 
body, people are deluded to think, “It is my body, 


Give Up Selfishness And Strive For Self-Realisation 193 





my mind, etc.” You are now sitting in this hall. As 
soon as you get up and take two steps, you do not 
know what will happen to you. Once you depart 
from this world, who is related to whom? Who are 
your friends and relatives? No relationships at all! 
Hence, the physical body should not be given too 
much importance. The body should be purified by 
undertaking good deeds. Since people develop many 
kinds of relationship with the external world, they are 
afflicted with several impurities. It is only when such 
impurities are cleared to a certain extent will one keep 
good health. For example, there were rains a few days 
ago. Because of the rains, the water was polluted. 
Several people who drank the polluted water became 
sick. In many places, people suffered due to their ill- 
health. Today the food we eat, the water we drink and 
even the air we breathe, are all polluted. Hence, this 
widespread pollution has to be controlled at least to 
a certain extent by undertaking sacred activities. That 
is the reason why the nine forms of devotion have 
been prescribed as sadhana: sravanam (listening), 
kirtanam (singing), Vishnusmaranam (contemplating 
on Vishnu), padasevanam (serving His Lotus Feet), 
vandanam (salutation), archanam (worship), Dasyam 
(servitude), Sneham (friendship), and atmanivedanam 
(self-surrender). 


194 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





One has to adopt any one of these sadhanas for 
pollution control. Humanness is not confined merely to 
Jivathwa (life force); it is associated with Daivathwa 
(divinity). Every human being, in fact every living 
being, is an embodiment of Divinity verily! Even the 
insects and bacteria! 


Constant Contemplation On God Is Real 
Sadhana 


What is the sadhana that a human being is 
expected to undertake? Sadhana does not mean mere 
physical exercise. It is an enquiry into Truth at the 
level of the mind and intellect. What is Truth? Is it the 
body or the mind or the intellect? No, none of these. 
The mind is a mad monkey. It is fickle in nature. If 
you follow such a fickle mind, you cannot reach your 
true destination. It has to be discarded one day or the 
other. However, food and recreation are necessary to 
a certain extent to protect the body. Even that food 
has to be pure and satwic. If you thus carry on your 
activities and lead a sacred life, what more sadhana 
is required? Whatever activities you may undertake, 
you must constantly contemplate on ‘Soham’ mantra, 
which reminds you of your innate divinity with each 
inhaling and exhaling process. The same principle has 
been explained in the mahavakya, ‘Aham Brahmasm?’ 


Give Up Selfishness And Strive For Self-Realisation 195 





(I am Brahma) in the Vedas. From the time you get up 
from your bed till you go to sleep, you must constantly 
remind yourself that you are Brahman verily and not 
merely a human being made up of the five elements. 
You must develop the faith that God is your mother, 
father and everything else and that He alone is your 
sustainer and refuge. After all, who gave you the 
mother? Is it not God? Everything in this world is by 
God’s grace only. If you forget God and concentrate on 
other thoughts, you will lose everything in life. If you 
constantly contemplate on God, all worldly thoughts 
will leave you. Hence, cultivate godly thoughts with 
love. Prema muditha manase kaho Rama Rama Ram 
(Sing the sweet name of Rama with your heart filled 
with love). Love is God. God is love. 


Devoid of this love, there is no mother, no father, 
no brother, no wife. Everything is suffused with 
love. It is only for our convenience, for our pleasure 
and for our own selfish purposes that we develop 
worldly relationships. Hence, give up selfishness 
and strive for self-realisation. You must enquire into 
yourself, “Who am I? Body, mind, intellect, chittha or 
ahamkara?’ You are none of these. You are yourself. 
“T am I.” Recognise this truth. You are all pursuing 
education and acquiring academic degrees like B.A., 
B.Com, M.B.A., etc. 


How many people are there with such degrees! 


196 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





What service do they render to the society? They are 
all concerned with their own career and earning. They 
do not at all help others. All this worldly education is 
for making one’s own living. That is not the purpose 
of one’s education. We must render selfless service. 
The fruit of all actions must be sacrificed. It is only 
such a person who deserves to be called a yogi. A 
yogi is not one who merely sits under a tree and 
meditates, closing his eyes. Real sacrifice involves 
giving up your desires. One has to broaden his heart. 
One should not be narrow-minded. If you are inflicted 
with narrow-mindedness your whole life will become 
narrow. Develop broad-mindedness. Cultivate broad 
heart. The reference to ‘heart’ in this context is not 
to the physical heart. If the physical heart is enlarged, 
it needs surgery. Develop love. Only then can you be 
called a real human being. 


Always Be In Good Company 
Dear students! 


You think Swami’s discourses are very simple. 
But, the entire essence of the Vedas is contained in 
them. The essence of all the sastras is to be found 
in Swamis words. Why should you be proud of 
your education? However high academic degrees 
a person may have acquired, a human being must 
always conduct himself with humility and obedience. 
Education with humility is the watchword. At the 
mental level man must be desireless. Then only can 


Give Up Selfishness And Strive For Self-Realisation 197 





he be called a human being. Excessive desires lead to 
danger. You should not indulge in unnecessary desires. 
That will lead to waste of time. Time waste is life 
waste! Time is God, don’t waste time’. Even the little 
time at your disposal must be spent in contemplation 
on the Soham mantra. Then only will your birth as 
a human being be sanctified. If you go on wasting 
your time in reading newspapers, all that you acquire 
will only be useless. Nowadays newspapers have 
degenerated into a nuisance. You will find all sorts 
of unnecessary things in the newspapers. You might 
have seen several advertisements with obscene pictures 
in the newspapers daily. What sort of pictures are 
they? Fie on them! We don’t like to go through such 
newspapers at all! These are not the stuff we have to 
read. We have to visualise God, who is beyond name 
and form. God’s name is sweeter than the sweetness 
of banana fruit and dates. What for all these festivals 
being celebrated? Every festival is meant to remind 
us about God. People of all religions have festivals 
to celebrate. 


All religions teach only good things. 
Realising this truth, one should conduct 
Himself carefully with proper Understanding. 
If you have a discriminatory 

Intellect, which religion is bad? 

Oh! The brave son of Bharat! Hear. 


(Telugu poem) 


198 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





Every religion preaches good only. Religion per 
se is not bad. Hence, you should respect people of all 
religions. It is only when your mind is distorted that 
you develop a bad opinion about a particular religion. 
Once you develop a discriminating intellect, you will 
realise that all religions lead to the same God. 


Dear Students! 


Please do not waste time. Sanctify every minute 
of your life and thereby experience bliss. Man is 
essentially the embodiment of bliss. Hence you must 
always be happy and blissful. Do not crave for 
unnecessary desires and feel depressed when they 
are not fulfilled. Happiness is union with God. You 
must always be happy and smiling. Even when you 
are faced with difficulties or during examination time, 
you should not put up a ‘castor-oil face’. Always be 
smiling. The more you feel enthusiastic and energetic, 
the more you will be happy. After all, what is there 
for you to worry about? Nothing, to My knowledge. 
A student who did not prepare himself well will be 
worried during examinations. If you have prepared 
well, then why should you worry? You will surely get 
good marks. Hence, read well, pass the examinations 
with distinction and serve the country. 


The festival that is being celebrated today is meant 
only to encourage you. The ten-day Dasara festival is 


meant to control your ten senses. The legend says that 


Give Up Selfishness And Strive For Self-Realisation 199 





Goddess Chamundi killed the demon Mahisha during 
this Dasara festival. What is the inner meaning of this 
story? We should not under any circumstances associate 
ourselves with demons. You are a human being and 
not a demon. How can there be friendship between 
a human being and a demon? A human being shall 
have relationship with another human being only. 


Satsangatwe nissangathwam, 
Nissangatwe nirmohathwam, 
Nirmohatwe nischalatathwam, 
Nischalatathwe jivanmukti. 


(Sanskrit sloka) 


(Good company leads to detachment; detachment 
makes one free from delusion; freedom from delusion 
leads to steadiness of mind; steadiness of mind confers 
liberation.) 


Always be in good company. If you join bad 
company, you will also become bad. Hence, you 
should never make friendship with a bad person. 
The moment you come across such people, just say 
‘goodbye’ and move on. You need not develop hatred 
towards them. Whomever you come across, consider 
them as embodiments of Divinity and salute them. 
Even when you come across people who hate you, 
offer your pranams (salutations) to them. Enquire, 


200 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





“How are you brother?” Then they will also respond, 
“How are you brother?” A human being is one with 
certain human values. What are those human values? 
Sathya, Dharma, Santi, Prema and Ahimsa. They are 
all interrelated. Always speak truth, observe Dharma 
(righteousness). Be peaceful. Be happy and blissful. 
You should conduct yourself with love in society. Love 
is God, God is Love. Hence, live in love. Then only 
can you acquire true knowledge. That is wisdom. 


Embodiments Of Love! 


I always address you as embodiments of love. 
The reason being, I am suffused with love. Love 
is My property. You all are heirs to that property. 
I will distribute that love to one and all. I do not 
hate anyone. I have no selfishness at all! My love 
is selfless love. 


Dasara, 27-9-2006, Prasanthi Nilayam 


14 


Love of God Is True Education 


Embodiments Of Love! 


EOPLE think worldly education is real 

education. This is not correct. Real education 
comes from the heart. Such an education is unwavering 
and lasting. Atma Vidya (knowledge of the Self) is 
the real education. Devoid of such atma vidya, what 
is the use of all your intelligence and education? 


Contemplation On God Grants Divine Bliss 


The Gopis, though lacking in worldly education 
and intelligence were pure at heart and deeply devoted 
to Lord Krishna. The ladies in Repalle used to go 
to the house of Nanda and Yashoda every evening 


202 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





and light their oil lamps from the one kept in front 
of their house. That was the tradition in those days. 
Even now this practice is in vogue in some villages. 
The tradition had originated from the belief that if 
they lighted their lamp from that kept in the house 
of a wealthy householder, they would also become 
prosperous. Nevertheless, not all the mothers-in-law 
in Repalle would permit their daughters-in-law to go 
to the house of Yashoda for this purpose. They were 
afraid that if they were allowed to go and see Krishna 
there, they may out of their devotion get mad and 
run after Him. They, therefore, used to chide their 
daughters-in-law saying, “Can’t we light the lamp 
in our own house? Why should we get it from their 
house?” In spite of these restrictions, all the ladies used 
to gather near the village well and discuss about Lord 
Krishna only. Then a new bride of one of the houses 
arrived in the village. Her name was Suguna. She had 
heard a lot about the divine leelas of Lord Krishna. 
She developed a deep desire to have the darshan of 
Krishna, somehow. She did not reveal her desire to 
her husband or her mother-in-law. She kept it as a 
tightly guarded secret within herself. However, it is 
impossible to conceal the truth. The entire creation 
has originated from truth: 


The creation emerges from truth, 
And merges into truth; 


Is there a place in the cosmos where 


Love of God Is True Education 203 





Truth does not exist? 
Visualise this pure and unsullied truth. 


(Telugu poem) 


In spite of her keeping her desire as a closely 
guarded secret, it became known to all. One day, she 
went to the house of Yashoda and was lighting her 
lamp from that kept in front of their house. Suddenly, 
she could visualise Krishna in that flame. She lost her 
bodily consciousness in that divine experience and 
put her fingers in the burning flame. Her fingers were 
getting burnt, but, she had no body consciousness at 
all! Meanwhile, Yashoda came out smelling the burning 
finger. Immediately, she pulled out the hand of Suguna 
from the lamp and asked, “What is the matter with 
you girl? Are you asleep? Your fingers are burnt badly. 
Don’t you realise? Don’t you feel the pain?” Suguna 
then came to her senses and replied, “Mother! Lord 
Krishna gave me His darshan in that flame. I lost 
my body consciousness on seeing Him.” The other 
gopis heard her explanation. They were very happy 
to know about the divine experience of Suguna. They 
went round the village singing and dancing: 


It seems our Suguna had 
The Vision of Krishna, 
In the house of Nanda; 
Krishna appeared to her 
In the flame of the lamp. 


204 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





(Telugu poem) 


Thus, if you constantly contemplate on God, you 
can forget your sorrows and difficulties and experience 
divine bliss. Devotees, since ancient times, have 
experienced bliss by constant contemplation on God 
and shared their experiences with the world. 


Today, intelligence has increased but educational 
standards have declined. Wherever you see, the students 
refer to newspapers and magazines from abroad. They 
do not however evince the same interest in their 
textbooks. They do not at all think about their own 
customs and traditions. Students in this modern age 
are accustomed to such false sense of values. They 
would like to engage themselves in discussion about 
all unnecessary things. For example, they discuss 
about novels making comments like “so and so author 
has written a book; how great it is!” They involve 
themselves in discussions and argumentation over such 
trivial matters. But, they forget about their lessons in 
the textbooks. Thus, they go on acquiring knowledge 
about all and sundry and try to increase their worldly 
knowledge. They do not have any concern for the 
glory of real education. 


Our Karmas Are Resoponsible For Our 


Love of God Is True Education 205 





Happiness Or Sorrows 


We should desist from aspiring for the fruits 
of our karma (action). The Gita exhorts us 
“Karmanyevadhikarasthe ma phaleshu kadachana” 
(you have right only on action, not on its fruit). 


Man is born in action, sustained by action and 
ultimately merges in action. Action is the cause for 
pleasure and pain. Truly speaking, action is God 
for man. 

(Telugu poem) 


The karmas (actions) that we perform are 
responsible for all the happiness and sorrow we 
experience. When we perform good deeds, we get 
good results. When we perform bad deeds, we get bad 
results. Good deeds will result only in good results 
and bad deeds in bad results. That is why it is said, 
“DO GOOD, BE GOOD, SEE GOOD; THIS IS THE 
WAY TO GOD.” When you cultivate good thoughts 
and undertake good activities, you will experience 
good results. Therefore remember that the result of 
our own actions is responsible for all our sorrows 
and difficulties. All our elders have experienced peace 
and happiness by following our ancient traditions. 
But, today’s children gave up those good traditions, 
forgot the path shown by their elders and are exposed 
to various kinds of unrest due to modern education. 


206 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





They are not only exposed to unrest, but they do 
not also have contentment and satisfaction in life. 
With the result, they are becoming sick mentally and 
physically. 


Man’s thoughts and resolutions are the root cause 
for his ill-health. For all the unrest and agitation he 
suffers, the gunas (qualities) are responsible. Hence, 
our thoughts must always be good. You may observe 
that a person taking good and sattwic food, drinking 
pure water and breathing unpolluted air is always 
healthy. In contrast, people consuming unsacred food, 
drinking impure water and inhaling polluted air are 
exposed to various kinds of diseases. The root cause 
of man’s ill-health today is unsacred food and impure 
water. All that we consume must always be pure and 
sacred. The Dasara celebrations are meant to foster 
good and noble qualities in us. We can always lead a 
happy life by taking a good bath, performing puja in 
our house, partaking of sanctified food and drinking 
pure water. If we follow this routine, our face will 
also be radiant. On the other hand, if we consume 
unsacred food, drink impure water and move about in 
a polluted atmosphere, there is the danger of forgetting 
our humanness even! In such a situation, we may lose 
our divine nature and acquire demonic qualities. 


Love of God Is True Education 207 





Several people wonder, “Swami is nearing 81 
years, yet, his physical body does not reveal any signs 
of old age.” My answer to those people is: “My dear 
devotees! I am not taking unsacred food or breathing 
polluted air. I am breathing the air of prayers of the 
devotees. How then can I lose My divine effulgence?” 
I have no ailment of any kind. I have no pain at all! 
Sometime back, I fell down on the floor on account of 
an inadvertent error committed by a student. I broke 
My leg then. Hence, I feel a little difficulty in walking. 
That is all! There is another reason too! Nowadays 
I don’t feel like walking. Nevertheless, I am coming 
to Sai Kulwant Hall daily and giving darshan to the 
devotees. What difficulty or pain is involved in this 
routine? I do not have any pain or suffering. When 
I am able to make the devotees happy, I too will 
be happy. Sorrows, difficulties and pain are nowhere 
near Me. I am always happy and blissful. Bliss is My 
food. There is no greater happiness than My bliss. 
If for any reason I am unable to come out and give 
darshan to the devotees, I feel very sad: “Alas! How 
much the devotees are pining for My darshan! For 
how long they have been waiting in the hall! How 
much suffering they are undergoing?”, etc. 


Sometimes I may be late in coming to Sai 
Kulwant Hall due to some urgent work. Still I do 


208 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





not miss giving darshan to the devotees. Hence, you 
should not feel that Swami has not come due to pain 
or suffering. I am revealing these facts to you today, 
so that you may not feel any distress because of My 
absence and always be happy and cheerful. 


Be Rooted In The Atma Tathwa 


I expect that you should face difficulties boldly, 
reposing faith and devotion in God. If you constantly 
contemplate on God, no other thoughts will trouble 
you. Sorrows and difficulties will not affect you. I 
am always happy. You should also be happy always. 
Happiness is union with God. When you are associated 
with God, you will not feel any pain or suffering. 
You may have some physical pain or mental anxieties. 
But, you should ensure that they do not disturb your 
Atma Tattwa (the principle of the atma). If you are 
thus firmly established in the atma tathwa, nothing 
can bother you. This is the message of Navaratri. We 
encounter several difficulties, sorrow, pain, etc. We are 
mentally disturbed day in and day out due to several 
reasons. But, we should ignore them with a detached 
feeling, “They are not mine, they are somebody else’s.” 
They just come and go like passing clouds. As for 
Myself, I do not at all attach importance to them. 


Love of God Is True Education 209 





We should not think that someone else is putting 
us to all these difficulties. We should not blame others 
for our difficulties and suffering. Our sorrows and 
difficulties are of our own making. The Kauravas tried 
their best to cause suffering to the Pandavas. But, 
the Pandavas did not relent. What was the reason? 
It was only because of their unwavering faith and 
devotion to Lord Krishna. They felt that when Krishna 
Himself was constantly protecting them, any number 
of difficulties and obstacles could not cause any 
fear in them. Similarly, you also develop firm faith 
that Swami is always with you, in you and around 
you. Do not at all worry about these sorrows and 
difficulties. These are all like passing clouds. None of 
them can shadow the blazing sun. It is only during 
rainy season that the clouds come in the way of sun 
rays. Similarly, it is only when our mind is wavering 
and disturbed we suffer from sorrows and difficulties. 
When our mind is steady and firm, no ‘clouds’ can 
disturb us. Hence, keep your mind pure and steady. 
Develop courage and fortitude. 


How does a man lead his life today? He is 
enacting his role in the cosmic drama, singing the 
songs of kama (desire) and krodha (anger) and playing 
games obsessed with mada (pride) and ahamkara (ego). 
Several people appreciate their acting as “very good”. 
But, some people are not carried away by this ‘acting’. 


210 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





Unconcerned with the reaction, reflection and resound 
of this drama, they repose their faith in ‘reality’. 
And that ‘reality’ is Divinity. Divinity is unwavering, 
invisible and beyond delusion. We must hold on to 
that ‘reality’, firmly. When we rely on such reality, 
our thoughts, words and actions will always be pure 
and sacred. Hence, Dear Students! You should not at 
all be afraid of these ‘passing clouds’. You should 
not be concerned with them. You perform your duty 
well. You fulfil the aspirations of your parents. Your 
parents have sent you here with great expectations. If 
you go against their wishes, you yourself can imagine 
how much they will feel. If you cause pain to your 
parents, it amounts to causing pain to Swami. Are you 
not praying daily. 


Thwameva mathacha pitha Thwameva, 
Thwameva bandhuscha sakha Thwameva, 
Thwameva vidya dravinam thwameva (You 
alone are the father and mother, Friend 
and relation, wisdom and wealth). 


(Sanskrit sloka) 


There is no difference at all between God and 
parents. Hence, keep your parents happy. Swami 1s 
always happy. Establish that truth firmly in your heart. 
Then only can you be called true students. 


Once, Hiranyakasipu called his son Prahlada close 
to him and enquired, “Dear son! I have placed you 
in the hands of the gurus. I requested them to teach 


Love of God Is True Education 211 





you good things. What did they teach you?” Prahlada 
then replied, 


Father! The teachers have taught 

Me many many things; 

I have understood the four objectives 
of life — Dharma (righteousness), 
Artha (wealth), Kama (desire) 

And Moksha (liberation). 

I have studied manythings; 

In fact, I have Understood 

The very essence of education. 


(Telugu poem) 


Hiranyakasipu felt very happy at his son’s reply 
and told him, “Son! Please explain that secret of all 
education”. Prahlada then replied “Dear father! All 
that we see and experience in this world is unreal 
and impermanent. Only Divinity is real and true.” 
The father got angry. He held his son by his neck 
and pushed him down. He commanded his officers to 
throw him into the sea, saying, “a son who flouts the 
commands of his father does not deserve to be in my 
presence. Take him away and dump him in the sea, 
immediately.” Thereupon, the demons took Prahlada 
to the top of a hill and pushed him down into the 
sea. Even then, Prahlada chanted the name “Narayana! 
Narayana!” Lord Vishnu then emerged from the sea 
and saved Prahlada from drowning. Hiranyakasipu 


212 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





noticed that Prahlada was still alive. He fretted and 
fumed with anger on seeing Prahlada. He then ordered 
him to be thrown into the fire. Immediately, the flames 
subsided. Even the fire was not willing to consume 
him. What is the inner meaning of this episode? 
Good people will always encounter problems from 
bad people. Nevertheless, the good people will not be 
affected by them. It is only the fruit-laden tree that 
receives stones. Similarly, good people will always 
face certain obstacles. However, one has to face such 
difficulties boldly reposing faith in God. 


Durga, Lakshmi And Saraswati Represent 
Thoughts, Words And Actions 


Dear Students! You should obey the commands 
of your parents and God meticulously. Cultivate good 
behaviour. Then, everything will turn out to be good 
for you. Nothing will deter you. No difficulty will 
ever bother you. It is only to enable you to put such 
good thoughts into practice that goddesses Durga, 
Lakshmi and Saraswati are worshipped during these 
Dasara celebrations. Durga is not to be understood 
as a ferocious goddess. She is the goddess supreme 
who protects you. 


Lakshmi is the embodiment of all wealth. Then, 
Saraswati is the goddess of speech. Good thoughts, 
good words and good actions (behaviour) represent 


Love of God Is True Education 213 





the tathwa (nature) of these three goddesses. He who 
teaches good things to you is verily the embodiment 
of goddess Saraswati. He who teaches evil is verily 
a demon. Goddess Durga destroys only such demons. 
Durga, Lakshmi and Saraswati are, in fact, not 
different from you. They are very much installed in 
your own heart. They exhort you to lead the life of 
a human being, since you are a human being. Durga, 
Lakshmi and Saraswati are the three mothers to a 
human being. 


You should treasure these good words in your heart 
and put them into action. Thereby you should come 
up in life and set an example to others. You should, 
by your example, spread the message to the world 
that Bharatiya Vidya is great. There are several people 
in the modern world imparting education that leads 
to evil ways. You should denounce such education. 
You should not go after it. You must enquire, “will 
it help to purify my heart or not.” If you feel it is 
not conducive to your progress, you must give it up 
immediately. It is only when you are able to satisfy 
your conscience that your life will be happy, peaceful 
and contented. Do namasmarana incessantly. 


Dasara, 28-9-2006, Prasanthi Nilayam 


214 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





Be My Instrument 




























Krishna was born during the Krishna 
paksha (the dark fortnight of the month). The 
effulgence of the Lord is seen with greater effect 
when it is dark. In a world of disorder, Krishna 
was born to establish order. He was born on 
Ashtami day. Ashtami is associated with troubles 
and difficulties. When do troubles arise? When 
righteousness is forgotten. Krishna’ advent 
therefore signifies removal of darkness, end of 
troubles and effulgence of Supreme Wisdom. 
Krishna’s primary role was that of a teacher. 
He taught the Gita to Arjuna. He told Arjuna: 
“Be only My instrument.” Krishna thereby 
declared : “Using you as an instrument, I am 


reforming the whole world.” 


- Baba 


15 


Expel The Six Enemies 
And Elicit Values 


Embodiments Of Love! 


INCE I came a bit late today for this afternoon 

programme, you all had some misapprehensions 
about My health. I want to assure you that I am 
perfectly alright. I cannot be idle, that is my nature. 
There were a few devotees waiting for Me there. I 
therefore spoke to them for sometime and made them 
happy. Thereafter, I started for giving darshan to the 
devotees in Sai Kulwant Hall. Whatever I do, it is only 
for satisfying the devotees. I have no other work. There 
is no work you can call My own. I have not come 
down for eating and drinking. Eating food and drinking 


216 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





water are of no importance to Me. Occasionally, I just 
sip a few drops of water and continue My talk. After 
all even a brand new car, needs petrol in its tank to 
keep it moving. Is it not? 


What Is Educare? 


These days the world is taking to strange ways. 
In every field - physical, moral, spiritual and worldly 
- there is rampant pollution. We are of two minds 
with the way in which the world is moving. We are 
both amused and sad at the state of affairs. 


Humanness is very sacred. There is no greater 
force than humanness. Man has to pursue two kinds 
of education - ‘Education’ and ‘Educare’. Education 
is acquiring knowledge from textbooks written by 
someone else. Educare is manifesting the divinity latent 
in a human being. This is by self effort. It involves 
bringing out something which is already there from 
within, by one’s own sadhana not bringing out evil 
qualities that are carefully and perversely preserved in 
one’s bosom. Educare is bringing out or manifesting 
the human values of Sathya, Dharma, Santi, Prema 
and Ahimsa by sadhana. 


The first among the five human values is Sathya 
(truth). Who is the author or who spoke and taught 
about this Sathya? It is said Manasyekam vachasyekam 
karmanyekam mahatmanam (those whose thoughts, 
words and deeds are in perfect harmony are noble 
ones). Such noble souls have preached this truth since 


Expel The Six Enemies And Elicit Values 217 





time immemorial. Sathya (truth) manifests from one’s 
own heart. 


The second value is Dharma (righteousness). Who 
created this Dharma? What is Dharma and what is 
Adharma? If you go on enquiring, it becomes clear 
that Dharma is not something that is created by 
someone. Sathyannasthi paro dharmah (there is no 
Dharma greater than adherence to truth). Dharma 
originated from Sathya. 


The third value is Santi (peace). You enquire from 
any millionaire, “Sir! You have everything in this world 
for a happy living. Are you happy?” Pat comes the 
reply, “I have everything, but I have no peace.” Peace 
is not something that a person passes on or gives in 
charity to another person. It has to come from one’s 
own heart. Today, wherever you see, “only pieces, 
no peace.” 


The fourth value is Prema (love). Where did this 
love come from? Did it come from mother or father 
or some friend? Did anyone gift it? No! Love is 
your very life-breath. Devoid of love, the world 
cannot exist. 


The fifth human value is Ahimsa (non-violence). 
Gautam Buddha taught Ahimsa paramo dharmah (non- 
violence is the supreme dharma). But, today wherever 
you see, there is only violence. Like the other human 
values, the heart is the seat of non-violence. 


218 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





The five human values Sathya, Dharma, Santi, 
Prema and Ahimsa are not independent of each other. 
They closely follow one another. These five qualities 
are the gift of God to a human being. We as human 
beings have to manifest these five human values by 
putting them into practice. That is ‘Educare’. 


Values Are Natural To Humans 


What is the foremost quality of a human being? 
Speaking truth is the foremost quality of a human 
being. To speak untruth and talk irresponsibly does 
not behove a human being. If you indulge in useless 
and indiscriminate talk, how can it be called truth? 


In fact, truth has to dance on your tongue. Before 
you speak something, you must enquire whether it is 
truth or not. “Truth is one, not two.” If there is duality, 
it cannot be truth. We have to speak only truth which 
emerges from our heart. The entire world has emerged 
from truth and everything merges into truth. 


The clouds moving in the sky sometimes obscure 
the Sun. It is not possible to remove the clouds. They 
just come and go. Once the clouds move away, the 
resplendent Sun is fully visible. Similarly, it is only 
when the dark clouds of resolutions and confusions 
in our heart are cleared, truth manifests. 


The panchabhutas (five elements) are natural 
phenomena in creation. Similarly, the five human 


Expel The Six Enemies And Elicit Values 219 





values of Sathya, Dharma, Santi, Prema and Ahimsa 
are natural to human beings. Man has to manifest them 
from his heart and lead a natural life. They should 
flow from the ‘source’ and not extracted by ‘force’. 
Truth is pure and unsullied. Love is selfless. We have 
therefore to lead a selfless life. That is real love. Love 
does not expect anything in return. Selfishness troubles 
a human being in subtle ways. It is very cunning. 
Hence, one should not allow selfishness to come near 
him. If you are suffused with love, selfishness cannot 
approach you. Hence, develop love. Love is divine. 
When you are able to develop love, non-violence will 
come to you of its own accord. Where there is love, 
there can be no trace of violence. Thus, when man 
is able to manifest the five human values of Sathya, 
Dharma, Santi, Prema and Ahimsa, then his intellect 
becomes steady and he can walk the straight path. 


Everyone has to face the consequences 
Of his Karma (actions). 

Who has made the bats to hang 

From the branches of a tree 

With their heads downwards? 

Has Anyone tied them upside down 
Out of Hatred? No, it is their fate. 
Likewise, Nobody can escape from 
The Consequences of Karma. 


(Telugu poem) 


220 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





None Can Escape Karma PHALA 


The bats will be hanging to the branches of trees 
with their heads downwards. They move about in 
darkness only. Their entire life is spent in darkness. 
Is it anybody’s malice that makes the bats hang heads 
down from their perches on the branches? No, this 
is not anyone’s making. It is God’s leela. Similarly, 
man has to follow his destiny. While experiencing 
the result of his past karma, it is possible that some 
changes can occur. Sometimes, the ways of karmaphala 
(fruits of action) appear to be rather strange. Once, 
Lord Vishnu enquired of sage Narada, “Narada! How 
is the world?” Narada replied, 


The stories of the Lord are amazing ; 

It purifies the lives of the people in 

All the three worlds. 

It is like the sickle that cuts the creepers 
Of worldly bondage; 

It is like a good friend who helps you 

In times of need, 

It is like a shelter for the sages and Seers 
Doing penance in the forest. 


(Telugu poem) 


Karmaphala makes the human beings dance to 
its tunes in several ways. People cry when someone 
close to them dies. Similarly, they feel happy when 


Expel The Six Enemies And Elicit Values 221 





a child is born in the family. Is it not a fact that 
happiness and sorrow are the result of karmaphala? 
Is it not true that they are part of the divine Jilas? 
Hence, develop the faith that whatever happens is as 
per the divine will. It is a common practice in the 
present-day world to blame others for all their ills 
and praise themselves when they are happy. This is 
not correct. Develop the attitude that everything is 
God’s gift and whatever happens is for our own good. 
Happiness and sorrow, losses and gains are all like 
passing clouds! 


Develop Good Vision And Good Thoughts 
Embodiments Of Love! 


First and foremost, control your thoughts. The 
clouds of these thoughts are moving about in the sky 
of your heart. The clouds, as they move will cover 
the sun called the intellect and the moon called the 
mind. It is said, Chandrama manaso jataha (the 
moon was born out of the mind). The moon reflects 
the mind’s nature. The intellect is the reflection of 
the sun. Both of them move about in the sky of 
the heart. Sometimes, our own thoughts form ‘dark 
clouds’. More so in the youthful stage. The ‘dark 
clouds’ are water-borne, meaning they are associated 
with desires. When such ‘dark clouds’ gather, the 
sun and the moon are hidden by them. It is only in 


222 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





the youthful stage you are troubled by an excess of 
thoughts. You will be drowned in them literally and 
will forget your very humanness. Hence, first and 
foremost, you have to remove those ‘clouds’. From 
where do these ‘clouds’ come? They are formed on 
account of your sankalpas (resolutions) and vikalpas 
(indecisiveness). Hence, first and foremost, you have 
to control your thoughts. If you are able to do it, 
then your mind and intellect will shine brightly. The 
mind is a bundle of thoughts. When the thoughts 
and resolutions are controlled, it will be clean like a 
placid lake. Narendra (Swami Vivekananda) tried his 
best to control his thoughts, when he was a youth. 
When he finally succeeded, he acquired a pure heart. 
He constantly reminded himself, “I am very proud 
of my birth as Bharatiya. How great and sacred is 
this country Bharat! How pure it is! “To whichever 
country he travelled, he used to teach the people of 
that country about the greatness of Bharat. The very 
thought of the sacredness of Bharat would make you 
great. Hence, you must constantly remind yourself of 
the greatness of Bharat. The students of the present 
times are not at all reading the life history of great 
people like Ramakrishna Paramahamsa and Swami 
Vivekananda. They read all trash novels. They consider 
them as great literature. I want that you should throw 
away such cheap literature. 


Expel The Six Enemies And Elicit Values 223 





God is immanent in every human being. God is 
everywhere. It is said, Ekatma sarva bhutantaratma 
(one Atma dwells in all beings). The same Atmic 
principle is present in all human beings. You may 
have a doubt in this context, “if that is so, then why 
should I not make friendship with such and such 
person?” When his age, behaviour and thoughts are 
not conducive to your moral and spiritual development, 
you should not make friendship with such a person. 
If you do so, you will also become like him. “Tell 
me your company, I shall tell you what you are’, Its 
said.We should make friendship with good people. It 
is only in keeping with this principle, Adi Sankara 
in his famous treatise Bhaja Govindam declared as 


under: 


Satsangatwe nissangathwam, 
Nissangatwe nirmohathwam, 
Nirmohatwe nischalatathwam, 
Nischalatathwe jivanmukti. 


(Sanskrit sloka) 


(Good company leads to detachment; detachment 
makes one free from delusion; freedom from delusion 


leads to steadiness of mind; steadiness of mind confers 


224 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





liberation.) 


You should move with good people, speak good 
words and see good things. It is only when you develop 
good vision and good thoughts and undertake good 
activities, you will become a good person. You should 
not read bad and cheap literature. Reading such trash 
is like moving in bad company. 


Values Are Like Vital Airs 


Especially today, I don’t wish to dilate upon 
such topics as Divinity, spirituality, etc. What I am 
interested in is that you should lead your daily life 
in accordance with the principle of truth. The five 
human values of Sathya, Dharma, Santi, Prema and 
Ahimsa are embedded in you. They are like the five 
vital airs in you. They are, however, enveloped by 
the arishadvargas, the six enemies of kama (desire), 
krodha (anger), lobha (greed), moha (delusion), mada 
(pride) and matsarya (jealousy). What you have to do 
is to throw away this outer layer of arishadvargas and 
bring out the five human values latent in you. If you 
want to draw water from a well, you have to tie a 
rope to a bucket and with the help of this bucket you 
can draw water. In the well of your heart, there is 
the pure water of human values. In order to draw that 
water from the well, you have to secure the rope of 


Expel The Six Enemies And Elicit Values 225 





firm faith. However, people today lack such faith and 
become blind. 


The loss of the spiritual eyes of faith leads to 
spiritual blindness. You should not become blind. It is 
only when you develop firm faith in God, will humanity 
be transformed into Divinity. Many people can deliver 
‘speeches’. But, we do not derive satisfaction merely 
by listening to such speeches. We just listen to them 
and forget them soon after that. It should not be so. 
What has been listened to has to be contemplated upon 
and then put into action. The most important aspect is 
you should develop firm and unwavering faith. When 
the rope of faith is strong and secure, the bucket can 
draw out the water of the five human values from the 
well of your heart. This process is called ‘Educare’. 
Educare is to bring out that which is in the depth of 
one’s heart. It is not something external. It cannot be 
purchased from the market. Nor can it be taught by a 
teacher. You yourself have to strive for it. Only then 
can you attain self-realisation. For this, the prerequisite 
is self-confidence. In order to gain self-confidence, 
you must develop noble qualities. 


Embodiments Of Love! 


Your education may help you to achieve a sharp 
intellect. But, real happiness comes from ‘Educare’ 
only. That should in fact, be the basis for our life. 


226 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





Bookish knowledge is not very important. Even those 
who have acquired high academic qualifications have to 
give importance to ‘educare’. Devoid of ‘educare’ all 
the education and academic achievements are useless. 
You may acquire high degrees, but your education is 
not complete without ‘educare’. Of what use is all 
your education? Is it only for making a living? There 
is no shortage in this world of highly educated people. 
What is it that they are doing? Did they contribute 
anything for promoting non-violence in the world? Do 
they protect dharma in any manner? Are they fostering 
santi (peace)? At least, are they able to live in peace? 
No, not at all! They are unable to live in love and 
harmony even with their own children. Hence, first 
and foremost, cultivate love and share it with all. Only 
then will you experience its taste. Students have all the 
capabilities at their disposal. They have a strong and 
healthy body and mind. But, if they do not put them 
to proper use, they will become weak physically and 
mentally. Such weak people cannot achieve anything 
in their life. A strong will is a prerequisite in the 
spiritual field. 


“Having resolved on what ought to be 
Resolved, hold on to your resolution 

till You have succeeded. Having desired 
What Ought to be desired, hold on to it 


Expel The Six Enemies And Elicit Values 227 





Till Your desire is fulfilled. Having asked 
What Ought to be asked, do not leave 
The hold till you attain it. 

Having thought what ought to be Thought, 
Hold on to it till you have Succeeded. 
With heart mellowed, 

The Lord must yield to your wishes or 
With no regard for yourself, you should 
Ask Him with all your heart. 

Persevere, be tenacious, and never give up; 
For it is the quality of a devotee Never to 
retreat, abandoning his resolve.” 


(Telugu poem) 


If you wish to secure good marks in the test 
given by God, you must have a firm resolve. This is 
necessary even in your worldly education. You should 
not, however, be satisfied with getting high academic 
degrees. You should not be elated by good marks; 
avoid bad remarks. Only then will your education 
have value. 


Dear students! | am teaching you many things 
daily. But, you are not giving proper thought to them. 
You are forgetting the purpose for which you have 
joined our Institution. You have to recognise that 
purpose in the first instance. You came here with a 
purpose, but your actions are different. There is no 


228 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





use at all by such behaviour. For example, you wish 
to have a breakfast of idli and sambar. But, you go 
to a military (non-vegetarian) hotel to get those items. 
You have joined this Institute to sanctify your heart 
and make it pure. But, you are taking part in unholy 
activities. The reason is your mental pollution! You 
should not at all pollute your mind and thoughts by 
involving yourselves in such activities. These are the 
things that our elders have been teaching us since 
ancient times. You are students of the modern age. 
Along with the modern education, you should sustain 
our ancient traditions. It is only when you conduct 
yourself accordingly, will you be able to attain the 
happiness you wished for. Then only will your life be 
sanctified. Worldly education is for the life here and 
spiritual education is for the life hereafter. You have 
come here to acquire Brahma Vidya (knowledge of the 
Brahman), not merely worldly education. Along with 
academic education, you also learn spiritual education. 
You have to strike a balance between these two. Only 
then will your life be sanctified. 


Dasara, 29-9-2006, Prasanthi Nilayam. 


16 


Cultivate Sacred 
And Noble Thoughts 


Embodiments Of Love! 


ANY ladies are eager to hear Swami’ 

discourse in Telugu. They have expressed 
that “The students are highly educated and speak in 
fluent English about some technical and engineering 
topics. Swami is also encouraging them. But, we are 
unable to understand them. We will be happy to hear 
Swamis discourse in simple Telugu.” 


Sweeter than sugar, tastier than curd, 
Sweeter indeed than honey is 
The Name of Rama. 


230 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





Constant repetition of this sweet Name 
Gives one the taste of divine nectar Itself. 
Therefore, one should contemplate on 
The Name of Rama incessantly. 


(Telugu poem) 
Embodiments Of Love! 


The country of Bharat is ancient and has a glorious 
history. There is no village in Bharat where there is no 
temple of Lord Rama. In whichever village you see, 
you will come across at least a few persons with the 
name ‘Rama’. Since ancient times, the Rama Nama 
has been shining brilliantly in the entire length and 
breadth of the country of Bharat without undergoing 
any change. The astikas (theists), nastikas (atheists) 
and asthika nastikas (theistic atheists) are all chanting 
the name ‘Rama’. For example, a person while getting 
up from his seat utters the name ‘Rama’. The Rama 
Nama is so popular in the daily life of people in 
Bharat. Not only here, even in China, Rama Nama 
has become popular. In fact, Rama Nama has spread 
to the entire world. 


The Rama Story 


King Dasaratha did not have children for a long 
time. He had three wives. He was very hopeful that 
he would beget a son through any one of his three 


Cultivate Sacred And Noble Thoughts 231 





wives and that he would uplift his clan. But, he was 
disappointed. He did great penance for getting a male 
child. Then as well as now, it is only through tapas 
that one can fulfil one’s wishes. He also performed the 
Putra Kameshti Yaga, along with his three wives. At 
the conclusion of the yaga, the Yajna Purusha appeared 
before him and handed over a vessel containing 
payasam (sweet pudding). He told King Dasaratha, 
“Dear son Dasaratha! Distribute this payasam to 
your three wives in equal measure.” Dasaratha did 
accordingly. This incident is described differently in 
some texts. It is mentioned that King Dasaratha did 
not distribute the payasam equally between his three 
wives. This is not correct. He arranged to bring three 
golden cups and filled them with the payasam in equal 
measure, in the presence of Sage Vasishta. He then 
handed over the cups one each to his three wives, 
Kausalya, Sumitra and Kaikeyi. Sage Vasishta blessed 
them, “May your desire be fulfilled!” The queens 
were happy and took the cups filled with payasam to 
their respective prayer rooms. Sumitra, however had 
different thoughts about begetting a son. There was a 
valid reason for her disturbed mind. When the king of 
Kekaya kingdom gave his daughter Kaikeyi in marriage 
to King Dasaratha, he laid down a condition that the 
son born to his daughter only shall rule the Kingdom 
of Ayodhya. Dasaratha agreed to this condition and 


232 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





married Kaikeyi. Hence, he could not go back on 
his word any way. Queen Kaikeyi was therefore very 
happy that the son to be born to her would be the 
king of Ayodhya in future. As for Kausalya, she was 
very happy and sure that her son to be born would 
definitely be crowned by King Dasaratha, since she was 
the first among the three wives. Thus, both Kausalya 
and Kaikeyi were happy. Sumitra, however, was not 
entertaining any hopes. She took a head bath and went 
upstairs to dry her hair. As you know, in those days, 
fans or hair dryers were unknown. She kept her cup 
of payasam on the parapet wall of the terrace and was 
drying her hair. Meanwhile, a kite descended over the 
cup and carried it away. Sumitra was very much afraid 
and thought to herself, “It does not matter if the cup 
of payasam is lost. I am afraid that my husband and 
our Guru Vasishta may scold me for my negligence.” 
She came down immediately. Kausalya and Kaikeyi 
were waiting there for her. Kaikeyi enquired, “Dear 
elder sister! Why are you so much disturbed?” Sumitra 
related the entire incident. In those days, the wives 
never fought with one another, as in the present times. 
They used to move about like sisters with mutual 
love and affection. Kaikeyi then told Sumitra, “Dear 
elder sister! You don’t worry. I will give you some 
quantity of payasam from my share.” So saying, she 
brought a cup and poured some quantity in that cup. 


Cultivate Sacred And Noble Thoughts 233 





The broad-minded Kausalya too shared some of her 
payasam with Sumitra. They then took the three cups 
of payasam to Sage Vasishta for his blessings. He 
blessed the cups saying, “May you beget sons with 
noble qualities, long life, supreme valour and who are 
capable of ruling the kingdom in a manner that will 
please the subjects.” 


He Who Pleases Is Rama 


First Kausalya gave birth to a male child. The 
child was extremely charming and resplendent. Sage 
Vasishta therefore named him ‘Rama’. He was so 
beautiful, charming and attractive. He made everyone 
who came to see him, happy and blissful. Hence, it 
is said, Ramayathi Ithi Ramah (He who pleases is 
Rama). The second wife, Sumitra gave birth to two 
sons, while Kaikeyi too had a son born to her. Sage 
Vasishta was wondering, “How come? Kausalya and 
Kaikeyi has one son born to each while Sumitra gave 
birth to two sons?” He contemplated over the matter 
and realised with his yogic vision, what exactly had 
happened. He realised that the two children born to 
Sumitra were born out of the two shares of payasam 
given to her by Kausalya and Kaikeyi. The four 
children were named Rama, Lakshmana, Bharata and 
Satrughna. Lakshmana was an amsa (part) of Rama 
and Satrughna that of Bharata. Sumitra then thought to 


234 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





herself, “If Rama becomes the king, my son Lakshmana 
should be his servant. Similarly, if Bharata were to be 
the king, my other son Satrughna should serve him. 
I don’t want that my two sons should ever aspire 
for kingdom. It is enough if they serve Rama and 
Bharata, respectively.” She did not however reveal 
her thoughts to anyone. 


Both Lakshmana and Satrughna were crying 
incessantly, right from the time of their birth. They 
neither took food nor slept. Sumitra could not 
understand the reason for their restlessness. She tried 
various methods like mantra, tantra and yantra. But, 
they did not yield any result. They did not stop 
crying. 

Finally, she approached her Guru Sage Vasishta 
and prayed to him, “Oh! divine Guru! I am not able 
to understand why my sons are crying incessantly. 
Kindly let me know the reason.” Sage Vasishta closed 
his eyes for sometime and with his yogic vision tried 
to understand the reason for their incessant crying. He 
then explained, “Mother! Lakshmana is the amsa (part) 
of Rama and Satrughna that of Bharata. Hence, please 
make Lakshmana lie in the cradle of Rama next to 
him. Similarly, in the case of Satrughna, make him lie 
beside Bharata.” Sumitra, after obtaining the permission 
of Kausalya and Kaikeyi made the two boys lie in the 


Cultivate Sacred And Noble Thoughts 235 





cradle beside Rama and Bharata, respectively. The very 
next moment both Lakshmana and Satrughna stopped 
crying and started to play happily. Thereafter, they 
drank milk and slept peacefully. Since then Lakshmana 
followed Rama like a shadow and Satrughna followed 
Bharata. 


After the marriage ceremony of Rama, Lakshmana, 
Bharata and Satrughna was over, Bharata left for his 
maternal uncle’s (King of Kekaya’s) house. Satrughna 
followed him. Here in Ayodhya, Rama was preparing 
to leave for His fourteen-year exile to the forest, as 
per the command of His father, King Dasaratha. Sita 
and Lakshmana followed Him, voluntarily. Thus, when 
Lakshmana was following Rama and Satrughna was 
moving in the company of Bharata, people thought 
that the two pairs were separate. But, the fact was 
that the mutual love among the four brothers was 
unparalleled. 


During their exile in the forest, while Rama, 
Lakshmana and Sita were moving about, they came 
across an asram (hermitage). On enquiry, they came to 
know that it belonged to Sage Agastya. Agastya and 
his disciples extended a warm welcome to them. They 
conveyed their grateful thanks to them for visiting their 
asram. During the course of their conversation, sage 
Agastya advised, “Rama! You cannot be comfortable 
in this Asram. There is a forest called Dandakaranya, 


236 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





nearby. There, you will be comfortable. Mother Sita 
will also be happy there, without any inconvenience. 
You will get a variety of fruits in plenty there for 
eating. The sacred river Godavari is flowing in that 
forest. Hence, you build an asram and live there.” 
As per the advice of Sage Agastya, Sita, Rama and 
Lakshmana built a small parnashala (cottage) on the 
banks of the river at Panchavati in the Dandakaranya 
forest and started living there happily. 


Destiny Is Invisible 


All species of animals used to move about in the 
surroundings of that ashram. One day Sita happened to 
see a golden deer in the vicinity of their parnashala. 
She was enamoured by it. How can Sita who left all 
her gold ornaments in Ayodhya and followed Rama 
to the forest, have a desire for a golden deer? She 
thought for a moment and concluded that it might 
be her illusion. But, destiny is invincible. In spite of 
her knowing that there is no possibility of a golden 
deer living, she requested Rama to catch the deer and 
bring it to her so that she Could play with it. She 
prayed, “Rama! How beautiful that deer is! If You 
can catch that deer and bring it to our parnashala, | 
can play with it and spend my time happily. When 
You are moving in the forest, I am alone in the 
parnashala. Why don’t You fulfil this small request 


Cultivate Sacred And Noble Thoughts 237 





of mine and make me happy?” Rama said, “All right, 
your happiness is My pleasure.” So saying He left to 
catch that golden deer. Lakshmana then counselled 
Rama, “Dear elder brother, this is a strange animal. 
It is not really a golden deer. I think some demon 
must have donned the form of this golden deer to 
trick and delude us. You need not go after it to catch 
it. I will go.” However, Sita insisted that only Rama 
should go and catch the golden deer. That was how 
her mind worked during that crucial period. As per 
Sita’s prompting, Rama went after the deer, chasing 
it. After going for some distance, Rama released an 
arrow on the deer. Once Rama’s arrow struck the 
deer, the demon donning the form of the golden deer 
assumed his real form. He shouted, “Ha! Sita! Ha! 
Lakshmana” and died instantly. Sita, who was at a 
distance from that spot heard that voice and mistook 
it as that of Rama’s. She advised Lakshmana, ‘Oh! 
Lakshmana! Please go immediately to help Rama. I 
feel Rama is in some trouble and is seeking our help. 
I think He is calling us.” Lakshmana then explained 
to Sita, “Mother! This must be some trick played by 
the demons. No danger can ever befall Rama. Don’t 
lose heart. Please maintain your poise.” Sita was angry 
that Lakshmana did not move, in spite of her repeated 
requests. She cast several aspersions on him. She went 
to the extent of slandering Lakshmana, saying, “Do 


238 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





you wish to take me as your wife, if Rama dies?” 
Unable to bear her words, Lakshmana moved out 
at that very moment and went in search of Rama. 
However, before leaving the parnashala, he drew a line 
around it and advised Sita, “Mother! I am not worried 
about the accusations hurled at me. But, you please 
don’t come out of this line under any circumstances. 
The demons, animals or for that matter any kind of 
insects cannot enter the asram, crossing this line. You 
remain in the asram only.” You might have noticed a 
product called “Lakshmana Rekha” being sold in the 
market even today. If a line is drawn with that stick, 
no ants or insects can cross over. Similarly, the demon 
Ravana who came to the asram with the intention of 
abducting Sita during the absence of Rama, could not 
cross the Lakshmana Rekha and enter the ashram. He 
therefore stood in front of the ashram beyond the line 
drawn by Lakshmana and begged for alms crying, 
Bhavati bhiksham dehi (mother, give alms). Sita took 
pity on him, thinking, “Alas! Poor fellow! He must be 
hungry. It is not fair on my part to turn him away.” 
She therefore came out crossing the Lakshmana Rekha 
to offer food to Ravana. The moment she crossed the 
Lakshmana Rekha, Ravana abducted her and took her 
away to Lanka. After Rama and Lakshmana returned to 
the asram, they noticed that Sita was abducted. They 
were anguished. In Lanka, Sita too felt very sorry that 


Cultivate Sacred And Noble Thoughts 239 





she had to encounter this pitiable situation because 
she did not pay heed to Lakshmana’s words. Sitting 
in Ashoka vana in Lanka, she was pondering, 


“Will I ever move out of this prison? 
Will I ever be able to see Rama? 

Oh! My dear brother-in-law Lakshmana! 
I hurled several abuses at you, 

Oh! Noble one!” 


She was repenting, “Lakshmana! I am undergoing 
this punishment for having hurt your feelings.” Sita 
spent ten months thus in Lanka. But, she never looked 
at the face of Ravana. Ravana donned several kinds 
of vestures, played several tricks and made several 
promises to Sita during those ten months. But, Sita 
was unrelenting. She abhorred his very presence 
castigating him, “Fie on you! You don’t even match 
the nail of the foot of Rama.” When Ravana started 
abusing Rama, she lost her temper and declared, 
“Rama is a man of supreme valour. He is courageous 
and profound in character. You are a mean fellow and 
trivial in nature. You don’t deserve to utter even the 
name of Rama.” Unable to make her submit to his 
overtures, Ravana left that place giving her time of 
ten days to bow to his wishes. 


The Glory Of Chastity 


240 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





Sita, however, was spending her time with courage 
and confidence constantly contemplating on Rama. 
She assured herself that her own conscience was her 
witness and none could do anything to her. Among the 
ladies belonging to the demonic community appointed 
to guard Sita in the Ashoka vana, there were two by 
name Ajata and Trijata. They were the daughters of 
Vibhishana, the younger brother of Ravana. One day 
while consoling Sita who was weeping, Trijata told 
her “Mother! Last night, I had a dream. I saw one 
monkey entering Lanka and setting the city ablaze. 
I also saw very clearly that Rama invaded Lanka, 
killed Ravana and took you to Ayodhya.” Ajata too 
counselled Sita saying, “Oh! Mother! It is true. I too 
had a similar dream. You need not be sorry any more.” 
Both of them gave a lot of love and kindled faith in 
Sita. In fact, their father Vibhishana was a devotee of 
Rama. Hence, his daughters too developed devotion 
towards Rama. 


Thus, ten months passed by. Suddenly, one day 
there was a big commotion in Lanka. On enquiry, it 
was known that the battle between Rama and Ravana 
had started. In a few days’ time, the news that Ravana 
was killed in the battle also spread. Sita felt very happy 
that she would soon be free from confinement and 
would join the divine presence of Rama. However, she 
had a doubt in her mind whether she had to go herself 


Cultivate Sacred And Noble Thoughts 241 





to Rama or Rama would come to her and take her 
along with Him. In the meantime, Rama sent a word 
that Sita be brought to His presence. All the vanaras 
gathered there. They are by nature fickle-minded. No 
further elaboration is required about their behaviour. 
They were dancing and jumping to have a glimpse of 
Mother Sita. On having her darshan, their hearts were 
filled with joy. At last, Sita was taken to the divine 
presence of Rama. But, Rama did not look at her. He 
bent His head and was sitting quietly. He commanded 
the people around him to prepare a fire so that Sita 
could enter into it and prove her chastity. Rama knew 
that Sita was a very chaste and noble woman but 
He wanted the fact to be made known to the world 
too. Someone may later question, “How did Rama 
accept Sita back into His fold, when she had spent 
ten months in Lanka in the captivity of Ravana?” Is 
it not a fact that He has to answer such questions? 
That is why He ordered Sita to undergo the fire test. 
Having realised this truth, Sita went round the fire 
three times and chanting Rama’s name jumped into the 
fire. The very next moment, the God of fire appeared 
and handed over Sita to Rama with the request, “Oh! 
Rama! Sita is a woman of supreme chastity. She is 
the noblest. It is not fair on Your part to doubt her 
chastity. Kindly accept her.” The chastity of Sita was 
thus made known to all. This incident established the 


242 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





glory of truth and chastity. 


Vibhishana, the younger brother of Ravana took 
Sita, Rama and Lakshmana along with their entourage 
to Ayodhya in the Pushpaka Vimana. The coronation 
of Rama as the king of Ayodhya was celebrated on 
a grand scale. The people of Ayodhya lived in peace 
and happiness during the reign of King Rama. The 
Ramayana story is most sacred. The pathivratha 
dharma (chastity) itself protected the ladies in those 
times. 


“This land of Bharat has given birth to many 
noble women like Savitri who brought her dead 
husband back to life; Chandramati who extinguished 
wild fire with the power of truth; Sita who proved 
her chastity by coming out of blazing fire unscathed 
and Damayanti who reduced an evil-minded hunter 
to ashes with the power of her chastity. This land of 
piety and nobility attained plenty and prosperity and 
became the teacher of all the nations of the world 
because of such women of chastity.” 


(Telugu poem) 


The noblest quality of chastity is unique to the 
culture of Bharat. You don’t find it anywhere else in 
the world. In those days, whenever the men came 
across women, they used to move on bending their 


Cultivate Sacred And Noble Thoughts 243 





heads in reverence to them. But, today both women 
and men stand in the middle of the road, gossiping. 
At the fag end of the Dwapara Yuga, Dharamaraja 
witnessed such a scene one day. He felt very unhappy 
and immediately called for a meeting of his brothers. 
He expressed his anguish to them thus: “Oh! Bhima! 
Arjuna! Nakula! Sahadeva! The kali yuga (age of kali) 
has begun. Yesterday while I was taking a stroll in the 
city, I saw a woman talking to a man in public. I am 
sorry I cannot bear witness to such immoral behaviour.” 
On another day, his younger brother Arjuna narrated 
another incident, “Today, I saw a farmer returning 
from his field carrying his plough on his head. I 
asked him why he was carrying it, as he could have 
left it in the field itself while returning to his house. 
He replied, “Alas! Swami! It cannot be left there. If 
I leave the plough in the field itself, the thieves may 
take it away. Hence, every day I am taking it home 
and bringing it next day to the field.” On another day 
the Pandava brothers noticed some woman locking the 
door of her house before going out. On enquiry, the 
woman replied, “If I don’t lock the house, someone 
will enter the house and carry away our articles.” All 
these were signs heralding the advent of kali age. 


Uphold Dharma 


244 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





During the time of Rama Rajya, there was no 
practice of locking the houses or carrying the agricultural 
implements back home or ladies and gents chit-chatting 
in public places. It is only due to the effect of the 
kali age, such incidents have started happening. That 
is why the Pandavas decided on their Mahaprasthana 
(final journey in the northward direction). “The kali 
age has begun. Let us therefore depart,” that was their 
resolve. Accordingly, they returned to their heavenly 
abode. The Pandavas led a sacred life. It is only on 
account of such noble and sacred souls, the country 
of Bharat has earned the name of a sacred country. 
Today, however, such purity and sanctity has declined. 
Of course, it is still there, but it is not manifest. It 
is only Dharma that protects one and all! Both, men 
and women have to protect Dharma (righteousness). 
In order to do so, the mind has to be kept pure 
and steady. You should not allow evil thoughts enter 
your mind. 


Ahalya, the wife of Sage Goutham was a great 
and noble lady, yet, she had to suffer on account 
of the curse of her husband. He cursed her on one 
occasion, “May you become a stone and lie in the 
dust!” It is only due to the grace of Lord Rama at a 
later date that she could come out of the curse. The 
moment Rama’s feet touched the stone, the stone 


Cultivate Sacred And Noble Thoughts 245 





transformed itself into Ahalya. God can turn even 
a stone into a human being and sanctify it. He can 
purify the impure. However much you suffer from 
evil thoughts, the moment you think of God, all your 
impurities will be removed. Mind is the root cause 
for everything. Hence, ladies and gentlemen, everyone 
should cultivate sacred and noble thoughts. You must 
purify your heart. Only then can humanness survive. 
Otherwise, it degenerates into demonic nature. 


Dasara, 1-10-2006 Prasanthi Nilayam 


246 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





Vyakti 

























The sun derives its energy and effulgence 
from the Divine cosmic source. It is the same 
cosmic source that accounts for the power of 
the human mind and the marvellous power of 
the eye to see the most distant star. With this 
power of sight, man is able to see the entire 
creation. There is no greater power than this. 
This boundless power is being recognised and 
exercised by each according to the level of 
his development. Because of man’s ability to 
manifest the divine boundless cosmic energy, 
man is described as a manifestation of the 
Divine (Vyakti). Humanness lies in manifesting 
what is hidden and invisible to man. 


- Baba 


247 





17 


Put Human Values Into Practice 


AN today feels proud that he has mastered 

many branches of knowledge and studied a 
number of texts. But he does not try to understand the 
essence of education. Nowadays, learning is limited 
only to physical and worldly aspects; moral, ethical 
and spiritual aspects are left out. 


A Test Of Intelligence 


Today the parents make strenuous efforts to provide 
education to their children. But nobody is trying to 
know the real meaning of education. People think that 
those who can speak eloquently and have studied a 
number of books are highly educated. But the fact is 


248 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





that it shows just the knowledge of the alphabet and 
nothing else. Mere knowledge of the alphabet cannot be 
called education. Besides knowing the letters, one has 
to know the meaning of the words and the sentences 
constituted by them. Having realised this truth, King 
Krishnadevaraya convened a big assembly. He posed 
a question to all the assembled poets and scholars. 
Also present in this assembly were eight renowned 
poets of his court known as ashta diggajas (eight 
eminent scholars). They were: Allasani Peddana, Nandi 
Thimmana, Madayyagari Mallana, Dhurjati, Ayyalaraju 
Ramabhadrudu, Pingali Surana, Ramarajabhushanudu 
and Tenali Ramakrishna. Krishnadevaraya wanted to 
know who among them was the best. He wanted 
them to frame a meaningful sentence consisting of 
five words, each word having the same meaning in 
five different languages. “Whoever comes out with an 
answer to this question by tomorrow morning will be 
suitably rewarded”, he declared. 


Since his house was far away, Tenali Ramakrishna 
decided to spend the night in his brother-in-law’s 
house. When he was provided with a comfortable bed 
for the night, Ramakrishna refused to sleep on it. He 
said, “I have to think of an answer to a question put 
by the king by tomorrow morning. A bed like this 
is sure to put me to sleep in no time. So, provide a 


Put Human Values Into Practivce 249 





cot for me in the cowshed.” As he was lying on the 
cot, at one o’clock in the night, one of the cows in 
the shed gave birth to a calf. Ramakrishna called out 
to inform his brother-in-law about this. His brother- 
in-law wanted to know which cow it was since he 
had given different names to his cows like Lakshmi, 
Saraswati, Radha, etc. He asked Ramakrishna, “Ye Aav 
Ra Bava” (Oh! brother-in-law! Which cow is that?). 
When Ramakrishna heard this, his joy knew no bounds 
since he had found an answer to the king’s question. 
So, he repeated the phrase again and again. His brother- 
in-law thought that Ramakrishna was behaving in this 
strange manner due to lack of sleep. 


Next morning, Ramakrishna went to the royal 
court and found that no one else had the answer to 
the question. All others were convinced that it was 
not possible to frame such a sentence. “Ye Aav Ra 
Ba Va. This is the answer”, he said. Everyone was 
intrigued. Then he explained, ‘Ye’ in Marathi, ‘Aav’ 
in Hindi, ‘Ra’ in Telugu, ‘Ba’ in Kannada and ‘Va’ in 
Tamil convey the same meaning, i.e., ‘come’. All the 
five languages were represented in this sentence. 


In this manner, one should know the meaning of 
every letter. People today read many books without 
knowing the real meaning of the words. But in 
ancient times, people knew the meaning of every 
letter that they studied. Pleased with the answer of 


250 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





Tenali Ramakrishna, Krishnadevaraya presented a 
bundle of gold coins and precious diamonds to him. 
Ramakrishna was happy to receive the precious gift 
from the king, but he was worried how he should 
safeguard it. Therefore, he requested the king to provide 
him with two bodyguards to enable him to carry 
the bundle safely to his house. Accompanied by the 
bodyguards, he carried the bundle safely to his house. 
On reaching there, the thought of keeping the bundle 
safe in the house caused him a lot of worry since he 
did not have any iron safe. His wife came near him 
and saw the bundle. At that time, Tenali Ramakrishna 
noticed two thieves who had followed him all the way 
and were now hiding in the backyard of his house. 
Then he told his wife that he was going to drop the 
bundle of gold coins and precious gems into the well 
in the backyard of his house for its safety. He spoke 
loudly so that the thieves could overhear him. Instead 
of putting the bundle of precious gems in the well, 
he actually put a bag of stones in it. All through the 
night, the thieves kept on drawing water out of the 
well in expectation of getting the bundle of gold coins 
and precious gems. All their attempts proved futile. 
They left the place at daybreak. Tenali Ramakrishna 
was happy that he could save the precious bundle 
from the clutches of thieves and in the process his 
garden was adequately irrigated. 


Put Human Values Into Practivce 251 





One who knows the meaning of every letter, 
every word and every sentence is a true poet. Tenali 
Ramakrishna was one such great poet. 


Kavim Puranamanushasitaram 
Anoraniyansamanusmaredya, 
Sarvasya Dhataramachintyarupam 
Adityavarnam Tamasa Parastat. 


(He who contemplates on the all-wise, ageless, 
the ruler of all, subtler than the subtle, the universal 
sustainer, possessing a form beyond human conception, 
reffulgent like the sun and far beyond the darkness of 
ignorance, reaches verily that supreme divine Purusha 
(God). 


Acquire The Knowledge That Makes One 
Immortal 


Today people try to know the meaning of 
sentences without trying to know the meaning of 
letters and words that constitute the sentences. Even 
the preceptors today give only the worldly meaning of 
the sentences, but none gives the moral, ethical and 
spiritual import of the sentences. It is the responsibility 
of teachers to disseminate the knowledge pertaining 
to moral, ethical and spiritual principles. That is true 
education. Today the students pursue their studies, 


252 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





but if you ask them what they are doing, they reply, 
“Chaduvu-Kontunnamu”, which also means, “We 
are buying education”. That is no education at all. 
We have to know the meaning of every letter, every 
word and every sentence and act accordingly. Despite 
acquiring all this worldly knowledge, one has to meet 
one’s end which is inevitable. One should acquire 
that knowledge which makes one immortal. It is the 
knowledge of the five human values, namely, sathya, 
dharma, santi, prema and ahimsa. 


The first one is sathya (truth). Truth is deathless. 
Truth is one, not two. Dharma (righteousness) is 
eternal. santi (peace) is the source of bliss. Next is 
prema (love). Right from a child to an old person at 
the verge of death, everyone is endowed with love. 
But love has no death. The last, but not the least, is 
ahimsa (non-violence). Where is the death for ahimsa? 
Buddha propagated this principle. He declared: Ahimsa 
Paramo dharma (non-violence is the highest dharma). 
Knowledge and practice of these five principles 
is real education. Speak truth, follow the path of 
righteousness and experience peace. Share your love 
happily with all and lead your life with non-violence. 
This is the essence of education. These are the five 
main human values which should be propagated in 
the world. They are eternal and immortal. Today we 
run after all that is perishable, ignoring that which is 


Put Human Values Into Practivce 253 





immortal. The President of India has told you many 
important things. You can achieve great heights if you 
put his teachings into practice. Every human being is 
endowed with these five human values. If we promote 
these five human values, we become God. The Vedas 
declare: Tat Thwam Asi (That Thou Art). This profound 
statement of the Vedas contains the essence of all 
knowledge. Therefore, these five human values have 
to be inculcated in everyone right from childhood. 


When you rely on truth, you can achieve anything 
in life. Daivam manusha rupena (God is in human 
form). God is not separate from man. All are the 
embodiments of divinity. The same principle of the 
atma is present in all. But it assumes many names. 
Develop self-confidence. Face all difficulties with self- 
confidence. Whomsoever you see, consider him as 
your own reflection. God is beyond all attributes and 
actions. Develop the spirit of sacrifice. Na karmana 
na prajaya dhanena thyagenaike amrutatthwamanasu 
(immortality is not attained through action, progeny 
or wealth; it is attained only by sacrifice). You should 
be prepared to make any sacrifice. Have the firm 
conviction that you are God and God is not separate 
from you. Wherever you see, God is there. There 
is nothing else except God. Names and forms may 
be different, but the same principle of the Atma is 
present in all. 


254 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





Practice Of Human Values Promotes Unity 
And Harmony 


All that man experiences is the result of his 
actions. It is already very late now. I do not want to 
cause inconvenience to you by speaking at length. It 
is enough if you know these five principles and put 
them into practice in your daily life. It is only by 
practising these five principles that you can know them, 
not merely by reading or writing about them. Any 
knowledge that is not put into practice is no knowledge 
at all. Put into practice at least one or two principles 
in your life out of all that you have learnt. Then only 
will your life be redeemed and you will acquire merit. 
Then you would have followed the right path. You have 
heard many things from Me and Kalam. What is the 
use of all your listening if you do not put anything 
into practice? It is your rare fortune that you got the 
opportunity of listening to such sacred talks. Make 
the best use of the opportunity and attain the goal 
of your life. 


Lord Krishna declared in the Bhagavad Gita, 
Mamaivamsho jivaloke jivabhuta sanathana (the eternal 
atma in all beings is a part of My Being). You are 
all sparks of divinity. You are not mere mortals. You 
are not separate from Me. Being an aspect of My 
Divinity, you should conduct yourself accordingly. Do 


Put Human Values Into Practivce 255 





not waste your time in vain gossip. These five values 
have originated from God. Wherever you see, there is 
the principle of unity. You and I are one. Many people 
ask Me about My true identity. I tell them, “You and 
I are one. You are not separate from Me.” Consider 
all your fellowmen as your brothers and sisters and 
strengthen the bond of love with them. You should all 
stand united. Never give room for evil qualities like 
anger, hatred and jealousy. These qualities will create 
only differences. We should develop the five human 
values which will promote harmony and unity in the 
world. We should develop those qualities which will 
bring us closer to each other and not the ones which 
will distance us from each other. Leave the burden of 
all your responsibilities to God. This is My message 
to you today. 


Benedictory Address, Sri Sathya Sai 
International Centre for Sports, 22-11-2006. 
Prasanthi Nilayam 


256 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 















Acquire Self-knowledge 










Self-knowledge is that knowledge by 
acquiring which everything else becomes known. 
A person with self-knowledge can indeed be 
acclaimed as all-knowing. Secular learning 
cannot confer on us abiding and absolute 
peace. Self-knowledge alone can help us cross 
the sea of sorrow. So, all should strive to 
attain self-knowledge which can be acquired 
through purity of mind. And purity of mind 
can be attained through sacred deeds, charity, 


compassion and devotion. 


- Baba 


18 
Service To Society Is Service To God 


When the child emerges from the womb of 
its mother, one does not find any garland around 
its neck. There are no jewels made of pearls nor 
are there glittering gold ornaments. There are no 
necklaces studded with precious stones like emeralds 
and diamonds. But there is one garland around its 
neck. Brahma strings together the consequences of his 
past deeds into a heavy garland and puts it around 
its neck at the time of birth. 


(Telugu poem) 
Embodiments Of Love, Students —Boys And Girls! 


T is not possible to describe how fortunate a 
human being is. Jantunam nara janma 
durlabham (of all living beings, human birth is 


258 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





the rarest). Man is not able to realise the value of 
humanness and is deluded by the sight of ephemeral 
and transitory objects of the world. The basis of 
man’s life is not the transitory and ephemeral world. 
His life on earth is a synthesis of moral, ethical and 
spiritual values. Man, in fact, is the image of divinity. 
Mamaivamsho jivaloke jivabhuta sanathana (the eternal 
atma in all beings is a part of My Being). All of 
you are a part of Myself, you are not different from 
Me. Unable to realise the value of his humanness, 
man becomes a victim of his many delusions. All 
your learning and your strenuous efforts should be 
directed towards realising this truth. You don’t need 
anything else after realising this fundamental truth. All 
the material possessions of this world are a cause of 
bondage for man and so long as man is in bondage, 
he has to suffer. Therefore, man should try to achieve 
freedom from this bondage. He should get rid of the 
feeling of attachment. Nothing is ‘mine’ and ‘thine’, 
everything is one. Develop the feeling in your heart 
that all are one. Only then can you experience truth, 
peace and bliss. 


The One Dwells In The Many 
Embodiments Of Love! 


Your life is full of ambitions and desires. You 
have to enquire whether you are making appropriate 


Service To Society Is Service To God 259 





efforts to attain fulfilment in life. First search your 
heart to know what your thoughts and feelings are — 
whether they are pure, steady and selfless or are they 
tainted with desires. Desires are like luggage which is 
a heavy burden in the journey of life. Less luggage 
more comfort makes travel a pleasure. Therefore, 
gradually reduce your desires. If you have less 
luggage, you will be more peaceful. On the contrary, 
man today is increasing his baggage of desires instead 
of lightening it. 


Thousands of people have assembled here. Heads 
are many, but the feeling is one. Ekatma sarva 
bhutantaratma (one atma dwells in all beings). Because 
of your body attachment, you are subjected to too 
many troubles. Today you are a single person. After 
completing your studies and securing a good job, 
you will try to get married. Then you become two. 
When one wears one bangle, no sound is produced. 
Only when one wears two bangles sound is produced. 
After marriage, you are inclined towards worldly 
acquisitions. You will have children and your family 
will expand. With this type of ‘progress’, how can 
you have peace? All these worldly attachments are the 
result of your deluded thinking. There is no reality 
in them. When your thoughts and feelings are not in 
the right direction, you are bound to suffer. Instead of 
getting yourself entangled in worldly life, you should 


260 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





engage in the service of society. Once you take to the 
path of service, your problems will gradually decrease. 
LOVE ALL, SERVE ALL. Do not consider anybody 
as other person. Develop the feeling that he and you 
are one. The entire mankind is one. What you see in 
this world is only the reaction, reflection and resound 
of the reality that is one. Once you understand this 
truth, you will be peaceful. Only then will your mind 
be steady and one-pointed in the pursuit of your study 
and profession. Therefore, first and foremost, engage 
yourself in the service of society. What is society? 
Society is your own reflection. Therefore, do not 
distance yourself from society. Keep yourself always 
engaged in the service of society. Why has God 
given hands to you? They are not given to scribble 
something on paper. They should be fully engaged in 
the service of God. Work is worship. Duty is God. 
Do your duty. 


Embodiments Of Love! 


You are now young and all your limbs are healthy 
and strong. First is the body. Next come the senses. 
Higher than the senses is the mind, and the intellect 
is higher than the mind. The atma is the highest. 
When you understand and contemplate on the principle 
of the atma, you will be free from all suffering and 
bondage. It is the perversion of the mind that is the 


Service To Society Is Service To God 261 





cause of all your sufferings and bondages. 


The Devaki And Yashoda Of Kaliyuga 


Once the mother of this body, Easwaramma, went 
to a well to fetch water. Suddenly, she felt giddy and 
heard an ethereal voice, “I am entering your body.” 
She was fear-stricken and was at a loss to know what 
was entering her body, whether it was a ghost, a spirit 
or an angel. She heard the voice again, “I am entering 
your body for the welfare of the world.” 


Easwaramma was not the name given to the 
mother of this body at the time of her birth. This name 
was given to her by Kondama Raju, the grandfather 
of this body. He was a noble soul who had realised 
My Divinity even when I was a child. Realising that 
she was the mother of Easwara, he changed her name 
to Easwaramma (mother of God). Easwaramma was 
not an ordinary woman; she was a high-souled person 
who was loved and admired by one and all. Wherever 
she went, people greeted her with great love. 


Karanam Subbamma was one of great virtues. 
She had a highly respected position in the village. As 
time passed, there was great transformation in her. She 
prepared food for all the devotees who came for My 
darshan. Whatever she made, she made it for the sake 
of Swami. Those days, I did not stay at home most 


262 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





of the time. I moved about in the adjoining hills and 
valleys. Subbamma made many preparations, put them 
in a tiffin box and went searching for Me wherever 
I was. Her love for Swami was great. In the Dwapara 
Yuga, it was Devaki who gave birth to Krishna, but 
Yashoda had the great good fortune of being called 
the mother of Krishna. Similarly, Subbamma had such 
great good fortune in this Age. 


Once Karanam Subbamma performed Sathya- 
narayana Vrata. She invited Easwaramma also to 
participate in it. As I was born after Easwaramma 
partook of the Prasadam (sanctified food) of 
Sathyanarayana Vrata, | was given the name of 
Sathyanarayana. Right from My birth, people did 
not consider Me as an ordinary person; they always 
considered Me as a Transcendental Being endowed 
with great divine powers. When I was a child, all the 
children in the village used to surround Me. I used 
to ask everyone of them what he wanted. Each one 
of them wanted to have something or the other like a 
pencil, a pen, a sweet or a peppermint. Whatever they 
asked, I used to take it out of My empty bag. I did 
not have even a single paisa with Me. On receiving 
the items they asked for, they used to wonder how 
I was able to give them all those things. There was 
no possibility of My mother giving them because 
she too had no money. One day, I left My bag and 


Service To Society Is Service To God 263 





went inside. Finding this as an opportune moment, 
the boys searched the bag all over. They were not 
ordinary boys. They wanted to make sure if there was 
anything hidden in the bag. After making a thorough 
search, they could not find even a single pin. Then 
they realised that all these things were coming from 
some unknown source. They were wonderstruck. In this 
manner, I was always surrounded by boys right from 
My childhood. Gradually, My name spread far and 
wide. This created jealousy in some people. In spite of 
the jealousy of people, My name and fame spread to 
all corners of the world. People from many countries 
of the world representing various faiths started coming 
to Prasanthi Nilayam in large numbers and started 
celebrating their festivals here. Now December is 
coming and Christmas is approaching. Christians from 
all parts of the world will assemble here and celebrate 
this festival. Likewise, Mohammedans also will come 
to Prasanthi Nilayam and pray for My permission to 
celebrate their festivals. People belonging to all faiths 
have been coming to Prasanthi Nilayam to celebrate 
their festivals here. As I have always been telling 
you, “All are one.” 


Religions are many, but the goal is one. 
Clothes are many but yarn is one. 
Jewels are many but gold is one. 


(Telugu poem) 


264 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





Develop Human Values To Insure Peace 


Likewise, there are many beings, but the 
indwelling atma in them is the same. However, there 
are certain people who are creating differences. As the 
name and fame of Swami is spreading, many people 
have developed jealousy and they are making false 
propaganda. Recently, a meeting was held in London 
in which Air Chief Marshal (retd.) Suri repudiated 
all such false propaganda. There he told the critics 
that they should go to Sathya Sai Baba, observe and 
experience the truth personally and then only make 
any comments. He further asked them not to listen 
to all sorts of gossip and start talking about it. What 
do you gain by listening to others? Those who spread 
rumours have themselves not seen or experienced 
anything. But they started false propaganda and it 
spread to many countries; it reached India also. Without 
ascertaining the facts, some Indian newspapers also 
published these false articles, imitating the foreign 
newspapers. In fact, these critics don’t have faith in 
what they themselves speak. Then, why should they 
believe in what others say? Their only intention is to 
defame Swami by foul means. But it is not possible 
for anyone to defame Swami. Not only now, but for 
all times to come, nobody can tarnish Swami’s name. 
Everybody has to surrender to Swami’ love one day or 
the other (loud applause). The Name of Sai is eternal 


Service To Society Is Service To God 265 





and changeless. One can speak whatever one likes. 
Boneless tongue can be twisted in any way. Stones are 
hurled only on a fruit-laden tree. Like a fruit-bearing 
tree, all noble people are subjected to many ordeals 
and difficulties. But when one firmly adheres to truth, 
nothing can shake one. Let any number of people 
fight against truth; they can never win. Therefore, hold 
on to truth firmly, come what may. One who stands 
by truth is bound to be victorious. Therefore, never 
give up truth. Who is God? Truth is God. Truth is 
unshakable. Sathyannasti paro Dharma (There is no 
Dharma greater than adherence to truth). It is Dharma 
that leads man to peace. Without peace man cannot 
live. Saint Thyagaraja said, “One cannot have happiness 
without peace.” When you attain peace, you will 
experience love and bliss. Truth is the origin of bliss. 
Non-violence also emerges from truth. A man of love 
will not entertain even a thought of violence. Sathya 
(truth), Dharma (righteousness), Santi (peace), Prema 
(love) and Ahimsa (non-violence) are like the five 
life-breaths of man. These are the prime qualities of a 
human being. The need of the hour is to develop these 
human values. Only when these values are developed 
can there be peace in the country. Wherever you see 
today, you find limitless desires in people. Take any 
area of human endeavour, man’s desires have no limit. 
There is no limit even in reading of books. People 


266 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





keep reading books all the time. This reading of all 
sorts of books is a mere waste of time. What is the 
use of reading if it does not give you self-satisfaction? 
Your bookish knowledge can help you only in earning 
a living. Bharatiya culture emphasises the inculcation 
of morality, ethics and spirituality. But our modern 
authors are ignoring these three principles. That is 
why in spite of widespread academic learning, there 
is no real progress. 


Oh, man! Do not feel proud of your 
Education. If you do not offer your 
Salutations to God and do not think of 
Him with devotion, all your education 
Will become useless. 
(Telugu poem) 


Therefore, man should develop love for God. If 
you have love for God, you will have everything. 
Without love for God, everything will come to nothing. 
Love for God is like the main switch. If the main 
switch is put off, no other switch can function and 
there will be no light. Once the main switch is on, 
you will get light by pressing any switch. 


Humanness is the main quality of a human 
being. Mother Easwaramma was fully endowed with 
humanness. All her thoughts were always focused 


Service To Society Is Service To God 267 





on Swami. The Summer Course was going on at 
Brindavan. Easwaramma had her breakfast and coffee. 
After that, she was chewing betel. Suddenly she 
shouted, “Swami, Swami, Swami” three times. I said, 
“T am coming, I am coming, I am coming.” I came 
down immediately and she breathed her last. She had 
an easy death without any suffering at all. The body 
has value so long as there is life in it. Once the life 
goes out of it, it is just like a log of wood. The body 
of Easwaramma was taken to Puttaparthi according to 
My instructions and the final rites were performed. 
Many people said that I should also go. But I did 
not go. I do not have any body attachment. Body 
attachment is a big bondage. Once you surrender your 
body to God, your wayward senses will also lose their 
power and you will be free from bondage. There may 
be some ups and downs in life, but once you have 
surrendered to God, nothing will disturb you. 


Do Good To Society. Swami Will Be Happy. 
Embodiments Of Love! 


Study whatever you are expected to study. Earn 
a good name in society. Your parents have high 
expectations from you. You should satisfy their 
aspirations. Matru devo bhava, Pitru devo bhava, 
Acharya devo bhava, Atithi devo bhava (revere your 
mother, father, preceptor and guest as God). When you 


268 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





make your mother, father, preceptor and guest happy, 
then God will give you more happiness. All your 
learning is useless without love for God. You are all 
young. You should study well and earn a good name in 
society. This is what I expect from you. I do not want 
you to merely acquire high academic qualifications. 
There are many highly educated people in the world. 
But what good have they done for the world? You 
should work hard and make others happy. You will 
have fulfilment in life only when you make the society 
happy. Kalam is highly educated and is devoted to 
the service of society. Render all possible service to 
society. That alone will make Swami happy. 


Yesterday, Ram Setty said that he did not want 
to go back to America. He wants to spend the rest 
of his life here in the service of Swami. His son is 
as worthy as his father. He is also a doctor. He told 
his father that he did not want to come in the way 
of his father’s wish. This stadium is built by the 
munificence of Ram Setty, his wife, son and daughter. 
He sold all his property and donated the entire money 
for the construction of this stadtum. He is a man of 
great sacrifice. He has donated 40 crore rupees for 
the construction of this stadium. How many will have 
the spirit of sacrifice of such a high order? In this 
Age when people turn away even a beggar without 
giving him anything, this family has made such a great 


Service To Society Is Service To God 269 





sacrifice. He has a son and a daughter. Even then he 
has donated such a huge amount. Both his son and 
daughter are not interested in worldly enjoyments. Their 
only objective is to obey Swami. Peace and happiness 
lie in spirituality and in nothing else. You may study, 
get married, have children and lead a happy life. 
There is nothing wrong in it. But never forget God. 
Without forgetting God, you may follow any path. 
This is My blessing to you. Spread the divine Name 
of Sai to every nook and corner of the world. That 
will lead to manifestation of divinity within everyone. 
The closer you come to Swami, the divinity within 
you will become more pronounced. Then your life will 
be sanctified. The worldly pleasures are no pleasures 
in the real sense of the term. Today you may enjoy 
pleasure, tomorrow you may experience difficulties. 
You may be happy when a son is born, but you will 
be grief-stricken when some mishap occurs to the 
son and he dies. One day you smile, another day 
you cry. There is only a little gap between happiness 
and sorrow. Everything in man’s life is transient and 
temporary. Ma kuru dhana jana yauvana garvam, 
Harathi nimeshath kalah sarvam (do not be proud 
of your wealth, progeny and youth; the tide of time 
may destroy them in a moment). 


270 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





Students! 


May you live long and lead a happy life! Serve 
the society. Consider service to society as service to 
God. Service to society alone can confer peace on 
you. 


81% Divine Birthday, 23-11-2006 
Prasanthi Nilayam. 


19 


Earn Eternal Peace With Eternal 
Truth 


The pompous person 
With unclear mind; 
What chance has he 

Of realising the true self? 


An intellect pure alone 
Is able to comprehend 
The true principle of self ; 
No more is there to be said on this. 
(Telugu poem) 


VERYTHING is contained in purity of 
consciousness. Here is a bouquet of flowers. 
Outwardly, it appears like a single flower. But, there 


272 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





are a number of flowers in this bouquet. Similarly, the 
world appears to be a single entity. But, it consists 
of many individuals with diverse names and forms. 
All such individuals stay together like the flowers in 
a bouquet. The Panchabhuthas (five elements) are the 
most important characteristic of the world. The world 
is a conglomeration of individuals. All are one. There 
is nothing like I am Deva (God) and you are Jiva 
(individual). You and I are one only. Not realising 
this, you perceive unity as diversity. 


Embodiments Of Love! 


Love is one. The same feeling of love permeates 
every human being. Nevertheless, depending upon the 
mental make-up, the state and destiny of different 
human beings it assumes different forms. A child is 
called a ‘baby’. When she grows up, she is called 
a ‘girl’. Later, when she is married and goes to her 
in-laws’ house, she is referred to as daughter-in-law. 
The same woman after giving birth to children is 
called mother. She also becomes grandmother in due 
course. 


God Is Beyond Gunas 


Is it not a fact that the lady being referred to 
by so many names is only one? Similarly, all human 
beings living in this world belong to only one 


Earn Eternal Peace With Eternal Truth 273 





category. Jesus Christ exhorted: “All are one; be alike 
to everyone.” We should love all. We should take 
everyone into our fold. In fact, that is My way. But, 
some people may not agree. That is due to their lack 
of maturity; the reflection of their inner feelings. God 
assumes different forms in consonance with the inner 
feelings of the devotees. For example, when someone 
calls Me ‘thatha’ (grandfather), I appear to them so. 
Some people call Me ‘father’ and I appear to them 
as ‘father’. Yet some others address Me as ‘Swami’ 
and I will be Swami to them. By whatever name and 
form the human beings contemplate on God, He will 
appear to them in the same name and form. 


In this Age of Kali even good appears to be bad. 
The same individual loves one and hates another. He 
develops enmity with one and friendship with another. 
This sort of friendship or enmity is not something that 
he has acquired from outside. Such feelings are of 
his own heart. When you consider someone as your 
‘enemy’, he becomes so. On the other hand, when 
you consider someone as your ‘friend’, he becomes 
a friend. Supposing you come across a girl, you call 
her a ‘college girl’. After sometime when you marry 
her, you call her as ‘my wife’. Your ‘wife’ of today 
and the ‘college girl’ sometime ago are one and the 
same. Is it not a fact? Thus, man develops a number 


274 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





of relationships based on names and forms. In fact, it 
is the mind that is responsible for so many changes 
in the world. Man, per se is faultless. It is love that 
permeates all human beings. It is true that human 
beings exhibit qualities like anger, hatred, jealousy, 
pomp, etc., sometimes. But, God is not affected by 
them. God is beyond gunas (attributes), whereas human 
beings are with gunas. Those gunas may be positive 
or negative. Good and bad are only in a human being, 
not in God. We often come across people who are 
by nature angry, displaying feelings of intense love 
sometimes. In the Kali age we find several such people 
with such paradoxical behaviour. When you witness 
such changes, you think that God is bringing about 
such changes. No; God is only a witness. He is not 
responsible for these changes. God is like milk, which, 
when added to the decoction, becomes coffee. The 
same milk can become a sweet pudding too. All the 
changes that are taking place in the human beings are 
only due to their gunas. 


A person called Paul was inimical towards Jesus 
Christ in the beginning. The same person became an 
ardent devotee later. The qualities in a human being 
bring about a lot of changes. For example, this African 
devotee has been devoted to Me since his childhood. 
He used to love Me intensely from the beginning. I 
advised him that he was still young and he should 


Earn Eternal Peace With Eternal Truth 275 





return to his country to pursue his vocation. Bowing 
to the wishes of Swami, he returned to his native land. 
But, there is no change whatsoever in his devotion. 
He has been constantly praying to Me, calling 
‘Baba! Baba!’ 


Pure Love Has No Barriers 


Some years ago, when I went on a tour to East 
Africa, several Africans came to Me for darshan. Each 
one of them prayed, “Swami! Please spend some time 
with us”. There were a few hundred children among 
them. All of them had their vision glued to My form. 
You know the then President of Uganda, Mr. Idi Amin. 
He was a military officer. He was young and very 
energetic then. He was tall and hefty. He had a number 
of wives. He was very fond of Swami. He used to 
have the darshan of Swami both in the morning and 
evening. I was very short before that giant. The sight 
of Me beside him was like the view of a deer by the 
side of a camel. People were surprised at his love 
and devotion towards Swami. He was well educated 
and was the President of his country, Uganda. He 
was known for his stern nature. Such a person shed 
tears when I started on My return journey. He told 
Me, “Swami! I have never shed tears since my birth. 
Today, I am very sad and have a feeling of separation 
because Swami is leaving us.” He covered his face 


276 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





with a handkerchief so that others may not notice his 
feelings. His hands were very strong. He held My 
hands firmly, expressing thanks for My visit. He also 
prostrated before Me. He held My feet so tightly that 
it became difficult for Me later to climb the ladder for 
boarding the aeroplane. At the time of My departure, 
he pleaded with Me “Swami! I will surely come to 
have Your darshan shortly. Otherwise, You please visit 
our country again. I cannot bear the separation from 
You.” The situation in Uganda then was such that he 
could not leave the country. 


During My stay in Uganda, he planned to host 
a dinner for Me in his house. He therefore came to 
the house of Dr. Patel to personally enquire about the 
arrangements to be made in this regard. He collected 
all information as to how to organise the dinner, what 
should be the menu, who are to be invited as guests, 
etc. He arranged for brand new utensils for cooking 
various dishes. He also arranged for new tumblers 
for the guests. Finally, when I visited his palace for 
the dinner, all his wives stood in rows on either 
side and greeted Me with veneration. He introduced 
them to Me, one by one. I stayed in Kampala, the 
capital of Uganda. The last day was Guru Purnima, 
an important occasion for Sai devotees. I had earlier 
promised to return to Bombay by that date. But, the 
Africans did not allow Me. They fell at My feet and 


Earn Eternal Peace With Eternal Truth 277 





prayed: “Bhagawan! Please spend this holy day with 
us’, with tears in their eyes. In answer to their prayers 
I stayed back to spend Guru Purnima with them. On 
that day, they wished to take photos with Me. I told 
them that they might silently pray in their hearts so 
that their request would be fulfilled. To their joy, each 
one of them found a photo with Swami standing beside 
them. The devotion of Africans is indescribable. Even 
now, I feel very happy when I think of their devotion. 
My next visit was to the country of Tanzania. There 
also, everyone who came to have My darshan felt 
very happy. Ladies and gents came in large numbers 
to welcome Me, wearing their traditional dresses. 
They danced in ecstasy on seeing Me. On the day of 
departure, just before the plane took off, all of them 
stood in front of the aircraft and pleaded with Me, 
“Swami! You should not go from here. You must be 
here only.” How can I accede to their request? I had 
to leave. The pilots and other officers in the airport 
counselled them saying, “You should not obstruct 
Swamis aircraft like this. This is not good.” They 
then moved away. I was observing all this from the 
window of the aircraft. Finally, when the plane started 
to take off, many of them nearly fainted in grief. That 
scene was fresh in My memory till I reached Bombay. 
During that trip, I visited three countries - Kenya, 
Uganda and Tanzania. They are all neighbouring 


278 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





countries. I was very happy and felt deeply touched 
at the devotion of African people. During My return 
journey, the aircraft was filled to the brim with the 
articles gifted by the African devotees. What are those 
gifts any way? They brought all sorts of articles like 
dinner sets and tea sets in gold colour. They are still 
with Me. We are making use of them while hosting 
high dignitaries like Prime Ministers and Governors. 


There are several devotees in foreign countries who 
love Swami. Their love towards Swami is incomparable. 
The devotees of East Africa enjoyed a lot during My 
visit to their places. I had decided then itself that I 
would make no further visits abroad. Since then, I 
never visited any foreign country. Even for My visit 
to East Africa, there was a reason. Dr. Patel prayed 
to Me from the depth of his heart that I should pay 
a visit to Africa. He prayed “Swami! Your visit is not 
exclusively for us. There were several wild animals in 
these parts. Kindly confer the good fortune of Your 
darshan to these animals and bless them too.” When 
I went to that place, he arranged for some small 
aircrafts for our journey through the wild life habitats. 
He saw to it that only two people sat in each aircraft, 
with plenty of space to move about in it. Sitting in 
those small aeroplanes, we saw a number of places 
abounding in scenic beauty. The huge Lake Victoria 
is spread over a vast area. It took us one and half 


Earn Eternal Peace With Eternal Truth 279 





hours to cross that lake by those aeroplanes. There are 
several crocodiles in that lake of extraordinary size. 
Unable to find enough space to move about in the 
lake, they were falling on one another. Later, we had 
a boat ride in the lake. The crocodiles were looking 
at us with jaws wide open while we were moving in 
the lake. We threw apples towards them. Surprisingly 
they did not eat those apples, till we completed our 
boat ride. They were holding the apples in their mouth 
and gazing at us. There were several Hippopotamuses 
in that lake. Some of them were suckling their babies. 
It was a charming sight of wild animals in their 
natural habitat. The beautiful scenery was a feast to 
our eyes. The animals also have desires like human 
beings. But, their love towards us was unparalleled. 
By the time we reached the shore of that lake, we 
could see big herds of elephants moving about. The 
African elephants have enormous fan like ears. The 
wind caused by a quick swaif of their ears was enough 
to make people fall down. I went into their midst in a 
car. On seeing Me sitting in the car, they raised their 
trunks in veneration and paid obeisance to Me. The 
noble qualities in those wild animals are not to be 
found even in human beings. There is no feeling of 
hatred at all in those animals! All those animals are 
living together happily. Normally, an elephant fears a 
lion. But, the lions and elephants are living together 


280 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





happily in those forests. We went to a small hillock, 
where there was a group of ten lions. The elephants 
were moving about in their presence without any fear. 
We went near them and took photographs. There may 
be fear and anxiety in the human beings now and 
then. But, not even one wild animal displayed any fear 
on seeing us. There were some lions relaxing there. 
Our jeep passed over their tails. But, they were not 
bothered. On the other hand, they drew their tails near 
their mouths and kissed them. I was really moved by 
their love and affection. I could not come out of that 
place. Such intense feeling of love is not to be found 
even among the human beings today. The humans hate 
one another. Even the mother and child hate each other. 
The husband and wife hate each other. But, we could 
not find even a trace of hatred in those wild animals. 
I could witness an unparalleled and intense feeling of 
love and equality in those wild animals. 


The Agony And The Ecstasy 


It was time for us to leave that wonderful place 
and people. The agony of separation suffered by the 
people, especially the devotees living in those countries 
at the fine of our return journey is indescribable. In 
fact, I also felt sad to leave those loving devotees. Our 
plane reached Bombay very late. Sri K.M. Munshi was 
waiting there for our arrival. You know, who Munshi 


Earn Eternal Peace With Eternal Truth 281 





was? He was the chairman of Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan. 
He was suffering from a paralytic attack of his right 
side and his mouth. The moment he had My darshan 
on alighting from the plane, he could raise his hand. 
With boundless joy, he shouted, “Bhagawan Sri Sathya 
Sai Babaji Ki Jai”! The people around were surprised 
that Munshi could raise his hand and speak. Munshi 
took Me to the Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan, straight from 
the airport. The world conference of the Sathya Sai 
Organisations was to be held there. A large number 
of devotees and public had gathered there. Munshi 
addressed that gathering without any difficulty. He 
declared: “The invisible Lord is standing right in front 
of us and speaking to us today.” He made a small 
request that I should stay in his house for three days. 
Acceding to his request, I stayed in his house for three 
days. Those three days passed like three seconds to 
him. He was very happy. 


After My return from the East African tour, I 
tried to explain the intense love and devotion of the 
African people and the wild animals residing there, to 
the people in these parts. If the animals could develop 
such intense love, why not the human beings? The 
animals have no prajnana (divine wisdom), vijnana 
(discriminatory intellect) and sujnana (higher level of 
consciousness). But, human beings who are endowed 
with all these noble qualities and read a number of 


282 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





texts are bereft of even an iota of love. Hence, oh! 
human beings! I wish that all of you should lead a 
life of mutual love. “Love all! Serve all!” - this is 
My exhortation to you. If only there is love, you can 
achieve anything. Love is everything. “Love is life; 
life is love’. Life is associated with love, not hatred. 
Today, wherever you see there is hatred, hatred, hatred! 
This is not a good sign. Having been born as human 
beings, it is not proper to possess animal qualities, 
throwing to wind the human qualities. Sometimes, 
the animals seem better than human beings in this 
regard. The animals seem to possess human qualities. 
Today, the animals are transforming themselves into 
humans and the humans degenerating into animals. 
This is not proper. The human beings should lead the 
life of human beings. They should strengthen their 
human qualities. 


Be Courteous And Loving 


The person who spoke a little while ago is an 
African. He is engaged in propagating the human 
values. The world is full of such people. But, persons 
imbued with human values are very rare. In fact, some 
people do not know how to talk courteously. Even 
if you enquire with love, “Sir! Where did you come 
from?” They will give a curt reply, “I came from 
somewhere.” Whatever they talk, will be discourteous 


Earn Eternal Peace With Eternal Truth 283 





and harsh. This is not correct. A human being should 
talk sweetly and softly. The words must be suffused 
with love. Only then will you experience peace. When 
your behaviour and talk is bad, how can you expect 
peace to reign in your heart? Peace is not in the outside 
world. It is very much in your own heart. There are 
only pieces outside, not peace. You say “I want peace”’. 
Let your behaviour be good and courteous. Then, peace 
will flow from you. Wherefrom do you get truth? 
Can you obtain Truth from the text books you read? 
No! Truth is very much in you. Truth, righteousness, 
peace, love and non-violence are the innate qualities 
of a human being. Love is the very form of God! We 
can experience God’s love only with love from our 
side. Love and peace are the most essential qualities 
for a human being. A millionaire may build several 
residences, purchase a number of cars and have several 
conveniences. But, whomever you come across, they 
say that they have no peace. Of what use is all this 
wealth and comforts and conveniences, if there is no 
peace within? 


Give Up Attachnent 


Nowadays, there is a real estate boom all over 
the country. How much land does a human being 
require? Only six feet! Nothing more. There was a 
rich landlord who went in search of some land. He 


284 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





wanted to purchase an additional piece of land. Having 
come to know of this man’s efforts, a person came 
to him and advised, “Sir! You may please go to the 
Himalayan region where plenty of land is available 
free of cost.” This man went to the Himalayas and 
contacted the king of that region. The king told him: 
“T promise to give you all that land which you cover 
by walking from sunrise to sunset.” The landlord was 
very happy. Next morning, he set out on his expedition, 
enthusiastically. In fact, he began to run greedily with 
a view to acquire more land. He was thus running 
continuously from morning till evening. It was sunset. 
He was very tired and weak. Yet, he did not give 
up his greed. Just when he was at a distance of six 
feet before his final goal, he swooned and fell down. 
The king came to that spot, saw his condition and 
commented: “Alas! What this man requires now is 
only six feet land!” In fact, what every human being 
requires is only that much land! 


King Alexander conquered several countries and 
finally set his foot in Bharat. As he was crossing a 
river, he had a heart attack. The doctors who examined 
him confirmed that he was nearing his end and any 
medicines will be of no use. King Alexander then 
lamented, “I am the king of such a vast kingdom. I 
acquired gold in plenty. I have a great army by my side. 
Is there no one who can save me from the clutches of 


Earn Eternal Peace With Eternal Truth 285 





death?” Immediately, he called his ministers and told 
them, “Oh, ministers! After my death, you take my 
dead body to my native country. Wrap it with a white 
cloth keeping my hands in a raised position and take 
it in a procession through every street.” As per the 
king’s wish, his dead body was taken in a procession 
through the streets. The people were rather surprised 
at this strange act and enquired, “Why are you taking 
the dead body of the king in procession, with his 
hands raised?” The ministers replied, “Alexander 
the Great, who was rolling in great wealth left this 
world empty-handed. It is only to make this fact 
known to the people as per the king’s last wish, his 
dead body is being taken in procession like this.” 
Not only Alexander, but every human being has to 
ultimately depart from this world empty-handed. One 
may acquire a vast kingdom; one may have a great 
army behind him; one may have a number of friends 
and relatives; but, none will accompany one during 
one’s last journey. 


Several kings and great souls spread this truth in 
those days and exhorted people to give up attachment 
to the body. Unfortunately, you are not reading the 
stories of such great people. What you are learning 
now is not ‘history’, but ‘hysteria’. No one reads 
history. What is history in the real sense? His story 
is History!” Man today is pursuing high education. 


286 Sathya Sai Speaks Volume - 39 





He is learning science and technology. But, today’s 
‘technology’ is mere ‘trick-nology’. What you read 
may not remain in your brain. Only what you have 
actually put into practice lasts long. It is enough if 
you put into practice at least one aspect of what you 
have read. That will help you in every way. 


Embodiments Of Love! Dear Students! 


You may pursue any type of education; but, do 
not forget the human values. Truth, righteousness, 
peace, love and non-violence are the five human 
values to be cultivated by a human being. You learn 
these five human values and put them into action. 
Then your life will go on smoothly. This is what I 
wish to communicate to you today as an important 
message. Truth is eternal. It is only when you follow 
this eternal truth that your name will remain in the 
annals of history forever. Eternal truth will earn eternal 
peace for you. If you succumb to bad qualities like 
anger, jealousy, envy, arrogance, etc., your entire life 
will become miserable with unrest and agitation. 


Christmas, 25-12-2006 Prasanthi Nilayam 


