SATHYA SAT SPEAKS 


VOLUME - 34 


Discourses of 


BHAGAWAN SRI SATHYA SAT BABA 
Delivered during 2001 


PRASANTHI NILAYAM 


SRI SATHYA SAI BOOKS & PUBLICATIONS TRUST 
Prasanthi Nilayam - 515 134 
Anantapur District, Andhra Pradesh, India 
Grams: BOOK TRUST STD: 08555 ISD: 91-8555 
Phone: 87375. FAX: 8723 


© Sri Sathya Sai Books & Publications Trust 
Prasanthi Nilayam (India) 


All Rights Reserved 


The copyright and the rights of translation in any language are 
reserved by the Publisher. No part, para, passage, text or photo-graph 
or art work of this book should be reproduced, transmitted or utilised, 
in original language or by translation, in any form, or by any means, 
electronic, mechanical, photo copying, recording or by any 
information, storage or retrieval system, except with and prior 
permission, in writing from The Convener Sri Sathya Sai Books & 
Publications Trust, Prasanthi Nilayam, (Andhra Pradesh) India, except 
for brief passages quoted in book review. This book can be exported 
from India only by Sri Sathya Sai Books and Publications Trust, 





International standard book no. 


81 - 7208 - 308 — 4 


81 - 7208 - 118 - 9 (set) 


First Edition: 


Published by 

The Convener, 

Sri Sathya Sai Books & Publications Trust 
Prasanthi Nilayam, India, Pin code 515 134 
Phone: 87375 Fax: 87236 

STD: 08555 ISD: 91 - 8555 


CONTENTS 


1. Good Thoughts Herald New Year 


OMNI DWN ABW 


10. 
Leg 
12. 
13; 
14. 
13: 
16. 
17. 
18. 
19; 
20. 
Zs 
22s 


Doe 


. Hospitals Are Meant To Serve The 


Poor And Needy 


. Vision Of The Atma 

. Have Steady Faith In The Atma 

. Know Thyself 

. Ramayana - The Essence Of The Vedas 

. Fill All Your Actions With Love 

. Prayers Of Mothers Sustain The World 

. Attain God’s Grace Through Sacrifice And 


Love 
Cultivate Love And Become Divine 
Health Care Is Not A Business 
Human Birth Is To Experience Atmic Bliss 
I And You Are One 
Love Can Unite The Entire World 
Sacrifice Is My Enjoyment 
Vinayaka-the Master Of Siddhi And Buddhi 
Happiness Is Union With God 
The Life Principles Of Man 
Good Mothers Are Nation’s Pride 
‘Educare’ Is True Education 
Pari Prashna —the Divine Answers 
Humility And Character Are The 
Hallmarks Of True Education 
Self-confidence And Equanimity 
Lead To Divine Bliss 


24.God Never Forsakes His Devotees 


Is 
25 
41 
55 
69 
87 
101 


121 
137 
147 
165 
179 
193 
207 
229 
247 
269 
289 
305 
319 


341 


250 
365 


Publisher's Note 


It is a fact well known to the devotees of Bhagawan Sri 
Sathya Sai Baba that no celebrations, festivals or special 
functions will be considered complete without the blessings of 
Bhagawan in the form of His Discourses. Such discourses cover 
a wide variety of subjects centering on Man and his spiritual 
progress which alone can confer peace and joy on him eternally. 
This shower of nectar sweetens every subject discussed because 
of its natural qualities of unique presentation and universal 
appeal. Even a high philosophical point is made simple, 
understandable, enjoyable and fit for consumption by the 
layman. Examples and anecdotes are drawn from every day 
happenings and familiar but meaningful stories related to the 
great epics like the Ramayana and the Mahabharata. In short it 
is a grand feast serving all kinds of delicacies contributing to the 


health and well being of heart and mind alike. 


The present volume, 34 in the series, is a compilation of 
24 such scintillating discourses during the year 2001. The 
discourses relating to the Dussera of the relevant year are not 
included in this volume as they are bunched and published in a 


separate volume. 


Paragraph headings and a bigger font continue to be 


adopted here to suit easy reading by elderly persons. 


The Book Trust prayerfully presents this volume at the 
Lotus Feet of Bhagawan for the benefit and enjoyment of the 


millions, who adore HIM. 


Jai Sai Ram 


Convener 
Sri Sathya Sai Books & Publications Trust 
Prasanthi Nilayam 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 1 


Good Thoughts Herald New Year 


There is pain in pleasure also; none can sepa- 
rate them. It is pain that leads to pleasure. In 

fact, both pain and pleasure are the effects of 
Kali Age. (Telugu Poem) 


Embodiments of Love! 


YEARS have rolled by, but man has not devel- 
oped noble feelings. A true human being is one with a 
good mind. The qualities of a good mind are: it has the 
brightness of the sun and coolness of the moon; it 
makes one utter sacred words and confers peace on 
society. Only one with compassion, love, forbearance, 
sympathy and sacrifice is a true human being. But in 
modern man such sacred qualities have become scarce. 
How can one, bereft of human qualities, be called a 
human being? 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 2 


Follow Nature And Practise Human Values 


Man has originated from Nature. Earth sustains 
life. Sun gives light. Trees give oxygen. Water quench- 
es our thirst and air helps us to live. How is it that 
man, born out of the five elements and sustained by 
them, does not possess the sacred qualities of the five 
elements? Having been born out of and brought up by 
Nature, man should practise and propagate the ideals 
set by nature. Birds, animals and trees follow Nature 
and lead an ideal life. Trees inhale the poisonous car- 
bon dioxide and exhale the life-supporting oxygen. 
Even the animals discharge their duties and help man 
in many ways. But, having been born as a human 
being, why is man not practising human values? He is 
not in a position to practise and propagate human 
values in society as he himself has lost them. 


Embodiments of love! 


Every man expects the new year to confer on 
him peace, happiness and prosperity. New year does 
not bring happiness or sorrow with it. Yesterday was 
same as today and tomorrow will be same as today. 
Days are the same, but one experiences either pleasure 
or pain depending on one’s own actions. Meritorious 
deeds will not confer misery and sinful deeds cannot 
give happiness. One is bound to face the consequences 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 3 


of one’s actions. But one treats pleasure and pain alike 
when one becomes the recipient of God’s grace. God’s 
grace destroys mountains of sins and confers peace. 
But due to the impact of Kali Age, man has lost faith in 
God. He is after money and power. How can such a 
man attain Divinity? Man can rise from the level of the 
human to the Divine only by practising human values. 
So, man should cultivate human values. 


Years come and go, so also pleasure and pain. 
Nothing confers permanent bliss except the experience 
of the Atma. Man cannot attain peace and happiness 
from his actions unless he has sacred feelings within. 
Many people expect the new year to confer happiness 
and prosperity on them. But in fact, new year only 
confers on you the results of your past actions. In order 
to atone your past sins, you have to cultivate sacred 
qualities and involve yourself in sacred activities more 
and more in the new year. In fact, Bliss is within you, it 
originates from your sacred feelings. So, you have to 
manifest bliss from within, it cannot be bestowed on 
you by others. None can take away the bliss from you 
and you cannot obtain it from outside. 


Sacred Activities Confer Happiness 


Heart is the centre of sacred feelings. It is filled 
with compassion. It is compassion that gives rise to 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 4 


sacred feelings. One has to develop compassion, 
spread the light of love and cultivate Divine feelings. 
Without doing so, how can one expect time to confer 
happiness on him? One gets what one does. If one 
expects good results, one must cultivate good feelings. 
With purity of heart, steadiness of mind and selfless 
actions, one can become the recipient of Divine grace, 
which will remove any amount of sufferings in a trice. 
One cannot achieve anything without Divine grace. So, 
one has to undertake such activities which will confer 
Divine grace. Peace and happiness cannot be obtained 
from the external world. Only through Divine grace 
can one be peaceful and happy. People celebrate the 
advent of the new year with singing and dancing. That 
enthusiasm and happiness are momentary. What man 
needs is permanent peace and happiness. How can he 
expect to attain permanent happiness by indulging in 
worldly deeds? He has to undertake sacred activities in 
order to attain permanent happiness. 


Happiness results only from difficulties. Plea- 
sure is an interval between two pains. It is impossible 
to experience pleasure without pain. You may be one 
of affluence or a spiritual aspirant; you get what you 
deserve. You cannot expect mangoes by sowing a 
neem seed and vice-versa. As the seed, so is the fruit. 
Similarly, as the feeling, so is the result. Pain and 
pleasure result from one’s feelings. People are deluded 
thinking that they get pain and pleasure from the ex- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 2S 


ternal world. In fact, they result from their own feel- 
ings. They should transform their heart with sacred 
feelings. Today man is changing, but not his mind. 
Years are rolling by, but his feelings have not become 
pure. He will attain peace only when there is trans- 
formation in his feelings. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Under all circumstances, let your feelings be 
pure and ideal. Let all your actions be for the welfare 
of others. The Vedas declare: 


Paropakarah Punyaya 

Papaya Parapeedanam 
(One attains merit by serving others and commits sin 
by hurting them). When your feelings are sacred, you 
will get sacred results without your asking. Due to the 
impact of Kali Age, man’s thoughts, words and deeds 
are not in harmony with each other. You may say or do 
anything, the result you get depends on your feelings. 
So, make your feelings sacred and become a good 
human being. One with good feelings and good mind 
alone can be called a good human being. Sometimes 
deeds done with good mind may yield bad results. The 
result may appear adverse but there is goodness latent 
in it. A good mind will never change because of such 
results. Man is essentially good. So, he ought to lead a 
life of goodness. But today man wavers every moment. 
It is due to the lack of Will power. Man should have 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 6 


unwavering mind and steady vision. Then he will not 
be subjected to any hardships. Only God’s grace can 
help man to overcome these negative tendencies. One 
may be a millionaire, but his wealth will not redeem 
him if his feelings are impure. Even if a man does not 
possess anything, he can still achieve the highest if he 
has purity of heart. Anything that a man of purity sees 
or touches turns into gold. On the other hand, if he 
lacks purity and effort in the right direction, even a 
stick in hand will turn into a snake. Sankalpamoolam 
Idam Jagat (thoughts form the basis of the entire 
world). Some people feel their expectations are not 
fructifying in spite of their best efforts. This is mainly 
due to absence of purity in their feelings and 
intentions. 


Change Your Actions For Better Results 


Today marks the commencement of the new 
year 2001. Next year, it will become 2002. Destiny 
does not change with the change in year. Along with 
the change in year, your actions too should change for 
the better. Only then you will get good results. 


Students! 


You will fare well in the examination only 
when you work hard throughout the year. As is the 
feeling, so is the action. As is the action, so is the 
result. Sometimes, you may question the adverse 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 7 


outcome of a good action. But in fact, good actions 
never yield bad results. Bad result implies an element 
of negativity in the intentions. It is a human weakness 
to see only the good in oneself ignoring the bad. 


Pleasure and pain, good and bad 

co-exist, none can separate them. You cannot 
find pleasure or pain, good or bad to the 
exclusion of the other 

Pleasure results when difficulties fructify. 


(Telugu Poem) 


Even a sweet mango tastes sour when plucked 
prematurely. It should be allowed to ripen. Only then it 
will taste sweet. So, do not get disheartened if your ac- 
tions don’t yield the desired results immediately. Your 
efforts are bound to fructify in due course of time. 


Embodiments of Love! 


You have been waiting for the commencement 
of the new year with great expectations. Your efforts 
must be in accordance with the expectation. Before 
undertaking any activity, you should discriminate and 
enquire into the pros and cons. Today man has lost the 
sense of discrimination. He does not know how to 
respect and behave amongst elders. He should make 
proper use of the Mathi (mind), Gathi (destiny), Stithi 
(position) and Sampatthi (wealth) that God has 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 8 


bestowed on him. The six evil traits of man, namely, 
desire, anger, greed, infatuation, pride and jealousy 
arise due to the defects in his food and habits. Food 


and habits are responsible for qualities in man, good 
or bad. 


Take To The Inward (Nivritti) Path 


The sacred qualities that originate from the 
heart are true and eternal. They correspond to the in- 
ward path (Nivritti), whereas all the worldly, tenden- 
cies like amassing wealth, taking up jobs, playing 
games, desiring for positions of authority, etc., corres- 
pond to the outward path (Pravritti). Worldly tenden- 
cies originate from the head and are bound to change. 
Only the inward tendencies that originate from the 
heart are true and eternal. Ignoring the inward tenden- 
cies, man takes to the outward path. Consequently, he 
is unable to attain permanent happiness. He treads the 
path of Pravritti but expects the results corresponding 
to Nivritti. All that he sees, says, and does have be- 
come polluted with untruth and unrighteousness. In 
fact, his entire life has become Pravritti-oriented. He 
should give up the outward path and direct his vision 
inward. Before entertaining any thought, he should dis- 
criminate whether it is good or bad. One who follows 
the inward path will never become frustrated or 
restless. One who follows the outward path can never 
attain permanent happiness. For example, you may be 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 9 


20 years old or 40 years old. You have been eating 
food everyday all these years. But can your hunger 
ever be satisfied permanently? No. Only the taste 
varies but hunger is the same for everybody. 


Food may vary but hunger is the same, 
Jewels are many but gold is the same, 
The colour of the cows may vary 

but milk is the same, 
Forms are many but God is one, 
Beings are many but breath is one. 


(Telugu Poem) 


Man leads a life of delusion because he sees 
diversity in unity. He faces many hardships to carry on 
with the sojourn of his life. But life is transient. To 
lead such an ephemeral life, why should one take to 
wrong path and get deluded? So long as one is alive, 
one should tread the path of truth and set an ideal. 
Only then can one’s life be sanctified. Truthful activi- 
ties alone can confer eternal peace. 


A poet composes many verses in praise of God. 
He extols God grandiloquently and ultimately prays for 
His protection. The feeling is important and not the 
manner in which the verses are composed. One may 
extol God according to one’s own capacity but one 
should do so with pure, steady and sacred feelings. 
One may be doing bhajans, offering worship and 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 10 


undertaking service activities for a number of years. 
But all this will prove futile if there 1s no transforma- 
tion of the heart. Heart should be filled with compass- 
sion. Only then can it be called temple of God. Other- 
wise, it becomes verily a devil’s den. 


Ignore Evil Qualities 


The new year does not bring anything new with 
it. The day when fresh and sacred thoughts originate in 
your heart is the real new year day. As you all 
consider this day as new year day and welcome it with 
enthusiasm, I bless you all so that you may cultivate 
fresh, sacred and ideal feelings. I desire that you share 
with others all that you consider as good. I want you to 
lead a peaceful and blissful life and become role 
models for the rest of the country. 


At times evil qualities like desire anger and 
hatred may arise in you but they should not be allowed 
to enter the mind. Once they are refused permission, 
they will automatically withdraw. If they are allowed 
to enter the mind, they will remain in it. A small 
example. When someone comes to your doorstep with 
his baggage, if you receive him and start exchanging 
pleasantries, he will immediately enter and settle down 
in your house. On the other hand, if you ignore him 
completely, he will go to a hotel or a lodge. Likewise, 
when the evil qualities try to enter your mind, just 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 11 


ignore them. Then they will go back to the place of 
their origin. On the other hand, if you entertain them, 
they will rule over you. When you come across 
something evil, do not look at it, talk about it or listen 
to it. Just ignore it. That is the true human quality. You 
will allow only your friends and relatives to enter your 
house through the doors. Will anyone allow the 
donkeys and pigs to enter the house just because it has 
doors? Your body has got nine doors. You should 
permit through them only that which is sacred. Do not 
allow the evil to enter. Only then can you attain peace. 


Human life is highly noble, valuable and 
divine. Do not put it to misuse by giving room to evil 
qualities. Use the power of discrimination and make 
proper use of the senses. Only then will your life be 
redeemed. You will attain immortality and infinite 
bliss. Start a novel and Divine life in this new year. 
Give up all the old unsacred feelings. Cultivate Divine 
feelings. Once you have divine feelings, no other 
feeling can enter your mind. Install God within, then 
peace will automatically follow. 


Embodiments of Love! 

I bless you all so that you may lead your lives 
with peace, prosperity and happiness. Thus I bring My 
Discourse to a close. 


New Years Day, 1.1.2001, Prasanthi Nilayam 


2 


Hospitals Are Meant To Serve The Poor 
And Needy 


The motherland of ours gave to the 
world 
Noble souls renowned in all the 
continents. 
It is the land, which ousted the 
Foreign rulers and achieved freedom. 
This Bharat is reputed for its 
scholarship. 
It is the sacred land, which stood forth 
As the exemplar in the realms of music, 
literature and sacred lore; Born in the land of 
Bharat, noted for its fine arts and natural 
beauty, oh devotees! 
It is your bounden duty to foster 
The glory and prosperity of the 
motherland. 


(Telugu Poem) 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 14 


Embodiments of Divine Atma! 


IN life, Health is the greatest wealth. Since an- 
cient times, many Yogis, sages and seers and men of 
excellence have been making deep investigations into 
the ways and means of keeping good health. They 
made great efforts in this direction as they were of the 
view that man could work for the peace and security of 
the nation only when he was hale and hearty. In mod- 
ern times, some people repose complete faith in Allo- 
pathy while some others feel Ayurveda is also essential 
along with Allopathy. Allopathy gives only temporary 
relief; it does not have permanent cure for diseases. 
But Ayurveda can provide permanent cure for diseases. 


Divine Grace Sustains Human Life 


The heart is the most important part in the 
body. If the heart goes on strike, the body becomes 
lifeless. What is the role of the heart in the human 
body? It pumps blood to the lungs where it gets 
purified and then it is supplied to all parts of the body. 
Each time the heart beats, the blood travels 12,000 
miles in the body. Who has endowed the heart with 
such a capacity? Is it the scientist, the engineer or the 
Yogi or any man-made machine that makes it perform 
such a stupendous task? No. It is only the Divine 
power that is the basis for all this. Man cannot 
accomplish even a small task without the help of 
Divine power. Today man has lost self-confidence and 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 15 


does not have faith in God. So, first of all, man should 
foster self-confidence without which life becomes 
meaningless. 


Allopathy cannot eradicate disease-causing 
germs permanently. It can control them only to a cer- 
tain extent for a certain period of time. There is always 
the risk of relapse. Though allopathy has been prog- 
ressing from time to time, the number of diseases too 
has been increasing. Dr. Samuel Hahnemann of Ger- 
many, who discovered Homoeopathy, also made deep 
investigations into ayurveda. Welfare of the whole 
world was his motto. But man today is not concerned 
with the welfare of the world. 


Impart Health And Happiness To The Poor 


These days heart diseases are widely prevalent 
in society. That is why we established a Super Spe- 
ciality Hospital at Prasanthi Nilayam where 10,600 
operations have been performed so far, totally free of 
cost. Many poor people have benefited from this. Heart 
surgeries have become very expensive. In such a 
situation, what would have been the fate of poor 
people? No one seems to be bothered about this. One 
has to work for the welfare of the poor, alleviate their 
suffering and set an ideal to the nation. Service be- 
comes truly meaningful only when it is rendered to the 
poor and needy. Today neither the doctors nor the 
politicians, not even the Government for that matter, 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 16 


are concerned about the welfare of the poor. If a 
hospital is constructed at a cost of ten crores, they 
expect a profit of 100 crores. Instead of being kind- 
hearted, they have become business-minded. Hence, 
the pathetic condition of the poor. 


During the last three or four days, many heart 
surgeries have been conducted here in this hospital. 
Who are the patients? One is a carpenter, another a 
Dhobi (washer man). Many such patients who are 
economically backward are being treated here. In this 
short period, as many as 50 heart surgeries have been 
conducted! One gets immense joy seeing their happy 
faces. Of what use is medical science if it does not 
bestow health and happiness on the poor and needy? 


Today the educated do not care to spare a 
thought for the poor and forlorn. This hospital is 
dedicated for the welfare of the poor. I am happy only 
when the poor are served. I have dedicated My entire 
life for the uplift of the poor and downtrodden. In 
future, even the highly advanced surgeries like heart 
transplant and lung transplant will take place here. One 
may be wealthy and virtuous but without good health, 
one cannot lead a happy life. The late former Chief 
Minister of Karnataka, Patel helped us a lot in this 
project. The present Chief Minister, Krishna, has also 
been of great help to us. Many noble people of 
Karnataka are also associating themselves with this 
project. So, we are determined to give happiness to the 
people of Karnataka. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 Ly 


Sai Institutions Are Eternal 


Disease has no distinction; it may afflict 
anybody, be it a pauper or a millionaire. We too have 
no such distinction. Here the treatment will be 
rendered totally free of cost to the rich and poor alike. 
Not merely this, even the food will be supplied free. 
Our aim is to cure the patients of their ailments and 
send them home happy and healthy. This establishment 
will serve the poor forever. Some may have a mistaken 
notion that it will only be a temporary one. All the 
institutions established by Sai are eternal. 


The other day, a washer man from Gulbarga 
underwent a heart surgery in our hospital. When he 
saw Me, his joy knew no bounds. He said, “O Swami, 
You are our God, I have undergone heart surgery in 
Your hospital.” One needs to spend a lot of money to 
undergo a heart surgery. Even for admission, one 
needs to spend thousands of rupees. The poor washer- 
man does not have even a fraction of the required 
amount. In this world, there are many men of afflu- 
ence, but how many are showing compassion towards 
the poor? They may say a thousand things, but do they 
practice even one? Is there any rich person who is do- 
ing even one-thousandth part of what Sai is doing? We 
are spending crores of rupees to provide potable drink- 
ing water to the villagers, to render free medical treat- 
ment and to give free education. But some people out 
of jealousy are indulging in false propaganda. The 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 18 


tongue has no bone, so people twist it in the way they 
want. Let us see, if any of those who indulge in false 
propaganda are prepared to feed the hungry and 
alleviate the suffering of the poor. In fact, such people 
set their dogs on the beggars who come to their door- 
step to beg alms. Today all fields like education, medi- 
cine, music, literature, have become business-oriented. 


Sacrifice Is The Hallmark Of A Doctor 


Embodiments of Love, Doctors! 

Fill your hearts with compassion and serve the 
poor and needy. Don’t be stonehearted and money- 
minded. When the hour of reckoning comes, will you 
be able to carry with you the wealth you have amas- 
sed? No. Serve the poor with love. That alone can re- 
deem you. Service to the poor is service to God. Sacr- 
ifice your life for the cause of the poor. Service to the 
poor is My only motto; I have no other desires. I am 
prepared to sacrifice even My life to serve the poor 
(cheers). Do at least one-thousandth part of what 
Swami is doing. Of what use is human life if it is not 
spent in the service of the poor? 


Neither by penance nor by pilgrimage nor by 
study of scriptures nor by japa can one cross 
the ocean of life. One can achieve it only by 
serving the poor. (Sanskrit Verse) 


It is your good fortune that you have become 
doctors. Sacrifice is the hallmark of a true doctor. So, 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 19 


doctors should have the spirit of sacrifice. They should 
be compassionate and considerate towards the poor. 
There are many poor people who are losing their lives 
as they cannot afford costly treatment. Your love alone 
can sustain such lives. The more you develop the spirit 
of sacrifice in you, the greater will be the word’s 
progress. Hospitals are meant to serve the poor and not 
to earn money. What is the point in earning crores of 
rupees when one has to ultimately leave the world 
empty handed? So, spend all your earnings for the 
welfare of the poor. Dedicate your lives to the service 
of your fellowmen. 


Prior to the establishment of this hospital, the 
land here had not much value. But after the hospital 
has come up, here the land value also has gone up. 
Now you find so many buildings coming up around. 
What is the use if one is merely interested in making 
profit? One should utilise it for the benefit of the poor. 
Your happiness will become manifold if you can make 
at least one poor person happy. Help ever, hurt never. 
Do not extort money from the poor. Do not put them 
to suffering for your greed for money. Remember it is 
not money that you are wresting, but their lives. Lead a 
life suffused with love, compassion and sacrifice. 
Thyaga (sacrifice) alone can lead to Yoga (spirituality). 


We don’t have any distinction of caste, creed, 
religion and nationality. We offer free treatment to 
everybody. We are determined to offer free treatment, 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 20 


come what may, even if we have to take loans. We are 
prepared to spend any amount of money; safeguarding 
the life of patients is our main objective. All of you, 
particularly doctors, should learn this lesson. Eschew 
greed for money; develop love and spirit of sacrifice. 
Then money will come to you automatically. 


Divine Grace Is Essential For Cure 
Embodiments of Love! 


Medicines on their own cannot cure diseases; it 
is Divine grace that cures. Only sacrifice can win 
God’s grace. Do not be satisfied by merely filling your 
own belly; try to appease the hunger of others too. 
Undertake such activities that will benefit the poor. 
This hospital does not merely stand for architectural 
beauty. Andam (beauty) has no value if there is no 
Anandam (bliss). You can experience bliss only when 
you give happiness to the poor. The poor are suffering 
because they cannot afford to buy medicines. We will 
give all the required medicines free. Make every effort 
to give happiness to all. 


Today, as the programme is already delayed, I 
do not have enough time to give you further details. 
Develop spiritual outlook and treat the patients with 
love and care and make them happy and healthy. 
Without God’s grace, even the pulse cannot beat. You 
are under the mistaken notion that mere medicines can 
cure the diseases. If that were the case, what happened 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 21 


to all those kings and rich men who had access to best 
medical facilities? So, along with medicines, one 
should have Divine grace too. Medicine and Divine 
grace are like negative and positive, respectively. 
Diseases can be cured only when both these come 
together. So, along with taking medicines, one should 
also pray for Divine grace. Without Divine grace, 
human body cannot be sustained. Human body is most 
wonderful and mysterious. Who is responsible for the 
pulse beat? Who is making the heart pump blood? All 
this happens because of Divine Will. Divine power is 
responsible for the growth of the body. There is no 
point in merely feeding the body and sustaining it 
unless it is used to serve the poor. 


This hospital will surely attain exalted position. 
You may not understand it now, but you will realise it 
in future. People belonging to different parts of the 
world will come here for treatment (loud applause). 
This hospital has such Divine potentiality in it. Do not 
entertain any wrong notions about this hospital. Earlier 
when the Super Specialty Hospital was established at 
Puttaparthi, people had their own misgivings about its 
functioning. Now, in the villages surrounding Putta- 
parthi, you don’t find anybody suffering from heart 
diseases. Even small children are not afraid to undergo 
heart surgery in our hospital there. Likewise, we 
should see to it that no one suffers from heart diseases 
in the State of Karnataka. Villagers who are suffering 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 22 


from heart diseases should be brought here for 
treatment. Anybody can come here for treatment. We 
have no objection. Everyone has equal right to get 
treatment here. 


Leaders Should Support Noble Causes 


Our Prime Minister Vajpayee took great pains 
to come here. Leaders like him are very essential for 
this world. He is a leader who supports and encourages 
noble causes like this. Ministers who extend their 
cooperation for good causes are very much necessary 
for the nation to progress. They should have noble 
feelings and love for God to attain Divine grace. There 
is nothing that one cannot achieve if one has Divine 
grace. Loka Samastha Sukhino Bhavantu (May the 
whole world be happy!) That is My desire. I am 
prepared to do anything for this. I am prepared to 
sacrifice even My life for the welfare of humanity. Of 
what use is the life of one who does not aspire for the 
welfare of humanity? I always wish for the well being 
of others. My feelings are always pure and sacred. If 
your feelings and intentions are noble, you need not be 
worried about money; it will come to your doorstep. 


Embodiments of Love! 


We have caused great inconvenience to you by 
making you wait for a long time. You are all very tired 
having been sitting here patiently for the last three to 
four hours. Having taken part in this congregation, 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 22 


may you develop the spirit of sacrifice and spend your 
time, wealth and energy in the service of the poor! This 
is what I desire from you. I do not ask anything from 
anybody. Help the poor in every possible way. Feed 
the hungry. Food is God. Do not waste food. Do not 
waste money. Money makes many wrongs. Misuse of 
money is evil. The rich squander their wealth in 
drinking and gambling. Money should be put to proper 
use. One should not spend as one pleases. Do not 
waste energy and do not waste time. These are the four 
important principles that a man should adhere to. Time 
wasted is life wasted. Instead of wasting time in vain 
gossip, utilise it to serve society. Help everybody to the 
extent possible. This is what I expect you to do. Come 
and see it for yourself the work that is being done here 
with the spirit of sacrifice, and experience bliss. Here 
you will find the poor with happiness and joy on their 
faces. You should see to it that the poor lead a healthy 
and happy life. That should be your aim in life. 
Paropakara Punyaya Papaya Parapeedanam (one 
attains merit by serving others and commits sin by 
harming them). I bless you all so that you may attain 
the deservedness to see the happiness of the poor. 


Inauguration of SSSIHMS, 19th January 2001, 
Whitefield, Bangalore. 


3 


Vision Of The Atma 


One may be able to repeat Vedas and 
Sastras by rote. 

One may be able to sing ornate poetry 
melodiously. 

If one lacks purity of heart, one is 
bound to be ruined. 

The word of Sai is verily the truth. 


(Telugu Poem) 


Embodiments of Love! 


IF you lack purity of heart, you will not be able 
to understand the principle of Atma, irrespective of 
your educational qualifications. You may be a highly 
learned person but you are not able to see your own 
body when you are in deep sleep. On the contrary, 
even an illiterate person can see himself and the 
surroundings if he opens his eyes. Just as ash covers 
the live embers, man’s vision is clouded by delusion. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 26 


Consequently, he is unable to realise his true nature. 
Man should understand the intimate relationship be- 
tween himself and Divinity. You can acquire immense 
power and strength once you develop purity of heart, 
gain spiritual knowledge and understand Divinity. Sa- 
dhana or spiritual practice does not mean undertaking 
good activities like japa and dhyana. True sadhana lies 
in removing the veil of illusion that covers the 
antahkarana (inner instrument). It is said, Pas- 
hyannapi cha Napashyati Moodho (he is a fool who 
sees yet does not recognise the reality). O man, is it not 
foolishness on your part to think that you have not seen 
God though you see Him in the form of the world. Fire 
is seen if you blow the ash from live embers. You can 
see the pellucid waters only after removing the moss. 
A person’s vision is clouded when he has cataract in 
his eyes, but when the cataract is operated on, he gets 
back his normal vision. Similarly, as long as a person 
is under the influence of the mind, he identifies himself 
with the body and experiences pleasure and pain. Once 
he transcends the mind, 1.e., maya, the dualities of the 
world do not exist for him. He visualises Divinity 
everywhere. Today man tries to know Divinity with his 
mind. In order to visualise Divinity, you should under- 
stand the principle of Atma or ‘I’. The Atma is form- 
less. So long as you are attached to your form, you will 
not understand what Atma means. Everyone introduces 
himself using the letter ‘P’, which is nothing but the 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 Pa | 


Atma. Though not seen, the Atma is present in one and 
all. This Atma is all-pervasive. 


Atma Is The Greatest 


There are three types of ethereal dimensions, 
namely, Bhutakasha, Chitthakasha and Chidakasha. 
Bhutakasha is engulfed by Chitthakasha, which in turn 
is encompassed by Chidakasha. The Bhutakasha, 
which consists of the earth, the sun, the moon and the 
stars, is very vast. The sun is much bigger than the 
planet earth having a circumference of 8000 crore 
miles. But it looks small to our eyes, as it is at a 
distance of 9 crore miles from the earth. The stars are 
still farther away and are much bigger than the sun in 
size though they look like small diamonds adorning the 
sky. Light travels at a speed of 180 thousand miles per 
second. Some of the stars are at such a great distance 
from the earth that the light emanating from them is 
yet to reach the earth. All the stars, the sun, the moon 
and the earth, form a part of Bhutakasha. All these are 
present in Chittha in a subtle form. So, Chitthakasha is 
many times bigger than Bhutakasha. You feel the sun 
is self-effulgent, but in fact, it is the Atma, which 
illumines the sun. So, the Atma is the greatest of all. Its 
vastness cannot be described in words. All the five 
elements are made up of atoms, whereas the Atma is 
not made up of atoms, as it is formless. What do you 
mean by vision of the Atma? It is visualisation of the 
all-pervasive effulgence. The Atma is present in every 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 28 


cell of the human body. In order to understand this, 
you have to transcend form. All the material objects 
have a definite form, but in due course of time they 
lose their identity and merge into the causal dimension, 
1.e., in the Atma. So, man should make an effort to go 
beyond form and merge into the Atma. All the activi- 
ties that are related to the form correspond to Pravritti 
(outward path) 1.e., Bhutakasha, which is made up of 
atoms. All this will ultimately merge into the Atma. 
What is Atma? Bliss is Atma. 


Atma Transcends Name And Form 


In the days of yore, many sages made concerted 
efforts to recognise the nature of the Atma. Ultimately, 
they declared to the world, Vedahametham Purusham 
Mahantham Adithyavarnam Thamasa Parasthath (I 
know the Supreme Being who shines with the efful- 
gence of sun and who is beyond Zhamas (the darkness 
of ignorance). O people, the Atma transcends name 
and form. It is self-effulgent. In order to have the vi- 
sion of the Atma, you don’t need to go to the forest and 
undertake penance. You can see it everywhere once 
you dispel the darkness of ignorance from within. 
Efforts in this direction amount to true Sadhana. 
Divinity is latent in humanity, but you are attributing 
various names and forms to it and are trying to visual- 
ise it through worship and rituals. As a result, you are 
subjected to frustration and depression. First of all, you 
should make efforts to realise the divinity that is latent 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 29 


in Bhutakasha. But how can one understand Divinity 
when he fails to understand humanness. In the first 
place, man should understand what humanness means. 


Only when you transcend Bhutakasha and Chi- 
tthakasha, can you understand Chidakasha. Bhutaka- 
sha is like a small star in the sky of Chitthakasha. The 
same can be said of Chitthakasha as compared to 
Chidakasha. Chidakasha is nothing but the Atma. 
There is nothing beyond this. To understand the form- 
less Atma, you should go beyond form. In the begin- 
ning, you meditate on a specific form, but gradually 
you should go beyond that form and realise the form- 
less Divinity. So long as you are attached to the form, 
you are bound to experience pleasure and pain. 


The formless Atma is experienced in the deep 
sleep state (Sushupti) in which you lose the identity of 
name and form. In the deep sleep state, there are no 
feelings pertaining to Bhutakasha. So long as your 
mind dwells on Bhutakasha, you identify yourself with 
a form. Though the modern man is highly educated, he 
is unable to comprehend the principles of Bhutakasha, 
Chitthakasha and Chidakasha. He is keeping himself 
away from such an enquiry, thinking them to be 
abstruse philosophical truths. It is not mere philosophy. 
They are the eternal truths, which are to be understood 
and put into practice in daily life. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 30 


In Bhutakasha, beings are many, but the 
underlying Atmic principle is the same. Right from his 
childhood to old age, man uses the letter ‘I’ while 
introducing himself. Man passes through different 
stages of life, but the ‘I’ in him remains the same. That 
changeless ‘I’ is verily the Atma. Oblivious to the 
presence of such divine principle within, man is after 
the worldly and ephemeral pleasures. This corresponds 
to Pravritti. But the Atma is related to Nivritti. As man 
is engrossed in Pravritti, he is not able to realise his 
true nature. 


Divinity Pervades The Entire Nature 


All that you see in the external world is nothing 
but the manifestation of God. All of you who have 
assembled here are the embodiments of God. Even this 
hall is a manifestation of God. In fact, you are yourself 
God. Though you see God everywhere, still you search 
for Him. Here is a small example. The hostel boys see 
Sai Gita every day, so they are not excited about it. But 
if they happen to see even the tail of an elephant in a 
forest, they would feel thrilled. Likewise, though you 
see God in the form of people around you, you are not 
excited. But if you see a person with three heads, you 
will become ecstatic thinking that you had the vision of 
Divine Cosmic Form. You should understand that 
Divinity pervades the entire nature. Lord Krishna 
declared in the Gita. Mamaivamsho Jeevaloke 
Jeevabhuta Sanathana (the eternal Atma in all beings 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 eal 


is a part of My Being). I and you are not separate. We 
are one and the same. Once you understand this truth, 
you will not go in search of God here and there. All 
that you find in the external world is nothing but Viswa 
Virat Swarup (cosmic Divine form). All forms are His. 
Form is associated with Pravritti. It is the root cause of 
delusion. What is Maya? That which leads to mistaken 
identity is Maya. When you mistake a rope for a snake 
in the darkness, you are scared. But when you flash 
torchlight on it, you realise that it is a rope and not a 
snake. It is the mistaken identity that has given rise to 
fear in you. Once you know the reality, you become 
fearless. Due to the influence (Prabhava) of worldly 
objects, you have forgotten your Swabhava (true 
nature). Once you recognise your Swabhava and 
strictly adhere to it, there will be no scope for delusion 
or fear. Where is the question of fear when you are 
everything and there is nobody other than you? An 
actor once came to the Court of a King to give per- 
formances. That day, he had come dressed as Sankara- 
charya. He gave a scholarly exposition on the philoso- 
phy of Adi Sankara. He preached thus: 


Janma Dukkham, Jara Dukkham, Jaya Dukkham 
Punah Punaha, 


Antyakale Maha Dukkham, Tasmath Jagrata 
Jagrataha 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 32 


(Birth, old age and worldly life are full of 
misery. Death too is miserable. Beware of this 
truth.) 


Matha Nasthi, Pitha Nasthi, 
Nasthi Bandhu Sahodaraha 
Artham Nasthi, Griham Nasthi, 
Thasmath Jagrata Jagrataha 


(Parents, friends, relatives and wealth are like 
passing clouds. Beware of this truth.) 


The King was very pleased and offered a lot of 
gold. The actor said, “O King, a Sanyasi does not need 
gold. I cannot accept this gift.” The next day the actor 
appeared in the Court as a dancer. He danced beauti- 
fully and pleased everyone present. At the end of the 
performance the King offered a small gift of just a few 
coins. The actor said, “O King, this payment is meagre 
and not enough.” The King was astonished and asked, 
“Yesterday, you refused a substantial gift but today 
you are demanding more. What is the reason for this 
strange behaviour?” The actor replied, “O King, an 
actor will not be true to his profession if his words do 
not match the costume he is wearing. Yesterday, I 
played the role of a Sanyasi and therefore, spurned 
wealth. Today, I am a dancer, and a dancer always 
expects a handsome reward! My conduct must be in 
consonance with my garb.” Today, though man has put 
on the garb of a human being, his conduct is not in 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 a3 


accordance with his ‘dress’. Having been born as a 
human being, man should lead his life with self-confid- 
ence and uphold his self-respect. 


Abraham Lincoln 


You are aware of how Abraham Lincoln, though 
born in a poor family, rose to become the President of 
America because of his self-confidence. He was born 
in a poor family. His schoolmates used to heckle him 
for his dress and poverty. Lincoln, unable to bear this 
humiliation, approached his mother and said, “Mother, 
I am subjected to a lot of ridicule by fellow students. 
Please get me a new dress.” Then the mother told him, 
“Son, we are not well-to-do. You must act according to 
our family condition. Don’t be deterred by other peo- 
ple’s taunts. Develop self-confidence and uphold your 
self-respect. From that moment, Lincoln strictly fol- 
lowed the advice of his mother. After some time, his 
mother passed away, and his father married again. His 
stepmother was also quite affectionate towards him 
and encouraged him to persevere on the path shown by 
his mother. After his father’s death, Lincoln, who was 
aged 16 years then, left home to earn his livelihood and 
started selling newspapers. There also he continued to 
uphold his self-respect. Seeing his good qualities, his 
friends encouraged him to contest the elections. Lin- 
coln stood for elections and won with a thumping ma- 
jority. He was made the President of America. Though 
born into a poor family, he rose to an exalted position 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 34 


because of his self-confidence and self-respect. 
Students! 


Uphold your self-respect. First of all, understand 
what Atma means. The principle of ‘I’ that is present 
in everybody is Atma. The Vedas declare. Aham 
Brahmasmi (1 am Brahma). But in My view, even this 
is not complete truth because the presence of ‘I’ and 
Brahma symbolises duality. Truth is one, not two. Man 
should hold on to the principle of non-dualism and 
sanctify his life. Once you develop faith in this prin- 
ciple, you will have all the purity and prosperity. 


Today is the very auspicious day of Sivarathri. 
Siva stands for auspiciousness. What is so special and 
auspicious about Sivarathri? Mind has 16 aspects, of 
which 15 are merged on this night and only one is 
remaining. Make proper use of this holy night by 
undertaking Sadhana with devotion and steadfastness. 
What sort of Sadhana you must undertake? Cleanse 
your heart of all evil qualities. Evil qualities arise in 
you because of the misuse of the senses. It is the root 
cause of all sins. Sadhana does not mean doing Japa 
and meditation. You should develop pure and divine 
feelings in you. Consider everyone as divine. Respect 
them. “All are Mine and I belong to everybody.” Once 
you have such firm conviction, you can enjoy immense 
happiness in life. There will be no trace of worry in 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 a5 


your life 
Have Firm Faith In God 


Once while Sankaracharya was going to river 
Ganga with his 14 disciples, he came across a Brahmin 
who was memorising some Sanskrit passage, “Dukrun 
Karane”’. The Acharya asked him, what he was doing 
and the Brahmin replied that he was studying Panini 
(the great grammarian). “What do you gain out of this 
study of grammar’, the Acharya asked. He replied, “I 
shall become a great scholar and go to some royal 
Court or the other and become an official scholar and 
earn all the wealth that I need. With wealth earned like 
that, I shall lead a happy life.” “How long will you live 
like that?” “I shall live as long as I am alive.” “What 
next?” asked the Acharya. He replied, “I don’t know,” 
Then, Sankaracharya made his famous pronouncement, 
“Bhaja Govindam, Bhaja Govindam, Govindam Bhaja 
Moodhamathe, Samprapthe Sannihite Kale Nahi Nahi 
Rakshati Dukrun Karane,”’ (O fool, chant the name of 
Govinda. When the hour of death approaches, the 
nuances of grammar will not come to your rescue). 
The Acharya said, “You fool, you will enjoy all the 
pleasures of the world as long as you are alive, but 
after this body passes away, what will you do? So, 
keep chanting the name of Govinda incessantly and 
don’t waste your time in these mundane studies. These 
studies are all related to Pravritti. This helps only for a 
very short time. You are proud of your youth; how 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 36 


long does youth last? Soon you will be an old man. Do 
not put your faith on your youthful prowess, place your 
firm faith in God.” Realise your self-confidence. Self- 
confidence leads to self-satisfaction and self-satisfac- 
tion leads to self-realisation. 


Students! 


‘I’ is a permanent reality. Consider this Atma as 
Godhead itself. Without a substantial basis, there will 
be no manifestation. The basis for the waves in the 
ocean is the water therein. In the same manner, Atma 
is the basis for the phenomenal world. All the good and 
bad, praise and blame that happen are all mere passing 
clouds. The baby, the boy, the youth and the old man 
are all differences in form but the Atma in the person is 
the unchanging entity. While traveling in the train, you 
see out of the window, trees, mountains and lakes 
fleeting past. This is an illusion. Sometimes, in the 
skies, you see as if the moon is moving fast, while in 
reality the clouds are moving. This again is an illusion. 
The moon is not moving at the same pace as the 
clouds. In the same way, the Atman does not change or 
move; it is only our feelings that change. 


Total Understanding Is Awareness 
Embodiments of Love! 


Today is a very holy day. The time at 6 o’clock 
is highly sacred. At that time, the Atma Lingam will be 
manifested. God is sometimes called the Hiranya- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 oF 


garbha. The golden Lingas emerge from Hiranya- 
garbha itself. Don’t conclude that only Swami is Hi- 
ranyagarbha. All of you are manifestations of Hiran- 
yagarbha. You are also eternal and self-effulgent. Hold 
this truth firmly in your heart. Keep this awareness 
firm. 


We have ‘Awareness classes’ in our Institutions. 
Knowing this or that bit of information is not complete 
awareness. Awareness implies total understanding. 
Having seen just the tail of a rat, how can you claim to 
have seen the rat itself? Today what the scientists have 
known is only a fraction of the total truth. But they 
think that they know everything. 


First of all, you should understand what human- 
ness means. In accordance with your form, you should 
have human qualities. Of what use is your life if you 
behave like a monkey? Understand that you belong to 
mankind. Do not have a monkey mind. One whose 
heart is full of compassion alone is a true human being. 
Today man talks of the need for compassion but has 
filled his heart with demonic qualities like anger, 
greed, jealousy, etc. 


Excessive Desire Causes Imbalance In Nature 


Man should put a ceiling on his desires. As 
man’s conduct is perverted, today we find natural 
calamities taking place. You are aware of the devas- 
tation caused by the earthquake in Gujarat. Thousands 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 38 


of people lost their lives. The reason for this is that, 
man is entertaining excessive desires. God maintains 
perfect balance in His creation. In God’s creation, the 
earth and the oceans are endowed with balance. But 
man is indiscriminately exploiting the earth for extract- 
ing oil. Every day tonnes of fish are caught from the 
oceans. This indiscriminate exploitation of nature 
results in imbalance in earth, which is playing havoc 
with human lives. Only when man is free from Kam- 
pam (unsteadiness) within, will he not be troubled by 
Bhukampam (earthquake). Not only the people of 
Bharat but also the people of the entire world should 
strive to maintain balance. The five elements are 
nothing but manifestations of the Divine. Man’s life 
will be secure only when he realises this truth and acts 
accordingly. A few days ago, I had sent Lorry loads of 
rice, grams, etc., to the earthquake victims of Gujarat. 
Some people asked “Swami, why should you take the 
trouble of spending so much money for sending the 
relief material to Gujarat. You could have as well 
averted the earthquake.” I replied, “My dear, man has 
to blame himself for the earthquakes. Due to excessive 
greed for wealth, he is disturbing the balance of the 
earth. Hence the earthquake. That is the law of Nature. 
You have to express your love for man by helping the 
needy. Love is your nature. Just as balance is very 
much essential for Nature, so also love is very much 
needed for man. Know that whatever God has created 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 39 


is for your own welfare. You should enjoy Nature 
according to your need. You should not rob Nature of 
its resources to satisfy your greed. Here is an example. 
Once a greedy person owned a duck, which used to lay 
a golden egg every day. One day, he ripped open the 
stomach of the duck thinking that he would get many 
golden eggs at a time. Today man also is indulging in 
such foolish and greedy acts. Instead of being satisfied 
with what Nature is giving him, he aspires for more 
and more, and in the process, creating imbalance in 
Nature. 


Today scientists are interested in new inven- 
tions. The advancement in science and technology has 
also led to imbalance in Nature. As a result, there are 
earthquakes and no timely rains. Science should be 
utilised only to the extent needed. Science has its 
limitations, and crossing those limits leads to danger. 


You have a long way to go. Adhere to truth and 
righteousness. Our ancient sages said, Sathyam 
Bruyath, Priyam Bruyath, Na Bruyath Sathyama- 
priyam (speak truth, speak pleasantly and do not speak 
unpalatable truth). Make proper use of natural resour- 
ces and do not put them to misuse. Help everybody and 
make them happy. Share all the good things you have 
learnt with others. This is your foremost duty. 


Sivarathri, 21.02.2001, Prasanthi Nilayam. 


Have Steady Faith In The Atma 


The evil effects of Kali Age cannot shake the 
one whose heart is filled with compassion, 
whose speech is suffused with truth and whose 
body is used for serving others. 

(Sanskrit Verse) 


Embodiments of Love! 


IN this world, all the beings are classified into 
four categories: (1) Andaja, that which is born out of 
an egg, (2) Pindaja, that which is born out of the 
mother’s womb, (3) Uthbhija, that which is born out of 
the earth (4) Swedaja, that which is born out of sweat. 
Under each category, there are 21 lakh types of 
species. Hence, it is said that there are 84 lakh species 
in God’s creation. The 84 lakh species are subjected to 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 42 


three types of sufferings, namely Adhibhouthika, 
Adhidaivika and Adhyatmika, Adhibhouthika refers to 
the diseases that are caused by man’s attachment to the 
physical world. It also refers to the diseases that are 
caused by insects like mosquitoes, flies, etc. Adhi- 
daivika is related to the suffering caused by natural 
calamities like earthquakes, floods, and epidemics like 
cholera, plague, etc. Adhyatmika refers to the suffering 
that result from wrong food and bad habits. It also 
indicates to the suffering caused by cruel animals and 
wicked people. What is the remedy for these three 
types of sufferings? One should have strong faith in the 
Self. That is the panacea for all the suffering. One 
should strive to experience Atmic bliss for which nine 
paths of devotion are prescribed: Sravanam (listening), 
Kirtanam (singing), Vishnusmaranam (contemplating 
on Vishnu), Padasevanam (serving the Lotus Feet), 
Archanam (worship), Vandanam (salutation), Dasyam 
(servitude), Sneham (friendship), Atmanivedanam (Self 
surrender). Man can get rid of his afflictions by taking 
to any of these nine paths. 


Faith In The Atma Is Your Dharma 


Before the commencement of the Kurukshetra 
War, Duryodhana and Dussasana prostrated before 
their mother Gandhari seeking her blessings. Gandhari, 
being one of pure heart, steady mind and selfless love, 
blessed them saying, “Yatho Dharmah Thatho Jaya- 
ha” (victory is where Dharma is). Then they went to 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 43 


their preceptor Dronacharya to pay their respects. He 
blessed them saying, “Yatho Dharmah Thatho Krish- 
nah Yatho Krishna Thatho Jayaha. Where righteous- 
ness is there Krishna is; where Krishna is, there victory 
is). You are born as a human being but are you 
following the Dharma that is prescribed for a human 
being? If so, your Dharma will certainly protect you. 


Today man is subjected to hardships because 
he has forgotten the source of his origin. Fish is born in 
water. It cannot survive even for a while without water. 
It is happy only when it is in water, the place of its 
origin. What is the source of man’s origin? Lord Krish- 
na declared in the Gita, “Mamaivamsho Jeevaloke Jee- 
vabhuta Sanathanaha” (the eternal Atma in all beings 
is a part of My Being). From this it is evident that man 
is a spark of the Divine. He has originated from the 
principle of Atma. Having been born from the Atma, 
man should always contemplate on the Atma. He will 
become restless and face hardships if he forgets the 
Atma. So, never forget the Atma, the place of your ori- 
gin. Have faith in the Atma. Respect it and revere it. 
Treat Atma as the basis of your life. This is the Dhar- 
ma that man should adhere to. You may occupy posi- 
tions of authority, you may have wealth and prosperity, 
but none of them can protect you. Only faith in the Self 
can protect you. You may involve yourself in any work 
you like but have unwavering faith in Atma. 


When a mother goes to the river to fetch water, 
she leaves her child in the cradle. On her way back, she 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 44 


may be conversing with other ladies while carrying a 
pot full of water on her head. But her mind will be 
constantly focused on her child. She wants to get back 
home as quickly as possible, lest her child should wake 
up and start crying. Likewise, your mind should be 
constantly focused on the Atma in all your activities. 
That should be your aim. You participated in the bha- 
jan throughout the night. While doing bhajans, you 
may sing various songs with different tunes and beats 
but your mind should be constantly fixed on the Atma. 
All your actions must be done with the sole purpose to 
please God. Arjuna asked Lord Krishna as to how he 
could fight in the war if he had to constantly think of 
God. Krishna replied, “O simpleton, it is your body 
and senses that are involved in the warfare. Such being 
the case, you can always focus the mind on God.” 


See No Evil, Hear No Evil, Speak No Evil 


Direct your mind on God instead of directing it 
on the senses. As I pointed out yesterday senses are 
responsible for both merit and sin. If you put them to 
misuse, you will incur sin. If they are used in a proper 
way it results in merit. Speak softly and sweetly and 
cultivate a good mind. Only then will you earn the 
respect of others. You cannot always oblige, but you 
can speak always obligingly. Cultivate right vision. 
Evil looks will put you in danger. Keechaka cast his 
evil looks on Draupadi, which eventually led to his 
death at the hands of Bhima. Do not listen to evil talk. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 45 


Kaikeyi paid heed to the evil words of Mandhara, 
which ultimately led to the exile of Rama, whom she 
had loved much more than her own son, Bharata. 
Today do you find any woman named Kaikeyi or Man- 
dhara? No. Society will not respect those who indulge 
in evil talk and listen to evil. So, you should always 
speak good and listen to good words. If you happen to 
hear something evil do not share it with others. What is 
the purpose in causing unrest to others by telling them 
something, which has caused unrest to you. Today 
there are people who not only lend their ear to evil talk 
but also spread the same to the rest of society causing a 
great deal of unrest. Paropakaraya Punyaya Papaya 
Parapeedanam (one attains merit by serving others and 
commits sin by hurting them). Let your tongue utter 
such words, which will give joy to others. This is pre- 
cisely what you have done the whole night. You sang 
the name of God, which gave joy to one and all. When 
you think of God, there will be no scope for criticism 
or talking ill of others, but there is a type of prayer in 
which the devotee reminds God of those who troubled 
Him. Once Vidura prayed to Krishna thus: “O Krishna, 
why don’t you come to my house? Never did I tie you 
to a pillar and whip you the way Sakkubai’s mother-in- 
law did. Never did I try to harm you the way Kamsa 
did. Never did I abuse you the way Sisupala did. Then 
why don’t you visit my house?” 


You may be aware of how Sisupala hurled 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 46 


abuses at Krishna in the open Court questioning the 
latter’s credentials to receive the grand offering made 
by Dharmaraja at the conclusion of Rajasuya Yaga. He 
said, “O Krishna, what makes you think that you 
deserve this grand offering more than others in this 
Court? Is it because you played pranks with Gopikas as 
you pleased? Don’t indulge in self-aggrandizement, 
shut up.” Thus, as Sisupala had crossed his limits, 
Krishna took the plate in which the offering was made 
and hurled it at Sisupala, which in a trice beheaded 
him. Krishna’s act was appreciated by one and all. 
Many people are under the impression that Krishna 
used His chakra (discus) to kill Sisupala; but in fact, it 
was only a plate that beheaded him. When the time is 
not favourable, even a stick in hand will turn into a 
snake. On the contrary, if your time is favourable, even 
if you stamp on a snake, it will remain harmless like a 
stick. In order to enjoy favourable time always, you 
must fill your heart with sacred feelings. The history of 
Bharat is replete with many examples that bear 
testimony to this truth. Such sacred history is being 
forgotten today and people are resorting to unrighteous 
means and setting bad examples. Learn the sacred 
lessons that the history of Bharat teaches. Cultivate 
sacred feelings. Let your ears listen to sacred stories. 
Let your tongue utter sacred words and let your hands 
perform meritorious deeds. You know why God has 
given you hands? Is it merely to feed your stomach? 
No. They must be used in the service of society. You 
know why feet are given? Not to wander in the streets 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 47 


like a vagabond, but to visit sacred places. 


The evil effects of Kali Age cannot shake the 
one whose heart is filled with compassion, whose 
speech is suffused with truth and whose body is used 
for serving others. 


(Sanskrit Verse) 


Today people are prepared to listen to vain 
gossip but when the sacred stories of the Lord are 
narrated, their ears get clogged. People are never 
tired of going to cinemas but their eyes find it very 
difficult to concentrate on the beautiful form of the 
Lord even for a minute. 


(Telugu Song) 


People see anything and everything with their 
eyes wide open, but when they visit a temple, they 
close their eyes while standing in front of the beautiful 
image of the Lord. What an irony it is! Senses can lead 
you to either sin or merit. It is your duty to put them on 
the right path and earn merit. Then God will fulfill all 
your wishes. You don’t need to ask Him. 


Do not ask, O mind, do not ask. The more you 
ask, the more you will be neglected. God will certainly 
grant you what you deserve without your asking. Did 
He not grant the wish of Sabari, who never asked? Did 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 48 


He not redeem the bird Jatayu, who never asked but 
sacrificed his life for His cause? 


(Telugu Poem) 


So, first and foremost, make your heart pure. It 
is only purity that attracts Divinity. If the iron filings 
are rusted, even the most powerful magnet will not 
attract them. The iron filings may blame the magnet, 
saying it has no power. But the magnet tells them, 
“You may think as you please, I am not bothered. Get 
rid of the rust and become pure. Only then will I attract 
you.” In the same manner, how do you expect God to 
attract your mind, which is rusted with evil thoughts? 
See good, listen to good things, speak good and 
pleasant words, undertake sacred activities. If you act 
in this manner, without your asking God will certainly 
bestow His grace on you. 


Keep Your Senses Under Check 


Yesterday evening at 6 o’clock, the most auspi- 
cious time arrived during which the emergence of the 
Linga took place. Why is Sivarathri considered auspi- 
cious? The reason is this. The moon has 16 kalas 
(aspects) and so too the mind. On the day of Sivarathri, 
15 are merged and only one remains. If the 16th aspect 
is also merged, one attains Divinity. This total merger 
will take place only when one chants the divine name 
continuously and wholeheartedly. Of all the senses, the 
tongue is very important. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 49 


O tongue, the knower of taste you are very 
sacred. Speak truth in the most pleasing manner. 
Chant the Divine names of Govinda, Madhava and 
Damodara incessantly. This is your foremost duty. 

(Sanskrit Verse) 


The tongue is one of sacrifice. When it tastes 
sweet delicacies, it sends them to the stomach. But if 
the item is bitter, the tongue at once spits it out. Not 
merely that, the tongue conducts itself in the most 
respectful manner. It does not step out of its house 
(mouth) under any circumstances. It does all its work 
without crossing its limits. While all other senses do 
only one work each, the tongue alone has the capacity 
to do two types of work, namely, to taste and to speak. 
That is why one has to exercise proper control over the 
tongue lest it should indulge in sinful activities like 
talking ill of others. In times of anger, observe silence. 
Our ancients taught: Talk less, work more. The lesser 
you talk, the purer your heart remains. 


Contemplation on God is the only means to 
keep the senses pure. But today people have absolutely 
no control over their senses. Even the animals have a 
reason and a season but not the modern man. He is 
facing limitless difficulties, as he has not kept senses 
under proper control. All the spiritual practices are 
meant to exercise control over the senses. Eat to the 
extent necessary. Do not overload your stomach. 
Divide your stomach into three equal parts. Fill one 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 50 


part with food, one with water and leave the remaining 
empty. But today, some people overload their stomach 
to such an extent that they find it extremely difficult to 
even get up after their meals. Such people are bound to 
suffer from indigestion. 


You may exercise control over your food but 
you need not set any boundaries for your love. It 
should be given total freedom. Love one and all. Love 
transcends the senses. “All are mine. The life principle 
that exists in me exists in everybody.” With this 
feeling of unity, share your love with everybody. Love 
alone can confer peace, which everyone aspires for. 


Your vasana (innate tendencies) depend on the 
feelings you cultivate in your heart. Here is a small 
example. A paper has no smell by itself. If it is used 
for wrapping pakodas or dry fish or Jasmine flowers, it 
emits the smell of the item wrapped, good or bad. Your 
heart may be compared to a paper. If good feelings are 
packed in it, you will certainly develop good tenden- 
cies. See good, hear good, talk good, and do good. 
Then the evil effect of Kali will have no impact on 
you. Do not allow the Kali Prabhava (effect of Kali 
Age) overpower your Swabhava (true nature). Today 
practice of dharma is fast declining and, consequently, 
the water level in earth is also going down. Humanness 
has become scarce. There is no purity in society, no 
morality in politics. Neethi (morality) alone can sustain 
manava jathi (human race). 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 51 


Embodiments of Love! 


When you sing Bhajans, take care that the 
words you utter do not convey negative meanings. 
Here is an example. Our boys sing many Hindi bha- 
jans, in which they often use the word “Thu’ meaning 
‘you’. They sing ‘Thu’ Rama’, ‘Thu Krishna’, ‘Thu 
Sai’ (you are Rama, you are Krishna, you are Sai, etc.) 
But in Telugu, the letter ‘Thu’ conveys a derogatory 
meaning. You may use ‘Thu Hai’ instead of ‘Thu’. The 
Bhajans you sing must convey sacred meanings. You 
should not give scope for disrespectful words. 


Bhakta Pothana 


Yesterday Raju spoke about Pothana, a great 
poet and devotee of Rama. He was one with pure heart. 
He was the one who composed the Bhagavata in Telu- 
gu. He firmly believed that it was Lord Rama Himself 
who wrote the Bhagavata through him. His name 
Pothana has a profound inner meaning. ‘Po’ means ‘to 
drive out’ and ‘Thana’ means the feeling of ‘his’. So, 
he had driven away the feeling of ‘mine’ and thus 
became a great devotee. 


Srinatha, the famous poet from the royal court, 
had given his daughter in marriage to Pothana’s son. 
Pothana’s family used to eke out their livelihood 
through farming. Once Srinatha came to see them in a 
palanquin. On the way, he found Pothana’s son in- 
volved in ploughing the field. In a sarcastic tone, he 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 52 


asked him, “O farmer, how are you?” Pothana’s son 
was not upset by this sarcastic remark. In fact, he gave 
a fitting reply in the most loving manner thus: “Sir, it 
is better to take refuge in Bhumatha (mother Earth) and 
Gomatha (mother cow) and lead a dignified life than to 
seek the refuge of a king, and be subservient to him.” 


Those who repose their faith in Bhumatha and 
Gomatha will never lack anything in life. Since times 
of yore, Bharatiyas considered Bhumatha and Goma- 
tha as the very basis of their life. But today we find 
many people are giving up agriculture and migrating to 
towns in search of money. They watch television day 
in and day out and aspire for luxurious life. As more 
and more people are giving up agriculture and desert- 
ing villages, scarcity for food has arisen. Having given 
up farming, how can you expect the mother Earth to 
feed you? Villages are the very life breath of Indian 
culture. Even to day, Indian culture is sustained only 
in villages, not in towns. Only people of villages are 
aware of the greatness of Indian culture. As people 
have lost respect and reverence for mother Earth, we 
experience earthquakes and such other natural calami- 
ties causing untold destruction. 


In Bhagavatha, there is a story of Vishnu and 
His consort Lakshmi involved in a game of chess. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 53 


Generally, women are more intelligent than men. 
Though men are also endowed with high intelligence, 
they can never make full use of it, as their mind always 
wavers. Lakshmi, being one of intelligence, was able 
to arrest the movement of Vishnu’s elephant. Sudden- 
ly, Vishnu stood up and said, “O elephant, I will come 
to your rescue, don’t worry.” Lakshmi immediately 
said, “impossible”, thinking that Vishnu was referring 
to the elephant in the game. But in fact, Vishnu’s mind 
was on Gajendra (King of elephants), who by then had 
totally surrendered to Him as his desperate attempts to 
wriggle out of the crocodile’s grasp proved futile. 
Gajendra, being highly egoistic had utmost faith in his 
physical prowess. But as he got tired, he realised that 
God alone could save him. He cried out, “O Lord, I 
have no refuge other than You. I surrender to You 
completely. Please forgive my sins and come to my 
rescue.” Vishnu, being one of compassion, rushed 1m- 
mediately and saved Gajendra. (At this juncture, Bha- 
gawan recited a beautiful poem composed by Pothana 
describing Lakshmi’s plight, as she found her husband 
Vishnu rushing to save His devotee without telling her 
and without even taking any weapons with (Him.) All 
the compositions of Pothana are suffused with sacred- 
ness. He composed the Bhagavata with the sole pur- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 54 


pose of describing the glories of the Lord, not to 
parade his poetic skills. Unlike many ordinary poets, 
he was never after name and fame. Pothana’s words 
contained the essence of the Vedas. The path shown by 
Pothana is the royal road to liberation. 


Sivarathri, 22.02.2001, Prasanthi Nilayam 


) 


Know Thyself 


Neither merit nor sin, nor comfort nor misery, 
nor incantations, nor places of pilgrimage, nor 
scriptures nor sacrifice, nor food nor eating 
nor eater. I (the Atman) am the very personi- 
fication of Chidananda. I am Siva Himself. 


(Sanskrit Verse) 


Embodiments of Love! 


RIGHT from the beginning, the Vedas have 
taught the principles of equality to mankind. It says 
that you are neither sin nor merit, neither happiness nor 
misery. You are neither Yajna nor charity. You are 
neither the ritual offering nor the process of worship. 
You are neither a man nor an animal. Then who are 
you? You are the embodiment of Siva (auspicious- 
ness). Since man has not understood the fundamental 
principle of creation, he goes by name and form and 
distinguishes among birds, animals, human beings, etc. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 56 


One should not repose faith in name and form. Name 
and form correspond to Pravritti (outward path). One 
should take to the path of Nivritti (inward path) and 
understand the fundamental principle of creation. (At 
this juncture Swami created a lemon). This is a lemon. 
We call it lemon on the basis of its form and taste. 
These reflect Pravritti aspect and not Nivritti. In fact, it 
is nothing but a combination of cells, molecules and 
atoms and in each of these cells there is immanent 
potentiality of the whole lemon. The cells have neither 
beginning nor end. These cells are of immense power. 
This immense potentiality is related to the akasa 
(space). This Akasa is related to the pure conscious- 
ness. Even the lemon is a representation of pure 
consciousness. The person who eats the lemon is also a 
personification of consciousness. Everything that IS, is 
consciousness itself. Name and form are conditioned 
by Pravritti (outward path) and are not related to the 
internal path, namely, Nivritti. 


Every Object Is Pervaded By Consciousness 


Every man uses the terms ‘I’ and ‘mine’. This 
handkerchief, tumbler, car, house, etc., are all related 
to the expression ‘mine’ and not to the Atmatathwa ‘I’. 
Thus, ‘mine’ relates to Pravritti while the Atma is 
related to Nivritti. The term ‘I’ (Atman) is constant, 
unchanging and eternal. This ‘I’ term is Constant 
Integrated Awareness. ‘I’ is the embodiment of con- 
sciousness. As this principle is immanent in every 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 a 


person, everybody is the personification of conscious- 
ness. We have therefore to recognise the fundamental 
principle or mooladhara. There are three aspects to it. 
They are pravikriti, paryanakruti, and pariprasna, 
Pravikriti means surrendering one’s own self. 
Secondly, one has to surrender all that one considers 
me and mine. Thirdly, one must constantly be en- 
quiring about this Atmatathwa from one who has 
realized it. To recognise that I am not the body, the 
mind or the intellect or any of these things that are 
manifest in the external world is the import of Pari- 
prasna. The Vedas from ancient times have been 
teaching these eternal truths. 


First of all, you must enquire into the nature of 
the Self. The cells are made of atoms, which have no 
beginning or end. Atoms and molecules are mani- 
festations of the Divine principle. Wherefrom did this 
Divine power manifest? It arises from akasa (space). 
Sarvathah Pani-padam Tat Sarvathokshi Siromukham 
Sarvathah Sruthimalloke Sarvamavruthya Thishtathi 
(with hands, feet, eyes, head, mouth and ears pervad- 
ing everything, He permeates the entire universe). 
Consciousness is all-pervasive. Wherever it falls, it 
occupies the object therein. Object occupies space and 
space 1s pervaded by Consciousness and hence all 
objects are also pervaded by Consciousness. There are 
two aspects to this: being and manifesting. This mani- 
festation (Bhathi-effulgence) is the Atmic principle. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 58 


This Atmic principle is consciousness itself. It is this 
effulgence that is variously called Atma, Paramatma, 
Paramajyoti, etc. It is from this effulgence that the 
various objects of the world manifest. The Vedas call 
this manifestation as Atma (1). This is not created by 
anybody. It is Self — manifest. There is an eternal prin- 
ciple of ‘I’ present inside the individual. The feeling of 
‘mine’ is relating to external objects. ‘I’ is the Atman 
and ‘mine’ is maya (illusion). The changeless principle 
is immanent in all objects of the world. But man falls 
into error due to his vasanas (innate tendencies) and 
abhyasas (habits). Man creates for himself manifold 
relationships like my son, my brother, etc. The body 
consciousness is the cause for these bonds. Who is the 
mother and who is the child before birth? Who is the 
husband and who is the wife before marriage? All 
these are transient relationships created by man and 
they are as impermanent as passing clouds. Getting lost 
in these transient relationships, man falls into delusion 
(bhrama). When you are in deep sleep, you are not 
even aware of your own body. In samadhi, similarly, 
the sadhaka does not feel his body. It is believed by 
some that what is perceived by the senses only is real. 
Actually, none of it is real. The Atma alone appears as 
reflection, reaction and resound. None of these is your- 
self. The Atmic principle alone is your Self. Nobody 
else can create your inner reality nor can anyone deny 
it. This ‘I’ is the true eternal principle. Nirgu- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 59 


nam, Niranjanam, Sanathana Niketanam, Nithya, Sud- 
dha, Buddha, Muktha, Nirmala Swarupinam (Attri- 
buteless, pure, final abode, eternal, unsullied, en- 
lightened, free and embodiment of sacredness). This 
Atmic principle is the very personification of Divinity; 
hence the expression Easwara Sarvabhutanam (God is 
the indweller in all beings). It is this principle of 
universal divinity that is asserted by great scholars. For 
instance, all of you know the story of Adi Sankara and 
the Brahmin who was learning Panini’s Grammar 
whom Sankara admonished to concentrate on Govinda 
Nama (Bhaja Govindam, etc.). In our daily life, we 
give different names to different persons and objects. If 
you just call, ‘hey boy’, who will come? But if you 
call, ‘hey Rama’, the boy named Rama will immedi- 
ately respond. You are not born with any name. Names 
are imposed. Even the very body that you possess is 
not you. By constant repetition of ‘I’ in relation to the 
body, you have fallen into the illusion of body 
consciousness. Whenever you are able to apply the 
expression ‘my’ to any object, from your handkerchief 
to the various limbs, it implies that ‘you’ are different 
from the object denoted by the expression ‘mine’. 
Then who are you? To recognise this, Vedanta has 
given various expositions. If you find the true differ- 
entiation between ‘me’ and ‘mine’ in its true implica- 
tion, the relationships in the entire world become clear. 
The sense of possession ‘mine’ is entirely separated 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 60 


from your true self. Your self transcends all these. That 
is why the Veda makes the assertion, Aham Brahmasmi 
(I am Brahman). It does not say, Brahma is mine. It 
says, I am the very personification of Brahman. So, 
one should try to recognise this principle of ‘I’. 


Understand the Fundamental Principle 


Embodiments of Love! 


Firstly, this confusion arises because of the 
distinction of ‘I? and ‘mine’ and consequent neglect of 
the principles of the cell, molecule, atom, etc. This 
lemon is an agglomeration of atoms and not a lemon 
per se. For our convenience we have given it the name 
lemon, not for the sake of understanding the basic 
reality of atoms and molecules. What is knowledge? 
Advaita Darshanam Jnanam (perception of the One 
without a second is supreme knowledge). This is a 
body with various systems of blood, food, etc., in it. It 
is alive only so long as all these systems are functional. 
It becomes a dead body, the moment these systems 
stop functioning. The body is dead but the cells and 
atoms are still there. Atoms get back to atoms. Hence, 
it is necessary, first of all, to recognise the principle of 
mooladhara. What is the basis for water? When 
hydrogen and oxygen combine, we get water and we 
can drink it. But can we drink hydrogen or oxygen, 
when we are thirsty? For convenience, we postulate 
such variety. But all this variety is mere mithya 
(relative reality). What is Mithya? It is neither truth nor 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 61 


untruth but an appearances of the non-existent as real. 
Such appearances are temporary and transient and 
change their form after some time. Truth is unchang- 
ing. Trikala Badhyam Sathyam (that which is un- 
changing in the past, present and future) alone is truth. 


Man today resorts to many evil ways for the 
sake of power and pelf. But how long do they last? 
They come and go. Ma Kuru Dhana Jana Yauvana 
Garvam, Harathi Nimeshath Kalah Sarvam (Do not be 
proud of your wealth, progeny and youth; all will be 
destroyed in due course). Presuming such a transient 
world as true, you waste your life in such pursuits. You 
are born so that you may fulfill the purpose of your 
life. Sareeramadhyam Khalu Dharma Sadhanam (the 
body is solely intended for the pursuit of righteous- 
ness). What is your dharma? Does everything that 
pleases you constitute dharma? Not at all. True 
adherence to your conscience is righteousness proper. 
You abandon the dictates of your conscience and 
become a victim of delusion. You see your reflection 
in a mirror, but is the image real? In fact, it suffers 
from lateral inversion. How can such erroneous images 
become true? In the same manner, the entire external 
world is a reflection of your inner reality. Your inner 
reality should be the basis. When you have a firm grip 
on the principle of mooladhara, all external delusions 
and illusions vanish. From birth to death, man neglects 
his inner fundamental basis (mooladhara) and 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 62 


dissipates his life and energy on the objects of the 
external world. This is not the purpose of life. You 
must realise the truth of your inner source and 
ultimately attain it. You must experience the life of 
truth. Being born, growing, eating and indulging in 
other mundane activities and dying is not the purpose 
of your birth. However, these days such concerns have 
increased manifold. Because of this man has not 
increased his stature for several ages. 


The Good Will Remain Unaffected 


The name of this New Year is Vrusha. Lots of 
people are making all kinds of predictions of the events 
in the coming year. What is bound to happen will hap- 
pen. Carry on doing what you have to do. During all 
this, your mind should be centred on your original 
source (mooladhara). If you neglect this, all your ef- 
forts are useless. As a consequence of this only, hu- 
manity is faced with so many distressing and calami- 
tous events. One should not say unpleasant things, but 
I am obliged to say some unpleasant things. The com- 
ing year is likely to face far more difficulties, than the 
past year, in fact a lot more. The political arena is like- 
ly to face greater problems. There are likely to be more 
earthquakes. What is the cause? It is the consequence 
of man’s wrong actions. The good or bad events of the 
world are a consequence of the activities of mankind. 
There is conflict even between brothers; and in the 
field of politics human values have been forsaken. It is 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 63 


not in any one country but all over the globe. 


Vrusha is the name of this New Year. In Kera- 
la, this is known as Vishu. According to Indian calen- 
dar there are 60 years, after which the cycle repeats. To 
name a few, Prabhava, Vibhava, Shukla, Pramodhuta, 
Prajotpathi, Angirasa, Srimukha, Bhava, Yuva, Datha, 
etc. These are the names of the children of Narada. He 
begot these children when he became Narada. As he 
had desired that the names of his children should 
remain eternally, the years have been named thus. 


One is bound to experience the reflection, reac- 
tion and resound of one’s own actions, but none can 
predict when, where and how. One thing is certain, the 
good will never be put to suffering and no danger can 
befall them. 


In Gujarat, there lived a well-to-do business- 
man named Patel, who was also a great devotee. He 
had all comforts and conveniences at his disposal. He 
used to perform regular Puja (worship) every day. One 
day one of his friends asked him, “Patel, you have got 
everything that one could ask for in life. Then what for 
are you worshipping God?” Patel replied, “I don’t 
worship God for wealth and prosperity. I only ask Him 
for peace and bliss which He alone can confer, as He is 
the embodiment of Supreme Bliss and Peace.” This is 
true devotion. Peace and bliss cannot be obtained 
elsewhere except from God. Happiness is union with 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 64 


God. No matter however you try, you cannot attain 
peace from the external world. Many overseas devo- 
tees say, “I want peace.” I tell them, “You are the 
embodiment of peace. What you get outside is only 
pieces. The peace you aspire for is within you.” You 
are truth, peace, love, nonviolence, and you are verily 
God. When you have such a firm conviction, there will 
be no scope for misery, you will always be blissful. Do 
not think that God is separate from you. Have full faith 
that ‘I am God’. 


Hanuman’s Devotion 


Once Lord Rama asked Hanuman, “How do 
you contemplate on Me?” “At the physical level, You 
are my Master and I am Your servant. At the mental 
level, I am a spark of thy Divine Self. At the Atmic 
level, You and I are one’, said Hanuman. Pleased with 
Hanuman’s reply, Lord Rama presented him with a 
pearl necklace, which was given to mother Sita by her 
father, king Janaka, at the time of her marriage. 
Hanuman held this very valuable necklace in his hand, 
began to remove all the pearls one by one from the 
necklace, and kept it near his ear for some time and 
then after biting each one of them, threw them away. 
Sita was surprised to see Hanuman behaving thus. She 
thought that Hanuman had not given up his monkey 
traits. Rama knew the intention behind this act of 
Hanuman. But in order to make Sita understand this, 
He asked, “Hanuman, why are you biting and throwing 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 65 


away such precious pearls?” “O Lord, I am examining 
whether I could listen to Your name in the pearls. 
Since I couldn’t hear, I am throwing them away. The 
pearl is no better than a stone if there is no Rama Na- 
ma in it. I want only You.” Listening to this statement 
of Hanuman, Rama offered Himself by embracing 
Hanuman. The inner meaning of this is Rama is where 
Hanuman is and vice-versa. Hanuman is one who real- 
ised the unity of the individual and God. Consequently, 
Hanuman was always in a state of bliss. Hanuman is 
given various appellations such as Santhudu, Guna- 
vanthudu, Balavanthudu (one of peace, virtues and 
strength). He derived his strength from the Divine 
name of Lord Rama. Many people confine the Divine 
Name only to the lips but Hanuman chanted the name 
of Rama from the depth of his heart. 


Poison will remain poison even if it is put in a 
precious vessel studded with diamonds, pearls, eme- 
ralds, etc. The divine ambrosia will not lose its taste 
even if it is put in a brass vessel. Likewise, it is the 
purity of heart, not the external appearance that 
matters. Purity of heart is the purpose behind chanting 
God’s name. Chanting of God’s name should originate 
from the heart, not from the lips. 


Let Society’s Welfare Be Your Aim 


When you give away something in charity, 
think that you are offering it to God Himself. That is 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 66 


true charity. Some people give money to the priest and 
ask him to perform worship on their behalf. Will your 
hunger be appeased if someone else eats? Likewise, 
how can you get the benefit of worship performed by 
the priest? Any good activity should be undertaken by 
the concerned person himself in order to derive the 
benefit therefrom. Today people are unable to under- 
stand the secret of Divinity. In fact, you are divinity 
personified. But you consider yourself to be the body, 
which is ephemeral. The Bhagavadgita says, ‘Anityam 
Asukham Lokam Imam Prapya Bhajasva Maam’. 
Having reached this world, which is temporary and full 
of misery, contemplate on Me (God). 


This body is a den of dirt, disease-prone and 
cannot cross the ocean of Samsara. O mind, do not be 
under the delusion that body is permanent. Instead 
take refuge at the Divine Lotus Feet. 


(Telugu Poem) 


So long as one is alive, one can aspire to lead a 
happy and healthy life. Healthy body leads to healthy 
mind. So, take proper care of your body and always 
contemplate on the selfless, pure, steady Atmic prin- 
ciple. You are a member of the society. Your welfare 
depends on the welfare of the society. So, aspire for 
the well being of one and all. Lokassamastha Sukhino 
Bhavantu (May all the worlds be happy!) Eschew 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 67 


narrow-mindedness; cultivate broad feelings in order 
to experience bliss. 


Embodiments of Love! 


This New Year brings with it some good results 
also. The New Year Day is not celebrated merely to 
partake of delicious dishes. You have to imbibe sacred 
feelings and resolve to lead a fruitful life. The good 
and bad of the world depend on your conduct, which in 
turn depends on your thoughts. So, develop good 
thoughts. Only then will you be able to lead a noble 
life. Set an ideal to your fellowmen. Give them happi- 
ness. Show compassion towards them. Talk to them 
lovingly. All this is possible only when you acquire 
Divine love. So, strive to become the recipient of 
Divine love. Chant His Name wholeheartedly. 


Ugadi Day, 26.3.2001, Prasanthi Nilayam 


6 


Ramayana — The Essence Of 
The Vedas 


Just as Veda Purusha (Virat Purusha) was 
born as Dasaratha’s earthly son, the Vedas 
were born from Prachetas in the form of The 
Ramayana. 


(Sanskrit Sloka) 


Embodiments of Love! 


THE Ramayana is the very form of the Vedas 
that have come down to us from the heavens. The 
Vedas are divided into four parts, namely Rig Veda, 
Yajur Veda, Sama Veda and Atharvana Veda. Lord 
Rama is the embodiment of Rig Veda, Lakshmana, the 
Yajur Veda, Bharata, the Sama Veda and Satrughna, 
the Atharvana Veda. The four Vedas became the four 
sons of Dasaratha and played at his palace. The Rig 
Veda and the Yajur Veda consist of Mantras, which 
are related to Yajnas and Yagas. That is the reason why 
Sage Viswamitra took Rama and Lakshmana along 
with him to safeguard his Yajna. While Rama was in 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 70 


exile, Bharata left Ayodhya and stayed in a village 
called Nandigrama, all the time singing the Divine 
Name of Rama for 14 long years. It is for this reason 
that Bharata is described as the personification of 
Sama Veda. It was Satrughna who safeguarded the 
places of sacred rituals like Yajnas and Yagas from the 
invasion of evil spirits and demons. Do not think that 
Ramayana is different from the Vedas. In fact, it is the 
very essence of the Vedas. 


The Inner Significance Of Ramayana 


Rama exemplified three kinds of righteous 
behaviour (dharma), namely, the dharmas relating to 
(1) the individual (2) the family and (3) society. To 
uphold this three-fold dharma, Divinity manifested in 
a triangular flow, in the form of the Trimurtis (the 
Triune form). The Ramayana manifested to elaborate 
the human values. The period of the Mahabharata was 
well over 5000 years ago, and the Ramayana was 
enacted aeons earlier. Even after the passage of count- 
less ages, if it 1s still occupying the hearts of the people 
at large, you can well imagine its importance. There 
are two kinds of messages dominating the Ramayana: 
One pertains to Rama and the other to Ravana. 


Sathya (Truth) is the very form of man; dharma 
(righteousness) is the innate propensity. Sathya and 
dharma are the two eyes of man. These eyes are the 
very forms of all the scriptures. Rama’s message to 
humanity was to uphold dharma and sathya, to stay in 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 a 


the path of these and fulfill one’s life. On the other 
hand, the two principles of sathya and dharma were 
the very opposites of Ravana’s propensities. At the 
point of death, Ravana sent the following message to 
his people: “Oh my people, do not follow my example. 
I am the personification of all evil qualities. Falling 
into excessive desires, I have lost my progeny. Instead 
of establishing a good name for myself, I have des- 
troyed my entire kingdom. Ultimately, I have ruined 
myself. Rama achieved universal fame and I have 
ended up accumulating ill-fame.” 


Fame and disrepute are cognates. There is no 
Rama without Ravana or Ravana without Rama. It is 
the bringing together of Rama and Ravana that is the 
Ramayana. Good and evil are always present side by 
side. Pitch-black hair surrounds a moon like face. 
What is the inner significance of this? The shining 
forth of righteous fame is intensified by the 
surrounding darkness of evil. It is necessary for you to 
recognise the inner significance of the events of the 
Ramayana. 


The Ramayana has very subtle truths embed- 
ded in it. The epic first of all expounds the duties of the 
individual. In the everyday world, any person’s form is 
termed as the individual. The duties of the individual 
taught by Ramayana are not relating to this external 
form of the individual. The Unmanifest, immanent and 
hidden human values are the essence of the Ramayana. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 (o: 


The inner reality and the divinity resident in the heart 
constitute the true individuality. Individual does not 
mean the form; the individual in action is the true 
individual. Rama was exemplifying such individual 
values to humanity. To uphold the promise of his fa- 
ther, He went through the inconveniences of forest life, 
but He did not look on these hardships as hardships. In 
this way, He upheld His family traditions also. It is 
well known that the scions of the Ikshvaku family 
never swerved from their promises. Under any circum- 
stances, upholding the values of one’s parents, rela- 
tions, and wife and children constitutes this three-fold 
dharma. How has Rama done this? 


Rama Was The Embodiment Of Dharma 


Wearing bark clothes, He came to Kausalya to 
take leave of her. Kausalya was astonished at the attire 
of Rama, who was about to be crowned as the em- 
peror. Smilingly Rama told Kausalya. 


“Today I have been commanded by My father 
to become the ruler of the forests. To rule the forests is 
also part of our family tradition.” As this conversation 
was in progress, Lakshmana arrived there in a furious 
state. He said, “Mother, this is not what happened. 
Father, compelled by the words of Kaikeyi, has caused 
this situation. I am only waiting for Rama’s command. 
Let Him just give me permission. I will go immedi- 
ately and destroy Manthara and Kaikeyi and restore 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 fe 


Rama as the king. I am not constrained even by the 
words of father”. Rama rushed up and physically 
closed Lakshmana’s mouth. He said, “Lakshmana, this 
evil way is not in keeping with our family tradition. 
Our family tradition is the upholding of dharma. We 
have to uphold the individual and family tradition. 
Nothing happens in this world without a cause. Father 
wouldn’t give Me such an instruction without proper 
reason. Please keep your emotions under control.” 


On hearing Lakshmana’s version, Kausalya 
fainted. Later, she said, “Rama, is it not a son’s duty to 
equally obey father and mother? Do I not bear half of 
your father’s rights? Therefore, You have to fulfill 
your mother’s orders also. So, I shall also come along 
with You to the forest.” Then Rama pleaded to His 
mother, “Father is highly distressed because of separa- 
tion from Me. In this condition, it is not proper for you 
to desert him. You carry half his burdens. It is your 
duty now to support, sustain and protect him. The duty 
of a wife is to serve her husband first of all.” Sita, who 
was standing by heard this conversation. She asked 
Him, “Rama, You seem to be changing words accord- 
ing to persons and place. You have asked me to stay 
back and look after father and mother, but to Your 
mother, You are telling that serving the husband is the 
prime duty of a wife. Is not my husband, my God? Are 
the norms different for the wife and the mother?” Ra- 
ma was pleased that Sita understood her duty well. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 74 


When Lakshmana used abusive words against 
Kaikeyi, Rama advised him, “Kaikeyi loves Me even 
more than Bharata. Such a mother should not be 
abused like this. Matru Devo Bhava, Pitru Devo Bhava 
(revere the mother and father as God). This is our 
family tradition. I am obeying the words of My father 
implicitly. I respect all My mothers”. In this manner 
Rama expounded dharma to different people appro- 
priate to the circumstances. 


Encounter With The Rakshasa Hordes 


In the forest, Lakshmana cut off the nose and 
ears of Surpanakha. She went and complained to Ra- 
vana. Then Ravana invaded the forest with a huge 
army. At that time, Rama called Lakshmana and said, 
“You have to support Me as per My instructions. I 
shall go and face this army of Rakshasas alone. You 
take Sita to a secluded place and keep her concealed in 
a safe haven.” But Lakshmana refused to accept this. 
He said, “Is it proper to face this huge horde of Ra- 
kshasas alone? My duty is not to protect Sita alone. 
My prime purpose is to serve You. Being Your broth- 
er, can I standby and safely preserve my life while You 
are in grave danger? So, I shall not go leaving You 
alone”. Rama replied, “In the multiple duties of man, 
many such situations arise. You have to act according 
to circumstances without transgressing dharma. Are 
you not aware that I can face alone any number of 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 75 


opponents singly? Therefore, you only take up the job 
of protecting Sita.” In such soft words, He mollified 
Lakshmana and made him agree to stay back and look 
after Sita. He whispered the secret of the appropriate 
dharma in Lakshmana’s ears. Lakshmana agreed and 
conducted Sita to a safe place. From their safe haven, 
Lakshmana and Sita could hear the loud clamour and 
bright flashes of the fierce battle. It was difficult for 
Lakshmana to keep his mind tranquil. Sita also, in her 
anxiety, urged Lakshmana with even abuses to go in 
help for Rama. “Lakshmana, why are you abandoning 
your brother? Go to His support,” she insisted. La- 
kshmana said, “Mother, my prime duty is strict obedi- 
ence of Rama’s instructions. Rama is capable of 
winning over all the enemies by Himself. He is omni- 
potent and omniscient. What is my strength compared 
to His! I won’t leave you.” He was pacifying her in 
this way, and waiting. Rama released a thousand-head- 
ed weapon against the enemy, and the Rakshasas were 
all destroyed. When Rama returned, He was happy to 
see that Sita and Lakshmana were safe and sound. 


How was Rama able to destroy the Rakshasa 
hordes singly? Really Rama is not a single person. He 
has got many forms. Sahasra Seersha Purushah Saha- 
sraksha Sahasra Pad...etc., (Myriad headed, myriad 
eyed and myriad footed is the PURUSHA...etc.,) 


A mere sight of His presence was enough to 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 76 


render the Rakshasa horde unconscious. 


Sweeter than sugar, tastier than butter, sweeter 
indeed than the essence of a beehive, constant 
repetition of this nectarous sweet name makes you 
taste the very divine Amruta itself. Therefore, 
contemplate on this sweet name incessantly. 


(Telugu Poem) 


Lakshmana said to Sita, “It is even possible to 
count the waves of the ocean, but there are no words to 
describe the manifold powers of Rama. In Rama, there 
are transcendental powers that transcend the Trigunas. 
We are mere instruments. Rama is the omnipotent 
One. It is enough if you merely pronounce the syllable 
“Rama”. 


All Dharmas Are Ordained By Vedas Only 


All the dharmas (righteous duties) are no 
different from the dharmas contained in the Vedas. 
Dharma is frequently defined as a two-way path. One 
is pravritti and the other 1s nivritti. All activities 
relating to the external world are pravritti dharmas. 
Pravritti tells you when you are hungry, “My child 
eat.” Nivritti tells you on the other hand, “Child, 
merely because you are hungry, don’t eat everything 
that you get hold of.” Nivritti tells you what, when, and 
how you should eat. Pravritti confuses the mind. Ni- 
vritti purifies the heart. That which pertains to external 
objects 1s Pravritti; that which concerns internal needs 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 77 


is Nivritti. All the things that you are experiencing 
through your eyes, ears, mind, etc., are only related to 
Pravritti. Nivritti transcends the sense organs such as 
eyes, ears, etc. Rama taught such a path of Nivritti. 
This is the main theme of the Vedas. 


Rama was born as a child of Dasaratha. He was 
not born from the womb of Kausalya, but actually 
from the fire of sacrifice. In fact, the Vedas are per- 
sonified by the Yajnas (sacrifice) and Rama is the very 
personification of Yajna. This is not related to objects 
of nature. The Rama principle transcends the mind and 
the intellect. 


Kaikeyi was in fact fonder of Rama than 
Bharata, but Manthara intervened. If you start enquir- 
ing what the principle is behind actions of Manthra, 
you will discover that this is also part of the Vedic 
principle. Once, when the King of the land of Kekaya 
was hunting, he aimed an arrow and killed a male deer. 
The female deer went to her mother and said, “Mother, 
the King of Kekaya has killed my husband. Now, what 
is my fate?” That mother had the device (Yantra) by 
which dead persons could be revived. So, the mother 
deer said, “My child, don’t cry, I shall revive your 
dead husband.” The mother deer went to the King of 
Kekaya and told him, “O king, It is not a proper action 
that you have done, killing the husband of my daugh- 
ter. You should not indulge in such actions that create 
separation. Just as I am suffering now by the loss of 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 78 


my son-in-law, you will suffer the loss of your son-in- 
law. I shall see to it that this event takes place.” That 
mother deer was born as Manthara and was the cause 
of the death of Dasaratha and the consequent loss of 
son-in-law of Kaikeyi’s father. If you look closely into 
the various events in the Ramayana, you will discover 
several truths that are enshrined in the Vedas. 


Vedas, Sastras and Puranas are all inter-depen- 
dent, indispensable to each other, and should not be 
studied as independent works. It is not proper to 
separate them as unconnected works. The so-called 
scholars apply worldly standards to these works and 
make all kinds of studies by separating them as differ- 
ent (Such as Veda, Sastra and Purana). 


Good and bad are intricately mixed and it is not 
possible for anybody to entirely disentangle them. The 
same kind of connecting and contrasting relationship 
that exists between a bright face and a crown of black 
hair exists between good and evil. If Ravana never 
existed, Rama’s reputation would not have been so 
popular and widespread amongst people. Ravana was 
no ordinary person. He had studied all that Rama had, 
but he did not put any of his knowledge into practice; 
hence suffered indigestion of knowledge. Whereas, 
Rama fully put into practice all His study, having 
digested it properly, and uplifted his people thereby. 


There are two kinds of study: Inward looking 
and outward looking. The stuff that you learn by rote 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 79 


and disgorge into your answer paper is the outward 
looking study. On the other hand, taking your studies 
into your heart, feeling its fullness and experiencing its 
bliss is the inward looking study. These have been 
differentiated by the terms: Education and “Educare”. 
Your aim should be for acquiring “Educare” and not 
mere education. 


Manthara Was Born To Fulfill A Vow 


Manthara never forgot her past resolve and 
therefore decided to poison Kaikeyi’s mind against her 
natural affection and her duties towards Dasaratha. 
Outside Kaikeyi’s palace, there was fanfare, trumpet- 
ing and joyous noise of some procession. It was actual- 
ly Dasaratha coming with all his regal paraphernalia to 
inform Kaikeyi about his decision to crown Rama. The 
hunchback Manthara looked out of the window to see 
what the noise was about. The glory of Dasaratha was 
distasteful to Manthara. As Manthara was coming 
down, she encountered Kausalya’s servant maid. She 
was on her way to Kaikeyi to show off all the dress 
and fineries that Kausalya had given her. Manthara 
asked her wherefrom she got all this finery. She 
replied, “Kausalya’s son Rama is going to be crowned 
as king and in the joy of that news Kausalya has given 
all of us, her servitors, fine clothes, jewelry, etc.” 
Manthara was infuriated by this. She was even jealous 
of the fact that none of it was coming her way also. 
Even that rankling was persisting in her mind. Immedi- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 80 


ately, she went to Kaikeyi and asked her, “Wherefore 
are you decked out in all these fineries?” Kaikeyi did 
not pay any attention to Manthara’s words. Manthara 
went near Kaikeyi and told her, “You simpleton, you 
are under the false impression that Dasaratha loves you 
more than anyone else. But it is really deceit. You will 
see what happens to you in the future. Just listen to 
me.” So saying Manthara tapped on Kaikeyi’s shoul- 
der. By this mere contact, all the evil seething inside 
Manthara entered into Kaikeyi. It is very dangerous to 
cultivate association with anyone with evil habits. 
Even a little contact can pollute you with their quali- 
ties. Kaikeyi who was so fond of Rama till then turned 
against Him in a moment. Manthara told her, “Remem- 
ber, you had rendered a lot of help to Dasaratha when 
he was fighting with Sharadushana. When the retaining 
peg of the axle tree of Dasaratha’s chariot got loose 
and the wheel was about to fall off, you put your finger 
in the place of the lost peg and retained the wheel in 
place until Dasaratha was able to vanquish his enemy. 
At that time, Dasaratha, in his joy, granted you two 
boons and you had told him that you would ask for the 
same at some future date, and the king had promised 
you that he would keep up his word. Now is the time 
for you to ask for the boons. (Bhagawan here mentioned 
that if husband and wife remained separated for more 
than thirteen years, their relationship ceased to exist) 
So, you ask Dasaratha to banish Rama to the forest for 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 81 


fourteen years and insist on Bharata’s coronation im- 
mediately. See, Dasaratha is coming. Take off your 
ornaments; throw them pell-mell on the floor. Get into 
your Hall of Anger, lie down on the ground like a 
withered creeper.” Kaikeyi followed her advice. The 
king came, asked where Kaikeyi was, and got no reply. 
Manthara told him, “Go and see for yourself’. Dasara- 
tha was horrified by the sight he saw inside the cham- 
ber. He asked gently, “Kaikeyi, why are you acting 
like this?” There was no reply. Dasaratha exhorted fur- 
ther, “Kaikeyi, this is not an occasion to behave like 
this. Rama is about to be crowned and this is a very 
important event in my life. On such a happy occasion, 
don’t put on such a sorry face. Whatever you want, pa- 
lace or ornaments or anything else, just mention it and 
it will be yours.” Kaikeyi said she did not want any of 
these things. Then she expressed her demands, as tu- 
tored by Manthara. On hearing this, Dasaratha fell un- 
conscious. In a fit of jealousy, Manthara pushed Kai- 
keyi into this plight. Anyone possessed by the demon 
of jealousy will not be spared. Dasaratha pleaded, 
“Why are you afflicted by this fit of jealousy? This 
will only bring you ill fame.” But Kaikeyi stuck to her 
stand. 


Swami keeps telling you, Tyaja Durjana Sam- 
sargam (Leave association with people of evil habits). 
Don’t associate with anyone who is afflicted with 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 82 


jealousy even at the cost of losing your life. 


Rama Upheld Dharma Even In Adversity 


Manthara was the personification of jealousy. 
Her jealousy was so potent as to change Kaikeyi’s 
great motherly love for Rama. Any amount of persua- 
sion from Dasaratha was fruitless. Just then Rama 
entered, all dressed-up ready for coronation, to pay His 
respect to His parents. Looking at the situation there, 
He asked Kaikeyi, “Amma, what is the problem?” 
Kaikeyi did not reply, but Manthara told Him about 
Kaikeyi’s boons. She told Him, “Your father promised 
that day, but is now going back on his promise”. After 
hearing everything, Rama told Kaikeyi, “Mother, I 
shall uphold the words of father. One should never go 
back on promises. Such an act will bring great dishon- 
our on the Ikshvaku clan. So, I shall depart for the 
forest immediately.” At once, Manthara came in with 
bark clothes for Rama to wear. Jealousy is so ready 
when it decides to act. Rama changed His clothes right 
there. Rama saluted His father, but Dasaratha was 
unaware of all that was happening. Kaikeyi then told 
Him, “Rama, do you look on Your father and mother 
differently? As a mother, I am telling You to go to the 
forest straightaway.” Rama complied without demur. 


Jealousy Is The Root Cause Of All Evils 


The Ramayana gives examples of Ravana and 
Manthara as both had evil propensities in them. Rava- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 83 


na was slain in the battle, but Manthara is alive even 
today in the form of jealousy. There is none who can 
destroy this ‘Manthara’. We have to ignore this 
‘Manthara’ and carry on with our duties. When 
Lakshmana wanted to kill her, Rama stopped him, 
saying, “One should not kill a woman.” Jealousy is the 
worst of all evil qualities. Three-fourths of the world is 
ruined because of jealousy. Jealousy has no limits 
whatsoever. People are jealous of others’ prosperity, 
beauty and education, and try to cause their downfall. 
One should not speak bad words, listen to bad things 
and indulge in evil activities. This is the main teaching 
of Ramayana. Manthara indulged in evil talk and 
Kaikeyi paid heed to her. What happened to them 
ultimately? They were put to disrepute. Today, do you 
find any woman bearing the name of Kaikeyi or 
Manthara? You come across women having the name 
Kausalya, but not Kaikeyi or Manthara. Keechaka cast 
evil looks on Draupadi, and consequently met his 
doom at the hands of Bhima. Do you find anybody 
having the name Keechaka? None. All those who 
indulge in evil talk and evil actions should be banished 
from this world. The Ramayana shows us the way to 
lead an ideal life. That is why people of all countries 
and all languages hold the Ramayana in high esteem. 
This sacred epic is ever new and ever inspiring. Its 
glory has not diminished even a bit with the passage of 
time. It has stood the test of time because of the sacred 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 84 


ideals it stands for. 


Divine Will Is Supreme 


Once Anjana Devi, mother of Anjaneya, visited 
Kausalya at her residence. Kausalya enquired who she 
was. Anjana Devi introduced herself saying, “I am the 
mother of Anjaneya, who could cross over the mighty 
ocean in a leap”. After some time, the mother of Sage 
Agastya also came there. On being asked, she 
introduced herself saying, “I am the mother of the one 
who swallowed the entire ocean in one gulp.” Then 
Kausalya said to them, “Your sons could accomplish 
such stupendous tasks because of the mighty power of 
my son, Rama’s name.” As they were conversing, 
Rama appeared there and asked, “Mother, what is it 
that you are discussing?” Kausalya replied, “Son, we 
are discussing the glory of Your name.” Then Rama 
said, “Mother, it is not because of My name, but 
because of My Will that they were able to perform 
such mighty tasks. There are many who chant My 
name, but are all of them able to reap its benefit? 
Purity of heart is very essential.” 


The one with noble qualities of purity, patience 
and perseverance is verily God. Have the determina- 
tion to uphold good and remain peaceful in the face of 
adversities. Don’t aspire for name and fame. Keep your 
heart sacred. Have strong determination to do good. 
This is the sadhana you are supposed to do. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 85 


Describing the greatness and grandeur of Ra- 
ma’s Divine power, Thyagaraja composed a beautiful 
song, “Oh Rama, without Your Divine power, would a 
mere monkey cross the ocean? Would Lakshmana 
worship you! Would Lakshmi Devi, the goddess of 
wealth, become Your consort? Would the intelligent 
Bharata be subservient to You? Words are inadequate 
to describe Your Divine Power.” 


People have been celebrating Rama’s birthday 
for the past thousands of years, but are not able to give 
up their evil tendencies. Celebration of any festival 
becomes meaningful only when there is transformation 
in your heart. 


Students! 


You are young and have a long way to go. 
Society is like a train and all elders are bound to get 
down soon, but you have yet to travel a long way. So, 
keep your ‘compartment’ clean and have a 
comfortable journey. Keep your goal in mind and be 
the recipients of Divine grace. Chant the Name of 
Rama wholeheartedly. Install Him in your heart and 
sanctify your lives. Rama is present in every heart in 
the form of the Atma. That is why, He is known as 
Atma Rama. Atma is changeless and that is your true 
form. Develop the faith that you are Brahma (Aham 
Brahmasmi). 


Embodiments of Love! 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 86 


As you are aware, Prasanthi Nilayam is a part 
of Rayalaseema region, which is known for its hot 
summer. Though you are very happy here, your body 
may not be able to bear this summer heat. It is but 
natural in this season. So, those who wish to go may do 
so. No one needs to wait for Swami’s permission. Go 
happily and come back happily in the month of June. 


Rama Navami, 2.4.2001, Prasanthi Nilayam 


7 


Fill All Your Actions With Love 


If you leave pride, you become dear to 
all; 

If you conquer anger, you become free 
from worries; 

You become prosperous when you control 
your desires. 

You attain happiness only when you conquer 
greed. 


(Sanskrit Verse) 


Embodiments of Love! 


AS Long as man is proud and pompous, none 
will love him including his wife and children. They 
may pretend to love him, but it is not true love. The 
reason is that pride and pomp come in the way of love. 
As long as man has anger in him, he cannot escape 
misery. If man wants to be away from misery and 
attain peace, he has to rid himself of anger. One with 
desires can never attain happiness. “Less luggage more 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 88 


comfort.” In this journey of life, desires are your 
luggage. You have to reduce them in order to lead a 
comfortable life. A greedy man can never attain pros- 
perity. He will be happy, prosperous and blissful on the 
day he gives up greed. 


Welfare Of The World Depends On Man’s 
Thoughts And Actions 


Today marks the commencement of the New 
year. Many such New Years have gone by. Man ex- 
pects the new year to confer on him and the world at 
large peace, happiness and prosperity. But the welfare 
of the world depends on man’s conduct and behaviour. 
Man’s conduct depends on his mind. The nature of the 
mind depends on thoughts. Only when man’s thoughts 
are based on truth will the world flourish. One who 
aspires for the welfare of the world should see to it that 
his thoughts and actions are in accordance with his 
aspirations. 


Good and evil, happiness and misery, merit and 
sin depend on man’s actions. As is the action, so is the 
result. But today man ignores the law of action and 
acts as he pleases. It is easy to indulge in sinful deeds 
but it is extremely difficult to bear the bad results they 
yield. The Upanishads say. “Thasmai Namah Karm- 
ane”’ (salutations to action). You should offer your 
salutations to the action you perform so that it becomes 
sacred, brings you good name and contributes to the 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 89 


welfare of the world. This is one of the primary 
doctrines of the culture of Bharat. Since time immem- 
orial, the Bharatiyas have been offering respect to ac- 
tion, be it big or small, before undertaking it. A dancer 
pays her respects to the anklets that she wears before 
the commencement of her dance performance. Even 
tabla players start playing on the tabla only after 
offering their respects to it. Not only the educated peo- 
ple follow this practice, even an illiterate lorry driver 
offers his obeisance to the steering wheel before driv- 
ing the vehicle. This is the sacredness that our culture 
imparts to action. 


Offer your Namaskar (salutation) to the action 
you perform. What is Namaskar? It is giving up the 
sense of ego. But today this ancient culture is being 
forgotten and man acts as per his whims and fancies. 
Consequently, he is subjected to untold misery. He 
feels miserable when he has to face the consequences 
of his evil deeds, but he does not care to enquire whe- 
ther it is good or bad before undertaking any action. 
Use your sense of discrimination before performing an 
action. Never be in haste. “Haste makes waste, waste 
makes worry. So, do not be in a hurry. Man attains 
happiness or misery based on the actions he performs. 
The New Year brings with it neither happiness nor 
misery. Man faces the results of his actions. So, he 
should perform righteous deeds. You should perform 
activities that would benefit others. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 90 


True Service 


Once when Emperor Asoka celebrated his 
birthday, all his vassal kings made their offerings of 
wealth collected through taxes from the people of their 
respective kingdoms. But the King of Magadha did not 
offer anything. So, the emperor asked the king as to 
why he had come empty handed. The king replied, “O 
emperor, this year my kingdom passed through a ter- 
rible phase of drought, famine and floods. Conse- 
quently, my people suffered too much due to lack of 
food, water and shelter. In order to alleviate their suf- 
fering, I spent all money that I had collected through 
taxes. I provided drinking water, constructed schools to 
educate children, and established hospitals to treat the 
sick. As a result, I am left with nothing to offer you”. 


Emperor Asoka was immensely pleased with 
his reply. He called him by his side and said, “Oh king, 
what you have done is highly commendable. Water 
sustains life. Education develops the intellect and med- 
ical care is essential to maintain good health. You have 
done a great service to your people by providing these 
basic amenities. I am happy to note that you have done 
all this without any trace of selfishness and as an offer- 
ing to God.” Addressing the other assembled kings, the 
emperor said, “Many criticise the government for col- 
lecting taxes. But without collecting taxes, how can the 
government get money? Without money, how is it pos- 
sible for the government to undertake social welfare 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 91 


projects? So, it is necessary for the government to 
collect taxes. But one should see to it that the money is 
spent for the benefit of people. That is true service.” 


Offer Dedicated Service 


Today people talk of devotion without really 
understanding its meaning. I don’t want your devotion; 
I want your transformation. What is devotion? 
Paropakarartham Idam Sareeram (this body is meant 
to serve others). You should understand that the body 
is the means to serve others and involve yourself in 
such activities, which will benefit others and give them 
happiness. Resolve to tread the path of service. Some 
people indulge in meaningless activities in the name of 
devotion and waste their time. True devotion lies in 
performing actions that will sanctify time. I am not 
asking you to serve the whole world in a big way. It is 
enough if you keep God in your heart and serve as per 
your capacity. Neither by penance nor by pilgrimage 
nor by study of scriptures nor by japa can one cross 
the ocean of life. One can achieve it only by serving 
the pious. (Sanskrit verse). The path of service is su- 
perior to all the spiritual practices like japa, dhyana 
and yoga. Only through service can you please God. 
“Deho Devalaya Prokto Jeevo Deva Sanathana” 
(Body is the temple and the indweller is God). So treat 
every body as a temple. Have firm conviction that 
God resides in every body in the form of the Atma. 
There is no place where God does not exist. He 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 92 


pervades all names and forms. Sarvata Pani-padam 
Tat Sarvathokshi Siromukham, Sarvata Sruthimalloke 
Sarvamavruthya Thishthati (with hands, feet, eyes, 
heads, mouth and ears pervading everything, He per- 
meates the entire universe). Whatever action you un- 
dertake, do it as an offering to God. 


Make Proper Use Of Your Senses 


The body is made up of five elements and is 
bound to perish one day or the other. But in such a 
transient body there exists the eternal divinity in the 
form of the Atma. The all-pervasive divinity is known 
as consciousness, the limited form of which exists in 
body as conscience. Consciousness and conscience are 
the same in terms of quality, only the quantity differs. 
You may collect water from an ocean in a pot and a 
tank. The water in these two differs only in quantity 
but the salinity is the same in both of them. The body 
may be compared to the pot; the all-pervasive con- 
sciousness exists in it as conscience. The whole world 
is pervaded by consciousness. On this basis, the Vedas 
declare; Sarvam Khalvidam Brahma (verily all this is 
Brahman). There is no matter in this world that is not 
pervaded by Brahman. You are all embodiments of the 
Cosmic Divine. Though you see God day in and day 
out, you feel you haven’t. It is a sign of your weakness. 
Have firm faith that the body is a temple. Will anyone 
utilise a temple for unsacred purposes? So, make 
proper use of your body. This temple has many doors, 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 93 


but the doors of senses like the ears, the eyes and the 
mouth are very important. Do not allow any evil to 
enter your body and mind through these ‘doors’. 


See no evil; see what is good. 
Hear no evil; hear what is good 
Talk no evil; talk what is good. 
Do no evil; do what is good. 
Think no evil; think what is good. 
This is the way to God. 


The safety and sanctity of the body lies in 
making proper use of the five senses. The culture of 
Bharat has taught nine paths of devotion to sanctify the 
senses. They are: Sravanam (listening), Kirtanam 
(singing), Vishnusmaranam (contemplating on God), 
Padasevanam (serving His Lotus Feet), Vandanam 
(salutation), Archanam (worship), Dasyam (servitude), 
Sneham (friendship), Atmanivedanam (self-surrender). 
Chant the name of God and perform all actions for the 
benefit of others. Karmanubandheeni Manushya Loke 
(in this world, man is bound by action). Your life is 
controlled by action. You cannot live even a moment 
without action. Let every action of yours be a prayer to 
God. This is the true and eternal path prescribed by the 
Upanishads, and contained in the prayer, “Thasmai 
Namah Karmane.” You should offer your prayer to the 
God of action so that He makes you perform noble 
deeds that are beneficial for one and all and lead to 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 94 


world peace. 
Recognise The Principle Of Unity 


Human body is meant to serve others, not to 
indulge in selfish deeds. As selfishness has become 
part and parcel of your life, you indulge in many sinful 
activities. Eschew selfishness, take to selfless service. 
Give up attachment towards the body. Become 
attached to the Self. Understand that the same Self 
(Atma) exists in everybody. Though you find myriad 
bulbs glowing here, the current that is passing through 
them is the same. Bodies are like bulbs; the principle 
of the Atma is the current that is present in them. With 
such a feeling of oneness, make efforts to alleviate the 
suffering of your fellowmen. 


Sage Vyasa has given the essence of 18 Pura- 
nas in the following dictum, “Paropakaraya Punyaya, 
Papaya Parapeedanam” (one attains merit by serving 
others and commits sin by hurting them). So, “Help 
ever, hurt never.” There is no higher sadhana (spiritual 
practice) than this. This is the basis for self-realisation. 


Self is nothing but the principle of the Atma. 
There is only one Self. Hence, it is said, Ekameva 
Adviteeyam Brahma (God is one without a second). It 
is rather surprising that man is unable to believe this 
principle of unity. He has faith in what is broadcast on 
television and radio, but does not have faith in the Self. 
One without faith in the Self is verily blind. In this 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 oS 


world nothing exists except the Atma. 


Everybody is the embodiment of divinity. 
Sarva Jeeva Namaskaram Kesavam Pratigachchhati 
(whomsoever you salute, it reaches God). Likewise, 
whomsoever you criticise, it reaches God. So, do not 
criticise or hate anybody. 


There are many people who undertake spiritual 
practices like Japa, Dhyana and Yoga. No doubt, these 
are sacred activities and one may undertake them. But 
it is very essential to recognise the principle of unity. 
There is only one God and He is omnipresent. Why are 
you not able to believe this all-pervasive Divinity? 
You are ready to believe those who put you on the 
wrong path. But you don’t believe those who show you 
the right path. This is the impact of Kali Age and the 
result of modern education. Modern education is 
limited only to bookish knowledge, which is nothing 
but superficial knowledge. There is one book that you 
have to study and that is this world. Instead of learning 
lessons from this big book of the world, you are 
confining yourself to your small textbooks. Of what 
use are they? Do not be satisfied with mere bookish 
knowledge. Try to acquire practical knowledge. Only 
then will your life find fulfillment. 


Embodiments of Love! 


There is love in everybody. Love is God, live 
in love. When you have such sacred love in you, why 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 96 


are you unable to translate it into action? 


Start the day with love, 
Spend the day with love, 
Fill the day with love, 
End the day with love, 
This is the way to God. 


Self-confidence Is The Key To Success 


There are some people who hate even their 
parents. It is a grave mistake. Matrudevo Bhava, 
Pitrudevo Bhava, Acharyadevo Bhava, Atithidevo 
Bhava (revere your mother, father, preceptor and guest 
as God). How can one who cannot respect his own 
parents, revere God? None can match the mother in 
imparting sacred teachings to the children. You might 
have heard the story of Abraham Lincoln. As he was 
born in a poor family, he did not have even proper 
clothes to wear. While going to school, his fellow 
students made fun of him. Lincoln could not bear the 
humiliation. One day he complained to his mother, 
crying, “Mother, my fellow students in the school 
make fun at my dress. They look down upon me and 
say that I am not worthy of their company.” His 
mother then told him, “Son, you are aware of our 
financial condition. So, don’t pay heed to what others 
say. Uphold your self-respect. Develop self-confi- 
dence, which alone can bestow all the wealth and 
prosperity on you.” From that day onward, as per his 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 97 


mother’s guidance, Lincoln grew in self-confidence, 
upheld his self-respect and ultimately rose to become 
the President of America. Though born in a poor 
family, Lincoln could reach such an exalted position 
only due to his self-confidence and self-respect. Self- 
respect confers grace. Do not get dejected if others 
subject you to criticism and ridicule. Think that 
whatever happens is good for you. Once you develop 
such equanimity, there will be none greater than you. 


Love Is The Greatest Wealth 


Embodiments of Love! 


Respect and be respected. What you give to 
others will come back to you. You are bound to face 
the reflection, reaction and resound of your actions. 
Everything, including God-realisation, depends on 
your actions. Today the New Year has commenced, 
but it has not brought anything new with it. Today is in 
no way different from yesterday. If you do good now, 
you will reap its benefits in future. So, sanctify your 
actions. Na Karmana Na Prajaya Dhanena Thyagena- 
ikena Amrutatthwamanasu (immortality is not attained 
through action, progeny or wealth. It is attained only 
by sacrifice). The bliss that you get out of sacrifice is 
eternal. That alone is the true wealth, and it can never 
diminish. In order to acquire such everlasting wealth, 
spend your time in the contemplation of God. Divinity 
pervades all that you see, hear and feel. Being in the 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 98 


constant company of such an all-pervasive Divinity, 
why should you worry and fear? Why fear when I am 
here? (loud applause). Never be afraid of anything; 
because God is in you, with you, above you, below 
you, around you. He follows you like shadow. Never 
forget Him. Atheists may talk as they please. If you 
have faith, God will protect you wherever you are: in a 
forest or in the sky; in a city or a village; on a hill or in 
the middle of deep sea. 


Today cities have become centres of pollution 
and unrest. There is pollution everywhere, as man’s 
mind has become polluted. If mind becomes pure, 
everything else will become pure. So, cleanse your 
mind. Drive out all your worries. What is the use of 
brooding over the past? Past is past, forget it. Future is 
uncertain. What is the guarantee that you will be alive 
till tomorrow? Don’t worry about your future. Present 
is very important. This is omnipresent, not ordinary 
present. So, make the best use of present and be happy. 


Students and Devotees! 


Devotion does not merely mean reading sacred 
texts and undertaking rituals. You may continue doing 
so, but keep your heart always sacred. Whatever may 
happen, see that your faith does not waver. All the 
worldly things come and go like passing clouds. But 
the principle of love comes and grows. There is no 
God other than love. Love is your life, your friend, 
your relative, your food and your everything. Heart 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 99 


that is filled with love can never be polluted. Love is 
nectarous. Once you fill it in your heart, the poison of 
evil will have no place in it. 


Embodiments of Love! 


As you are not aware of the sacredness of love, 
you are wasting it by diverting it on worldly things. 
Love is the greatest wealth and treasure. Let the whole 
world be filled with love. Love alone can safeguard the 
country and make it prosperous. Let every action of 
yours be filled with love. Love begets sacred rewards. 


14 April 2001, Brindavan 


8 


Prayers Of Mothers Sustain The World 


The more you grind the sandalwood, the 
more it yields sandal paste. 

The more you crush the sugarcane, the 
more it yields sweet juice. 

As the gold is heated more and more, it 
becomes purer and shines with 
added brilliance. 

Likewise, the good qualities in a noble 
person blossom more and more as 
he passes through the vicissitudes of life. 


(Sanskrit Verse) 

Embodiments of Love! 
THE difficulties of life do not cause any hin- 
drance to a person pursuing a noble course of life. In 


spite of these, he always remains at peace and contem- 
plates on God constantly. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 102 


In Bharat, the relationship between the mother 
and the child has been considered highly sacred and 
nectarous since ancient times. 


Rama’s Divinity blossomed under Kausalya’s 
loving care; 
Because of the tender feelings and 
austerity of Sita, 
Lava and Kusha achieved name and fame; 
Fostered with the love of his mother 
Putlibai, Gandhi became a Mahatma; 
The loving care of Jijabai made 
Shivaji a great warrior. 
(Telugu Poem) 


You cannot expect sweet mangoes when you 
sow Neem seeds. If you want mangoes, you have to 
sow the seeds of mango. The earth is one but the seeds 
are different. You must sow what you want to reap. 
The womb of the mother is like the earth. The children 
will be good or bad depending on the thoughts of the 
parents. Janthunam Naajanma Durlabham (out of all 
the living beings, the human life is the rarest). It is a 
great good fortune to be born as a human being. 
Having been blessed with human birth, man should 
develop noble thoughts and experience bliss within. 
Only then will he be called truly fortunate. 


Sacredness Of Mother - Child Relationship 
Putlibai, the mother of Mahatma Gandhi, used 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 103 


to observe a vow wherein she would not partake of 
food unless she heard the singing of cuckoo. One day, 
it so happened that the song of cuckoo was not heard. 
Gandhi, who was a small boy then, could not bear to 
see his mother fasting for a long time. Out of love and 
concern for his mother, he went behind the house and 
mimicked the singing of cuckoo. Then he came inside 
and told his mother that she could have her food as she 
had heard the song of cuckoo. The intention behind 
this act was no doubt good. But Putlibai felt very sad 
as she knew that her son was uttering a lie. With tears 
in her eyes, she bemoaned, “What sin have I com- 
mitted that I gave birth to a son who speaks untruth!” 
So saying, she reprimanded him for telling a lie. Gan- 
dhi took a vow that he would never indulge in false- 
hood thenceforth. As per the command of his mother, 
he adhered to truth till the very end of his life and 
attained good reputation. 


Putlibai had a maid-servant named Rambha. As 
the saying goes, “Yatha Raja Thatha Praja” (as the 
king, so the subjects), she was also pure-hearted like 
Putlibai. One day, Gandhi came running to her and told 
her that he was haunted by fear. She asked him to 
chant the Name of Lord Rama whenever he was fear- 
stricken. From then onwards Gandhi chanted the Name 
of Lord Rama till his last breath. Thus, we see that 
when the mother and other members of the household 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 104 


take to sacred path, the children would certainly 
emulate them and attain exalted position in life. 


Aryamba, the mother of Sankaracharya, spent 
all her time in the worship of Easwara. Everyday she 
performed Abhisheka (sacred bath) to the Siva Linga, 
sipped the sanctified water and gave it to her son too. 
She constantly chanted the Divine Name of Lord Siva. 
Sankaracharya became a world teacher and attained 
great fame as he was born to such a noble mother. 


After the war for the liberation of Rangoon, a 
mother and her son somehow managed to reach 
Chennai. They neither had shelter over their head nor 
any food to eat. The mother was concerned more 
about her son than herself. Such is the love of the 
mother. The love of the mother transcends all descrip- 
tions. A bus stand became their home. Everyday the 
mother would go for begging alms from house to 
house, give most of it to her son and partake of 
whatever little was left. When she would not get 
enough, she would give the entire food to her son, and 
would herself go without food. As a result, her health 
gradually deteriorated. One day the son told her, 
“Mother, you have been taking care of me all along. 
Now it is my duty to take care of you. From today you 
take rest, I will bring food for both of us.” Everyday 
he would go for begging, give most of it to his mother 
and partake of whatever little was left. Consequently, 
he too became very weak. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 105 


One day he stood in front of the house of an 
officer and cried, “Oh sir, I am hungry, I am hungry.” 
The officer was relaxing in an easy chair and was 
going through the daily newspaper. Hearing the 
pitiable cries of the boy, he went inside, brought food 
in a leaf plate and asked him to sit and eat. But the boy 
said that he would take it home. The officer said, 
“Why should you take it home? If you are really 
hungry, sit here and eat.” As the officer was insisting 
that he should eat the food there itself, the boy felt 
giddy and collapsed on the ground. He was trying to 
say something, but could not say it loud enough as he 
was very weak. The officer went close to the boy and 
tried to hear what he was saying. The boy was saying, 
“First to my mother, to my mother.” With these words, 
he breathed his last. Seeing this, the officer was 
moved to tears. He thought, how lucky this boy was 
who had sacrificed his life for the sake of his mother. 
Blessed was the mother, who gave birth to such a 
noble son. 


It is impossible to describe the love that exists 
between the mother and her child. The Bharatiyas 
consider the love of a mother as true love. But, unfor- 
tunately, modern youth do not realise the sacredness of 
mother’s love. They keep their self-interest above their 
parents. They do not try to understand the love their 
parents have for them. He or she alone is a true son or 
daughter who gives happiness to the parents. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 106 


Noble Mothers Have Noble Wishes 


Ishwarchandra Vidyasagar lived with his 
mother in a village near Kolkata. Financially they 
were poor, but they were endowed with the wealth of 
virtues. The mother often told her son, “My dear one, 
the education that merely caters to the needs of the 
stomach is no education at all. You should study so as 
to serve society. You should utilise your education for 
the emancipation of the country.” Vidyasagar used to 
study under streetlights or at the bus stand because of 
his poverty. He followed the words of his mother in 
letter and spirit and put his heart and soul in his 
studies. Mother’s blessings can make anybody great. 
The children may be good or bad, but the mother 
always loves her children and aspires for their welfare. 
The mother’s heart is full of love and compassion for 
her children. 


After completing his education, Vidyasagar 
took up a job. Once there was a religious festival in 
the village. The rich people of the village participated 
in the festival in their best clothes. But Vidyasagar’s 
mother had to wear an old sari even on that festival 
day, as she had no good sari to wear. Seeing this, Vid- 
yasagar felt very sad. When he received his first sa- 
lary, he placed it at the feet of his mother and pleaded 
with her to buy a good sari for herself. She said, “Son, 
I don’t want you to spend your earnings on my saris 
and jewels. Utilise it to serve the society. All that I 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 107 


want is that you should come up in life and earn a good 
name.” Then she added, “I have a few desires, but I 
will express them only at the appropriate time.” 


Gradually, Vidyasagar rose to a higher position 
and accordingly his salary too increased. Then he 
requested his mother to express her desires. She made 
him sit by her side and said, “My dear one, you are 
highly educated and are holding an exalted position. 
But as a mother I must tell you what is good for you. 
Whatever I tell you is only out of my motherly love 
towards you. I don’t want anything for myself. Ours 
is a small village. The children of our village have no 
opportunity for education, as there is no school in our 
village. So, I want you to construct a small school.” 
Complying with his mother’s wish, he established a 
small school in the village. After some time, he said to 
her, “Mother, as per your wish I have got a school 
constructed in our village. Is there anything else that 
you want?” She told him, “Son, in our village, people 
are suffering due to lack of medical facilities. There is 
nobody to treat them even for small ailments like 
cough, cold and fever. So, it would be convenient for 
everybody, especially the children, if you establish a 
small hospital here.” Obeying the command of his 
mother, he promptly built a small hospital. 


Easwaramma, The Chosen Mother 


Mother Easwaramma too had such noble de- 
sires. As Sai’s glory began to spread far and wide, she 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 108 


came to Me one day and said, “Swami, I am pained to 
see small children of our village walking all the way to 
Bukkapatnam to attend school. Please construct a 
small school.” Conforming to her wish, I established a 
small school. After some time, she wanted a small 
hospital also to be established here. She said she could 
not bear to see the mothers taking the trouble of 
carrying their children to Bukkapatnam for medical 
treatment. Accordingly I got a small hospital built. 
The small school that I established has become a big 
university today. The small hospital that I constructed 
has become a Super Specialty Hospital (cheers). These 
mighty tasks could be accomplished as a result of the 
Sathya Sankalpa (noble wish) of Mother Easwaramma 
and Nitya Sankalpa (Divine Will) of Sai. Her last wish 
was to provide drinking water to the village. She 
pointed out that the women had to take great pains to 
draw water from deep wells, which had almost dried 
up. I immediately provided drinking water to the 
village. Now under Sri Sathya Sai water Supply 
Project, I have provided drinking water to the entire 
district of Anantapur. 


Once you become the recipient of your 
mother’s love, you don’t need anything else. You may 
be aware or not, but even after 30 years of her passing 
away, Mother Easwaramma continues to express her 
love for Swami in a number of ways. Even to this day, 
she moves around in her physical body. At times, she 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 109 


comes to Me and expresses her motherly concern for 
My well being. Once she cautioned Me not to accept 
handkerchief from everybody. I told her that I had to 
accept when people offered it with devotion. She said, 
“Swami, no doubt there are crores of such noble 
persons. But there are also a few evil-minded persons 
who may smear poison on the handkerchief and offer it 
to You. This can prove dangerous when You use it to 
wipe your lips.” I promised her that I would follow 
her advice. Even to this day she makes her appearance 
in My room. The boys who sleep in My room too have 
witnessed this. Whenever she comes and talks to Me, 
they sit up on their beds and listen. 


One day, I asked the boys for a belt to keep the 
silk Dhoti tight around My waist. The belt that they 
gave Me had a shining buckle and could be seen 
through the robe I wear. I did not want to use it lest 
people should think that Sai Baba wears a gold belt. 
After this, one day Easwaramma came to My room 
early in the morning and started talking to Me. Then 
Satyajit, Sainath and Srinivas woke up and wanted to 
know with whom I was conversing. They wondered 
how anyone could enter My room since the lift was 
locked and the key was with them. Then I told that 
Griham Ammayi (Mother Easwaramma) had come. I 
showed them the belt that she gave me. It had no 
buckle. There are many such noble mothers in this 
world. But Easwaramma was the chosen one. I chose 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 110 


her to be My mother (cheers). That is the intimate 
relationship between Mother Easwaramma and Myself. 


True Devotion Of Chaitanya Mahaprabhu 


Once Chaitanya Mahaprabhu went to a temple 
and prayed, “Oh Lord, I know that you are the Master 
of the world. You are omnipresent, omnipotent and 
omniscient. You can grant any wish that I ask for. But 
I don’t have any worldly desires. I don’t aspire for 
money, jewelry and material objects. Neither am I 
interested in devotion or renunciation nor do I crave 
for liberation. But I do have one desire. Grant me the 
strength to love You. It is enough if I can love you. 
There is nothing superior to this.” As Chaitanya 
Mahaprabhu loved God dearly, he propagated the 
message of love to the entire world. ‘‘Think of God 
incessantly. Chant His Name. There is nothing in this 
world except God.” This was the message propagated 
by Chaitanya. 


His mother wanted him to get married to a girl 
named Lakshmi, who hailed from a good family and 
was highly devoted. But Chaitanya was not interested 
in marriage. He said that he had dedicated his life to 
the Lord. His mother said, “You might have offered 
your mind to God, but what about your body? Life 
should have both spiritual and physical aspects.” On 
the insistence of his mother, Chaitanya married La- 
kshmi. Immediately after the marriage, he set out on a 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 jer 


pilgrimage. He wanted to propagate the Divine 
message. Chaitanya did not return home from his 
pilgrimage for a long time. His wife Lakshmi was a 
pious lady. She had a pure heart full of selfless love. 
She left her mortal coil while constantly thinking of 
Chaitanya. Chaitanya returned home after her death. 
His mother felt highly depressed at the turn of events. 
She felt that it was impossible to get another girl like 
Lakshmi who was pious and pure-hearted. Then she 
got him married to another girl named Vishnupriya. 
After his second marriage, he again set out to 
propagate the Divine message and in the process 
totally forgot his home. He considered God as His only 
refuge. He had no other thought in his mind. 


Once when he was singing the glory of Lord 
Krishna in the streets, some miscreants, who were 
jealous of his growing reputation, snatched away the 
cymbals from his hands. Thereafter, he started playing 
on a drum while singing the Divine Name. Even the 
drum too was broken by the miscreants, but he was 
least perturbed. He felt there was no necessity to use 
the musical instruments to sing the Divine Name. 
Then he started clapping and singing Bhajans. Now the 
miscreants beat him up mercilessly. His body started 
bleeding profusely, yet Chaitanya continued to chant 
the Divine Name. But when his mother came and saw, 
there was no trace of blood on his body. It had all 
disappeared miraculously because Chaitanya firmly 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 112 


believed that his body belonged to God and was not 
attached to it. 


Wicked People Do Not Spare Even God 


When the mother’s heart is pure, her children 
too would be pure-hearted. One should respect one’s 
mother and never hurt her feelings. When Swami was 
staying in the Old Mandir, one day there was an 
unusual crowd. Sensing danger, Easwaramma came to 
Me and said, “Swami, these people seem to be having 
some ulterior motive. I am afraid they may try to harm 
You. I am unable to sleep peacefully.” I infused cour- 
age in her, saying, “Be fearless. The body is bound to 
perish one day or the other. So, give up body attach- 
ment.” Those days I used to sleep all alone in a 
thatched hut. That night, as Easwaramma feared, some 
evil-minded people set the hut on fire from all four 
sides. There were raving flames all around. Seeing this, 
Subbamma and Easwaramma came running. When 
they reached the spot, they found to their utter amaze- 
ment, there was a heavy downpour on the hut. How- 
ever, there was absolutely no rain in the surrounding 
area (loud applause). When I came out of the hut, both 
of them were overjoyed to see Me safe and sound. 


There is a similar incident in the Mahabharata. 
Lord Krishna went to the Kauravas as an emissary of 
the Pandavas to bring about a compromise and avert 
the war. Before going to the Kauravas, He approached 
the Pandavas one by one and sought their opinion. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 113 


Dharmaraja was of the opinion that a person of 
Krishna’s stature should not approach the mean- 
minded Kauravas in the role of an ambassador. Arjuna 
and Bhima who were filled with Rajo Guna (quality of 
passion) were in favour of Krishna going to the 
Kauravas, but they wanted him to settle for war so that 
the wicked Kauravas could be punished. Then Krishna 
sought the opinion of Droupadi. Women are by nature 
tenderhearted. She did not want war because it would 
cause immense grief to both the sides. Then He went to 
Nakula and Sahadeva who did not say anything. 


Krishna went to Hastinapur, spoke to the blind 
king Dhritarashtra and tried His best to bring about a 
compromise, but all in vain. When Krishna returned, 
Nakula and Sahadeva hugged Him and shed tears of 
joy. They said, “Krishna, it is enough for us that You 
have returned safe from the den of the wicked 
Kauravas. You had asked us what we wanted before 
setting out on Your peace mission. Your safe return is 
what we wanted. Your welfare is our welfare. You are 
everything for us.” 


Women Are The Embodiments Of Compassion 


Droupadi said to Krishna, “Oh brother, I too 
was of the opinion that You should not go to the wick- 
ed Kauravas. People may say that women are weak- 
minded. But, in fact, women are highly courageous and 
when it comes to sacrifice, women stand first.” 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 114 


During the Mahabharata war, on a certain 
night, Aswatthama, the son of Dronacharya, 
slaughtered the Pandava children while they were 
asleep. Arjuna took a vow that he would behead 
Aswatthama. He told Droupadi that she could anoint 
herself with his blood as an act of revenge. He tracked 
down Answatthama, tied him with ropes and dragged 
him before Droupadi. Will any mother forgive the one 
who has mercilessly slaughtered her children? But 
what did Droupadi do? Instead of cursing the evil doer, 
she fell at the feet of Aswatthama and said: /t is at the 
feet of your father, Dronacharya, that my husbands 
have learnt all that they know. Being the son of 
Dronacharya, was it proper for you to kill my 
children? How could you have the heart to kill them, 
who were unarmed, young, quietly asleep, were not 
having any grudge against you, and were not 
contemplating any harm to you? 


(Telugu Poem) 


Consumed with fury, Arjuna was about to 
attack Aswatthama. Droupadi raised her hand and 
asked him not to kill him. She said: Oh Parhta! It is 
not righteous to kill a person who is afraid or has lost 
courage, who is asleep or intoxicated, who seeks 
refuge or is a female. You should not kill Aswatthama, 
for he is your preceptor’s son. 

(Telugu Poem) 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 115 


She said, “Arjuna, today I am crying over the death of 
my children. If you kill Aswatthama, just imagine what 
would be the plight of his mother! One should never 
cause grief to a mother. So, restrain yourself from 
killing him.” But having taken the vow, Arjuna was 
bent upon killing him. She stood in front of 
Aswatthama and stopped Arjuna from going towards 
him. Bhima could not bear to see this. Exploding with 
anger, he roared: “Do not release him but kill him. If 
you do not do that, I myself will hammer his head with 
my powerful fist.”” Droupadi pleaded with him to 
forgive him: 


“Forgiveness is the highest virtue. It is the truth, 
righteousness, nonviolence. It is the heaven and 
everything in all the worlds.” 


(Telugu Poem) 


Though the Pandavas were highly virtuous and brave, 
the spirit of compassion that Droupadi possessed was 
not found in them. The heart of a woman is highly sac- 
red as it is filled with nectarous love and compassion. 
So, it melts easily. At times, women may also get 
angry, but they immediately repent and reconcile. Due 
to the impact of the Kali Age, modern women are 
sometimes found lacking in the spirit of love. But even 
today, there are many women of virtue and character. 
Bharat is what it is today because of such noble wom- 
en. The progress of a nation depends on its women. So, 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 116 


never look down upon them. Treat all elderly women 
as your mothers and the younger ones as your sisters. 
The country will remain safe and secure only when 
men have such noble feelings. When you understand 
this truth and act accordingly, you can attain even Div- 
inity. Mother is not just an ordinary woman; she is ver- 
ily God. Worship her and attain her grace. Once you 
have the blessings of your mother, you can achieve 
anything in this world. Never disobey or displease her. 


Abhimanyu ventured into the battlefield against 
his mother’s wish. His mother Subhadra said, “Son, 
your father Arjuna and uncle Krishna are busy fighting 
the enemies elsewhere. At this juncture, it is not proper 
for you to enter the battlefield.” But Abhimanyu did 
not pay heed to his mother’s advice and insisted upon 
going to the battlefield. She blessed him thus, “Son, 
you are going against my wish. May victory be yours!” 
Then she prayed: “May such blessings be with you and 
protect you which mother Gowri conferred on her son 
at the time of the killing of Tarakasura and those 
received by Bhargava from his mother when he slayed 
Shambharasura!” 


(Telugu Poem) 
Love And Serve Your Motherland 


Even today, there is no dearth of noble moth- 
ers. They feel pained to see their children straying 
away from the right path. They leave no stone 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 117 


unturned to correct them. It is impossible to describe 
the love of a mother. The love of the mother is much 
more than that of the father. Once Mother Parvati and 
Easwara saw a person sitting on the branch of a tree, 
which was about to break. Then Mother Parvati 
pleaded with Easwara to save him. Easwara teasingly 
remarked, “Why should I protect him? You have seen 
him first. It is your duty to save him.” She said, “How 
can I protect him without your grace. I am negative 
and you are positive. Unless you shower your grace on 
him, he cannot be saved. Please do not delay any 
further.” Then Easwara replied, “Is it not his duty to 
call Me for help? How can I go to his rescue without 
being called? As the proverb goes, one should not 
attend a function without being invited.” Parvati, out of 
her motherly compassion, wanted to protect that 
person at any cost. So, she said to Easwara, “If that 
person, when he falls down, cries out Amma (mother). 
I will go to his rescue and if he cries out Appa (father), 
you should protect him.” Easwara agreed to her 
proposal. Both of them eagerly waited, but the person 
fell down crying Ayyo! (alas!). The words Amma or 
Appa did not come to his lips as he never respected 
and revered his parents in his lifetime. Such was his 
fate. How can God come to the rescue of a person who 
has totally forgotten his parents? Mother is God; father 
is God. With such feelings, offer gratitude to your 
parents. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 118 


Today we are celebrating Easwaramma Day to 
propagate the glory of motherhood. The world is 
sustained by the prayers of mothers. A woman’s prayer 
is more powerful than a thousand prayers of men 
because women are pure and tender-hearted. Never 
cause displeasure to your mother. Never hurt her 
feelings. Then God will help you in all your 
endeavours. One calls one’s country motherland and 
not fatherland. Thus, mother is given an exalted 
position in the world. Consider your country as your 
own mother and work for its progress. Under any 
circumstances, do not cause any harm to your mother 
and motherland. This is the significance and main 
teaching of today’s celebration. 


In a few minutes from now, you will listen to a 
music programme presented by P. Susheela and others. 
She has been a devotee for the past 40 years. When she 
had no children, I blessed her with a son. I performed 
her son’s marriage too. Her daughter-in-law is also a 
musician. They are all here today to sing a few devo- 
tional songs and give happiness to one and all. After 
this music programme, Bal Vikas children will present 
a drama in the Kalyana Mantapam. You know why 
these programmes are arranged? Man’s mind is like a 
mad monkey. Discourses, music programmes and 
prayer meetings are meant to control the waverings of 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 119 


the mind. Body is like a water bubble; mind is like a 
mad monkey. Don’t follow the body; don’t follow the 
mind. Follow the conscience. Contemplate on what 
you have seen and heard here. Put it into practice and 
derive bliss therefrom. 


Easwaramma Day, 6 May 2001, Brindavan 


9 


Attain God’s Grace 
Through Sacrifice And Love 


Lam neither merit nor sin, neither 

happiness nor misery. I am none of these 
either--places of pilgrimage, scriptures or 
Yajnas (sacrifices). I am not the food, the 
consumer of food or the process of eating. Iam 
the Atman, the very embodiment of Divinity. I 
am Siva Himself. 


(Sanskrit verse) 


Embodiments of Love! 


IN this world, there is nothing like merit or sin, 
happiness or sorrow. Mantras, yajnas and yagas are 
mere rituals. God alone pervades everything. You are 
the very form of the Divine. True humanness lies in 
understanding the significance of truth and righteous- 
ness and putting them into practice. Truth is referred to 
as neeti (morality), righteousness relates to reeti (pro- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 122 


cedure) and sacrifice confers khyati (reputation). Ma- 
navajathi (human race) is the combination of Neeti, 
Reeti and Khyati. Unfortunately, these three are not 
found in the present day world. 


First Step Toward Nirvana Is Samyak Drishti 


Siddhartha, who came to be known as Gautama 
Buddha, undertook various spiritual practices in order 
to realise his true Self. He studied the Vedas and sacred 
texts. He met many elderly wise men and tried to know 
the truth from them. But none of these practices could 
show him the path to Nirvana. Ultimately, he realised 
that Nirvana lay in making use of the five senses of 
speech, touch, vision, taste and smell in a sacred 
manner. He understood that japa, dhyana, yoga, yajna, 
etc., were mere physical activities. These spiritual 
practices are needed for those who are attached to the 
body. One who is attached to the Self need not under- 
take any of these practices. Buddha taught that Nirvana 
could be attained only by cultivating Samyak Drishti 
(sacred vision), Samyak Vak (sacred speech), Samyak 
Sravanam (Sacred listening), Samyak Bhavam (sacred 
feeling) and Samyak Kriya (sacred action). Today man 
is polluting his mind because of his evil vision. Once 
the mind is polluted, how can he expect to attain Nir- 
vana? So, first of all he should develop sacred vision. 
See no evil; see what is good. Man is subjected to 
hardships because of his unsacred vision. Evil vision is 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 123 


sure to lead to sinful acts. In fact, it destroys his 
humanness itself. 


Buddha undertook various types of spiritual 
practices, but ultimately left all of them. He could 
realise the truth only by renouncing everything and by 
recognising unity in the plurality of the world. He 
could know the ultimate truth by sacrifice. This is what 
the Vedas say: Na Karmana Na Prajaya Dhanena 
Thyagenaikena Amrutatthwamanasu (immortality is 
not attained through action, progeny or wealth, but 
only by sacrifice). This immortality is true Nirvana. 
Samyak drishti is the first step toward Nirvana. Con- 
sider all that you see as divine. Let your vision be suf- 
fused with love. Vision filled with love is the hallmark 
of a true human being. All are one, be alike to every- 
one. You can understand unity in diversity only when 
you develop sacred vision. Samyak drishti makes you 
realise the presence of divinity in all. The Vedas de- 
clare, “Ekam Sath Viprah Bahudha Vadanthi” (truth is 
one, but scholars refer to it by many names). See the 
world with the vision of truth. All are one; all are 
essentially divine. Give up multiplicity to attain unity. 
The Vedanta declares that the Atmic principle is the 
underlying unity in diversity. Bulbs are many but the 
same current flows in all of them. Likewise, the Atmic 
principle exists in all. Man’s inability to understand 
this principle of unity is the cause of his ignorance. 
True humanness lies in understanding unity in multi- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 124 


plicity. You have to develop Samyak Drishti in order 
to develop unity. This was Buddha’s first teaching. 


Fill Your Heart With Love 


Next, he stressed the need for Samyak Vak 
(sacred speech). Anudvegakaram Vakyam Sathyam 
Priya-hitham Cha Yat (one should speak only those 
words, which cause no annoyance to others and which 
are truthful, agreeable and wholesome). Whatever you 
speak should not cause any disturbance to others. It 
should be truthful as well as pleasing. You cannot 
always oblige but you can speak always obligingly. 
Sacred speech is the manifestation of divinity. God 
exists in the form of Sabda Brahmam (sound princi- 
ple). Divinity is represented in eight forms, namely, 
Sabda Brahmamayi, Characharamayi, Jyothirmayi, 
Vaangmayi, Nityanandamayi, Paratparamayi, Maya- 
mayi and Srimayi (God is the embodiment of sound, 
mobility and immobility, light, speech, eternal bliss, 
supreme majesty, delusion and wealth). Under any cir- 
cumstances, do not let your speech be tainted by harsh- 
ness. Never become agitated. When you understand 
that all are one, there will be no chance to get agitated. 
All bodies are like mirrors, showing you your own 
reflection in them. How can you be angry with your 
own reflection? You should speak with love. There is 
no divinity greater than love. When you fill your heart 
with love, your thoughts, vision, words and deeds will 
be suffused with love. Because you are not filling your 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 125 


heart with love, many evil qualities are finding their 
way into it and destroying your very humanness. 


How can you attain God’s grace? Here is a 
small example. You toiled hard, earned money and 
deposited it in a bank for safety and security. No doubt 
that money belongs to you, but the Bank Manager will 
not give it to you on your mere asking for it. There are 
certain rules and regulations for the withdrawal of 
money from the bank. You can withdraw the money 
only when you sign the cheque and surrender it to the 
Bank Manager. Likewise, you have deposited the 
‘money’ of meritorious deeds with God, the Divine 
Bank Manager. Affix the signature of love on the 
cheque of sacrifice and surrender it to Him. Only then 
will He confer the wealth of His grace on you. This is 
the royal path to attain peace and purity; it leads 
ultimately to Nirvana. Though God is the embodiment 
of sacrifice and the money belongs to you, there is a 
proper procedure to get it. God is the Manager of the 
Bank of Love. You have deposited your money in His 
bank. In order to withdraw money from this bank, you 
have to submit the cheque of sacrifice with the 
signature of love. Love is God; live in love. Anything 
may happen; your love for God should not change. 
Only through such love can you follow the path of 
sacrifice and withdraw ‘money’ from the Divine Bank. 
Here ‘money’ does not mean currency notes. It is the 
‘money’ of grace, wisdom and righteousness. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 126 


Control Your Senses To Attain Purity Of Heart 


Having undertaken various types of spiritual 
practices for a long time, Buddha felt sad that he had 
wasted a lot of time without attaining the desired 
result. He realised that one could attain divinity only 
by making proper use of the five senses. God has given 
the five senses equally to all, be they rich or poor. You 
can see the manifestation of God only when you use 
your senses in a sacred way. Today man misuses the 
senses for the sake of comforts and worldly happiness. 
He uses the God-given faculty of speech to criticise 
and hurt others. Speak lovingly, softly and sweetly. 
That is known as samyak vak. 


Along with samyak drishti and samyak vak, 
you should also have samyak sravanam (sacred listen- 
ing). Why has God given ears? Is it to listen to vain 
gossip? Ears should listen to only those things that are 
related to the Atmic principle. Only the vibrations of 
the soul should percolate through the ears. Never listen 
to anything unsacred or evil. Your ultimate goal is to 
realise the innate Atmic principle, which is the same in 
all. There are no differences whatsoever. The Atma 
that is present in you is present in everybody. It is 
attributeless. In order to realise this Atmic principle, 
you should fill your heart with love. The heart is like a 
vessel. Fill it with the qualities of truth, love and 
sacrifice. Then you don’t need to ask for peace; it will 
automatically manifest from within. In fact, love, truth, 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 127 


etc., are within you. You should manifest them from 
within. You cannot acquire them from outside. 


Everything is the reflection of the inner being. 
Your innate nature is always pure. You pollute it 
because you follow the worldly path and fill your heart 
with worldly feelings. The heart is always pure, steady 
and selfless. It gets polluted mainly due to unsacred 
vision, unsacred listening and unsacred speech. You 
can maintain its purity only when you use the five 
senses in a responsible and sacred manner. Hridaya 
(heart) is that which is full of daya (compassion). Just 
as one God is worshipped in many forms and names, 
the Atma has various names like sathya, dharma, pre- 
ma. You have to make efforts to understand and ex- 
perience unity in diversity. Buddha could experience 
bliss only after understanding this principle of unity. 
He sacrificed all sensual pleasures. He understood that 
all that we experience through the senses is useless and 
leads to bondage. He realised that misuse of the senses 
destroys the very humanness itself. He left his house 
and family and renounced the world. Ultimately, he 
realised Atmic unity and attained the state of Nirvana. 


When Buddha was about to leave his mortal 
coil, his cousin Ananda was by his side. Ananda 
started shedding tears. Then Buddha said to him, “You 
are born to experience Ananda (bliss). It is possible 
only when you make proper use of your senses.” 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 128 


Brahmanandam, Parama Sukhadam, Kevalam Jnana- 
murtim, Dwandwateetam, Gagana Sadrisham, Ta- 
ttwamasyadi Lakshyam, Ekam, Nityam, Vimalam, 
Achalam, Sarvadhee Sakshibhutam... (God is the em- 
bodiment of supreme bliss, He is wisdom absolute, the 
One without a second, beyond the pair of opposites, 
expansive and pervasive like the sky, the goal indi- 
cated by the Mahavakya ‘‘Tattwamasi”’ eternal, pure, 
unchanging and the witness of all functions of the 
intellect). Instead of experiencing such eternal bliss, 
modern man is getting carried away by sensual plea- 
sures. What is the use of being born as a human being 
if you get carried away by sensual pleasures like dogs 
and monkeys? A monkey also experiences the same 
type of sensual pleasure that you indulge in. Then why 
should you be born as a human being at all? Do not 
behave like a monkey. You belong to mankind. Have 
kindness and compassion. You are born to experience 
eternal bliss, not to indulge in fleeting pleasures. 


At the time of birth, every human being cries, 
“Alas! I am born in this world again. I have become 
distant from Ananda due to my separation from God”. 
What is the use of human birth if man cries at the time 
of both birth and death? First of all, man should 
understand the purpose of life. What is it that he has 
achieved during the course of his life if he cries at 
birth, and also at death? Having been born crying, man 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 129 


should leave the world smiling. It is possible only 
when he puts his senses to proper use in the course of 
his life. What is death? It is just the change of dress. 
Death is the dress of life. Body is like a dress. After 
death, you change over to another dress. 


Every man aspires to attain Nirvana 
(liberation). What is the effort that he is putting in? He 
has deposited the merits accrued over the past lives 
with God. God even gives ‘interest’ over the “principal 
amount’. All that you need to do is to submit the 
cheque of sacrifice with the signature of love. Sacrifice 
bereft of love is useless. Only when these two come 
together can man attain the desired result. 


God is showering His love and grace on every- 
one, but the unfortunate ones are unable to receive 
them. Why? Their feelings do not match with God’s 
feelings. They do not understand God’s Will. God is 
the embodiment of love and the ocean of compassion. 
But you are unable to receive God’s love and compass- 
sion because you have filled your mind with worldly 
feelings. If you want to receive something sacred, give 
up all that is unsacred. If the head is empty, it can be 
filled with anything. But if the head is already stuffed 
with worldly desires, how is it possible to fill 1t with 
sacred feelings? First and foremost, empty your head 
of all worldly feelings. Only then can it be filled with 
divine love. For this, you have to cultivate Thyaga 
(sacrifice). That is true Yoga. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 130 


Today people are taking to meaningless 
practices in the name of Yoga. They are distorting the 
meaning of Yoga. What is Yoga? Yoga Chitta Vritti 
Nirodha (Controlling the vagaries of the mind is 
Yoga). Without controlling the mind, if you merely 
perform physical exercise, it amounts to Roga (dis- 
ease). Fill your mind with love. You become sacred 
when your mind becomes sacred. Yad Bhavam Tad 
Bhavati (as you think so you become). What is the 
spiritual practice required to purify the heart? It is 
neither japa nor dhyana nor yoga. Yoga does not mean 
controlling your breathing process. You should inhale 
good feelings, which are like oxygen, and exhale bad 
feelings, which are like poisonous carbon dioxide. 
‘Oxygen’ emanates from the heart and ‘carbon diox- 
ide’ from the head. Head is the source of all poisonous 
feelings. Control them and inhale the nectarous feel- 
ings that emanate from the heart. 


God Is The Indweller Of All Beings 


You aspire to see God, talk to Him and touch 
Him. None can describe the bliss that one experiences 
when one has the Darshan, Sparshan and Sambashan 
(sight, touch and talk) of God. In fact, you see God in 
the form of people all around you. Your vision 
becomes sanctified only when you develop the feeling 
that all are the embodiments of God. Everything in this 
creation is sacred. All that you see is only the mani- 
festation of God. You see God in the form of the 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 131 


world, yet you feel that you have not seen Him. God 
has no specific form or dwelling place. He is the 
eternal witness and is present in all forms. You can 
progress on the spiritual path only when you have such 
a feeling. Do not confine God to the form of Vishnu or 
Krishna that you find in Ravi Varma’s paintings. They 
are all pictures born out of the painter’s imagination. In 
reality, God has no form. He is the Cosmic Being. 
Easwara Sarva Bhutanam (God is the indweller of all 
beings). Isavasyam idam Sarvam (the entire universe is 
permeated by God). Sarvam Khalvidam Brahma 
(verily all this is Brahman). 


You can achieve anything with sense control. 
Today man has become weak because he lacks sense 
control. Instead of ascending to Daivatwam (Divinity) 
he has degenerated to the state of Deenatwam (help- 
lessness). He gets angry even at the slightest provoca- 
tion and becomes miserable at the smallest problem. 
Then, how can he expect to experience Divinity? He 
should treat pleasure and pain alike. You are happy 
when you beget a son and become sorrowful when he 
dies. Who is born and who has died? What is mar- 
riage? Marriage is a like a mirage. Can a mirage ever 
quench your thirst? Prior to marriage, who is wife and 
who is husband? Prior to birth, who is mother and who 
is child? Today man is developing undue attachment 
toward his family. “Matha Nasthi, Pitha Nasthi, Na- 
sthi Bandhu Sahodara, Artham Nasthi, Griham Nasthi, 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 132 


Thasmath Jagrata Jagrata.” (Parents, friends, rela- 
tives, house and wealth are all temporary. Be aware of 
this truth). Worldly relationships are passing clouds. 
They come and go, but morality comes and grows. Do 
your duty sincerely. Duty is God; Work is worship. 
Never differentiate between work and worship. 


Embodiments of Love! 


You have to recognise these three — first is that 
which once comes, then never goes; the second, once 
goes, then never comes back; the third, neither comes 
nor goes. The first is jnana (wisdom), the second is 
ajnana (ignorance) and the third is the principle of the 
Atma. Atma is steady and eternal; it never changes. 
The knowledge of the Atma is nectarean. All your 
worldly knowledge is useless without the knowledge 
of the Self. All that you read in pusthaka (book) comes 
from masthaka (head). But the knowledge of the Self 
cannot be found either in pusthaka or masthaka. It 
originates from the heart. First of all, control your 
mind. Mind is like a mad monkey. It is nothing but a 
conglomeration of thoughts. The nature of the mind is 
determined by the nature of thoughts. So, have pure 
thoughts and thence pure mind. 


What Is Nirvana? 


Today man aspires to attain mukti (liberation). 
What is mukti? It is not the attainment of a heavenly 
abode. Mukti means freedom from suffering. You need 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 133 


to have mukti at three levels - body, mind and soul. For 
example, you are hungry. When you eat food, your 
hunger is satiated. This is also a kind of mukti. You are 
suffering from a disease. You take a medicine and get 
cured. This is also mukti. All this is related to the body. 
At the mental level, mukti means controlling the 
vagaries of the mind. But true liberation lies in 
understanding the principle of the Atma, which neither 
comes nor goes. This is termed as Nirvana. 


One should have Daiva Preeti, Papa Bheeti 
and Sangha Neeti (Love for God, fear of sin and 
morality in society). That is true Nirvana. Be away 
from sin. Understand that Daiva Sannidhi (proximity 
to the Divine) is true Pennidhi (wealth). But ignorant 
people are unable to understand the Divine principle. 
They feel that they can experience God through medi- 
tation. What is meditation? It is a way of life. While 
you are walking on the road or driving a car, if your 
vision is not focused on the road, you may meet with 
an accident. Concentration is necessary in all aspects 
of life. But concentration does not become meditation. 
One should go beyond concentration which means the 
mind should become still. You should be free from 
thoughts. That is true meditation. 


One-pointed Devotion Of The Gopikas 


The Gopikas followed the same path and their 
minds were constantly fixed on Krishna. The Gopikas 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 134 


used to go to Yashoda’s house to light their lamps. 
They had the belief that their families would be 
sanctified if they brought light from Yashoda’s house, 
which was blessed with the advent of Krishna. Once a 
newly wed Gopika named Suguna went to Yashoda’s 
house to light her lamp. As she was doing so, she had 
the vision of Krishna in the flame. She was so lost in 
the enchanting form of Krishna that she had no 
awareness of her hand getting burnt. Yashoda smelt 
that something was burning and came running to the 
spot. She immediately pulled Suguna’s hand out of the 
flame. She was astonished that though her hand was 
getting burnt, Suguna did not feel any pain and was in 
a world of her own. When she was asked to explain her 
strange behaviour, Suguna revealed that she had the 
vision of Krishna in the flame and forgot herself 
completely. Hearing Suguna’s words, all the Gopikas 
became ecstatic and started singing: 


“Our Suguna saw Krishna at the residence 
of Nanda. He appeared to her in the flame”’. 


(Telugu Song) 


What does this mean? When you have one- 
pointed devotion towards the Lord, you see Him 
everywhere. When your thoughts, vision and words are 
sacred, you are verily God yourself. Then, you don’t 
need to search for God. God Himself will come search- 
ing for you. God is everywhere; one need not search 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 135 


for Him. In fact, God Himself is in search of a good 
man. One who is a recipient of God’s love is a good 
man. Such a good man is a Godman. One should 
become a good man and a Godman. There lies the 
fulfillment of human life. 


Embodiments of Love! 


The Principle of love in you is highly sacred. 
But because of delusion, you are polluting it, and 
thereby diminishing your value. I want to give a small 
example before I close. Gold in its pure form is 
brilliant and highly valuable, but when you add metals 
like silver, copper, brass, etc., to it, its shine as well as 
value diminishes. Likewise, man is like pure gold, but 
as he is associating himself with worldly desires, he 
has lost his value as well as effulgence. When you 
develop the human values of sathya, dharma, santhi, 
prema and ahimsa, you will attain exalted position and 
people will respect you wherever you go. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Do not pollute your mind with worldly desires. 
You have attained this human birth as a result of 
meritorious deeds done in past lives. Do not misuse it. 
Human life is highly valuable. Keep up its value by 
practising human values. This was the teaching of 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 136 


Buddha. People aspire to attain Nirvana. In order to 
attain Nirvana, one should have a pure heart. True 
Nirvana lies in having love for God, fear of sin and 
morality in society. Animals do not know what sin is. 
So, they do not have fear of sin. But you should have 
fear of sin, as you are aware of what it is. You should 
have control over your senses. 


Recapitulate all that you have heard and experi- 
enced here. Charge your spiritual batteries by joining 
good company. Only then will you progress in life and 
become ideal. 


Buddha Purnima, 7 May 2001, Brindavan 


10 


Cultivate Love And Become Divine 


Embodiments of Love! 


THE All India President of Sri Sathya Sai Seva 
Organisations, Srinivasan, spoke about the Fatherhood 
of God and Brotherhood of man. But he did not speak 
about motherhood of the mother. (cheers). In this 
creation all are born to a mother, however great they 
may be or whatever they might have achieved. The 
mother’s womb is like Bhumatha (mother earth). The 
quality of the fruit will be the same as the quality of 
the seed sown in the earth. 


Revere The Mother As God 


In today’s world, people lack purity and sacri- 
fice. What is the reason? It is the lack of purity of the 
mother’s womb. If the mother’s womb is pure, the 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 138 


children born to her will also be pure. If there is peace 
in the mother’s heart, the whole world will be peaceful. 
So, first and foremost, we need women of purity in this 
world. It is because of such pure women that Bharat 
became a Thyaga Bhumi (land of sacrifice), a Yoga 
Bhumi (land of spiritually) and a Karma Bhumi (land 
of action) and could set an example to the rest of the 
world. People say motherland and not fatherland. In 
every country, the mother is held in high esteem. The 
feeling of motherhood is far superior to all other 
feelings. The main flaw of today’s children is that they 
are not concerned about the happiness and satisfaction 
of their parents. If you make your parents happy, the 
whole world will be happy. Matru Devo Bhava, Pitru 
Devo Bhava (revere the mother and father as God). 
You must understand that parents are verily God. 


You have to make your mother happy. Only 
then will there be peace and happiness in the world. It 
is meaningless to worship God without revering one’s 
own parents. First of all, offer worship to your mother 
as she is the one who has given you birth. Only if the 
mother’s heart is nectarous will the whole world be 
nectarous. Rama’s Divinity blossomed under the 
loving care of Kausalya. As He was born from the 
womb of Kausalya, He got the qualities of Kausalya. 
That is why He is worshipped as God. Shivaji could do 
so much sacrifice for the country because he was born 
to the pure lady, Jijabai. It is because of the nobility of 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 139 


the mother that the children attain good fortune. So, 
Prema Swarupas! (embodiments of love!) There is 
nothing beyond love. Only love is the mainspring of all 
your good fortune. A man without love is lifeless. You 
should therefore adore and worship the mother who is 
the embodiment of love. 


Fill Your Heart With Love And Peace 


Where is peace in the world? When you do not 
make your mother happy, how can there be peace in 
the world? Peace cannot be bought in the bazaar. Every 
man’s heart is the abode of peace. Only when you fill 
your heart with love will there be peace in the world. 
The world is in turmoil today as man lacks total love. 
Peace will reign supreme in this world only when man 
develops total love. 


Embodiments of Love! 


We have attained human birth. There is nothing 
greater than this. Janthunam Narajanma Durlabham 
(out of all the living beings, the human birth is the 
rarest). You are born and brought up in society. Then 
why do you not work for the welfare of society? All 
the wealth that you have earned has come from society. 
You should show your gratitude to society. The world 
is facing problems because man does not show 
gratitude to society. You should never neglect society. 
Society’s well-being is your well-being too. But, is 
anybody looking for the welfare of society? No. It is 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 140 


selfishness all around. Give up selfishness and work 
for the welfare of society. The world will enjoy peace 
and security only when you serve society and have 
devotion towards God. If you want that peace should 
reign in the world, then you should first develop peace 
in yourself. Where is peace? It comes only from our 
heart. Our heart is the source of peace, truth, righteous- 
ness and love. You have forgotten the heart and are 
searching for peace in the external world. You don’t 
get peace in the bazaar, you get only pieces. Peace is 
only in your heart. Fill your heart with love. Whatever 
work you do, do it with total love. But now, wherever 
you go, there is only selfishness. Man has lost purity as 
his mind is polluted. 


The food you eat is impure. The air you breathe 
is impure. Everything is impure. Then how can you 
escape disease? If you do not want disease, eat pure 
food, breathe pure air, drink pure water and be pure. 
But wherever one looks around, there is only impurity. 
When you are surrounded by impurity, how can you 
get purity? When purity manifests from within, you 
can experience its reflection, reaction and resound in 
the external world. First and foremost, you have to 
infuse purity in society. To whomsoever you speak, 
speak sweetly, not with hatred, anger and jealousy. 
First you have to learn this. You cannot always oblige, 
but you can speak always obligingly. Speak with love. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 141 


From head to foot, man is filled with anger 
today. He has become like an animal. Even an animal 
is better than man. An animal has a reason and season. 
Today man has no reason and no season. If you behave 
in this manner, how can you call yourself a human? To 
call yourself a human, first and foremost show 
humanness in action. Just because you have a human 
body, you cannot call yourself a human. The human 
body will have value only when you cultivate human 
values, namely, sathya (truth), dharma (righteousness), 
santhi (peace), prema (love) and ahimsa (non-viol- 
ence). Of what use is human birth if human values are 
absent? First demonstrate humanness. Develop love. 
By doing so, all will become your friends. What kind 
of friends? Those who are full of love. Your real friend 
is only God. God is love personified. He is full of love. 


“Poornamada Poornamidam Poornat Poor- 
namudachyate Poornasya Poornamadaya 
Poornameva Avashishyate.” 

(That is full, this is full. When full is taken 
out of the full, what remains is again full.) 


God is the embodiment of love. If you want 
God, you should have total love for God. You should 
not love God for material benefits. Love Him for the 
sake of love. Only then can you attain Him. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 142 


Embodiments of Divine Atma! 


The same Atma, the same love and the same 
God is present in all beings. Ek Prabhu Ke Anek Naam 
(one God has many names). With such feelings of 
oneness, develop love for God. Then your heart will 
also be filled with love. The heart is like a tank and all 
the senses are like taps. When the ‘tank’ is full of love, 
all that comes out of the ‘taps’ will also be love only. 
Whatever you see in others is only a reflection of your 
inner being. First of all, understand this truth. If you 
see evil in others, it is actually the reflection of your 
own evil feelings. All are one. That is Prema, that is 
God, that is Atma. That is everything. 


Earn The Wealth Of Merit 


You have forgotten love and are hankering 
after all worldly things. Wherever you go it is only 
money, money, money. Money comes and goes but 
morality comes and grows. Everyone is interested in 
amassing wealth. But will the wealth accompany you 
when you leave this world? No. Only the results of 
your actions will go with you. Wealth is not going to 
protect you. Only the wealth of merit will protect you. 
Paropakaraya Punyaya, Papaya Parapeedanam, (one 
attains merit by serving others and commits sin by 
hurting them). Earn the wealth of merit. Do not accu- 
mulate sin. Alexander ruled over a vast empire, but 
when he died what did he carry with him? He went 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 143 


empty-handed. You should carry with you only pure 
love when you leave this world. If you earn the wealth 
of pure love, you are the richest person in the world. 
He who has much satisfaction is the richest man in this 
world and he who has many desires is the poorest man 
in this world. Today man is filled with desires from top 
to toe. As long as you have desires, you will never be 
happy and peaceful. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Give up desires and see for yourself how much 
love and bliss you get. The bliss you experience will be 
far superior to all the happiness you have experienced 
before. All the bliss is within you. But you are 
imagining that it is outside. What is outside is only the 
reflection, reaction, and resound of what is within you. 
If you are a good person, you will see goodness all 
around. If you wear blue glasses, you see everything 
blue. If you wear red glasses, you see everything red. 
Good qualities are your greatest wealth. Cultivate 
them. Eschew hatred. Demonstrate Ahimsa. Ahimsa 
Paramo Dharma (Ahimsa 1s the greatest dharma). Kill 
anger. Cultivate love. There is nothing sweeter than 
love. 


Man Is The Embodiment Of Cosmic Form 


Sage Narada went all over the world but could 
not get peace. He realised that peace could not be 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 144 


found in wealth and material objects. It is within one’s 
own self. Peace and bliss are within, but man is unable 
to experience them. How can man, who is unable to 
understand the divinity within, experience God 
outside? Everything is within you. Man is Viswa Virat 
Swarupa (embodiment of the Cosmic Form) but he is 
behaving like an ordinary person by developing 
attachment to the ephemeral body. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Give up body attachment. Cultivate the aware- 
ness of the Atma. Atmananda (bliss of the spirit) is 
Amritananda (the eternal bliss). That is within you. 
Brahmanandam, Parama sukhadam, Kevalam Jnana- 
murtim, Dwandwateetam, Gagana Sadrisham, Ta- 
ttwamasyadi Lakshyam, Ekam, Nityam, Vimalam, 
Achalam, Sarvadhee Sakshibutam, Bhavateetam, Tri- 
gunarahitam (God is the embodiment of supreme bliss, 
He is wisdom absolute, the One without a second, 
beyond the pair of opposites, expansive and pervasive 
like the sky, the goal indicated by the Mahavakya 
‘Tattwamasi’, the eternal, pure, unchanging, the wit- 
ness of all functions of the intellect, beyond all mental 
conditions and the three Gunas of Sattwa, Rajas and 
Thamas). Everything is within. Al qualities are within 
you. So, you should try to bring out the love that is 
within you. You will not get this love outside. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 145 


You are the embodiment of love. Do not 
develop attachment to the body. Body is bound to 
perish one day or the other. Why are you deluding 
yourselves with this impermanent body? That which is 
permanent is the Atma. In order to experience Atmic 
bliss, love is essential. If you cultivate love, you 
become divine. Do not think that God is different from 
you. Have the courage to say “I am God”. You are not 
man. You are God. Have the firm belief that you are 
God. You must first love your parents. They have 
given you their blood, their wealth and have brought 
you up with love and care, taking great pains. So, be 
grateful to them. That is real Bhakti (devotion). There 
is no greater Bhakti than this. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Swami has just come for a short while. I have 
not got the complete satisfaction of coming to 
Mumbai. I will come again. (oud applause) Cultivate 
love. Revere your parents. Make them happy. Then I 
will be with you always. Live a life of love. 


I June 2001, Dharmakshetra, Mumbai 


11 


Health Care Is Not A Business 


Neither by penance nor by pilgrimage nor 
by study of scriptures nor by Japa can 
one cross the ocean of life. One can 
achieve it only by serving the pious 


(Sanskrit Verse) 


DHARMARTHAKAMA mokshanam Arogyam 
Moolamuttamam. Health is the fundamental require- 
ment to achieve the four goals of human life, namely, 
dharma (righteousness), artha (wealth), kama (desire) 
and moksha (liberation). Without good health, man 
cannot perform even a small task. Health is man’s 
supreme wealth. It is much superior to the other types 
of wealth possessed by man. 


Recognise Your Innate Divinity 


God is omniscient and ominipotent and is 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 148 


present in all beings. That is why Lord Krishna dec- 
lared, Mamaivamsho Jeevaloke Jeevabhuta Sanathana 
(the eternal Atma in all beings is a part of My Being). 
God has endowed all beings with some power. But the 
power He has bestowed on human beings is much 
greater than that given to other living beings. Man’s 
physical strength may be less, but God has blessed him 
with immense mental power. With his will power, man 
can achieve any mighty task. There is nothing in this 
world that he cannot achieve with his will power. He is 
spending all his energy to travel lakhs of miles into 
space, but is he making any effort to travel even half an 
inch into his heart? It is the power of the mind that 
helps man to go within. It is possible only when he 
makes proper use of this power. 


Man is undergoing hardships in life as he is 
unaware of his immanent divine power. One needs to 
have a mirror to see one’s own reflection. Likewise, 
when man looks into the mirror of his divinity, he can 
realise his true potential. When a small piece of wood 
comes into contact with fire, it becomes fire itself, 
Brahmavid Brahmaiva Bhavathi (the knower of Brah- 
man becomes verily Brahman). When you put a drop 
of water on your palm, it gets evaporated in no time. 
But when you put the same drop of water into the 
ocean, it assumes the form of the ocean. Your position 
in life depends on the company you are associated 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 149 


with. Hence, it is said, “Tell me your company and I 
shall tell you what you are,”’ When you develop 
intimate relationship with God, you become God 
yourself. There is none in this world who does not 
possess divine power. All powers are latent in man, but 
he is unable to realise them. As a result, he is leading a 
miserable life. 


All Acts Of God Are To Help His Devotees 


Divinity pervades everything right from micro- 
cosm to macrocosm. Anoraneeyan Mahato Maheeyan 
(Brahman is subtler than the subtlest and vaster than 
the vastest). Though God is omnipresent, omnipotent, 
and omniscient, He sometimes pretends to have certain 
desires. Everyone should try to understand this. Lord 
Krishna, before conferring wealth and prosperity on 
His childhood friend Kuchela, asked him if he had 
brought anything for Him. All that Kuchela had with 
him was a small quantity of beaten rice. Krishna ate 
the rice brought by Kuchela. He did so only to confer 
His grace on Kuchela and redeem his life. In Vamana 
Avatar, the Almighty Lord approached Emperor Bali 
and asked for three footsteps of land in charity. Does it 
amount to begging? No. Not at all. God does such acts 
only to confer His grace on His devotees and redeem 
their lives. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 150 


Once Krishna entered the house of a gopika 
after a long walk and said that He was tired and hun- 
gry. He asked her to give Him something to eat. The 
gopika wondered how the Lord of the universe could 
ever be hungry. She said in all humility and devotion 
that she did not know how to satiate the Lord’s hunger. 
Krishna said that it was enough if she gave Him a glass 
of buttermilk. Then, the gopika prayed to Krishna thus: 


Oh Lord! How is it possible for me to give 
You delicious food when you have the entire 
universe in Your stomach? How can anyone 
build a temple for You when You are all- 
pervasive? How can anyone light a lamp before 
You when you are shining with the effulgence of 
a billion suns? 


(Telugu Poem) 


When the Pandavas were living in exile and 
were undergoing a great deal of hardship, sage Dur- 
vasa along with thousands of his disciples went to their 
hermitage and asked for food. He told them that they 
were going for a bath in a nearby river and would 
come back to have food. The Pandavas were gripped 
by anxiety as to how to provide food for so many 
guests when they had nothing with them. Fearing the 
curse of sage Durvasa, Droupadi prayed to Krishna to 
save them from this predicament. Krishna promptly 
appeared on the scene and asked Droupadi to give Him 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 151 


something to eat. Then Droupadi replied, “Krishna, if 
we were living in Hastinapur, I would have certainly 
given You a sumptuous feast. But alas! We are living 
in a forest eating roots and tubers. In such a situation, 
what can I offer to You?” Krishna told her to look into 
the vessel, which she had already cleaned, if there was 
any food particle left in it. She did accordingly and 
found a tiny piece of leaf sticking to the vessel. Krish- 
na ate that leftover leaf. As soon as He did so, the hun- 
ger of Durvasa and his disciples was satiated and they 
went away without bothering the Pandavas. Thus, 
Krishna saved the Pandavas from Durvasa’s curse. 
Thus, sometimes God pretends to have desires, not be- 
cause He lacks anything, but only to help His devotees. 


Sacrifice Is The Noblest Virtue 


You might have heard the story of Laila and 
Majnu. Laila was a rich lady while Majnu was very 
poor. She wanted to know whether he really loved her 
because she wanted to marry him. She thought of a 
plan and sent two of her maid servants to him. They 
approached Majnu and told him that Laila was very 
sick and was in need of blood. Majnu said that he was 
willing to sacrifice his life itself for the sake of Laila 
and that her well being was his prime concern. When 
this was conveyed to Laila, she realised how pure and 
selfless Majnu’s love was. She repented for not having 
properly estimated Majnu’s love for her. Likewise, 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 152 


some people do not understand Divinity and the inner 
meaning of God’s acts. God does not desire anything 
for Himself. All His desires are meant to uplift and 
redeem the lives of His devotees. Whatever He does is 
only for others. You should understand this truth. 


It was Dr. Rajeswari, the mother of C. Srinivas, 
who started this hospital. She was highly qualified and 
had worked in several countries. She would often tell 
Me, “Our Srinivas should become highly educated and 
get degrees from A to Z” I would reply, “Mother, don’t 
worry about his studies. If he is interested, he will 
study.” She was very loving and caring towards every- 
body. She started this hospital in a small room. Gradu- 
ally, she expanded it and brought it to its present state. 
Every year she would add some new department to it. 
Though it is a general hospital, all types of advanced 
treatments are now available here. One cannot say that 
treatment for a particular ailment is not available here. 
Then how can we call this a small hospital? It may 
look small in size but the service rendered here is great 
(cheers). In that sense it is, no doubt, a big hospital. 


All the doctors who serve in this hospital are 
highly qualified and reputed. They come here from far- 
off places and serve the village people with love and 
care. Bereft of all self-interest, they serve with a great 
spirit of sacrifice. Such sacrifice is very rarely seen 
among people today. Na Karmana Na Prajaya Dha- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 153 


nena Thyagenaikena Amrutatthwa-manasu (immortal- 
ity is not attained through action, progeny or wealth. It 
is attained only by sacrifice). Very few are blessed 
with such a noble quality. It is a great good fortune to 
be able to love and serve the suffering humanity. In the 
outside world, doctors crave for money, but here doc- 
tors aspire for the well-being of patients. They render 
service to the patients with noble feelings and purity of 
heart. With such dedicated doctors serving here, this 
has become an ideal hospital. In fact, the entire staff 
here work with total dedication. One may build big 
hospitals. We have also constructed a big Super Spec- 
iality Hospital in Whitefield. But its services are 
limited to only cardiology and neurology, whereas in 
this hospital, various diseases pertaining to lungs, liver, 
heart, etc., are treated. You can see it for yourselves; 
most of the patients are poor and helpless. They are the 
people who need our love and care most. 


You should render service with the spirit of 
sacrifice. Sacrifice is the only way to immortality. Ser- 
vice is superior to rituals like Yajnas and Yagas. En- 
quire for whose sake you are performing Yajnas and 
Yagas. You are doing them for your own sake, not for 
the sake of God. God does not need them. You may 
say that you are performing Yajnas for the welfare of 
the world. But, in fact, you are doing it for your own 
welfare. It is God alone who looks after the welfare of 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 154 


the world. Sarvata Pani-padam Tat Sarvathokshi Siro- 
mukham, Sarvat Sruthimalloke Sarvamavruthya Thish- 
thati (with hands, feet, eyes, heads, mouth and ears 
pervading everything, He permeates the entire 
uni verse). He alone can confer physical, mental and 
spiritual strength. 


New Building For The General Hospital 


He alone is a true human being who has the 
purity of thought, word and deed. Hence, it is said, 
“The proper study of mankind is man.” The doctors of 
this hospital are rendering service with such purity and 
broad feelings. Dr. Rajeswari used to work day and 
night in this hospital. I often used to tell her not to 
exert herself too much. I would tell her, “Rajeswari, it 
is possible for you to serve others more and more only 
when you have good health. So, you should take 
proper rest.” She would say that serving others was her 
way of taking rest. Her only wish was to leave her 
mortal coil while serving in the hospital. That is what 
happened ultimately. She breathed her last in this 
hospital itself while doing some work sitting in a chair. 
Dr. Savitri has been continuing the good work initiated 
by Dr. Rajeswari. Dolly is also rendering great service. 


In addition to these doctors, there are some 
specialists who come from the city to serve here — an 
eye specialist, a dentist, a liver specialist and an ortho- 
pedic surgeon. The doctor who is comparing this prog- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 155 


ramme is an orthopedic surgeon. He worked in Amer- 
ica before coming here. They are doing service with 
utmost devotion. All of them are highly dedicated and 
have love and concern for the patients. I want everyone 
to develop such love. Every doctor should have such 
love for the patients. They should talk to the patients 
with love and make them feel comfortable, and 
develop noble virtues of understanding and adjustment. 


I wish to give you a small example to illustrate 
this. When I gave mementoes to the doctors, one 
doctor did not receive the memento as he came in the 
end. Immediately, one of the doctors offered the 
memento that was given to him. What a noble act it is! 
All these doctors are endowed with such selfless love. 
Love alone sustains the entire world. Love is God, live 
in love. Humanness cannot exist without love. God 
does not exist in the form of Vishnu, Siva, etc. He 
exists in the form of love. One doctor has practically 
demonstrated such spirit of love in action just now. 
None of you have taken note of it, but I noticed it. 
Only the fortunate few are endowed with such spirit of 
sacrifice. 


There are many doctors in the world who are 
highly qualified and reputed, but they are after name 
and fame. They are interested in advertising their 
achievements, whereas our doctors do not care for 
name and fame. Service is their prime motive. It is 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 156 


because of such noble doctors that our hospital has 
earned good reputation. 


I have noticed that the space available here is 
very less. There are four operation theatres here. Not 
an inch of space is left as all the five acres of land are 
occupied by this building. That is why before coming 
here, I laid the foundation stone of the new general 
hospital building in the ten-acre plot of land donated 
by our Adikesavulu. The Chief Minister of Karnataka 
also participated in that function. Actually, I am not 
interested in foundation laying ceremony. What I am 
interested in is the inauguration ceremony. I have 
already decided to inaugurate this new hospital on 23 
Nov. 2001 (cheers) Then what will happen to this hos- 
pital? This hospital is also very important. This was 
like a tiny banyan seed that has now grown into a gi- 
gantic tree. It will continue to grow more and more. 
That general hospital is meant for treating ailments re- 
lating to disorders of lungs, bones, liver, etc. This hos- 
pital will be exclusively meant for mother and child. 


Hospital For The Mother And Child 


My opinion is that the mother and child care 
should be given top priority. Without the mother, how 
can the world exist? One should become the recipient 
of one’s mother’s love and grace. Only then can one 
expect to win Divine grace. Here is a small example to 
illustrate this. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 IS? 


In the Mahabharata, Gandhari, a woman of 
chastity and virtue, blindfolded herself as her husband 
Dhritarashtra was blind by birth, She did not even see 
her own sons. After the Mahabharata War, when 
Krishna went to console her at the death of her hund- 
red sons, Gandhari, in her moment of despair and an- 
guish, severely castigated Him. She questioned Him, 
“Krishna, could You not save even one of our sons to 
perform our final rites? Why didn’t Your vision of 
grace fall on any of them?” Krishna gave a fitting 
reply. He said, “Mother, did you ever see your own 
sons? How can My vision of grace fall on those 
whom their own mother does not look at?” One who 
cannot win one’s mother’s love cannot attain Divine 
grace. So, first of all one should try to become the 
recipient of one’s mother’s love. That is why the 
Vedas declare: Matru Devo Bhava, Pitru Devo Bhava, 
Acharya Devo Bhava, Atithi Devo Bhava (revere your 
mother, father, preceptor and guest as God) 


It is because of men of sacrifice that our 
country Bharat has been able to enjoy peace and 
prosperity. The spirit of sacrifice, love and 
righteousness that is found in Bharat is not present 
anywhere else in the world. This is Thyaga Bhumi, 
Yoga Bhumi, Karma Bhumi and Yajna Bhumi (land of 
sacrifice, land of spirituality, land of action and land 
of Yajnas). Such a sacred land is being converted into 
a Bhoga Bhumi (land of pleasure) by modern youth. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 158 


The bliss that one experiences from Thyaga cannot be 
obtained from Bhoga. Bhoga leads to Roga (disease) 
and Thyaga leads to Yoga (spirituality). Imbibe the 
spirit of sacrifice and utilise your energy and educa- 
tion for the welfare of others. Understand that educa- 
tion is meant for serving society and not for doing 
business. There is no greater service than utilising 
your education for the benefit of others. Especially, 
doctors should make every effort to safeguard the 
health of the mother and child. 


Selfless Service Of the Hospital Doctors 


The culture of Bharat teaches, “Sathyam Vada, 
Dharmam Chara” (speak the truth and practise righ- 
teousness). Humanness will blossom in the world only 
when this principle is put into practice. Truth is refer- 
red to as Neeti (morality), righteousness relates to Reeti 
(procedure) and sacrifice confers Khyati (reputation). 
Manava Jathi (human race) is the combination of Neeti 
Reeti and Khyati. But today morality is lacking in 
society. Of what use is education without morality? 
Life itself has no value without morality. Adhere to 
truth; practise righteousness; cultivate the spirit of 
sacrifice. There is nothing greater than this. 


Embodiments of Love! 

If you come across anyone who is suffering, 
make every effort to give him solace. This was the 
ideal demonstrated by Dr. Rajeswari. She spent all her 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 159 


earnings for this hospital. After her demise, Dr. Savitri 
has been working tirelessly day and night. At times, 
she even foregoes her food to serve the patients. I told 
her that it was not good for her health to work day and 
night without proper food and rest. I took a promise 
from her that she would take in time, food. 


All the doctors who work here, including the 
visiting doctors, do not take even a Naya Paisa from 
us. This has been the case for the past 25 years. They 
bring all the necessary equipments and medicines also 
with them and serve the patients here. There is no 
dearth of doctors in our country. But most of them are 
after money and fame. Doctors should have compass- 
sion and concern for patients. We have many such 
noble doctors coming from various places to serve in 
this hospital. He alone is a true doctor who serves 
patients in a selfless manner. Vaidyo Narayano Hari 
(doctor is verily God). What does Lord Narayana do? 
He helps everybody. Likewise, doctors should also 
help everybody. With such noble feelings, the doctors 
are offering their services here and it is because of 
them that this hospital has earned a good name for 
itself. Whenever need arises, these doctors even go to 
Puttaparthi to offer their services. 


In the Super Specialty Hospital at Puttaparthi, 
we have the departments of cardiology, urology, 
nephrology and ophthalmology. Dr. Hemanthmurthy, 
an eye specialist, goes every week to Puttaparthi to 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 160 


perform eye operations. It is no ordinary task to go to 
Puttaparthi all the way from here, week after week to 
render service. How many doctors in this world have 
such a spirit of service? Even the dentist and 
anesthetist go from here. In Puttaparthi hospital, 
sometimes we have to perform a large number of 
operations. Then there is invariably a need for more 
anesthetists. We just make one phone call, and they 
immediately present themselves there. Very rarely do 
we find such service-minded doctors today. But in this 
hospital, we have many of them working tirelessly day 
in and day out. Dr. Hemanthmurthy is one among them 
who is performing eye operations with utmost care. I 
told him that I was ready to get all the equipments he 
required to do his work more effectively. 


I always encourage those who dedicate 
themselves to service. I am prepared to establish any 
number of hospitals like this and give all the help 
needed. I am not interested in money and I have 
nothing to do with it. You may wonder as to how Sai 
Baba gets money for His projects. You may think that 
He creates money. No, not at all. I don’t indulge in 
such bad practices, because money is related to 
government. I can create any object, but I don’t create 
money. Whenever need arises, someone or the other 
will get the noble idea to donate the required amount. 
Just one word from Swami is enough; there are many 
Indian and overseas devotees who will do the needful 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 161 


at once. So, you don’t need to have any doubts 
whatsoever. We have to develop this hospital further. 
Yesterday, a liver specialist came to Me and expressed 
his willingness to work in Swami’s hospital. He has 
worked in America before. He can perform liver 
transplant operations. I gave him permission, saying 
Swami was always ready for any good work. 


Drinking Water Project In Karnataka State 


Today the food you eat, the air you breathe and 
the water you drink have become polluted. 
Consequently, people are suffering from heart and 
liver disorders. In olden days, such ailments never 
existed. The pollution of food, air and water is the 
main cause of the diseases. That is why I have resolved 
to provide pure drinking water to the needy. First of 
all, I started educational institutions and hospitals as 
education and health care are very essential for one and 
all. Then I started Drinking Water Project. I provided 
water not just by getting borewells dug. Borewell 
water may contain excess fluoride, which is harmful 
for health. So, I made arrangements to get water from 
natural sources like Krishna river, spending crores of 
rupees. Now the Chief Minister of Karnataka has 
requested Me to provide pure drinking water to 
Bellary, Bidar and Biyapur districts of Karnataka State. 
I have agreed to do so. Wherever there is scarcity of 
drinking water, one should make every effort to 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 162 


provide it. We need not give money; it is enough if we 
provide safe drinking water to the people. There is no 
dearth of rich people in the country. But of what use is 
wealth if it is not used for sacred purposes? No one can 
carry even a fistful of dust at the time of departing 
from the world. Otherwise, there would have been ra- 
tioning even for dust in the country. So, money should 
be utilised for the benefit of society. Hastasya Bhu- 
shanam Danam, Sathyam Kanthasya Bhushanam, Sro- 
trasya Bhushanam Sastram (charity is the true orna- 
ment for the hand, truth is the true necklace and listen- 
ing to sacred texts is the true ornament for the ears). 


What is most essential in life? It is essential to 
develop intimate relationship with God. You will be 
charged with Divine energy when you come into 
contact with Divinity. Living in the company of God is 
true Sathsanga (good company). Sathsangatwe Nis- 
sangatwam, Nissangatwe Nirmohatwam, Nirmohatwe 
Nischalatattwam, Nischalatattwe Jivanmukti. (good 
company leads to detachment, detachment makes one 
free from delusion, freedom from delusion leads to 
steadiness of mind and steadiness of mind confers 
liberation.) But today man does not have a steady 
mind. All the time his mind wavers like a mad 
monkey. When you say, ‘my body’, ‘my mind’, ‘my 
Buddhi’, etc., all these are different from you. Then 
question yourself, who am I? The same principle of ‘I’ 
is present in everbody, right from a pauper to a 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 163 


millionaire. In order to understand this ‘I’ principle, 
you have to develop the spirit of sacrifice. Patients 
belonging to different religions, namely, Hindus, Mus- 
lims, Christians, etc., come here for treatment. All are 
treated alike. There are no differences whatsoever. All 
are children of God. This hospital stands for the ideal, 
‘Brotherhood of Man and Fatherhood of God’. In all 
Sai Organisations, there are no differences of caste, 
religion, etc. Many seva dal volunteers from Sai 
Organisations come here to render service. There are at 
least 100 seva dal volunteers serving in the Super 
Specialty Hospital, Whitefield everyday. The youth of 
today should cultivate such spirit of sacrifice. As they 
grow old, their spirit of sacrifice should also grow. 


Today we are celebrating the Silver Jubilee of 
this hospital, but I am not satisfied with this. We 
should develop this hospital further and celebrate its 
Golden Jubilee. Many more doctors should join this 
hospital and all should work in a spirit of complete 
unity. Anything can be achieved with unity. The small 
hospital started by Dr. Rajeswari has grown into a big 
one. I wish it to grow further and serve the poor and 
needy. I bless you all and bring this Discourse to a 
close. 


10.6.2001 Sri Sathya Sai General Hospital, 
Whitefield (Bangalore) 


12 


Human Birth Is To 
Experience Atmic Bliss 


You may be highly educated, but without 
culture, how can you expect to be respected? 
You may be highly intelligent, but without 
morality, how can you earn value in society? 
You may be occupying position of authority, but 
if you cross your limits, how can people respect 
you? Without charity and righteousness and 
without following the path of truth, how can you 
expect people to honour you? It is a great 
mistake if you conduct yourself without fear of 
sin. What else is to be conveyed to this august 
gathering? 


(Telugu Poem) 
Embodiments of Love! 


IF you deeply enquire and investigate, you will 
find that the water level in the earth is going deeper 
and deeper day by day. If you observe the present 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 166 


political scenario, you don’t find any morality and 
integrity. The present-day teachers do not seem to 
possess the invaluable treasure of knowledge. Human 
values have become totally extinct in human beings. 
The ancient teachers were extolled as Thyagarajulu, 
Yogarajulu and Yathirajulu (kings of sacrifice, spiri- 
tuality and renunciation), but alas! The modern 
teachers have become Bhogarajulu and Kamarajulu 
(men of pleasures and desires). Indian culture is the 
manifestation of truth that does not change with the 
passage of time and is unaffected by creation or 
dissolution. Having forgotten such eternal truth, man 
is wasting his precious life in the pursuit of ephemeral 
pleasures. He is unable to understand his own value. 
He is attaching value to Dhana (money) and not to 
Guna (character). He is dedicating his life to attain 
selfish goals ignoring his innate value and character. 
Since times of yore, Bharatiyas have trodden the path 
of spirituality, derived bliss therefrom and shared it 
with others. Today man is unable to experience and 
enjoy such eternal bliss. Man has been able to 
accomplish mighty tasks, but he is yet to experience 
Atmic bliss. Human birth is meant to experience 
Atmic bliss. This truth is contained in the three letters 
‘M-A-N’, which stand for overcoming the Maya 
(illusion) experiencing the vision of the Atma and 
attaining Nirvana (liberation). But today man is unable 
to understand the truth that he is born to realise the 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 167 


Atma. 


Human Values Are Inborn 
Embodiments of Love! 


Once you recognise the value of human life, 
you will be able to understand human values. Human 
values are born along with man, not before or after. 
Man has to question himself, “What is the purpose of 
life?” Once man finds an answer to this question, he 
will be able to understand everything else in this 
world. Man is endowed with intelligence and 
knowledge, but he is in the pursuit of ignorance, which 
is far away from him, without making any enquiry into 
the knowledge that is within him. Consequently, there 
is aneed to propagate human values today. 


Man is getting carried away by Prabhava 
(worldly influences), himself forgetting his Swabhava 
(innate nature) and is ruining himself. One can 
describe Prabhava as Prarabdha (consequences of 
past actions) and Swabhava as the innate human 
qualities of truth, righteousness, peace and love. 
Man’s true nature is to attain the four goals of life, 
namely, dharma, artha, kama and moksha_ (righteous- 
ness, wealth, desire and liberation). Today man has no 
desire for spiritual teachings. There are no divine feel- 
ings in his mind. In such a situation, how can he 
remain unaffected by Prabhava? He has to transform 
Prabhava into Swabhava. His Swabhava is to erase 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 168 


Prarabdha. Swa—Bhava, which means Atmic feeling, 
is man’s Swabhava. Truth, righteousness, peace and 
love constitute Atmic feelings. Where is the need to 
search for them when they are his natural innate 
qualities? As he has forgotten his natural qualities, he 
is under the influence of Prabhava, craving for name, 
fame, wealth and comforts. He is interested in Dhana, 
not in Guna. Is this the purpose of life? No doubt, 
money is required, but, among the four Purusharthas 
(objectives of life), money comes only after 
righteousness. It means that money should be earned 
in a righteous manner. But today man resorts to 
unrighteous, means to amass wealth. 


Have Faith In Your Own Self 
Embodiments of Love! 


Today, you are being troubled by Prarabdha as 
you have classified the objectives of human life into 
four, namely, righteousness, wealth, desire and libera- 
tion. Club them together into two, namely, wealth 
earned in a righteous manner and desire for liberation. 
Only then will you be free from the influence of Pra- 
rabdha. You are unable to escape from Prarabdha as 
you have desire only for the world and not for libera- 
tion. Money is essential to carry on with your life, but 
it should be under certain limits. Man does not realise 
this. He is in mad pursuit of money till his last breath. 
Have you understood the meaning of the word MAN? 
You have to overcome Maya, understand the Atma and 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 169 


attain Nirvana. Ignoring such an eternal truth, man is 
leading an unsacred life. 


Man aspires to attain bliss. What is the path to 
bliss? Can he attain bliss from material objects? No, 
not at all. The happiness related to the world is only 
temporary. First of all, man has to develop faith in the 
Self. You love your mother because you have the faith 
that she is your mother. Wife loves her husband 
because she has faith in him. So, where there is faith, 
there is love; where there is love, there 1s peace; where 
there is peace, there is truth; where there is truth, there 
is God; where there is God, there is bliss. You need 
not undertake any worship or ritual to attain peace. 
There are many who say that they are undertaking a 
particular ritual for world peace. It is but a mere stunt! 
You can never attain peace from rituals. Peace is 
contained in love. You can develop love only when 
you have faith in the Self. Today man has faith in the 
ephemeral and transient but not in God. His faith in 
God is not steady. He is filled with doubts. One 
should have total faith in God. One should believe 
only God and not the world because all that is seen in 
the world is bound to perish one day or the other. God 
alone can grant the true and eternal bliss and one who 
experiences it is a true human being. When Buddha 
was about to attain Nirvana, his cousin Ananda, who 
was by his side at that time, started shedding tears. 
Buddha said to him, “O simpleton, why are you 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 170 


grieving over my attaining Nirvana? In fact, Nirvana is 
the true goal of human life. Overcome Maya, have the 
vision of the Atma and attain Nirvana.” Ananda 
followed the teaching of Buddha and ultimately 
attained Nirvana. 


Draw Bliss From Within 
Embodiments of Love! 


What you need to do is not rituals like Yajnas 
and Yagas. First of all, you should understand the 
truth that the changeless and eternal bliss is within. It 
is described as, Nirgunam, Niranjanam, Sanathanam 
Niketanam, Nithya, Suddha, Buddha, Mukta, Nirmala 
Swarupinam (attributeless, pure, final abode, eternal, 
unsullied, enlightened, free and embodiment of sac- 
redness). The Vedas declare, Sarvam Vishnumayam 
Jagat (the universe is saturated with Divinity), Sarvam 
Khalvidam Brahma (verily all this is Brahman). In 
order to understand these divine statements, you 
should cultivate sacred qualities. One without noble 
qualities cannot understand them. Every individual, 
every living being, every object in this creation is a 
manifestation of Divinity. All the five elements are the 
forms of the divine. To understand this truth, you have 
to take to the spiritual path. 


You are making efforts to understand the 
human values, namely Truth, righteousness, peace, 
love and non-violence. What is meant by Truth? It is 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 bg git 


that which is changeless. Sathyam Jnanam Anantham 
Brahma (Truth, Wisdom and Eternity are Brahmam). It 
is a mistake to think that truth is related to speech 
alone. Trikala Badhyam Sathyam (Truth is that which 
remains changeless in all the three periods of time). 
So, Truth is God. What is meant by Dharma 
(righteousness)? It does not mean actions of charity 
and rituals like Yajnas and Yagas. It does not mean 
good actions alone. Dharayati iti Dharma (that which 
sustains is dharma). True dharma is to put into 
practice the Truth that originates from the heart. When 
Truth is translated into action, it becomes dharma. 
What is santhi? It is the feeling one experiences at the 
time of attaining Nirvana. Peace is the crown that man 
should aspire to wear. Everybody wants peace in this 
world. Where is peace? It is within you. Keep 
reminding yourself, “I am the embodiment of Truth, I 
am the embodiment of Peace, I am the embodiment of 
Love, I am the embodiment of Righteousness. I am 
everything”. Have total faith in the principle of the 
Atma without which whatever you say or do cannot be 
called Truth or righteousness. 


Today the education that students pursue 
is only worldly in nature. They study books, 
write examinations and get degrees. They do all 
this only for the sake of their livelihood. A 
foolish person boasts of his high education and 
intelligence, yet does not know himself. What is 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 172 


the use of all the education he has acquired, if 
he cannot give up his evil qualities? All the 
worldly education will lead him only to vain 
argumentation, not total wisdom. It cannot lead 
him to immortality. So, man should acquire that 
knowledge which will make him immortal. 
(Telugu Poem). 


Sacred Actions Only Can Ensure World Peace 


Man specialises in various subjects not for the 
welfare of the world but for his own self-interest. If 
you sincerely want world peace, undertake sacred 
actions. 


Love your fellowmen. Make them happy. 
Human values are not mere verbal expressions. They 
originate from the heart. People are mistaken as they 
go only by the letter without understanding the spirit. 
First of all, develop faith that everything is within you. 
Without faith, human life will come to ruin. 


There should be transformation at three levels: 
individual, social and spiritual. This is what ‘SAI’ is 
bringing about. The three letters in SAI stand for Spir- 
itual, Association, and Individual change, respectively. 
SAI also denotes Service, Adoration and Illumination 
corresponding to work, worship and wisdom. You 
have to understand the inner meaning of every letter of 
this word SAI to sanctify your lives. 


Today, thousands of Bal Vikas Gurus have 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 173 


gathered here. Worldly education too is essential, but 
children should be taught spiritual education from the 
young age. In the conference held elsewhere, you find 
an ocean of difference between the number of 
delegates who are supposed to participate and the 
number of people who actually take part in the 
deliberations. But our conference is unique in the sense 
that all the delegates attend it. Nobody gets up in the 
middle except a few who do so only out of physical 
constraints. You cannot find such conferences being 
held anywhere else in the world. Though I know 
everything, sometimes I watch the proceedings of the 
conference from behind the screen or from above. All 
delegates are attending the meeting with utmost 
sincerity and devotion. Such conferences should be 
held more frequently. Many more members should be 
trained and should be taught new procedures. Only 
then will the whole world get benefit out of this. 
Yesterday our Prime Minister Vajpayee sent a letter to 
Me through Indulal Shah, “Swami, our government 
with all the power at our disposal cannot undertake 
such noble tasks. It is not possible for anybody except 
You. Please take up more and more responsibilities 
and involve even the Government in this matter.” They 
write such letters out of love, but we do not involve 
ourselves in the matters relating to Government be- 
cause their temperament and influences do not match 
with our activities, experiences and happiness. So, we 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 174 


take care of our activities without involving others. 
Many conferences are being held here, but do you find 
collection of funds here? No. Each one takes care of 
their own requirements. They come here whole- 
heartedly and enjoy the bliss. Such conferences should 
be held not once but thrice a year. Each time, new 
delegates should be given a chance. Be prepared to put 
any amount of effort for education purposes. 


Let There Be Less Talk And More Action 


Today students are acquiring various degrees. 
They are becoming doctors and engineers, but they are 
not doing the work that is expected of them. What is 
the use of their education? Can you call them educated 
at all? The modern field of education has become 
highly corrupted. Even those who cannot read a ther- 
mometer properly, manage to get a doctor’s degree 
these days! Even the engineering education has 
become a sham. In our institutions, you may call even 
a First Standard boy and ask him a question. He will 
give the correct answer. Our boys are well educated 
but they are not putting their knowledge into practice. 
They say, “Swami knows everything. Whatever He 
tells is good for me”. When you believe that whatever 
Swami says is good for you, why don’t you follow His 
command? I do not want such people. One must 
practise what one says. You may be teachers, but you 
should be good students in the first instance. If a 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 175 


student takes to bad ways, he ruins himself, but if a 
teacher takes to evil ways, he will be spoiling the lives 
of many students. So, teachers have to be very careful. 
It is not enough to merely attend here and keep quiet. 
You should go outside and propagate all that you have 
seen and experienced here. Be heroes in practice, not 
merely in platform speeches. Share the bliss that you 
have experienced here for the last three days. Talk less 
and work more. That is what I am doing precisely. For 
the last ten days, I have not been talking to people 
much. Why? There may be a few narrow-minded peo- 
ple who might feel that Swami is telling them to talk 
less, but He is not following the same. That is why I 
am talking less now. I am doing so only to teach them. 
There is limitless bliss in limited talk. Bliss cannot be 
obtained from outside, it comes from within. The good 
or bad that you see in others is nothing but the reflec- 
tion of your own inner feelings. Once you understand 
this truth, you will never talk bad about anybody. All 
that you experience in this world is nothing but the 
reflection, reaction and resound of your own feelings. 
So, you should be good to everybody and take them 
along with you with the spirit of love. Take care that 
you do not forget your Swabhava, which is the true 
Purushartha (objective of life). 


Follow Your Conscience 


Many speakers have taught you many things on 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 176 


the basis of their experiences. I have been hearing 
them. Try to understand their experiences, put their 
teachings into practice and teach the same to others. I 
tell you only one thing. Having been born as human 
beings, you should overcome Maya, have the vision of 
the Atma and attain Nirvana. This is the purpose of 
your life. Where is the Atma? It is your very form. You 
are not the physical body. Body is temporary, it is like 
a water bubble. Mind is like a mad monkey, do not 
follow the body, do not follow the mind. Follow the 
conscience, which is your true form. How can you 
have the vision of the Atma? You need not search for it 
outside. Turn your vision inward. Only then can you 
have the vision of the Self. 


A person remained silent though he was being 
criticised. When his friend wanted him to react, he 
replied, “The same Atma is present in me as well as in 
the person who is criticising. So, why should I be 
annoyed when he is criticising himself.” A deep en- 
quiry into the truth will reveal that when you love or 
hate others, you love or hate your own self. In fact, 
there are no ‘others’. You consider yourself different 
from others because of body attachment. Once you 
give up body attachment, you will realise that there are 
no others and all are yours. That is the true vision of 
the Atma. The Atma does not have a specific form. 
Bliss is Atma, Consciousness is Atma. Conscious 
means related to the senses; conscience is the inner 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 Tz 


witness and Consciousness is the all-pervasive Atma. 
Understand the unity of these three. Take to the path of 
service. Then you can proceed along the path of adora- 
tion and ultimately attain illumination. To the extent 
possible, serve everybody. True happiness lies in 
service. 


Love And Sacrifice Will Confer God’s Grace 


You may be disappointed that I have not spo- 
ken to you in the last two days, but I have been with 
you and listening to you all along. I do not have anger 
on you, nor am I disgusted with you. But I am disap- 
pointed in the sense that you are not paying heed to My 
words. Then how can you come up in life? What is the 
use of My talking to you or moving closely with you? 
This is the reason I have not spoken to anybody. But 
some people are unable to understand this truth. How 
can the narrow-minded understand My broad feelings? 


How can you attain God’s grace? Here is a 
small example. You toiled hard, earned money and 
deposited it in a bank for safety and security. No doubt 
that the money belongs to you, but the Bank Manager 
will not give it to you on your mere asking for it. There 
are certain rules and regulations for the withdrawal of 
money from the bank. You can withdraw the money 
only when you sign the cheque and surrender it to the 
Bank Manager. Likewise, you have deposited the 
‘money’ of meritorious deeds with God, the Divine 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 178 


Bank Manager. Affix the signature of love on the 
cheque of sacrifice and surrender it to Him. Only then 
will He confer the wealth of His grace on you. 


Man’s mind has become polluted because of 
modern education. When the mind is polluted, how can 
man come up in life? He may be highly educated and 
occupying positions of authority with name and fame. 
But all his achievements will prove futile if he does not 
know what he is supposed to know. What is it that he 
is supposed to know? It is the principle of the Atma. In 
order to lead a blissful life in this world, it is enough if 
you know that you are the embodiment of the Atma 
and everybody else also is the same. You are subjected 
to misery as you are unable to understand this subtle 
Truth. Tomorrow I will tell you in detail the Truth of 
human life, the goal of human life and the pathway to 
bliss. 


4.7.2001, 
International Conference of Bal Vika Gurus 
Prasanthi Nilayam 


13 


I And You Are One 


One who cultivates the crop of love in the 
field of one’s heart is a true Christian, a true 
Sikh, a true Hindu and a true Muslim. In fact, he 
is a true human being and a true Guru. 


(Telugu Poem) 


Know The Secret Of The Five Elements 


GOD is all-pervasive and is the indweller of all 
beings. Likewise, the five elements, which are nothing 
but divine manifestations are also all pervasive and all- 
powerful. The whole world is pervaded by the five 
elements, bound by the five elements and it functions 
because of the five elements. It cannot function even if 
one of the elements is absent. Therefore, for every 
man, the five elements are like his five life principles. 
No one can comprehend the power of these elements. 
However, every man must necessarily know the signi- 
ficance of these elements. He alone is truly blessed and 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 180 


meritorious who understands their significance and 
acts accordingly. In fact, he would have achieved the 
objectives of human life, i.e., the Purusharthas. It is 
the bounden duty of every man to recognise the import 
of these elements. The five elements are the cause for 
man’s pleasure and pain, good and bad. The five ele- 
ments confer on man happiness or misery depending 
on how he makes use of them. Their names and forms 
may appear simple, but they are highly powerful. 


Having been born, man lives for a few years, 
and ultimately gives up his body. The five elements are 
responsible for man’s birth, growth and death. The five 
elements are spread right from both microcosm and 
macrocosm. They are present in man from top to toe. 
So, it is imperative that man should know the secret of 
these elements. Having understood the significance of 
the five elements well, Buddha made concerted efforts 
to gain control over his five senses. He taught 
Buddham Saranam Gachhami, Sangham Saranam 
Gachhami. He used his intellect to understand the truth 
and shared his wisdom with society. First of all, he 
exercised control over his vision. Among the five 
senses of perception, the eyes are endowed with im- 
mense power. They have 40 lakhs of light rays in 
them. Today man is putting his senses to misuse and, 
as a result, his body is becoming weaker day by day. 
His life span is being reduced by his unsacred vision 
and the sensual pleasures that he is indulging in. Lakhs 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 181 


of light rays in his eyes are being destroyed because of 
his unsacred vision. That is the reason man is 
developing eye defects. Today many people undergo 
cataract operations to set their vision right. The doctors 
may say, man develops eye defects because of cataract, 
but in fact, it is the result of unsacred vision. So, one 
should have proper control over one’s vision. What- 
ever be the spiritual practices that one may undertake, 
one cannot derive their benefit without having control 
over one’s vision. All the Sadhanas like japa, thapa 
and dhyana confer only temporary satisfaction. These 
practices cannot help you to have control over your 
vision. In fact, the entire srushti (creation) is based on 
your drishti (vision). The netras (eyes) are verily the 
Sastras (sacred texts). 


Keep All Five Senses Under Check 


Along with control over vision, one needs to 
have control over one’s tongue. There are 3 lakhs of 
taste buds in the tongue. As man has become a slave to 
the taste, he consumes various delicacies and, in the 
process, spoils his tongue. Not merely that he makes 
his tongue utter unsacred words, but also hurts others’ 
feelings by using harsh words. His life span is further 
reduced by the misuse of his tongue in this manner. 
Likewise, all the senses are losing their power as they 
are being put to misuse, thereby cutting short his life- 
span. So, first of all, man should keep his eyes and 
tongue under check. When these two are controlled, 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 182 


man’s energy is revitalised. The power that one cannot 
attain from years of penance is obtained when man 
puts his eyes and tongue to sacred use. 


O tongue, the knower of taste! You are very 
sacred. Speak the truth in the most pleasing manner. 
Chant the Divine Names of Govinda, Madhava and 
Damodara incessantly. This is your foremost duty 
(Sanskrit Verse). Do not cause pain to others by using 
harsh words. In fact others are not others but your own 
self as the same principle of Atma is present in all. The 
one who causes pain and the one who suffers from it 
are one and the same. So, never speak in such a way as 
to hurt others. That is why I tell you often, talk less, 
but you are not taking My words seriously. You are 
unable to understand to what hazards will excessive 
talk lead you in future. 


See no evil; see what is good. Only then will 
your eyes attain the sacred power by which you will be 
able to visualise the Divine Cosmic Form. Spiritual 
practices will yield greater rewards if senses are kept 
under control. Unmindful of the power of the senses 
and without making proper use of them, man is under 
the delusion that he can achieve great rewards by 
undertaking various practices which are physical and 
worldly in nature. But in reality, one cannot get 
anything out of these practices except temporary 
satisfaction. First of all, man should exercise control 
over his senses. Never listen to anything that is evil. If 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 183 


any situation arises, leave the place immediately. Hear 
no evil, see no evil and talk no evil. Make every effort 
to be away from evil. Only then will spiritual power 
grow in you more and more. Why did our ancient 
sages and seers go to forests to spend their lives in 
solitude? It is only to control their senses. True 
spiritual Sadhana lies in controlling one’s senses. 
Without sense control all spiritual practices will prove 
futile. Instead of using the tongue to utter evil words, 
why don’t you chant the Divine Names like Rama, 
Krishna and Govinda? You are piling up sins because 
of the misuse of the senses. The sins that you have 
piled up may not be visible to the naked eye, but they 
are sure to put you to suffering. That which is not seen 
will make you eat the fruits of your action. O man, 
understand this secret of karma (action). 


Embodiments of Love! 


Senses are like life principles for every man. 
Once you rein your senses, your life will be peaceful. 
You should not only avoid evil talk, but should also 
talk less. Your speech should be short and sweet. Sages 
like Valmiki, Vyasa and great devotees like Potana 
composed sacred texts and sanctified their lives. 
Emulate their ideals and make your life exemplary. 
Read sacred texts composed by such noble souls. 
Today people read books that pollute the mind. It is a 
very bad practice. Be it reading, writing, seeing or 
talking, let everything be good. Do not commit any 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 184 


mistake knowingly. You can experience divinity in 
humanity by putting the senses to proper use. One can 
visualise the Divine manifestations and become Divine 
himself only through sacred use of the senses. Man, 
unaware of his innate divine potential, considers him- 
self low and leads a life of delusion. He thinks there is 
a power superior to him and makes efforts to attain it. 
There is no power superior to him. Ekam Sath Viprah 
Bahudha Vadanthi (Truth is one, but scholars refer to 
it by many names). There is only one, not two. It is a 
sign of ignorance to think that there is something dif- 
ferent from you and be in search of it. Multiplicity is 
your own imagination. Ekoham Bahusyam (I am one, I 
will become many). You can understand this truth once 
you control your senses. 


People are under the mistaken notion that they 
derive happiness when their desires are fulfilled. In 
fact, happiness results not when desires are fulfilled 
but when they are controlled. One can enjoy the state 
of bliss by controlling one’s desires. One who craves 
fulfillment of his desires is always restless. Desires 
correspond to pravritti (outward path) in which there is 
no happiness whatsoever. You are deluded by your 
thinking that there is happiness in the world, whereas 
you are distancing yourself from nivritti (inward path). 


Embodiments of Love! 


For everything, love is life. To attain that state 
of love, make proper use of your senses. Buddha 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 185 


visited many noble souls, studied sacred texts and 
undertook various Sadhanas. Later, he realised that all 
those related to Pravritti (outward path). Ultimately, he 
realised that happiness lay in making proper use of the 
five senses. He stopped reading sacred texts, he did not 
visit noble souls any more and gave up all the spiritual 
practices. He understood that whatever Sadhana was 
done with this ephemeral body would yield fleeting 
happiness only. True and eternal bliss will result only 
when Sadhana is done with pure and eternal feelings. 
When Buddha started exercising control over his 
senses, he experienced infinite bliss, which he could 
not contain in himself. He hugged his cousin, Ananda, 
who was by his side then and said, “Ananda, I have 
attained the state of Nirvana and am unable to contain 
the bliss within me. I am ready to give up this mortal 
coil.” On hearing this, Ananda started shedding tears. 
Then Buddha said, “Oh simpleton, instead of rejoicing 
over my attaining this state of bliss, why are you 
grieving over it?” You are looking for fleeting 
happiness in worldly matters, whereas Buddha strived 
to attain bliss in the spiritual realm, which is true, 
eternal and immortal. As you are immersed in 
worldliness, you are distancing yourself from 
immortality. Though you are committing many sins, 
you do not consider them as sins. You think that they 
are quite natural to human beings. You keep 
committing mistakes, yet you pray for pardon. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 186 


Actually, one should never seek pardon for the mistake 
committed. One should be prepared to undergo the 
punishment. Only then can you be free from defects. If 
a person commits a serious offence, he is put in jail. He 
is released only after he undergoes punishment for the 
required period. Likewise, you will be redeemed once 
you atone for your sins. Likewise, if you want 
redemption, you should be prepared to face 
punishment for your mistakes. Exercise control over 
the senses and see that you do not repeat them. 


By chanting the Vedic verses, which are sacred, 
one gets immense bliss. That is why even Buddha, who 
did not believe in the Vedas in the beginning, devel- 
oped interest in them. People were under the impress- 
sion that Buddha opposed the Vedas. Later Sankara- 
charya tried to erase this misconception, saying that 
Buddha was never against the Vedas. He said that peo- 
ple themselves were going against the Vedas out of ig- 
norance. Buddha conquered desire, which is not pos- 
sible for everyone. One need not do any great Sadhana 
to conquer desire. You will not be troubled by desire 
once you understand the inner meaning of life. Today 
man is prepared to stoop to any level for money. He 
pretends to be a great devotee of the Lord and tries to 
cheat people. Is this what he is supposed to do? No. He 
should conquer desire and control the senses. 


Students! 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 187 


You are young and yours is the right age to 
exercise control over the senses. You can make use of 
them in a sacred manner. Once you know the proper 
path, you will never give up. You can understand the 
teachings of the Vedas only when you cultivate good 
qualities. You can cultivate good qualities only by 
good practices. There may be a few obstacles in your 
path, but never give up. 


God Is Your Guru 


Today we are celebrating Guru Purnima. 
Purnima means full moon day. Then who is a Guru? 
The modern Gurus whisper a Mantra into the ear and 
stretch their hand for money. Such people are not fit to 
be called Gurus. 


Gukaro Gunateethaha Rukaro Rupava- 
rjithaha 


(one who is attributeless and formless is a 
true Guru) 


A Guru is necessary to make you understand 
the formless and attributeless Divinity. Since it is 
difficult to get such Gurus, consider God as your Guru. 


Gurur Brahma Gurur Vishnu 
Gurur Devo Maheswara; 
Gurur Sakshat Para Brahma 
Thasmai Sri Gurave Namaha. 


Guru is Brahma, Guru is Vishnu, Guru is 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 188 


Maheswara. Consider Guru as your everything. In this 
world, everything is a manifestation of Divinity. Sa- 
rvam Khalvidam Brahma (verily all this is Brahman). 
All are embodiments of Divinity. In fact, all that you 
see 1s nothing but the Divine Cosmic Form (Viswa 
Virat Swarupa). 


Sahasra Seersha Purusha 
Sahasraksha Sahasra Padh 


(With thousands of heads, thousands of feet 
and thousands of eyes, Divinity pervades everything). 
This means all the heads, all the feet and all the eyes 
that we see in this world belong to God. When the 
Vedic statement, Sahasra Seersha... was made, the 
population of the world was only a few thousands, but 
now it runs into a few hundred crores. In those days, 
people considered everyone as Divine. They believed 
in the Vedic dictum, Sarva Bhuta Namaskaram Kes- 
avam Pratigachchati (salutations to all beings reach 
God). Easwara Sarva Bhutanam (God 1s the indweller 
of all beings) Jsavasyam Idam Sarvam (the entire 
universe is permeated by God). Divinity is not restrict- 
ed to a particular place. God is here, God is there and 
He is everywhere. You are developing differences out 
of delusion, but Divinity is One and only One. It is the 
duty of a Guru to propagate such principle of oneness. 


Today there are many good disciples, but it is 
very difficult to find a true Guru. We have many good 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 189 


boys among our students. However, even if one or two 
are bad, all of them will earn a bad name and will have 
to face punishment. Here is an example. When you 
sleep at night, you are bitten by one or two mosquitoes. 
The next morning, you spray insecticide and kill all the 
mosquitoes though you were bitten by only a few. 
Likewise, God punishes those who join bad company. 
That is why it is said, Tyaja Durjana Samsargam; 
Bhaja Sadhu Samagamam; Kuru Punyam Ahorathram 
(run away from bad company; join good company, and 
perform meritorious deeds day and night). 


Chant Divine Name To Counter Anger, Jealousy 


Whenever bad qualities like anger and jealousy 
crop up in you, do not be carried away by them. Con- 
trol them. Keep telling yourself, “Anger is a bad quali- 
ty. It will lead to bad actions and ultimately put me to 
ruin.” When you are angry, sit quietly in one place and 
drink cold water. Chant the Divine Name. Then your 
anger will gradually subside. If your anger persists, go 
to a place of solitude and walk briskly for half a mile. 
There are many easy paths to control one’s anger. But 
the youth today are not making any effort to control 
their anger. When they get angry, they take it as an 
opportunity to hurl abuses at others. It is the worst sin. 
Through prayer and contemplation on God, you should 
try to control the evil qualities in you. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 190 


First of all, control your vision and tongue. You 
are incurring a lot of sin because of evil vision and you 
are bound to face its consequences. When you make 
use of your senses for evil purposes, the children born 
to you will also be evil-minded. So, see no evil, hear 
no evil and talk no evil. In olden days, people used to 
take care to see that pregnant ladies did not see or hear 
anything bad. They used to narrate to them sacred 
stories of the Lord, give them good food and convey 
only good news. They did so because they knew that if 
the mother had good feelings, then the children born to 
her also would have good minds. The sins committed 
by the parents will certainly affect their children too. 
When Subhadra was in the family way, one day Arjuna 
was describing to her the intricacies involved in 
entering the Padmavyuha (lotus maze). He had des- 
cribed to her in detail how to enter the Padmavyuha 
and when he was about to tell her how to come out of 
it, Krishna appeared on the scene and took away 
Arjuna saying, “This is not the proper time to talk 
about these matters. It is not Subhadra but the child in 
her womb who has been listening to you all along.” 
That is the reason why Abhimanyu knew only to enter 
the Padmavyuha and did not know how to get out of it. 
As a result, he was caught in the maze, and ultimately 
he was killed. 


God is watching all that you do. You may think 
that others do not know what you are up to. You may 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 191 


hoodwink others, but can you ever hoodwink God? He 
knows everything. So, always do good. All your sins 
will be atoned when you make proper use of your 
senses. When you become angry, you lose all your 
power of discrimination and behave in an inhuman 
manner. So, whenever you are angry, leave the place 
immediately. It is better to be away from sin rather 
than commit sin and repent later. 


No More Padanamaskars 


I want to tell you one more point. You may feel 
pained by what I am going to tell you now, but I am 
happy about it. From today onward, I am not going to 
give Padanamaskar to anybody because I and you are 
one. God is present in all. Easwara Sarva Bhutanam 
(God is the indweller of all beings). Understand this 
truth. From today onward, I have resolved not to give 
Namaskar, to anybody. You may do Namaskar to your 
parents as they and you are not aware of the truth that 
God is present in all. Since I know the truth, I shall 
follow it. The same Atma is present in you, Me, and 
everyone else. So, no one needs to do Namaskars to 
anyone for that matter. If you still want to do Nama- 
skar, do it mentally. Bring your palms together and 
say, “Swami, I offer my ten senses to You”. That is 
enough. You don’t need to touch My feet to do Nama- 
skar. Understand the truth that God is in you and act 
accordingly. Then you become God. If somebody is gi- 
ven Namaskar, others are feeling jealous. I am stop- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 192 


ping this practice of giving Namaskars only to see that 
such feelings of jealousy do not sprout in you. 
Wherever you are, offer your Namaskar mentally. That 
gives Me happiness. I have told you this many times, 
but you have not put it into practice. Touching Swa- 
mi’s feet and extolling Him are wrong practices. From 
this Guru Purnima, develop sacred feelings and enjoy 
supreme peace and bliss. Everyman aspires to attain 
Ananda. How can he attain it? There are five koshas 
(sheaths) in man annamaya (food), pranamaya (life), 
manomaya (mental), vijnanamaya (wisdom) and 
anandamaya (bliss). Make every effort to reach vijna- 
namaya kosha. Only then can you attain anandamaya 
kosha. Lead a happy and blissful life and share your 
happiness with others. You do not know how great this 
ananda is. Just as a small piece of wood becomes fire 
when it comes into contact with fire, so also when you 
are close to Me mentally, you become Divine. Your 
mind will be illumined and will dispel the darkness of 
ignorance in you. 


Do not feel dejected that Swami has spoken to 
you in this manner. Consider it as good for you. 
Pleasure is an interval between two pains. When I am 
walking amongst you, others will find it disturbing if 
you fall at My feet. From today onward, make proper 
use of your senses and follow what has been told to 
you about Padanamaskar. 


Guru Purnima, 5.7.2001, Prasanthi Nilayam 


14 


Love Can Unite The Entire World 


God controls the entire world. He is the 
Embodiment of Truth. 


(Sanskrit verse) 


Embodiments of Love! 


THE whole world is permeated with love. The 
world does not connote only the form but the people 
also. You are all the embodiments of love. You may 
or may not have any other quality, but every one of 
you does have love. In this world, there is nobody 
without love. There are, however, two types of love in 
this world — one is worldly while the other is spiritual 
or divine. 


Have The Vision Of God Through Love 


Divine love is totally selfless. It is love for 
love’s sake; there is no other consideration. God has no 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 194 


selfishness whatsoever. He does not expect anything in 
return. But worldly love is tainted with selfishness, and 
it craves for material possessions. Where there is 
selfishness, there is fear. Where there is no selfishness, 
there is no fear. Man should have no trace of selfish- 
ness in his love. He can have even the vision of the 
Divine through selfless love. Love is selflessness; self 
is lovelessness. God has no specific form. Love is God; 
live in love. 


Love is the form of God and God is full of 
love. It is necessary to connect love to love. You 
will have divine experience and wisdom when 
you strengthen love in you. 


(Telugu poem) 


Divine love is Nirgunam, Niranjanam, Sana- 
thana Niketanam, Nitya, Shuddha, Buddha, Mukta, 
Nirmala Swarupinam (attributeless, pure, final abode, 
eternal, unsullied, enlightened, free and embodiment of 
sacredness). Such divine love is all-pervasive. 


Love is the magnet that attracts everybody. 
Love is the cause of attraction between us. This 
magnet of love is present in every one of you. It is 
because of love that you have come here to see Me and 
I have come to see you. You are not merely human 
beings; you are Virat Purushas (cosmic beings). Man 
is endowed with such tremendous power which none 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 195 


of the other denizens possess. There is limitless power 
in each one of you, but you are unable to recognise it. 
When you love others, they will love you in turn. 
Therefore, first and foremost, you should love all. By 
experiencing love in this way, a human becomes 
divine. But man today is focusing his love on fleeting 
and ephemeral objects. He limits his love to his wife, 
children and material objects. 


Here is a small example to illustrate the nature 
of worldly love. When a young man gets married, he 
considers his wife as his very life for the first two or 
three months. If he happens to find a thorn on the way 
while going out for a walk, he pulls her aside 
immediately with great concern, fearing that it might 
prick her feet. After a period of six months, if the 
husband finds a thorn on the way while walking 
together, he merely cautions her. After one year if the 
same situation arises he will shout at her, saying, 
“Can’t you see? There is a thorn on the road. Worldly 
love declines in this manner day by day, but divine 
love will never decline. It is steady and changeless. 
You should make efforts to attain such true and eternal 
love. You are not able to experience this love due to 
your limitless desires. Life is like a long journey and 
desires are the luggage. Less luggage, more comfort 
make travel a pleasure. You will be free from worries 
and problems once you reduce your desires. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 196 


There is nothing in this world that is not divine. 
Divinity permeates each and every object of the unt- 
verse. Man commits mistakes, because he is unable to 
recognise this principle of non-dualism. (Swami 
showing His handkerchief) What is this? It is a 
handkerchief. It is made up of a number of closely 
interwoven threads. The threads are made up of cotton. 
Therefore, the cotton, the threads and the cloth are one 
and the same. Likewise, prakriti (nature), jivatma 
(individualised soul) and Paramatma (God) are one 
and the same. You are not one, but three: the one you 
think you are (physical body), the one others think you 
are (mental body) and the one you really are (Atma). 
You are neither the body nor the mind; you are the 
embodiment of the Atma. The body and the mind are 
mere instruments. 


Do Not Forget Your Divinity 
Embodiments of Love! 


You don’t need to talk about spirituality which 
all cannot understand. It is enough if you hold on to 
the principle of love in your daily life. The principle 
of love is the same in everybody, right from a pauper 
to a millionaire. Even a millionaire has to live on 
food; he cannot partake of gold. Food is therefore 
necessary for man. It sustains his body. Food is God. 
The body is made up of food; but the mind, which is a 
bundle of desires, is the root cause of man’s delusion. 
Man’s life today is full of delusion as he harbours 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 197 


limitless desires. You should have the firm conviction 
that you, being the embodiments of love, are basically 
divine. Your life will be redeemed once you know that 
you are the spark of the Divine. You forget your 
divine nature as you get deluded by various names and 
forms in this world. 


Is it possible to build a temple for God who 
pervades the entire universe? Your heart is the temple 
of God. Turn your vision inward and find Him there. 
It is a very easy path to Divinity. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Love is the prime feeling of man. All other 
feelings originate from love. Once you understand the 
principle of love, you can understand the entire 
universe. First and foremost, man should have strong 
faith. Where there is faith, there is love; where there is 
love, there is truth; where there is truth, there is peace. 
You don’t need to search for peace elsewhere. It is 
within you. Likewise, you are the repository of truth 
and love. In fact, the whole world is within you. 
Thousands have assembled here. Your names and 
forms are different, but the same five elements are 
present in all of you. In this world, you don’t find 
anybody without the five elements, which are nothing 
but the forms of the Divine. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 198 


Truth is present in everyone. It is divine. 
But today man is ignoring this divine principle. 

The creation emerges from Truth and 
merges into Truth, 

Is there a place where Truth does not 
exist? 

Visualise such pure and unsullied Truth 


(Telugu Poem) 
Understand The Principle Of Unity In Diversity 


Man’s mind is the cause of his pleasure and 
pain. Manah Eva Manushyanam Karanam Bandha 
mokshayo (mind is responsible for both bondage and 
liberation of man). When you insert the key into a lock 
and turn it to the left, the lock gets closed. When you 
turn it to the right, it opens. It is the same lock and the 
same key, but the side to which you turn the key 
matters. Likewise, the heart may be compared to a lock 
and the mind to a key. When the mind is turned 
towards the world, you are attached to the world and 
when it is turned Godward, you get detached and attain 
liberation. Today man is bound because his mind is 
turned towards the world. 


Human life is divine. Janthunam Narajanma 
Durlabham (out of all the living beings, the human 
birth is the rarest). Man is wasting such a divine and 
auspicious life. Human body is a gift of God, which 
has to be utilised to realise one’s Self. The body is an 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 199 


instrument for self-realisation. Just as ears, nose, 
hands, etc., are the limbs of the body, likewise body is 
the limb of society, society is the limb of Nature and 
Nature is the limb of God. Body cannot exist if the 
limbs are separated from it. Likewise, the country 
cannot exist if there is no unity among its ‘limbs’. 


In olden days, the Bharatiyas considered their 
country as their very home. They would proudly pro- 
claim that they belonged to Bharat. Unfortunately, 
such patriotic feeling is lacking today. People identify 
themselves with their respective States, saying, “I 
belong to Maharashtra, I belong to Karnataka, I belong 
to Tamil Nadu, etc.” By thinking in this sectarian way, 
the spirit of unity is lost. When a limb is cut off from 
the body, it leads to severe pain and loss of blood. The 
country also suffers the same fate if the various regions 
are separated from it. You are all Bharatiyas. Develop 
the feeling of nationality. 


Embodiments of Love! 


You belong to the human race. So, develop 
human values. Today the world is fragmented as man 
has forgotten human values. Unity of the world can 
thus be strengthened by developing human values. He 
is a true human being whose thoughts, words and 
deeds are in perfect harmony. Your life will be 
wrecked if your thoughts, words and deeds are in dis- 
harmony. Develop the spirit of oneness. All are one, be 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 200 


alike to everyone. Different bulbs have different 
wattages and colours, but the current that flows 
through them is one and the same. Likewise, God is 
present in men of all colours, races and nationalities. 
Easwara Sarva Bhutanam (God 1s the indweller of all 
beings). 


Flowers are many, but worship is one, 
Jewels are many, but gold is one, 
Cows are many, but milk is one, 
Beings are many, but breath is one 


(Telugu Poem) 


Make every effort to recognise the divinity in 
everyone. Though God is present in everyone, you 
search for Him elsewhere and thus waste time. 
Wherever you see, there is divinity in this world. It is 
because of the divinity within that you are able to 
speak. Is it not sheer madness to search for God in the 
external world when you have divinity within you? 
You are the embodiment of truth and love. So, do not 
hate or harm anybody. Hurting others amounts to 
hurting your own self. 


You will become divine when you realise the 
oneness of all human beings. You belong to the same 
universal family. Such being the case, why should you 
give room for hatred and conflicts? Love everybody. 
Love is eternal, immortal and nectarean. However, it 
is being turned into poison because of evil qualities 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 201 


like hatred, jealousy and anger. Never allow such evil 
qualities to enter your heart for God dwells in it. God 
and the individual are not different; both are one. Lead 
your life with the feeling that you are divine. Truly 
speaking, man has no misery. He is the embodiment 
of bliss. But man subjects himself to misery because 
of his limitless desires. Sukhadukhe Samekruthwa 
Labhalabhau Jayajayau (one should remain equal- 
minded in happiness and sorrow, gain and loss, victory 
and defeat). Your mind is responsible for both pleasure 
and pain. You feel elated when your desires are 
fulfilled; otherwise, you are depressed. You will be 
blissful only when you control your desires. Do not 
get carried away by pleasure and pain. 


Power Of Love Is Immeasurable 
Embodiments of Love! 


Being the embodiments of love, you should not 
hate anybody. Only through love can you attain im- 
mortality. There is love in everybody, but it is used in a 
perverted manner. With love, one can achieve any- 
thing. One can even control the five elements. When 
you gain control over the five elements, the whole 
world will be under your control. It is out of ignorance 
that you consider yourself weak. In fact, all powers are 
in you. It is only love that can dispel the darkness of 
ignorance. Love is God. God is love. Love can unite 
the entire world. What is the relationship that exists 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 202 


between you and Me? This body was born in a remote 
village of Andhra Pradesh. You belong to the State of 
Maharashtra. What is the connection between you and 
Me? It is love and love alone. It is only out of love for 
Swami that you have all gathered here. Your love has 
made Me very happy. How much is the power of love? 
It is infinite. None can fathom its depth. 


Do not hate anybody. All are your brothers and 
sisters. Cultivate the spirit of Brotherhood of Man and 
Fatherhood of God. Serve all with love. “Neither by 
penance nor by pilgrimage nor by study of scriptures 
nor by Japa can one cross the ocean of life. One can 
achieve it only by serving the pious” (Sanskrit Verse) 
No amount of money can procure the bliss that you 
attain by serving others. Money comes and goes, but 
morality comes and grows. There have been many men 
of affluence in this land, but what happened to them 
ultimately? They had to leave the world empty-handed. 
No one can carry even a fistful of dust at the time of 
departing from the world. Otherwise, there would have 
been rationing even for dust in the country. When you 
leave the body, you carry with you only the good and 
bad that you have done in your life. 


Aspire to become good, not great. Ravana was 
great, while Rama was good. Why? Rama put into 
practice His innate noble qualities. Ravana also had 
noble qualities in him, but he did not make use of 
them. Greatness is like a passing cloud. You occupy 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 203 


an exalted position, you earn a lot of money, but 
nothing remains with you. Earn a good name for 
yourself. People should respect you because of your 
goodness. Only goodness gives true happiness. Do 
always good. Never indulge in evil. If you want to be 
happy in life, you should try to become a good man. 


Take Refuge In The Divine Name 


Embodiments of Love! 


Today people fight for their rights, but do not 
carry out their responsibilities. A true human being is 
one who has the noble qualities of adherence to truth, 
duty, devotion and discipline. These are the things that 
man should learn. Today man is filling his Masthaka 
(head) with all that is contained in Pusthaka (books). 
First of all, he should cultivate noble qualities. Other- 
wise, all that he has learnt will prove futile. 


Man can achieve anything with self-confi- 
dence. Therefore, it is necessary to cultivate self- 
confidence. It transforms man into divine. Why are 
you born in this world? What is it that you have 
achieved? What is the purpose of life? Is it khana, 
peena, sona, marna (to eat, drink, sleep and die)? No. 
Even birds and beasts do the same. As least they have 
a reason and a season, but today’s man has no reason 
and no season. He misuses his senses. He should make 
proper use of his senses to become a good man. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 204 


There is nothing greater than having love for 
God. Love is God and through love alone can you 
merge in God. Mira was a great devotee of Lord 
Krishna. She used to spend all her time in the temple 
of Krishna singing His glory. When the Maharana 
ordered her to leave the temple, she was shocked. She 
did not know where to go. She meditated on Krishna 
and sang. “O mind, go to the bank of the Ganga and 
Yamuna. The cool waters of Ganga and Yamuna will 
make the body placid and serene” (Hindi song). She 
considered /da and Pingala as the rivers Ganga and 
Yamuna, which meet each other at Sushumna. In order 
to reach Sushumna all that one has to do is to sing the 
glory of the Lord. When one contemplates on the Lord 
incessantly, one will certainly attain Brahmaloka. 
There are many noble souls in Maharashtra. In fact, 
they are everywhere. But how are we leading our 
lives? What is the use of having a tongue that does not 
chant the Divine Name and hands that do not serve 
others? Chant the name of Easwara with love. 


There Is Immense Strength In Unity 
Embodiments of Love! 


Each of you is a spark of the Divine. Lord 
Krishna declared in the Bhagavadgita: Mamaivamsho 
Jeevaloke Jeevabhuta Sanathana (the eternal Atma in 
all beings is a part of My Being). When you identify 
yourself with your body, you consider yourself as 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 205 


human being. But in reality, you are divine. Prem 
Easwar Hai, Easwar Prem Hai (love is God, God is 
love). Divinity is the same in everyone, be he a Hindu, 
a Muslim, a Sikh or a Christian. There is only one 
religion, the religion of love. There is only one caste, 
the caste of humanity. So develop unity, chant the 
Divine Name. What an exalted position will the 
country attain if all its people were to chant the Divine 
Name unitedly! Once you take refuge in the Divine 
Name, the whole country will progress. Then you 
need not run after other countries for help. The 
greatness and grandeur of Bharat is unparalleled. 
Since ancient times, Bharat has been occupying the 
position of a leader to the rest of the world. What can 
be said of the great good fortune of Bharat for God 
incarnated in this land many a time to lead humanity to 
divinity! You may belong to any religion, but consider 
God as one. Do not have any differences whatsoever 
based on religion. You may be a Hindu, a Muslim, a 
Christian or a Sikh, but all are one in the eyes of God. 
One who cultivates the crop of love in the field of one’ 
heart is a true Christian, a true Sikh, a true Hindu and a 
true Muslim. 


Embodiments of Love! 


I am extremely happy to see that so many 
people of Maharashtra have gathered here to express 
their love for Me. I bless you all to lead a happy, 
peaceful and blissful life. Unity and love are fast 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 206 


disappearing. It is only in villages that you find unity 
and love. If you all stand united, you can achieve any- 
thing. When you conduct yourself with the spirit of 
unity and love, the country can attain any height. It is 
not possible for a few ministers to run the whole 
country. All of you should stand united and extend 
your cooperation to them. A thread can be snapped 
with two fingers, but when many threads are woven to 
form cloth, it will be strong. There is immense strength 
in unity. When the people and the government work 
together, any mighty task can be accomplished. 


Embodiments of Love! 


I am very happy and I bless you all to lead a 
meaningful and purposeful life by working for the 
welfare of society. Pray to God for timely rains and 
good harvest, so that all are blessed with plenty and 
prosperity. With these words, I bring my Discourse to 
a close. 


16.7.2001, 
Sai Nandanvanam, Chakur (Maharashtra) 


15 


Sacrifice Is My Enjoyment 


There is no disease equal to greed, no 
enemy equal to anger, no misery like poverty or 
joy equal to wisdom. 


(Sanskrit Verse) 


SICKNESS is not confined to the body. The 
mind and senses are equally afflicted by diseases, the 
chief among which is greed. All know the ill effects 
suffered by Duryodhana and his brothers because of 
their greed. Greed is one of the chief diseases afflicting 
mankind. I do not suffer from any kind of physical 
illness because there is no trace of greed in Me. Hence, 
bodily sickness is unknown to Me. 


There is no enemy equal to anger. I have no 
feeling of aversion to anybody nor does anyone have 
adverse feelings against Me. I love all and equally 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 208 


everyone loves Me. The life principle in everyone is 
the same. The entire creation is one mansion. The 
relationship between members of the entire humanity 
is like that of various members of a single family. 
Hatred and anger are the source of all feelings of 
division. There is no trace of anger or hatred in Me and 
hence everyone loves Me. 


There is no misery equal to poverty. I am not 
poor in any sense. The love in Me is My wealth. How 
can greed touch Me when I am so replete with wealth? 
There is no poverty in Me. It is essential for all people 
to avoid these three negative tendencies. Because of 
this I am in permanent bliss. Worries do not bother Me 
at all. 


Balakrishna Responds To Garga’s Prayer 
Embodiments of Love! 


Garga was highly respected by both the Pan- 
davas and the Kauravas. He was the Kula Guru (family 
preceptor) of Nanda and the Yadavas. He was a great 
scholar replete with knowledge and wisdom. He went 
to the house of Nanda and Yashoda for the naming 
ceremony of the two babies. 


There are a few esoteric matters that are not 
widely known. Incarnations generally occur in three 
categories of Shukla (white), Aruna (orange) and Pita 
(yellow). But here was a baby who was black. Hence, 
Garga considered and found the name Krishna (black) 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 209 


as most appropriate. After the naming, Garga narrated 
several episodes that were to take place in the life of 
the child and, after staying on to experience and enjoy 
some of them, he departed. After a while, Garga 
visited Nanda’s house again to see Krishna. He was a 
very austere person and was used to preparing his food 
with his own hand. He would not eat food even 
touched by anybody else. Yashoda therefore provided 
a secluded place for him to prepare his meal. He asked 
for a little flour, jaggery (molasses) and milk. Sugar as 
a sweetener was not known then. Sweets were made 
with jaggery. Garga put the constituents into a vessel 
and prepared some sweet pudding and, as was his 
wont, offered it to Vishnu before partaking of it. 
Suddenly the boy Krishna dashed into the room and 
started eating the sweet pudding in the vessel. Garga, 
who was praying, opened his eyes and found the child 
eating the food that he had prepared for himself. He 
called Yashoda and told her, “Mother, do you see what 
your son Gopal is doing? I am hungry and He has 
eaten the food before I could. Yashoda caught hold of 
Krishna and admonished Him for His action, saying, 
“Don’t you know that the venerable Garga is the Guru 
of our clan and you have defiled his food. Is it not our 
duty to honour our guests in a befitting manner? 
Krishna replied, “Mother, I have not done anything on 
My own. It was he himself who called Me to eat the 
pudding.” Yashoda then asked Garga why he called 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 210 


Krishna whom she had kept safely away. Garga 
protested that he had not called Krishna. Krishna 
remonstrated saying, “Oh sage, why are you uttering a 
falsehood? To whom did you offer the food in prayer 
before partaking of it? Is it not Myself to whom you 
prayed? How can you offer everything to Me first and 
then start complaining?” Garga was perplexed for a 
moment, but he recognised that Krishna was none 
other than Vishnu Himself. He prayed to Vishnu and 
Krishna responded. With this realisation, Garga was 
happy to partake of the leftover of the pudding eaten 
by Krishna. 


The Miracles Of Child Krishna 


When was Krishna actually born? He was born 
3228 years before the Christian era on 20 July at 3 a.m. 
As this is 2001 A.D., today He will be 5229 years old. 
In the auspicious month of Sravana, in the 
Bahulapaksha (brighter fortnight), on Ashtami day (8" 
day of the phase of the moon) under the star Rohini, 
the holy child was born. This confluence of Ashtami 
and Rohini has resulted in the occurrence of many 
marvelous events. At that time, there was a demoness 
named Balanthaki. Her real name was not known to 
any and she was generally known by the name Poo- 
thana. It was her practice to wander from village to 
village and kill infants with poisoned milk. In the 
course of her wanderings, she came to Repalle. She 
took on a beautiful form and entered Yashoda’s house 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 211 


and started feeding her poisoned milk to the infant 
Krishna. The infant Krishna sucked out along with the 
milk and the poison her entire lifeblood until she fell 
dead. Yashoda came running to Krishna as she heard 
the thud of Poothana falling down. Seeing the dead 
demoness, Yashoda questioned Krishna as to why He 
went to her. Krishna replied, “Mother, I did not go to 
her, in fact, it is she who came to Me. It is my duty to 
kill this cruel demoness who had come with the evil 
intention of killing Me.” 


As He grew up, He started taking the cows for 
grazing every day into the forest along with other 
cowherd boys. One day as they were lost in playing 
games, the cows moved to some other forest. Suddenly 
there was a big surge of flames in the forest. Frigh- 
tened by the fire, the gopalas started praying to Krish- 
na to save them and their cows. Krishna dispelled their 
fear by saying that everything would be all right and 
told them to close their eyes for some time. Gopalas 
never disobeyed Krishna and did as He said. After 
some time, the raging fire was extinguished and the 
cows started returning safely. Amazed by this exper- 
ience, the gopalas went about sharing this miracle with 
others in the village. They said, “Krishna is no ordin- 
ary being, He is verily God as it is not possible for 
anybody to perform such a miracle.” 


The following day, they again went into the 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 212 


forest. After playing for some time, Krishna said that 
He was hungry. When the gopalas wanted to go to the 
village to fetch food, Krishna told them to go to a near- 
by place where a sacred Yajna was being performed 
and ask the Brahmins for food. The Brahmins bluntly 
rejected their request by saying that they would give 
only the remaining food after the final offerings were 
made and after partaking of the food themselves. 
Seeing the gopalas returning disappointed, Krishna 
said, “Only the mothers know the sufferings of 
children. Go and ask the wives of the Brahmins for 
food.” In the spiritual path, particularly it is women 
who readily recognise Divinity. The gopalas went to 
the wives of the Brahmins and said, “Mother, our 
Krishna is very hungry. He wants food.” The mothers’ 
joy knew no bounds as Krishna Himself, who protects 
the entire universe, was asking them for food. They at 
once packed the food without even telling their hus- 
bands and went to Krishna. They served the delicacies 
to Krishna and gopalas and experienced bliss in His 
proximity. Krishna told them to go back as their hus- 
bands would be waiting for them. Karthavyam Yoga- 
muchyathe (discharging one’s duty is yoga). Do your 
duty. Do not delay. They returned to their husbands 
and told them what had happened. Krishna’s Will 
transformed the minds of their husbands. They were 
very happy and in fact asked for the prasadam of 
Krishna. It was evening by the time the gopalas along 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 213 


with Krishna started homeward. On their way, a 
demon in the form of a serpent by name Agadha, was 
lying on the ground. Kamsa sent him. If the mighty 
serpent opened its mouth, even cars could get in. The 
demon swallowed all the cows and was ready even to 
swallow the gopalas. The gopalas clamoured for help 
from Krishna. “What would we answer if our parents 
asked for the cows?” Krishna pacified them and at 
once entered into the mouth of the demon, enlarged 
His body till the demon’s body tore open and rescued 
the cows. The gopalas, awestruck with this incident, 
started spreading the glories of Krishna. The gopalas 
experienced such miracles every moment. 


Kamsa’s Stratagem Recoils 


As days passed on, Kamsa realised that it was 
impossible for him to kill Krishna. Kamsa sent his 
minister, Akrura, to bring Balarama and Krishna to 
attend the sacred yaga performed by him. Knowing 
very well the evil intentions behind this invitation, 
Akrura went to Repalle to bring Balarama and Krishna 
as it was his primary duty to follow the command of 
the king. Seeing Balarama and Krishna mounting 
Akrura’s chariot, the gopikas and gopalas blocked the 
pathway, thereby not allowing Akrura to take their 
Krishna away from them. They prayed, “Oh Krishna, 
don’t leave us. Who will be our saviour? Don’t go to 
that evil King, Kamsa.” Krishna consoled the grief- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 214 


stricken gopikas and gopalas as with his gentle and 
sweet words appropriate to the moment. They reached 
Mathura. Kubja, a short woman with a hunchback was 
assigned the task of carrying perfumes to King Kamsa. 
On seeing her, Krishna asked, “Oh dwarf lady, what 
are you carrying?” She replied that she was carrying 
the perfumes to Kamsa, as he was very fond of them. 
Krishna went near her, deftly stepped on her feet and 
with His hands under her chin lifted up. Kubja, who 
was short with a hunch on her back, became straight 
and good-looking. These /ee/as (miracles) were well 
expounded by Thyagaraja; You are beyond all decrip- 
tion and human comprehension. Is it possible to estim- 
ate Your glory and splendour even to Brahma? We 
have been waiting for Your grace. Oh Lord! Listen to 
my agony and redeem me. You are the one who 
brought back to life the dead son of Your preceptor. 
You are the one who suppressed the serpent Kaliya, 
freed Vasudeva and Devaki and saved Droupadi from 
humiliation. You fulfilled Kuchela’s desires, You made 
ugly-looking Kubja beautiful. You protected the Pan- 
davas and protected the 16,000 Gopikas. You are b- 
eyond all description and human comprehension. (Tel- 
ugu Kirtan) The stories of Krishna’s glory and tniractes 
started spreading in the entire village, which added fuel 
to the fire of hatred in Kamsa toward Krishna. As a 
part of his plan to kill Balarama and Krishna, he sent 
Akrura to invite both of them to fight with the 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 215 


wrestlers in his court. When they were passing through 
the streets, even ladies who were inside their houses 
came out to greet Balarama and Krishna. They whis- 
pered among themselves, “Who are these children with 
radiant forms? Perhaps they are sons of an emperor.” 


Balarama and Krishna entered Kamsa’s court, 
where the wrestling competition was in progress. The 
competition did not produce a winner as none of the 
wrestlers gained an upper hand over the other. Sudden- 
ly, Balarama and Krishna leapt onto the dais from 
where Kamsa was watching the proceedings and pulled 
him down. Kamsa fell on the ground. Putting His foot 
on Kamsa’s stomach, Krishna tore him to pieces and 
killed him. Kamsa had two wives, Asthi and Prasasthi. 
As it was not possible for them to stay there, they went 
back to their parents’ house. Their father too was a 
mighty demon. The moment he heard Kamsa’s death, 
he became furious and set out to kill Balarama and 
Krishna. He went many times to fight with them but 
was defeated every time and had to return humiliated. 
The miracles of Krishna were twofold: firstly to 
protect the pious and secondly to kill the wicked. This 
was the dharma for the Dwapara Yuga and not for the 
other Yugas. With sweet words and by being an ideal, 
man has to be set on the right path. 


Reward For Selfless Love 


One day a lady brought some fruits in a cloth to 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 216 


sell them. In those days there were no monetary 
transactions, only a barter system. Fruits were bought 
in exchange for grains. She was lost in bliss on seeing 
their beautiful forms. She called them near, selected a 
few good fruits and gave them. Krishna said that He 
had to give something in return for the fruits. So, He 
went inside the house and with His baby palms brought 
a few grains of rice and even of that half He spilled on 
the way. The old woman received the few grains left in 
Krishna’s hands in her cloth. She paid little attention to 
the offering from the Divine child. In her daily ex- 
change of fruit for grains, she hardly noticed the little 
offering from the hands of a child. Lo and behold! 
When she went home and opened her bundle, all the 
grains of rice had turned into shining diamonds. Such 
is the nature of the marvelous acts of the Avatar. Their 
significance is wondrous and is beyond the grasp of 
human mind. As the Upanishads say, Yatho Vacho 
Nivarthanthe Aprapya Manasa Saha (these are of a 
nature where the words and thoughts rebound in 
futility without comprehending them). The Divine na- 
ture of Krishna was experienced and enjoyed by the 
cowherds. Living in those days was essentially sacred. 
People were engaged in selfless activities rather than in 
selfish deeds. All were always engaged in helping oth- 
ers and never in hurting. In this manner, they could 
directly recognise Divinity. Therefore, we should 
always direct our activities in a selfless manner and 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 217 


never indulge in selfishness. As I say frequently, Help 
ever, hurt never. As the cowherds were constantly act- 
ing in this manner, many people noticed the marvelous 
nature of the child Krishna. The situation is not the 
same today. Strange news floats around at times. 
Someone says that Sai Baba is angry with X or Y. Sai 
Baba has no ill feeling toward anyone. Equally, 
nobody is hostile to Swami. Everyone loves and none 
hates Swami. Swami’s mission is well known. 


Free Education, Medical Care And Drinking Water 


You are aware what ‘educating children’ in- 
volves these days. To admit a child in a Primary 
School, one needs to spend something like 20,000 
rupees. On the other hand, in the Sai Institutions, 
education is imparted from K.G. to P.G. free of cost 
without any kind of discrimination. Even doctoral 
work is done free of cost. Our Institutions do not 
collect even a naya paisa from any of the students here. 
Thousands of students have enjoyed these benefits. 
The whole world knows this fact. 


In the same manner, in the field of health-care, 
you know how much a heart operation costs. Each 
operation may cost some two to three lakhs of rupees. 
Is such treatment available to the poor? Wherefrom 
will they get such amounts? This is not a happy state of 
affairs. With the aim that high level health-care should 
be available to all, Swami had the Super Specialty 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 218 


Hospital constructed at Puttaparthi. In these institu- 
tions, no aid is received even from the Government. 
Even the salary of the teaching staff is fully met by 
Swami. You know how the salary levels of educational 
staff have gone up these days. Swami’s Institutions are 
paying wages in full compliance with government 
regulations. Irrespective of one’s own nature or status, 
one should not go against rules and regulations. The 
same is the case with the Super Specialty Hospital in 
Puttaparthi. It is ten years since the Super Specialty 
Hospital of Puttaparthi started functioning and already 
12,000 heart operations have been performed. I leave it 
to your imagination to appreciate who is responsible 
for saving these many lives. Early this year, Bhagawan 
started another Super Specialty Hospital in Bangalore. 
Within a period of six months, 1,500 operations have 
been successfully performed there. Who helped the 
suffering there? The specialist doctors are highly paid. 
Some of them receive a lakh of rupees. When contrary 
opinions were raised, I said that no compromise should 
be made regarding rules and regulations. When I am 
looking after payments, why should anybody bother? 


Take the water project in Anantapur. Even 
now there are some areas where there is scarcity of 
water. I have spent 300 crores of rupees and made 
water available to the extent possible. Take Mahboo- 
bnagar; it is another water-starved area in Telangana. I 
asked the Chief Engineer Kondal Rao, what it would 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 219 


cost to arrange for water supply there. He gave an 
estimate of about 60 crores of Rupees. I told him not to 
bother about crores but to go ahead and carry out the 
project. There is no point in putting up a project from a 
depleting source like bore wells and pumps and so I 
arranged for water to be brought from the Krishna river 
at a cost of about 110 crores of Rupees. Now we have 
gone to Medak district and the project for water supply 
there is in progress. Many other similar projects are 
coming up and will be dealt with in a similar manner. 
These hands are forever engaged in helping not in 
hurting. There are some jealous and petty minds that 
spread false and imaginary propaganda. I take no note 
of this. I am only concerned with My functioning and 
not with the comments of others. I am aware that all 
love Me as much as I love them. In the single family of 
humankind, where is the room for jealousy or hatred? 
These are all imaginary. Whatever is anyone’s imag- 
ination, My truth is unwavering. Sathyam Bruyath, 
Priyam Bruyath Na Bruyath Sathyamapriyam (speak 
the truth, speak pleasantly and do not speak unpal- 
atable truth). There is nothing greater than truth in this 
universe. Truth is God; love is God; live in love. Love 
is My wealth. Sacrifice is My enjoyment. What greater 
joy do I have? I have been spending all this time in the 
same state of joy and all My actions are fruitful. All I 
do is for the good and good actions should not be 
criticised. Good actions always succeed. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 220 


All may not be aware of the state of affairs. 
The Bangalore Hospital involves an expenditure of 3 
crores of rupees per month. Special medicines, artifi- 
cial heart valves, etc., have to be imported from Amer- 
ica. Similarly, the Prasanthi Nilayam Hospital costs 
about 2 crores of rupees per month. I do not desire any 
assistance or support from the government nor are they 
giving any. Again, there are educational institutions in 
Prasanthi Nilayam, Anantapur, Bangalore, Muddena- 
halli and Rajahmundry. These cost about 1 crore of 
rupees a month. In this manner roughly the expenses 
come to 6 crores of rupees per month. Wherefrom does 
it all come? However, I am giving it. It would require a 
corpus of 600 crores rupees in deposit, which will 
yield an interest sufficient to run the Hospitals and 
Educational Institutions. If this is done, this level of 
free health-care and education can be maintained. 
There are thousands of you here and | have never 
asked any for assistance. My hand is always above 
(giving) and never below (receiving). My hand is 
stretched only for love, but none realises this fully. 
What I needed was 600 crores rupees and only today I 
have received the news that a sum of 600 crores of ru- 
pees is arriving from the U.S. If this amount is appor- 
tioned as 300 crores for Bangalore Hospital, 200 crores 
for Puttaparthi, and 100 crores for the educational 
institutions and invested, the interest accruing will take 
care of the running expenses. I have no personal de- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 221 


sires. My entire being is selfless. There is no 
selfishness in Me at all nor have I asked anybody. Will 
any body simply give a 100 crores of rupees as gift for 
the mere asking? None. But a single individual has 
come forward to give 600 crores. I have no direct 
contact with that person. The message says, “Swami, 
you will receive the amount on Monday noon. Please 
deposit 300 crores on Bangalore Hospital account and 
200 crores on Puttaparthi Hospital account as fixed 
deposit as soon as the amount is received”. It may be 
hard to find entirely selfless people, but if you under- 
take selfless work, resources flow of their own accord. 
Bharat is a land of Thyaga (sacrifice), Yoga (spiritu- 
ality) and not of Bhoga (sensual enjoyment). Na Karm- 
ana Na Prajaya Dhanena Thyagenaikena Amrutatthwa 
manasu (immortality is not attained through action, 
progeny or wealth. It is attained only by sacrifice). It is 
this spirit of sacrifice that makes such achievements 
possible. I have many other projects in mind. 


Uphold The Honour Of Women 


First thing in the morning, you look at the 
newspaper; it is full of obscene pictures and news 
totally opposed to our culture. How sacred is the code 
of conduct of the women of Bharat! From ancient 
times, how highly have women been held in our tradi- 
tion. All energy emanates from the female principle. 
This sacred feminine principle is grossly perverted in 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 222 


unsightly and immoral forms by the films and maga- 
zines. Such vulgar exhibitionism is destructive of Bha- 
ratiya culture. We have to protect our culture and res- 
tore proper status of the feminine behaviour. We have 
to seek some suitable method for achieving this. 
Swami desires to fund a few lakhs rupees for those 
who can come forward with appropriate activities for 
the restoration and upholding of true feminine values 
and traditions in the media. With money, you should 
achieve worthy objectives like this. In this world, 
much is achieved by money, and there is no harm in 
using money in the work of upholding righteousness. 
All manner of obscenity must be eliminated from the 
newspapers and the other media. Exposure of young 
people to such images affects their minds adversely 
and even ruins their lives. To work against this trend 
and to strengthen Bharatiya culture, I am prepared to 
help to any extent. Truth must be expressed, righteous- 
ness extolled, injustice and evil opposed, obscenity ex- 
punged, and honour and respect of womanhood up- 
held. The respect of Bharatiya culture is based on the 
high regard it bestows on women. Welfare of women 
is the true welfare of Bharat. We are converting the 
goddesses of welfare into objects of vice. 


Our Krishna Kant (the Vice President of India) 
is here. His mother is a very pious lady. She is 
constantly God-minded. In fact, it is his mother’s in- 
fluence that is responsible for the exalted position 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 220 


occupied by Krishna Kant today. Many great men of 
this country owe their greatness to the influence of 
their mothers. I am very happy to see such persons. 
Even now she advises her son in the right path as if he 
were a little child. Krishna Kant is also a model son 
and respects his mother highly and abides by her 
desires with great humility. Today’s need is for more 
such mothers and children. If mothers are good, chil- 
dren are also good. To ensure proper mother and 
childcare, I am proposing to construct a mother and 
child health centre in Bangalore. The relationship 
between parents and children is far from the ideal 
today. While the parents are abusive, the children are 
disobedient. This is a very unhappy situation. Matru 
Devo Bhava, Pitru Devo Bhava, Acharya Devo Bhava, 
Atithi Devo Bhava (Revere your mother, father, 
preceptor and guest as God). Parents spend their entire 
lives for the welfare of their children, who should 
realise this and behave appropriately in return. Krishna 
Kant is affectionate to his mother and has been 
obedient and has lived with great happiness in her 
love. Such examples must be widely emulated in our 
country. 


Rehabilitate The Orphans And Destitutes 


Unfortunately, today in this country, there are 
many fatherless and motherless children in great dis- 
tress. My resolve is to identity such children and prov- 
ide them with proper amenities by way of residence, 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 224 


studies and other facilities so that they become ideal 
citizens. I have spoken about this to the local district 
Collector. He has agreed to help and has allocated 
some land for this purpose. The construction has to be 
commenced shortly. There is no matter of hide and 
seek in My actions. All I do is transparent. Bring to My 
attention any such deserving orphans or children with- 
out fathers and I shall arrange to allocate to them one 
lakh of rupees per child to be kept in fixed deposit for 
their upbringing until they are able to support them- 
selves. All I do has a great ideal behind it. I have al- 
ready instructed the Chair of Nagarjuna Constructions, 
who recited his compositions just now, to take up the 
construction of the building and complete it expedi- 
tiously. He has assented. The project is to construct 
one house per fatherless family, provide the where- 
withal for livelihood and schooling until the children 
are educated and made capable of discrimination. To- 
day educated children abound, but many lack discrim- 
ination. Education should always lead to discrimina- 
tion. My firm resolve is to disseminate such disrim- 
ination widely. What others say is of no concern to 
Me, for what I am proposing is good. I have no ill will 
against anybody and I love everybody equally. Love 
all equally, and everyone will love you in return. Love 
for love and from heart to heart. Disregard every man- 
ner of adverse comments. Hold firm to your resolve. 


Having resolved what ought to be, 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 225 


Hold on until you succeed 

Having desired what ought to be, 

Hold on until they are fulfilled. 

Having asked what ought to be, 

Hold on until you get it. 

Having thought what ought to be, 

Hold on until the thought is realised. 

With heart mellowed, the Lord must 
yield to your wishes, 

Or forgetting yourself, ask Him with 
all your heart. 

Persevere, be tenacious, and never 
give up, 

For it is the quality of a devotee never 
to retreat, abandoning his resolve. 


(Telugu Poem) 


Pursue your resolve without concern for your- 
self and make Me yield by your sheer perseverance. 
This should be the relationship between you and Me. 
Be active in good deeds, act righteously, respect 
womanhood. The welfare of women is an index of the 
welfare of the country. The history of Bharat is replete 
with the stories of great women such as Savitri who 
brought back her husband from the jaws of death and 
Sumathi who could make the sun stand still. We are 
treating such womanhood with utter disregard, treating 
them as worthless. This is a very wrong attitude. The 
country’s welfare is closely linked to the welfare of 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 226 


women. Therefore, we have to uphold the respect of 
womanhood. This is the highest of education. Take to 
heart this lesson. Going abroad and acquiring some 
foreign qualification and earning a lot of money is not 
a sign of greatness. You have to stand firm in Bhar- 
atiya culture and uphold the honour of your country. 
Engage in good works. Love those who even abuse 
you. I am a standing example for this. My life is My 
message. You should be the same. The good runs into 
several impediments. Trees bearing fruits have stones 
thrown at them. Similarly, good people receive brick- 
bats. This should not make us waver. Rough diamond 
acquires value as it is cut and polished. In the same 
way, abuses turn into ornaments. Hence, we should 
disregard abuse and hold to our righteous ideals firmly. 
The cowherds surrounding Krishna and Balarama be- 
came ideal persons. In the same manner, I want all stu- 
dents here to become ideals. Serve your parents, res- 
pect them, and obey them implicitly. That indeed is the 
essence of Bharatiya culture. Lokah Samasthah Su- 
khino Bhavantu (May all the worlds be happy). This is 
our goal. Don’t seek your own happiness; crave for the 
welfare of the entire universe. Abandon selfishness and 
pursue the welfare of others and attain Paramartha 
(supreme goal). That is true education. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Your education is not merely to earn wealth, 
but for the acquirement of good qualities. You desire 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 22} 


wealth, health and friendship; but without character, 
they are of little consequence. Therefore, you should 
build up your character. You must emblazon the great- 
ness of Bharat all over the world. With this the whole 
world will be one with Bharat. 


On this sacred Krishnashtami day, I affirm to 
you that soon the entire world, be it Pakistan, China, 
Germany, Russia or any other country big or small of 
this world, will be our friend. This shall be our resolve. 
Our natural goodness is an assisting factor for this. 
That is the root cause of this hope for unity. Unity con- 
tains purity and purity leads to Divinity. You should 
strive to achieve the triad of unity, purity and divinity. 


Krishna Janmashtami, 11.08.2001, 
Prasanthi Nilayam 


16 


Vinayaka — The Master Of 
Siddhi And Buddhi 


Oh man! Examine and Enquire for yourself - 
what kind of happiness have you achieved? 
From the moment you get up from your bed, till 
you retire, spending all the time in acquiring 
knowledge and earning degrees while 
forgetting God, what kind of happiness have 
you got? Examine for yourself. 


(Telugu Poem) 


HUMAN life is the noblest, most rare and the 
only one fit to be lived. It is the primary duty and 
responsibility of every man to work for his redemption 
and liberation by his daily effort, by working hard and 
by discharging his duties. 


To fill your small belly, you face many 
problems in life. You acquire various forms of 
knowledge from various fields. You are not able 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 230 


to enjoy total bliss. Really, you are wasting your 
human life. 


(Telugu Poem) 
Embodiments of Love! 


You strain so much for filling this small 
stomach. Does this satisfy you? There is no content- 
ment at any point of time. Based on this, Lord Vigne- 
swara said, ‘Na Sukhaat Labhyate Sukham’ — you 
cannot derive happiness out of happiness. Happiness is 
the fructification of difficulties. You want all the com- 
forts and happiness, but this will not give you Peace. If 
you want to have a taste of happiness and peace, 
obstacles are necessary. 


As long as it is alive, the tree bears fruits 
for others; even after it dies, by splitting itself, 
it becomes useful as firewood. 


(Telugu Poem) 


Tree is the very symbol of sacrifice. For the 
ideal of sacrifice, trees are the best exemplars. In this 
human life, sacrifice is essential. Without sacrifice, 
you cannot enjoy the state of bliss anytime. Cultivate 
the spirit of sacrifice right from now onward. 

You may extend hospitality and kindness 


to a mean-minded person, but he will certainly 
harm you due to his very nature. Because of the 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 231 


‘poison’ that gets into one’s psychology, human 
life is ruined. 


(Telugu Poem) 


Therefore, we should never be mean-minded. 
We should be noble and broad-minded. We should 
uphold the pristine glory and esteem that man is 
supreme in the universe. In ancient times, the sages 
erred occasionally, but repented and atoned for their 
sins. They were great personalities. You should follow 
such mighty, eminent personalities. Modern man is 
weak. In modern times, people commit sins, but they 
neither realise their mistakes nor do they repent. In 
those days, the elders corrected their mistakes and led a 
pure life, being very grateful to God. Repentance is the 
basis for the glorious life that follows. To recognise 
this truth, you worship Lord Vigneshwara. 


The Ideal Path Finder 


Who is Vigneshwara? Who is Ganapathi? The 
word ‘Ga’ is related to the intellect. ‘Na’ refers to 
wisdom. Ganapathi is the head of all the secular and 
spiritual knowledge. Vinayaka has no master above 
him. He is the master unto himself. Vinayaka will 
never put you to suffering in anyway. Vinayaka blesses 
all your endeavours, efforts and confers success. He 
will never allow anything evil to reside in you. He has 
the mouse as his vehicle. A mouse stands for darkness 
as it moves about in the darkness at night. Vinayaka 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 232 


helps you to dispel this darkness and spread light. 
Divinity is not limited to mankind alone. We find 
divinity present in birds and beasts too. To demonstrate 
this latent, immanent divinity, we have Vinayaka 
having an elephant’s head, with a mouse as his vehicle. 
The elephant is highly intelligent, faithful and loyal. It 
never leaves the path that it lays all by itself and stands 
as a symbol for gratitude. Gratitude is a very sacred 
quality. Forbearance is Truth, dharma, Veda, Non- 
violence, and everything. The elephant has got great 
patience and forbearance. It is prepared to sacrifice its 
life, but it can never tolerate its master’s suffering. 
When there is no path for us to tread in the jungle, it is 
the elephant that walks through and creates a path for 
us. Similarly, in this jungle of life, it is the elephant- 
headed Vinayaka who shows the ideal path for all of us 
to tread. 


On this day of Vinayaka Chathurthi, various 
kinds of offerings are made. But He does not accept 
any oily or fried preparations. All preparations are 
cooked in steam and offered to him. They offer him 
Kudumulu and Vundrallu, made by using rice flour and 
til (sesamum) seeds. Why is such an offering made? 
For humanity, heath is wealth. Those who partake of 
food cooked in steam remain very healthy. But today, 
man is running after various delicacies. But, for the 
elephant health is all-important. Vinayaka too teaches 
us the same. This preparation of rice flour and fil 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 233 


sesamum seeds frees us from all defects of the eye like 
spots and cataract. A combination of jaggery and til 
seeds prevents all defects and diseases caused due to 
bile, wind and phlegm. The rice flour preparation made 
using steam helps in digestion too. 


We have learnt how to worship Vinayaka, but 
we do not recognise His inner principle. This will 
make everyone of us an ideal person. Students worship 
Vinayaka more on this day, as it will improve their 
memory and intelligence. Music concerts begin with a 
prayer to Vinayaka. But because of the effects of the 
age of Kali, we have forgotten this fact. For the mis- 
fortunes of the day, the root cause lies in the neglect of 
the worship of Vinayaka. Today, man is after tem- 
porary, fleeting, ephemeral pleasures, forgetting eternal 
joy. We should strive for permanent joy and peace. We 
can achieve that only by praying to God. As days pass, 
the very humanness is lost. Human values have disap- 
peared. Man is not following his prescribed code of 
conduct. If human values are followed, divinity can be 
attained. Once anything is told, it should be remem- 
bered throughout the life. For any act of help, whether 
small or big, gratitude must be expressed. Bereft of 
gratitude, one turns wicked. We should offer our pray- 
ers to the Sun God, the Lord of Effulgence. The light 
in our eyes is due to Sun God. It is because of Sun God 
that we are able to see. Even if Sun is present, if our 
eyes are closed, we will not be able to see anything. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 234 


Vision is the reflection of the Sun God. Sun withdraws 
from the eyesight of the man who does not show 
gratitude (i.e. he turns blind). Man cannot discharge his 
duties when he is blind. A person may be a great 
scholar, but if he is blind, he cannot do anything. 


Therefore, netra, the eye, is the Sastra, the 
scripture for our life. Our scriptures are nothing but the 
reflection of the effulgence of the Sun God. Therefore, 
we need to pay attention to our eyesight. Eye defects 
certainly imply lack of gratitude. 


Vinayaka Is The First Worshipped 


Vinayaka has many teachings that help man 
liberate himself. Worship of Lord Ganesha has been 
followed from very ancient times. In the Narayana 
Upanishad, Lord Ganesha 1s praised first. In the three 
Vedas, we find the mention of Lord Ganesha. Even in 
music, they pray to Ganesha for his grace. Do we have 
the qualities of Vinayaka? Lord Vinayaka has a pure 
heart. In fact, Siddhi and Buddhi (fulfillment and intel- 
lect) are his two eyes. He considered them as his con- 
sorts. For intelligence, we need to have Buddhi. For 
Buddhi, we need to have gratitude. An ungrateful man 
can never become an intellectual. Without intellect, 
one can never be successful. Vinayaka confers success. 
So, we need to know the inner significance of Lord 
Vinayaka. Today, before we start any work, we pray to 
Lord Ganesha. Without praying to the master of 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 235 


masters, Vinayaka, and thereby, acting in an egoistic 
way, we are bound to fail. Vinayaka Chathurthi is the 
first festival of the year, followed by other festivals. 
Bharatiyas begin their daily prayers with a prayer to 
Lord Ganesha. Vinayaka is the head of spiritual, men- 
tal and physical levels. We should sustain and protect 
all these levels. 


In our college, we have M.B.A.— meaning, 
Master of Business Administration, but it is not that. It 
stands for Mind, Body and Atma. We need to under- 
stand the integration and coordination of all the three. 
Mind is given to enquire. Body is granted to perform. 
The Atma monitors the performance of these two. 
Atma is permanent. Mind is fickle and has to be made 
steady. It should be exercised properly. One should 
constantly enquire whether one has a mind like that of 
a man or a beast. We should not act according to our 
mind. The body should not do what the mind has 
decided. Intellect has the capability to discriminate 
whether a thought is good or not. If the thought is 
good, the intellect acknowledges it to the Atma. Man 
should realise that he is the combination of Mind, 
Body and Atma. He has to purify the mind. An impure 
mind is not acceptable to the intellect that transcends 
all the senses. We follow the mind and senses. Mind is 
the master of senses, but it is not controlling the 
senses. One may have a sensitive mind, but it is only 
an animal mind. So we should master the mind and be 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 236 


a mastermind. To exercise the control of mind, wor- 
ship of Vinayaka is important. Vinayaka does not re- 
act, but remains as a witness. Atma, the spirit, is eter- 
nal. It is the witness and so also, it watches everything, 
but does not interfere. 


Good Thoughts, Feelings And Good Conduct 
Constitute Good Character 


At one time, Valmiki prayed to Narada and 
asked him whether there was anyone who upheld truth, 
enjoyed bliss, was ever smiling and forgiving, who did 
not commit any mistake, expressed gratitude for any 
small help, who always helped others, etc., and enum- 
erated 11 noble qualities. Narada replied thus: “Oh! 
Sage, why do you take so much trouble? Not just 
eleven, but 11000 noble qualities are in a single person 
who has taken birth in this world.” There is no one 
who attaches value to character now. The three essen- 
tial things that constitute character are good thoughts, 
good feelings and good conduct. If you have good 
thoughts, your actions will automatically be good. 
Good qualities are the very personification of Divinity. 
A person with such divine qualities only took birth in 
human form as Lord Rama. Lord Rama faced many 
problems and difficulties, but he never strayed away 
from His path. He never gave up Truth; rather, what- 
ever He spoke became Truth. This was the sacred path 
taught by Narada. Narada was not a conflict maker as 
we all think. He was verily the beacon of light that 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 237 


spread sacred wisdom. He propagated and spread the 
Gayatri Mantra given by Sage Viswamitra. ‘Bhur’ 
pertains to physical matter, which is the body. The 
body is the combination of various materials like 
calcium, lead, etc. ‘Bhuvah’ is the vibration that comes 
out of the mind and makes the body function. ‘Suvah’ 
is the radiation, which is the Atma. Man is the com- 
bination of matter, vibration and radiation. As the feel- 
ing, so is the vibration. Everyday, morning and even- 
ing, bhajans go on here. You think that the bhajans are 
going on in the Bhajan Hall. No. The vibrations of 
bhajans are there all over this place. You can certainly 
hear the bhajans even from this table if you listen 
carefully, with a steady mind, pure and selfless heart. 
Everything is Divine vibration - the walls, the roof, and 
this mike. The great sages were the ones who had these 
vibrations. The Veda was heard through sound, 
through vibrations. If you sit down and listen with a 
pure heart, you too can listen to it. Why go so far? Just 
close your ears and you can hear the Aumkar from 
within. Everything originated from the Aumkar. The 
same air produces seven different notes through diff- 
erent reeds in the harmonium. Similarly the Aumkar is 
one; all other sounds are ‘vikaaras’— modifications of 
the Aumkara. Vinayaka, who is the master of all these 
vibrations, gifts these vibrations to you. You may 
listen to any sound, but the most sacred is Aumkara. If 
your body is full of wicked vibrations, everything will 
be wicked. Never allow a wicked man to come near 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 238 


you. Run away from bad company to avoid the wicked 
vibrations from getting into you. 


Avoid bad company, foster good company. 
Perform good deeds day and night; discri- 
minate between permanent and temporary. 


(Sanskrit Verse) 


If you are good, your body will be full of good 
and divine vibrations. Bad thoughts give rise to bad 
vibrations. All that you see is the reflection of what is 
inside you. If you call a person bad, it is just that the 
bad in you is reflected in him. It has got nothing to do 
with him. Good or bad is the reflection of your inner 
being. Never consider that good or bad exists separ- 
ately from you. But modern students do not have the 
capacity to understand this truth. They have only 
bookish knowledge and not the knowledge of the heart. 
They read all that is in the books, go to the examina- 
tion hall, scribble on the papers and come out empty- 
headed. The student does not even know what he has 
written in the examination hall. All this is artificial 
knowledge; it is not true education. 


Even after acquiring various forms of 
knowledge, one cannot give up meanness. It will 
only lead to argumentation, but not to total 
awareness. After all, one has to die in spite of 
all his worldly knowledge. So, study that which 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 239 


makes you immortal. 
(Telugu Poem) 


All this education is being used to fill this small 
stomach. All this knowledge is superficial. Mere physi- 
cal education cannot sustain your life, give you a long 
life, or satisfy the heart. Therefore, we should learn 
that which is related to the heart. Saraswata explains in 
detail, the prayer that is offered to the Sun God. He 
says that man is bound by attachment. Attachment, 
greed and possessiveness are responsible for illusion. 

“Saraswathi Namastubhyam, Varade 

Kaamaroopini 


Vidyaarambham Karishyami, 
Siddhirbhavathume Sadaa” 


(Sanskrit Poem) 


All these teachings promote the power of dis- 
crimination. You are not filling your lives with divine, 
noble and novel thoughts. You are wasting your lives 
with bad thoughts, bad vibrations and bad actions. The 
ancient sages, who realised their mistakes and re- 
pented, were yogis. Today, you are bhogis who do not 
realise your mistakes. Bhoga is bound to cause roga 
(disease). Therefore, you must realise your mistake and 
repent wholeheartedly. This should not be done merely 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 240 


with words or writings. In fact, all the vibrations must 
be unified. Then, the reality will reflect and reveal 
itself. 


Share And Sustain Love And Compassion 
Embodiments of Love! 


All that is happening in this world today is 
destructive, divisive and extremely unnatural to man. 
Everywhere, we find atrocities, killings, conflicts and 
quarrels. Having been born as a human being, what 
happened to your humanness? What happened to your 
compassion and kindness? 


What happened to sacrifice, love and non- 
violence? There is no trace of all these. We find only 
useless exhibitionism. You have to repent wholehear- 
tedly and pray. God is the personification of Love and 
compassion. Sometimes He may appear unkind, but 
there is kindness in that too. You do not have the capa- 
city to understand this kindness. You can understand 
kindness only with kindness, Love with Love and 
hatred with hatred alone. You are born as humans and 
therefore, you must live as humans. You must practise 
humanness, propagate and experience humanness, and 
enjoy and share with your fellowmen, the bliss that 
results. When you have such sacred thoughts in you, 
naturally, you will become a divine person. You call 
yourselves human, but, in reality, there is no trace of 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 241 


human qualities. The behaviour is always perverted 
and the mind is full of bad thoughts. Where are the 
good feelings of love and compassion? We should 
share and sustain Love and compassion. One without 
compassion is a demon (danva). One with compass- 
sion is man (manava). With compassion and love, you 
can achieve anything. 


In this barren land without love, 

For the seeds of love to sprout 

With all the emotions and the 

downpour of love, 
For the incessant flow of rivers of love, 
Oh Krishna! Sing for us. 

This was the prayer of all Gopikas. From where 
was Krishna singing? Was it through the flute, which 
was made of wood? What is flute? This body with nine 
holes is the flute. From this instrument (body), proper 
and melodious tunes should come out and not discor- 
dant ones. Oh Krishna! Play on, holding the flute of my 
heart and sing tunes full of Love. Listening to that tune 
coming from the flute of Krishna, Radha merged her- 
self in the divine melody. Who is Radha? She is not 
just a woman. Radha is Dhara, the earth. The earth is 
the flute. Therefore, we call Radhakrishna. The name 
of woman comes first — nature (Prakriti) and then God 
(Paramatma). That is why the names Radhakrishna, 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 242 


Sitarama, Lakshminarayana and so on. Therefore, you 
should worship nature and do good deeds. Then, you 
will enjoy the presence of God. There is nothing that is 
impossible for God. 


Vinayaka Is The Master Of Sacred Qualities 


Today is Vinayaka Chaturthi. The nature of 
Vinayaka is found everywhere. Vinayaka is the master 
of Siddhi and Buddhi. We have to pray to such a Lord. 
If the leader is good, you will certainly reach the goal. 
Today, we do not have good leaders. Who is a good 
leader? Our conscience is the leader, but you have 
polluted that conscience. It is full of bad traits and 
wickedness. Vinayaka is the one who annihilates all 
such bad traits in our conscience. Mice smell every- 
thing wherever they go. Vinayaka has such a creature 
as his vehicle. He put the mouse under his foot. This 
means that he is not affected by any bad traits. As he is 
the master of all sacred qualities, sages and spiritual 
seekers praise him. We have to recognise and under- 
stand the significance of Vinayaka, who is there in our 
hearts. We have to think of him constantly. He is the 
presiding deity of all Gods. Shaivites as well as 
Vaishnavites worship Vinayaka. He symbolises all the 
religions. He stands for auspiciousness. Once you 
recognise this and worship accordingly you will 
redeem your lives. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 243 


Swami’s Love Recognises True Devotion 


Today, in Prasanthi Nilayam, we have many 
here, who have been serving with unwavering mind, 
unmindful of obstacles and difficulties. That is the true 
quality of devotion. One should have a steady mind 
and one-pointed vision. Swami has chosen this day to 
felicitate all of them. This is not an opportunity, but a 
reflection of Swami’s love toward you. All this is noth- 
ing but reflection, reaction and resound. In future, 
many more things are going to happen like this. Con- 
tinue to serve with steady devotion. We have here with 
us, Professor Radhaswamy, who has been here for the 
last ten years or more. When he is given some work, he 
says, “Swami, you have given me life. My bypass 
surgery was also done in the Super Specialty Hospital. 
I do not want anything in this world. I like to serve 
you.” Do you find anybody with such a sacred heart? 
There should be more and more such people in the 
future. We have a doctor from Italy, where he has a lot 
of work. Nevertheless, he wanted to work in the prox- 
imity of the Divine. He came and settled here and he is 
working in the department of cardiology. Another doc- 
tor Keshav Prasad, a young man from U.S.A., could 
have done great work there. However, he wanted to do 
Swami’s service. Therefore, he came here with all his 
baggage and settled here. For outsiders, all these peo- 
ple look very ordinary. If you go deep and enquire 
about them and their bio-data, you will find them very 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 244 


special and unique. They are good leaders and special- 
ists in their fields. Such leaders are leading unostenta- 
tious lives in Prasanthi Nilayam. They work very hard, 
day and night, just for the sake of Swami’s love. You 
have seen Dr. Alreja. When Swami visited Bombay 
thirty years ago, he was there in the crowd, at which 
time he sustained a heart attack and collapsed. Swami 
got up from the dais and ran up to him, made him lie 
down and patted on his chest. Then a stretcher was 
brought and he was taken away. Later, he came to 
Parthi, and from then onward, he has been here and has 
never gone home. When Swami told Alreja, “You are 
90 years old. You cannot climb the stairs. It is very dif- 
ficult for you to walk. You can go in a car,” he replied, 
“My body is a car. As long as it is healthy, I will walk. 
You don’t have to take any trouble. I don’t want the 
car.” He goes walking everyday to the hospital. 


Earlier, there was Seshagiri Rao in Prasanthi 
Nilayam. He was a great officer. He used to offer Aar- 
ati. He lived for a 100 years. Another person, by name 
Kishtappa, came after Seshagiri Rao had passed away. 
He used to come from a far off place by foot, sit 
through the bhajans and offer Aarati to Swami. He too 
lived for 101 years. Surayya, a huge personality from 
Venkatagiri, with a height of 6 feet and 3 inches, was 
also here. He was a celibate too. When Swami takes 
rest at night, he used to come slowly and massage 
Swami’s feet. When Swami says, “Surayya, my feet 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 245 


are not paining; you need not press my feet,” he will 
say, “Swami, you do not have any pain, but if I do not 
press, I will feel pain. So let me massage your feet.” 
After Swami closes His eyes, he would leave the room. 
He did this work till his last day. He too lived for a 100 
years. Karunyananda Swami also lived for a 100 years. 
Kasturi was supposed to have died very early. But after 
entering Prasanthi Nilayam, he lived for ninety years. 
Whoever came here lived long. What is the reason? 
They were thinking of God all the time. It confers long 
life. There are many people who go for jogging and 
take medicines, but without any avail. But these people 
never used to take medicines. If they had any problem 
with health, they came to Swami to take Prasadam. 
They led their lives in this manner. There should be 
more and more such people. Youngsters today have 
monkey mind; not just monkey mind, but something 
worse. What is said is forgotten the very next moment. 
The tongue has no bone and hence it can be twisted in 
any way. You have to hold on to a promise you have 
made till you die. Many people say, “Swami, I am 
losing my teeth. What is the use after I lose all my 
teeth?” Swami says, “You may lose your teeth but the 
tongue is still there.” All the teeth are strong. Strong 
things go first. The tongue that is soft remains. When 
you go, the tongue always goes with you. The tongue 
should be kept safe. That is why it is said, ‘you cannot 
always oblige but you may always speak obligingly.’ 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 246 


Talk softly and sweetly. Speak the truth. Follow righ- 
teousness. Chant the name of the Lord and make others 
listen to it. Do you know why the tongue is given? Is it 
to eat everything? Do you know why the feet are 
given? Is it to go around in the lanes and bylines? Each 
limb of the body has its own purpose. You should do 
good and perfect deeds. Body is gifted to undertake 
sacred activities. You should never be unrighteous and 
never utter falsehood. Let your body tread along the 
righteous path. Swami expects you to earn a good 
(saarthaka) name. 


Vinayaka Chaturthi, 22.8.2001 
Prasanthi Nilayam 


17 


Happiness In Union With God 


Indha Pujyamaya Onam Divasam Ella 
Janangalukum Endey Paripurna Anugraham 
Asirvadam 


(On this auspicious day of Onam, I confer my 
bounteous grace and blessings on all of you) 


WHAT happiness did the demon Somakasura 
attain by stealing the Vedas and hurling abuses at God? 
What was the fate of the ten-headed Ravana who ab- 
ducted the consort of Rama? What did Duryodhana, 
who refused to give the Pandavas even as much land as 
would a needlepoint occupy, take with him at the end? 
What happened to the wicked Kamsa ultimately who 
indulged in the gruesome act of slaying infants? The 
same will be the fate of the wicked today. If not today, 
at least tomorrow, they are bound to meet their doom. 
Oh man! Do not entertain excessive desires. Better that 
you lead a life of moderation. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 248 


Truth Is The Basis For The Whole Universe 
Embodiments of Love! 


The whole world is permeated by Truth. Truth 
is all-pervasive. All types of wealth, comforts and 
conveniences are based on truth. Bereft of truth the 
world cannot exist. Today man is facing hardships as 
he has forgotten truth. Truth neither can be hidden nor 
be changed. Trikala Badhyam Sathyam (Truth is that 
which remains the same in the past, present and 
future). Since ancient times Bharat has been able to 
enjoy peace and prosperity because its people adhered 
to truth. Bharatiyas propagated the message of spiri- 
tuality to the entire world. Loka Samasta Sukhino Bha- 
vantu (May all the worlds be happy!) has been their 
motto. Such a sacred ideal is forgotten today. Sathya- 
nnasti Paro Dharma (there is no Dharma greater than 
adherence to Truth). Truth is the very life of man. All 
human values are based on truth. 


Truth is the noblest of all virtues. You might 
have heard the story of king Harishchandra, who sacri- 
ficed his kingdom and even his wife and son for the 
sake of truth. 


The creation emerges from Truth 

and merges into Truth, 

Is there a place where Truth does not exist? 
Visualise such pure and unsullied Truth. 


(Telugu Poem) 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 249 


Truth may sound like a simple word, but it is 
very important to know its greatness. All that is, is 
embraced by Sathya (truth). The entire universe is 
dependent on truth. If the very basis is lost, what is left 
of our life? There is no place where truth does not 
exist. 


Emperor Bali based all his actions on truth. 
Looking upon his subjects as his own children, he 
performed his duties. Bali was a very generous person. 
He was compassionate and was a shining sun of truth. 
The very fact of his reign in the land of Kerala is the 
cause for the prosperity and happiness of the people 
there. He had conquered all the lesser Gods with his 
great prowess. He performed a sacrifice called Vis- 
wajit, in commemoration of his victory, on the banks 
of the river Narmada. The Lord incarnated as Vamana 
at that time. He was born as the son of the saintly 
couple Kashyapa and Aditi. They lived in a hermitage 
known as Siddhashrama. The young Vamana walked 
towards the site where Bali was performing the sacred 
ritual. The boy was brilliant and effulgent, and every- 
one looked with wonder at his great beauty. Vamana 
was the very personification of the attractive magnetic 
field. Ratnamala, the daughter of Bali saw the young 
boy and developed a desire in her mind to have Him as 
her own child and fondle Him in various ways. But, in 
the meantime, as you know, Vamana had pushed Bali 
down into the Pathala (netherworld). This event turned 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 250 


her love towards Vamana into hatred and she felt that 
she could kill the child herself. The all-knowing 
Vamana noticed what was passing through the mind of 
Ratnamala and pronounced ‘Tathaasthu’ (may it be 
so!). God, since He is omnipresent, Sarvatah Paani- 
padam, Tat Sarvathokshi Siromukham, Sarvatah 
Sruthimalloke Sarvamavruthya Thishthati (with hands, 
feet, eyes, heads, mouth and ears pervading every- 
where, He permeates the entire universe). He is cons- 
tantly pronouncing this blessing on all. Nothing es- 
capes His attention. That is why we should always 
keep our minds filled with good thoughts. He told 
Ratnamala, “Mother, you first desired to breast feed 
Me. But seeing your father’s downfall, your desire 
turned into hatred. You felt like feeding poison and 
killing Me. You will be born in Dwapara Yuga as 
Poothana and feed Me with poisonous milk, and you 
yourself will die.” Therefore, it is essential for all of us 
to have constantly good thoughts as God is pronoun- 
cing blessing of fulfillment incessantly. In view of the 
ignorance of this reality, mankind fills its mind with 
many forms of evil thoughts. 


See no evil, see what is good; 
Hear no evil, hear what is good; 
Think no evil, think what is good; 
Talk no evil, talk what is good; 
Do no evil, do what is good; 

This is the way to God. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 25.1 


Hence, if your thoughts are pure, you are 
blessed with purity. We fill our minds and spend our 
time in activities and associations replete with evil; but 
when we reap the consequences and suffer, we are 
filled with misery. As every thought emanates from the 
mind, its consequences are determined. Such was the 
fate of Ratnamala. When you are subject to misery you 
blame God, but do not realise that your distress is the 
consequence of your own thoughts. This is why you 
should have good thoughts and seek good company. 


Bali Was An Adherent Of Truth 


Emperor Bali was the personification of gener- 
osity. To uphold his promise, he sacrificed everything. 
Young Vamana requested three paces of land. Bali 
promised without a moment’s hesitation. His preceptor 
Sukracharya however dissuaded him. He told Bali, 
“The person before you is Vishnu Himself. Once you 
promise Him anything, you cannot transgress it. So, do 
not make any hasty promises.” Bali replied to Sukra- 
charya that there was no greater sin than going back on 
one’s words and, notwithstanding the specific com- 
mand of his own preceptor, he upheld the promise 
made to Vamana. Bali was prepared to undergo any 
misery while maintaining truth. So, Lord Vishnu sent 
him to the netherworld and gave him all the comforts 
of living. Being in Pathala, he attained eternal life. He 
however prayed to Vamana that He should return every 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 252 


year to the land of Kerala and grace it with His 
blessings. That is why the people of Kerala have 
named this day “Onam” and celebrate it with fervour. 


Emperor Bali was an extremely virtuous pers- 
on. Though born in a family of demons, he was filled 
with divine thoughts. It is the consequence of the great 
merits of Bali that is manifesting as the benefits that 
people of Kerala enjoy today. Onam does not mean 
merely the preparation of sweet pudding, various 
delicious dishes, etc., and eating ourselves to the full. 
We must relive the experience of the encounter be- 
tween Bali and Vamana. Today Vamana is supposed to 
be physically present in the land of Kerala and hence 
this day should be celebrated with gaiety and joy. We 
should lead an ethical, moral and spiritual life. Sat- 
hyam Bruyath, Priyam Bruyath, Na Bruyath Sathyam- 
apriyam (speak the truth, speak pleasantly and do not 
speak unpalatable truth). These three values are ethical, 
moral and spiritual, respectively. All the three values 
ultimately depend upon truth. Following the path of 
truth and without swerving from a spiritual life, we 
should work for the welfare of the whole world. Kerala 
has the political identity of being communist. How- 
ever, every individual Keralite, irrespective of his 
political colour, never swerves from the daily duties of 
a purifying bath, smearing of holy ash on his forehead 
or wearing a sandalwood paste mark, visiting the tem- 
ples, etc. Their divine love and devotion is unmatch- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 253 


ing. Kerala is a beautiful state. People there are replete 
with spiritual attitudes. But time has had its toll and the 
tender hearts of people have turned hard. Why is this? 
It is our own attitude that is responsible. The good and 
bad habits of the individual of a region have their 
effect on the whole land. 


Keep Anger, Jealousy And Greed At Bay 


If money is lost, nothing is lost; 
Tf health is lost, something is lost; 
If character is lost, everything is lost; 


Therefore, character, above all, is the quality 
that has to be safeguarded by one and all. This alone is 
God’s desire forever. People, not recognising this 
truth, spend their time in the acquisition of wealth and 
in other selfish activities. This selfish attitude should 
be uprooted from the heart of man. All are one, be 
alike to all. The entire humanity of the world is a 
single family. Whether you are an atheist or a theist, 
youth or aged, you should recognise that you are all 
part of the single race of humanity. You have to 
develop human values. Without this, you are human 
merely in form not in fact. Man is filled with qualities 
such as anger, desire, greed, jealousy, etc. These are 
animal qualities. Anger is the nature of a dog. Waver- 
ing mind is the quality of a monkey. You are neither a 
dog nor a monkey. When you are in a fit of anger, 
remind yourself constantly that you are not a dog and 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 254 


your anger will diminish. Many animal qualities are 
rampant in human beings today. This is a situation that 
must be corrected. What are the human qualities? 
Compassion, truth, forbearance, empathy, etc. These 
are the human qualities that we must cultivate 


God’s actions vary and their significance is not 
evident to all of us. So, we form our own reactions and 
attitudes to these situations. Such reactions are our own 
creation and do not conform to the reality of the event. 
The anger in you appears as if it is that of the other 
person. In the same manner, the various attitudes like 
greed, jealousy, pride, delusion, etc., are our inner 
attitudes projected on others. God is pure, attributeless 
and selfless and on such a Divinity, you project your 
own inner defects. You attempt to repress and suppress 
such negative impulses in you. There is no use in such 
attempts for, sooner or later, they are bound to erupt. 
Your effort should be to prevent the very entry of such 
attitudes and feelings in you. Several fuels like petrol- 
eum, coal, etc., are extracted deep from the earth. 
Where did they arise in the first place? Over a long 
period of time, they have accumulated deep inside. 
Now they are making their appearance outside. In the 
same way, evil tendencies like desire, anger, hatred, 
etc., are accumulated in you, hidden in you. Sometime 
or the other, they are bound to come out. So, take care 
that they do not even make their entry into you. This is 
the true human value. The very attempt to control or 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 255 


restrain your anger is a sign of weakness. In fact, you 
have to cultivate your nature in such a manner that the 
very feeling of anger does not enter you. 


Exercise Discrimination To Let In Good Qualities 
Embodiments of Love! 


There are manifold human qualities. It is not 
possible to restrict all of them from entry or to evict 
them. You should discriminate and ensure that only 
good qualities enter you. You ingrain them and be an 
example to others around you. This is the true human 
value. First of all, is “Love”. Love is God; live in love. 
We should have pure love filled in our hearts. If our 
hearts are full with sacred love, no evil tendency will 
enter them. The heart is like a single seat-sofa, not a 
double sofa, nor a musical chair. There is room for 
only a single tendency and be it divine love. 


Start the day with love; 
Spend the day with love; 
Fill the day with love; 
End the day with love; 
This is the way to God. 


Love emanates from truth and truth emanates 
from love; one does not exist without the other. Truth 
is an internal current and love is its external flow. The 
Vedic pronouncement, Anthar Bahischa Tatsarvam- 
vyapya Narayana sthithaha (That all-pervasive God is 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 256 


present within and without) is an expression of this 
truth. The Narayana principle is the expression of this 
unity. The inner flow is continuous. This symbolises 
Saraswathi. You may have seen the rivers Ganga and 
Yamuna. Saraswathi is the invisible undercurrent. The 
eternal inner flow of the Saraswathi principle rep- 
resents speech. Our faculty of speech is the divine 
Saraswathi principle and, as such, should not be 
abused or misused. Control of speech is of vital 
importance. If your feet slip and you fall, there is no 
great harm; but if you slip in your speech, it causes 
irreparable damage. Of all the human faculties, speech 
is of great importance and should be used with extreme 
carefulness. Never speak in a manner as to hurt 
anybody or untruly. One may think that it is a difficult 
job, but it is very easy. In fact, more than your teeth or 
other parts of your body, your tongue is under your 
control. It is extremely flexible and has no bone in it. 
You can turn it any way you want and the words you 
utter seem to dance to any tune that you make. 
Therefore, you must utter only sacred words through it: 
Nirgunam, Niranjanam, Sanathana Niketanam, Nitya, 
Suddha, Buddha, Mukta, Nirmala Swarupinam (attrib- 
uteless, pure, final abode, eternal, unsullied, enligh- 
tened, free and embodiment of sacredness). 


Sounds emanate from the tongue. It is said that 
God is a word made in form: Sabda Brahmamayi, 
Characharamayi, Jyothirmayi, Vaangmayi, Nityanan- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 or 


damayi, Paratparamayi, Mayamayi, Sreemayi (God 1s 
the embodiment of sound, mobility and immobility, 
light, speech, eternal bliss, supreme majesty, delusion 
and wealth). Therefore, always speak sweetly. For the 
proper evolution of humanity, truth and love must have 
a sound basis. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Emperor Bali attained his eternal life through 
truth and love only. While the body perished, the mind 
remained eternal. Body is like water bubble, mind is 
like a mad monkey; don’t follow the body, don’t 
follow the mind; follow your conscience. This is the 
lesson of Bali’s life. Conscience is deathless. The 
universal consciousness has neither birth nor death. It 
has no beginning, middle or end. He is omnipresent as 
the Atma of everything. (Telugu Poem) How can you 
comprehend such an entity? All your conceptions are 
mere reflections of this reality. 


Get Attuned To The Divine Vibration 


The sounds that you think you produce are all- 
pervading. All the fine things that were spoken here 
and the sweet songs that were sung had reverberated 
through this hall. Where have they all gone? They are 
all parts of the divine vibration. They are pervading 
and existing in every soft or hard article or object here. 
Occasionally, you hear some words or music from here 
or there, but the divine vibrations are eternal and 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 258 


omnipresent. That is why the Vedas declare, “Sarvatah 
Paani-padam ...”’ this divine vibration pervades all of 
us from top to toe. Only if you practise consistently the 
proper use of your speaking faculty, divine vibrations 
will fill you and you will feel divine bliss. Without fear 
of sin and filled with ignorance, irreverent, can you 
call such a one bereft of all humanness a human 
being? This is the enemy of universal peace (Telugu 
Poem). What is the source of all the violence and dis- 
turbance in the world? Individual’s existence is a ref- 
lection of the world’s condition. If each individual is 
good, then the world is peaceful. Speak well and act 
well. Transform your life into a sacred one. In this 
manner, distribute goodness all around. Talk with love. 
Sing with love. This is what the Gopikas sang. 


In this barren land without love 

For the seeds of love to sprout 

With all the emotions and the downpour of 
love, 

For the incessant flow of rivers of love, 

Oh, Krishna! Sing for us. 


(Telugu song) 


Music is a reflection of love. All phenomena 
are reflection, reaction and resound. Life is a reflec- 
tion, heart is the reality. When the reality is clear, the 
reflection and the resound will be true representations 
of that inner reality. Therefore, today we should fill our 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 259 


hearts with love. Love is a loose word. It means many 
things. There is worldly love, there is physical love, 
etc. LOVE is one. All others are transient. Spiritual 
love that emanates from the hearts is true love. The 
spiritual love flowing out of the heart alone is positive 
and all other kinds are negative. Even the rituals you 
perform, meditation and worship are all in fact 
negative. You are sitting in meditation rotating the 
beads of your rosary, but your mind is doing purchases 
in the market. Control of the mind is true worship. 
Letting your mind wander while your hands are 
performing the motions of worship, is no worship at 
all. Manah Eva Manushyanam  Karanam 
Bandhamokshayo (mind alone is responsible for both 
bondage and liberation of man). Your mind should be 
focused on God. Consider this as lock and here is the 
key. Put the key in the lock and turn it to the right and 
the lock opens; turn it to the left and it is locked. Your 
heart is the lock and your mind is the key. Turn your 
mind to God and you are free. Turn it to the world and 
you are bound. Our mind is constantly turned towards 
the world. It is obsessed with the world. We are not 
directing it toward spirituality. Of course, the world is 
there, but our experience there is impermanent, 
ephemeral. There is only one truth and that is spiritual. 
To become spiritual is to ‘merge’. The worldly life is 
like a ‘marriage’ no, not even a marriage, actually a 
‘mirage’, an illusion. A mirage is visible but there is no 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 260 


reality behind it. Marriage takes place, but there is no 
oneness between the husband and the wife. If one says 
‘yes’, the other says ‘no’ and there is endless strife. 
Does marriage produce unity? No. Unity alone is 
reality. Ekam Sath Viprah Bahudha Vadanthi (Truth is 
one, but sages refer to it by many names) 


Oh man! Forgetting the lotus-eyed Lord and 
running after this and that for the sake of filling 
your stomach, from the moment of wakening till 
dropping off to sleep what joy do you achieve? 


(Telugu Poem) 


You struggle hard in life merely for the sake of 
filling your belly. You acquire many forms of 
knowledge from various fields. But you are not 
able to enjoy total bliss. Instead, take refuge in 
God and contemplate on Him. He will certainly 
show you the proper path. 


(Telugu Poem) 


Morality First, Wealth Next 


For the sake of filling this belly, we enter into 
studies, acquire professional qualifications and engage 
in business activities, all for the sake of accumulating 
wealth — endless accumulation of properties and pos- 
sessions. Is there anybody who has taken any bit of it 
along with him (after death)? A certain amount of 
money is necessary for leading a good life. Money is a 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 261 


double-edged weapon that can be used for good or bad. 
Money comes and goes, but morality comes and grows. 
So, it is necessary to acquire a stock of morality, first 
of all. Students today are keen to acquire wealth, 
strength and friendship, but show little interest in dev- 
eloping character. Without character, wealth, strength 
and friendship are worthless. A true man is one with a 
sound character. For their physical needs, animals have 
reason and season, whereas man has no reason or 
season. What is the use of such unrestrained life? 


The people of Kerala must, endeavour to pre- 
serve their ancient culture. All the seeds for the cultiva- 
tion of their culture are still alive and strong. Emperor 
Bali was the one who encouraged pure and sacred 
thoughts and activities. He was called Mahabali, as he 
was truly great in every aspect of his character. Kerala, 
established by such a great personage, is not to be 
reckoned lightly. In the map of the world, Kerala may 
look small, but it is a centre of great divinity. It is full 
of bliss. This land gave birth to Bali, Vamana and it 
was where Viswamitra performed intense penance and 
revealed the sacred Gayatri Mantra which is prefixed 
with the triple syllable Bhur Bhuvah Suvah. Bhur rep- 
resents materialisation, Bhuvah-vibration and Suvah- 
radiation. The universe is entirely constituted out of 
these three components. Radiation is Divinity, vibra- 
tion is the life principle and materialisation is the body. 
All these three are in you. You are not one, but three, 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 262 


namely the one You think you are (body), the You, 
others think you are (mental) and the one you really are 
(the Atma). Only when you recognise these realities, 
you achieve your humanness. Do not get too much 
attached to your body. So long as you are alive, you 
must keep your body in a healthy condition. For Ka- 
rma Yoga, body is the basis. For meditation and wor- 
ship, mind is the basis. For realisation, heart is the 
basis. You must recognise the unity of all these three. 
There are several three-fold unities that can be 
recognised, for example, 


Trigunam Trigunakaram, Trinetramcha 
Triyayudham, 

Trijanma Papa Samharam Eka Bilvam 
Sivarpanam. 


Always Remember You Are Divine 


What is the proper offering to God? It is said, 
Patram, Pushpam, Phalam, Toyam (a leaf, a flower, a 
fruit and water). What are these? Your body is the leaf; 
your heart is the flower, your mind is the fruit and the 
tears of bliss is the water. Instead of attaching undue 
importance to this ephemeral body, emphasise on the 
Atmatatwa (Atmic principle). The body is also to be 
surrendered unto God. How? By acts of worship and 
other sacred deeds. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 263 


Embodiments of Love! 


It is not necessary to go in search of temples 
and shrines for worship. Your body itself is a temple. 
Deho Devalya Proktho Jeevo Deva Sanathana (body is 
the temple and the indweller is the eternal God). God is 
not to be found in the temple or in a palace. Find Him 
in your heart. All of you are embodiments of Divinity. 
As the Rig Veda says, 


Sahasra Seersha Purusha 
Saharaksha Sahasra Pad 


(with thousands of heads, thousands of feet and 
thousands of eyes, Divinity pervades everywhere). 


Keep this thought in your mind, “I am not a 
mere man, I am the embodiment of God.” Keep this 
conviction firm in your mind and you will realise this 
truth. As it is said, Brahmavid Brahmaiva Bhavathi 
(the knower of Brahman becomes verily Brahman). If 
you perceive yourself as Divine, you become Divine. 
If you consider yourself a human being, you will re- 
main so. While your form is that of human being, there 
is the Atmic principle in you. To recognise this Atman, 
you have to keep your heart pure and empty. To purify 
our hearts, we celebrate these festivals. The main aim 
of these festivities is purification of the mind. Where 
there is unity is very important for humanity. Perform 
your daily duties in the light of the principle of love. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 264 


Be Firm In Your Faith, Do Not Change Allegiance 
Embodiments of Love! 


These days there are many impediments in the 
path of spirituality. But these are temporary and sur- 
mountable. Man’s mind is, by nature, wavering, and 
the world adds opportunities to enhance this. Focus 
your mind on one goal and do not allow it to waver. 
You have to hold on to it till the very end. Such fixity 
of aim is not common these days. What is the reason? 
There is a host of so-called spiritual guides with 
various names of Mathajis, Swamijis and Babajis. 
Because of this, man’s mind gets confused. There is 
only one Divinity. Stick to any one God of your choice 
and hold firm to it. Unnecessarily, do not go around to 
various places, confuse yourself and ruin your faith. If 
you keep transplanting a sapling from one place to 
another frequently, how can it grow healthily into a 
tree? You have to plant it in one place and feed it with 
fertiliser and water regularly until it grows into a firm, 
strong tree. This is true devotion. If you keep changing 
your spiritual guides frequently, your devotion gets 
adulterated. Do not resort to such a course. Choose any 
one and trust that God is in all. As the Gita says, 
Mamaivamsho Jeevaloke Jeevabhuta Sanathana (the 
eternal Atma in all beings is a part of My Being). Trust 
that God is in all, but if one keeps on changing from 
one God to another, it is false devotion. Do not change 
your allegiance. Be firm in your faith. No matter what 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 265 


difficulties or whatever grief, you should get over them 
and go forward. That is true devotion. Many great 
souls had to go through such ordeals. What difficulties 
Mira and Sakkubai did not go through? But they held 
themselves firm to their faith and never deviated from 
their chosen deities. Mira’s husband the Maharana 
himself found fault with her and sent her out of the 
palace. Mira was taken by surprise for a very brief 
moment, but she recovered her composure very 
quickly. Consoling herself, she thought of going to the 
banks of Ganga and Yamuna, (Swami rendered the 
Bhajan in His Divine voice, “Chalo Re Man Ganga 
Yamuna Teer...”) We have to develop such staunch 
devotion. Sankaracharya also taught in a similar way. 
He advised a wayside Brahmin against wasting his 
time learning by rote some grammar rules and asked 
him instead to concentrate on the name of Govinda. 
“You stupid fool, concentrate on worshipping Govin- 
da, for when the time comes for Yama to call you, your 
rules of grammar will not come to your aid. So, wo- 
rship Govinda.” All the teachings of these great 
personages are true and eternal. You should remember 
such teachings. If you keep changing from day to day, 
you will ruin your heart. Have control over your 
wavering mind and deluding vision. This is the main 
trait of a true devotee. Worship God in any form or 
with any name. In fact, God has thousands of names 
and a myriad forms. Ek Prabhu Ke Anek Nam (the one 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 266 


Lord has many names). Worshipping the Lord with a 
thousand names, you should be fully aware that it is a 
single Divinity you are addressing. Rama, Krishna, 
Govinda, Allah, Jesus, etc., are all names denoting the 
same Divinity. Hold this faith firmly in your heart and 
make your life worthwhile. Live ever in bliss. Hap- 
piness is union with God. Worldly connections only 
lead to pain and misery. Your life is shattered to bits. 
Several people come to Me asking for peace. I tell 
them, “Son, peace is not outside, what you find outside 
are only pieces.” You are the embodiment of peace, 
you are the embodiment of God, you are the embodi- 
ment of Truth and you are the embodiment of dharma 
(righteousness). When you are yourself the personify- 
cation of peace, why are you looking for it outside? 
Follow your heart and you will reach your goal. 
Understand the unity of all Atmas. With that your life 
will be sanctified. 


Man runs into several difficulties. Birth is 
a pain, living on the earth is a worry, worldly 
life is a worry, death is a worry, youth is a 
worry, old age is another, every inauspciousness 
is a worry, your Karma is your worry, dif- 
ficulties are another worry, even happiness and 
wonder are worries. All these worries vanish 
when your mind is turned to God. 


(Telugu Poem) 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 267 


Why Dig Wells When The Ganges Is Nearby? 


If you dig a well by the side of the sea, you will 
get only brine. If you dig a well near Ganga, you will 
get pure water of the Ganges itself. When the pure wa- 
ters of the Ganges flow nearby, why waste your efforts 
by digging wells here and there? God is like Ganga in 
floods. There is no need for any well anywhere. Be 
near God and be dear to Him and enjoy bliss. 


The people of Kerala are lucky. Staying in their 
homes, they would perhaps celebrate this occasion 
each in his own small way. They will not get the op- 
portunity to celebrate it in this fashion with several 
thousands like this. The people of Kerala are the 
subjects of Bali and are blessed by Vamana. Hence, 
they are all very lucky and full of merit. Keep in mind 
your ancient culture. That is your life and your sus- 
tenance. These days our culture is declining. If you 
lose your culture, what are you left with? Everything is 
lost. The seeds of ancient Indian culture planted in 
your land are alive and growing. Ensure that they do 
not ever wilt, but they grow stronger. Believers and 
non-believers, all are imbued with this culture. Ensure 
that this is nurtured and developed. This is My wish. I 
don’t want anything for Myself. I have no personal 
needs. All I want is your happiness and your love. 


Onam, 31.8.2001 Prasanthi Nilayam 


18 


The Life Principles Of Man 


Fear of sin has declined; wicked deeds have 
become the order of the day; devotion to God 
has diminished. We find acts of violence all 
around. Oh man! Understand that you will 
attain peace and happiness only when you take 
refuge in the Lotus Feet of the Lord and chant 
His Divine Name 


(Telugu Poem) 


Embodiments of Love! 


THE Universe is visible to the naked eye. It 
consists of mobile and immobile objects called Prapa- 
ncha, because it is a manifestation of the pancha 
bhutas (five elements). There is no world without five 
elements. They are the very forms of the Divine. That 
is why people reverentially refer to the five elements, 
namely, earth, water, air, fire and ether, as Bhudevi, 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 270 


Gangadevi, Vayudeva, Agnideva and Sabda Brahman, 
respectively. It is on this basis that Divinity is extolled 
as Sabda Brahmamayi, Characharamahi, Jyothirmayi, 
Vaangmayi, Nitvanandamayi, Paraatparamayi, Maaya- 
mayi, Sreemayi (the embodiment of sound, mobility 
and immobility, light, speech, eternal bliss, supreme 
majesty, delusion and wealth). These are the attributes 
of the five elements, which sustain the world. The five 
elements are present in every being. The Spirit or the 
Atma which is the very form of God, is not visible to 
the naked eye, but the pancha bhutas can be seen, 
heard felt and experienced by one and all. One who 
understands the principle of these five elements 
becomes God himself. 


Consciousness Pervades The Whole Body 


The Gayatri Mantra begins with the syllables 
Bhur, Bhuvah, Suvaha. Bhur represents materialisa- 
tion, a combination of materials. Bhuvah represents 
vibration, it is related to wind. Suvaha represents 
radiation. It is supreme knowledge. This morning dur- 
ing the course of Puja, the Pundit described Dakshina- 
murthi as the embodiment of supreme knowledge. The 
four Vedas have given four Mahavakyas (divine axi- 
oms) to the world. They are: Prajnanam Brahma (Con- 
sciousness 1s Brahman), Aham Brahmasmi (I am 
Brahman), Tat Twam Asi (That Thou Art), Ayam Atma 
Brahma (This Self is Brahman). They represent the 
essence of the Vedas. What is Prajnana? Is it bookish 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 271 


knowledge? Is it the knowledge that is forgotten with 
the passage of time? Is it related to the experience of 
the body? No. Not at all. Prajnana is the unchanging 
and eternal principle, which is in you at all times and 
under all circumstances. People call it supreme knowl- 
edge but the correct translation for this term is Con- 
stant-Integrated-Awareness. Just as the air is pervasive, 
so too is the Constant-integrated-Awareness. How is it 
that man is not able to recognise such all-pervasive 
divinity, which exists in all the three periods of time, 
past, present and future? The Vedas describe divinity 
as that which does not move but appears to be moving 
and that which exists everywhere but cannot be per- 
ceived. Though God is present within, man goes in 
search of Him thinking that He is present only in a 
particular place. It is tantamount to somebody going in 
search of his own self elsewhere. Being himself verily 
divine, he looks for Him outside. How ignorant man is! 
He does not realise that the five elements present in 
him are the very forms of Divine. It is foolishness on 
his part to look for God outside ignoring his innate 
divinity. Divinity is present in every being. The life 
principle that flows through each and every nerve of 
the body is verily divine. The life Principle that 
sustains our body is Prajnana. On this basis, it is said, 
Prajnanam Brahma. The same thing is reflected in 
another Mahavakya, Ayam Atma Brahma. It can be 
interpreted as ‘I am Atma and Brahma.’ The third one 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 242 


is Tat Twam Asi. Tat denotes that which is outside and 
Twam stands for innate divinity. It means that the 
same divinity is present within and without. Antarba- 
hischa Tatsarvam Vyapya Narayana Sthithaha (That 
all pervasive God is present within and without). That 
which is seen, heard and experienced outside is noth- 
ing but the reflection, resound and reaction of the inner 
being. When reality is within, why crave for its reflec- 
tion outside? It is sheer madness. Prabhava is the term 
used to describe the manifestation of latent divinity. 
This also happens to be the name of the first year of 
the Indian calendar. Man is the embodiment of time. 
He is the master of time. In order to understand his 
reality, man has to control his mind. Hence, it is said, 
master the mind and be a mastermind. The five ele- 
ments that are seen outside are present in man. He is 
the master of the five elements. You should master the 
mind; do not become a slave to it. You all know what 
happened to Kaikeyi who, being a queen herself, paid 
heed to the words of her maidservant Manthara. She 
lost her husband and was despised by her own son and 
earned a bad name for her. Today you do not find any 
lady bearing the name Kaikeyi. Similar will be the fate 
of those who yield to the vagaries of the mind. 


Look Inward For A Vision Of Your Innate Divinity 


Man is the embodiment of the five elements. 
He is their master. They are highly potent. But man, 
out of his ignorance, considers himself very weak and 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 215 


mean. God, who is the embodiment of creation, is 
present in microcosm as well as macrocosm. On this 
basis, the Vedas declare, Anoraneeyan Mahato 
Maheeyan (God 1s subtler than the subtlest and vaster 
than the vastest). Such divinity is present in man. How 
can man comprehend his innate divinity? It is possible 
only when he turns his vision inward. But today man’s 
vision is always directed to the external world. All that 
is seen outside is also a manifestation of divinity, but 
man fails to realise this. Pashyannapi Cha Napashyati 
Moodho (he 1s a fool who sees yet does not recognise 
the reality). All that man sees and experiences in the 
world is divine. But man is not able to understand his 
divine nature. 


God has no distinctions or differences. No one 
can stipulate dos and don’ts for Him. He can do 
anything, as He is in everything and is everything. He 
has no master above Him. If man wants to visualise 
God, he will see Him only in the form of a human 
being far superior to him in all respects. It is said, 
Janthunam Narajanma Durlabham (Out of all the 
living beings, human birth is the rarest). It is also said, 
Daivam Manusha Rupena (God 1s in the form of man). 
So, man should know the nature of a human being to 
begin with. All the sacred texts have described God as 
having human form. It does not mean that God is 
confined to a human form. All forms are His. How- 
ever, man cannot but visualise God in any form other 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 274 


than a human being. If a buffalo wants to worship God, 
it can think of Him only as another buffalo having a 
gigantic form. Similarly, a frog thinks of God as 
another gigantic frog. God has no differences; He can 
assume any form and do anything. He has no trace of 
selfishness in Him. Whatever He does is for your own 
welfare. No one can say that God has a particular form. 
He is present all over. All forms are His. Each form is 
composed of five elements. So, develop faith that God 
is in the form of five elements. You love your mother 
because you have faith that she is your mother. The 
husband loves his wife because he has faith in her. 


Where there is faith, there is love; 
Where there is love, there is peace; 
Where there is peace, there is truth; 
Where there is truth, there is bliss; 
Where there is bliss, there is God. 


One can attain divinity only when one has 
steady faith. First of all, one should have faith in one’s 
own self. Develop self-confidence, which will lead to 
self-satisfaction. When you have self-satisfaction, you 
will be prepared for self-sacrifice. Only through self- 
sacrifice, can one attain self-realisation. Self-realisa- 
tion means to realise that you are everything. Self- 
confidence is the foundation, self-satisfaction is the 
wall, self-sacrifice is the roof and self-realisation is 
life. No one can live in a building without roof. Roof 
cannot be laid without walls and walls cannot be raised 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 215 


without foundation. So, self-confidence, self-satisfac- 
tion, self-sacrifice are very essential for self-realisa- 
tion. Today man has lost self-confidence. If one loses 
self-confidence, one loses everything. Only through 
self-confidence can one have the vision of the latent 
divine effulgence. 


Verily Man Is God 
Embodiments of Love! 


All are essentially divine. Wherever we see the 
five elements, there is divinity. As man is made up of 
five elements, he is verily God. God has no specific 
form. People attribute various forms to God. Here we 
have idol of Dakshinamurthi. This form is but your 
own imagination. It is not the reality. How can you 
visualise God who is the very form of the universe? 
The Viswa (universe) is made up of five elements. The 
human body also consists of five elements. Hence, it 
is called Viswa. The Veda says. 


Sahasra Seersha Purusha 
Sahasraksha Sahasra Pad 


(with thousands of heads, thousands of feet and 
thousands of eyes, Divinity pervades everything). It 
only means that all heads, hands eyes and feet are His. 
Unable to understand this truth, man considers himself 
to be an ordinary human being and develops attach- 
ment to the body. You are human only in form but 
divine in spirit. So, have the firm conviction that you 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 276 


are God. Develop total faith in the teachings of the 
Mahavakyas. When you say, this is my handkerchief, 
you are different from the handkerchief. Likewise 
when you say, this is my body, my mind, my buddhi 
my chittha, etc., you are different from all these. Then 
who are you? Put this question to yourself. These are 
mere instruments and you are the master. Once you 
realise this truth, you will transcend all these. 


This plate, tumbler and spoon are made up of 
silver. Their names and forms are different, but silver 
is common to all of them. Names and forms can be 
changed but silver remains unchanged. Likewise, a 
child becomes a boy, then a man and later on a grand- 
father. The form keeps changing but the spirit remains 
unchanged. Do not repose your faith in the body, 
which constantly changes. Body is like a water bubble; 
mind is like a mad monkey. Do not follow the body, do 
not follow the mind. Follow the conscience. 
Conscience is the Atma (Self). Have total faith in the 
Atma. You are bound to face problems if you rely on 
the body, the mind and the senses. However, so long as 
you live in this world, you have to discharge your 
duties using your body and the mind as instruments. 
Also you have to make use of the five elements for 
your worldly existence and ultimately you become one 
with them. 


You are the embodiment of Prajnana. It is not 
worldly or secular knowledge. This true knowledge is 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 217 


within you. It is not something that you acquire after 
you are born. It is with you right from your birth. This 
knowledge is with you always and it shows you the 
right path. But you have forgotten this truth and conse- 
quently, you suffer from delusion. In this world every- 
thing is an illusion, nothing is permanent. All are pas- 
sing clouds. Atma alone is true and eternal. You have 
to carry on with your life’s sojourn and discharge your 
duties keeping in view the eternal Atmic principle. 


Limbs Are Instruments, Basis Is The Atma 


Today you conducted the Paduka worship. 
What is the significance of the Padukas? Head is the 
most important part of the body. That is why it is 
crowned. Such a precious head cannot go anywhere 
without the help of the feet. The feet bear the weight of 
the head. 


Chandrama Manaso jataha Chaksho Suryo 
Ajayata (Moon is the presiding deity of the mind and 
Sun is the deity presiding over the eyes). Eyes are very 
important in the body. Without the Netra (Eyes), you 
cannot go through the Sastra (sacred text). Without 
Drishti (vision) one cannot see the Srishti (creation). 
But all these limbs are mere instruments. The funda- 
mental basis for all this is the Atmic principle. Man 
ignores this fundamental basis and attaches importance 
to the instruments. As a result, he is subjected to mis- 
ery. It is the Bhrama (delusion) that is responsible for 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 278 


one’s misery. So long as one is engulfed in Bhrama, 
one cannot attain Brahma. The term Brahma means 
vastness. Similar is the meaning of the term Vishnu. 
So, God symbolises vastness and broad-mindedness. 
But He appears narrow-minded to the narrow minded. 
Yad Bhavam Tad Bhavathi (As you think, so you 
become). God is filled with broad feelings. It is not 
possible for anybody to comprehend God’s Will. 
Unable to understand the Divine Will, people forget 
the yathartha (reality) and lead themselves into anar- 
tha (difficulties). They are carried away by padartha 
(worldly objects) and ignore Parartha (Divinity). Take 
Parartha as the fundamental principle. Do not repose 
your faith in the physical world. However, you have to 
play your role well in this drama of life. You have to 
discharge your worldly responsibilities. To that extent, 
you can keep the world in your mind. If you have firm 
faith in God, you will perceive divinity everywhere, no 
other thought will enter your mind. Once you under- 
stand the principle of the five elements, you will un- 
derstand divinity. 


Embodiments of Love! 


The five elements are the very life principles of 
man. There can be no life even if one of the five 
elements is absent. The air is present in you, around 
you and below you, but you neither can see it nor can 
catch hold of it. You cannot deny its existence for you 
cannot survive without air. It is present in you in the 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 219 


form of breath. So long as there is breath in you, you 
are Sivam (auspiciousness); otherwise you become a 
Savam (corpse). So, the breath is the very form of 
Easwara. Thus, we see that God resides in man in the 
form of breath and sustains his life. 


God Has No Specific Form 


First of all, give up the notion that God has a 
specific form. All forms that are attributed to Him are 
man’s own creations and imagination. God is depicted 
to be having four hands holding Shankha, Chakra, 
Gada and Padma (conch, discus, mace and lotus). If 
God were really to be born with four hands, people 
would certainly put Him in exhibition. What is the 
inner meaning of God having these four insignia? 
Shankha represents sound, Chakra denotes the wheel 
of time. Gada symbolises power and lotus stands for 
heart. It is only to make you understand that God is the 
master of sound, time, power and heart that He is 
depicted to be having these insignia in His hands. 


Of all forms of God, human form is very 
sig nificant. Datvam Manusha Rupena (God is in the 
form of human). You should have full faith in this. 
Make proper use of your senses. Only then can you 
become a true human being. Who is a human being? 
The proper study of mankind is man. It means the 
thoughts, words and deeds would be in harmony with 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 280 


one another. The unity of thought word and deed is 
true humanness. 


Tridalam Trigunakaram Trinetramcha Triy- 
ayudham; Trijanma Papa Samharam Eka Bilvam 
Sivarpanam. 


(Offer the trifoliate Bilva leaf to Lord Siva, the 
three-eyed Lord having trident in His hand, which 
destroys the sins of three births). Offer your thought, 
word and deed to God. 


Though God is present in you, with you, 
around you all the time, you waste a lot of time look- 
ing for Him outside. Do not waste time, for time is 
God. That is why God is extolled as Kala Swarupaya 
Namah, Kalateetaya Namah... (God is the embodiment 
of time, He transcends time...) When you are in the 
company of God all the time, why should you give 
room for worry? To understand that God is not sepa- 
rate from you, undertake sacred deeds. Help others. 


Hastasya Bhushanam Daanam, 
Sathyam Kantasya Bhushanam, 
Srotrasya Bhushanam Sastram 


(Charity is the true ornament for the hand, 
Truth is the true ornament for the neck and listening to 
sacred Sastras is the true ornament for the ears). 


These are the Bhushanas (ornaments) which 
God wants you to decorate yourself with. But man 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 281 


craves for worldly Bhushanas and thereby subjects 
himself to Dooshanas (criticism). 


Embodiments of Love! 


Love is the common principle in all of you. It is 
sacred and changeless. But you are directing such 
sacred love on the physical world and subjecting your- 
self to blame and censure. Undertake sacred activities 
and earn a good name for yourself. God sustains your 
body. So, utilise it for noble causes. 


See no evil, see what is good; 
Hear no evil, hear what is good; 
Talk no evil, talk what is good; 
Think no evil, think what is good; 
Do no evil, do what is good; 

This is the way to God. 


Engage Your Body In Sacred Activities 


Sanctify all the limbs of the body in selfless 
activities. But it is not that easy to practise. There is 
always some self-interest in whatever man does. Self- 
interest is also necessary, but it should be within 
certain limits. 


God is the ocean of bliss. As is the size of your 
container, so is the amount of water that you can col- 
lect from an ocean. If you want to collect more bliss 
from the ocean of bliss, 1.e., God, you have to increase 
the size of the container, which means you have to 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 282 


cultivate expansion love. Expansion love is life; con- 
traction love is death. Develop love in you and share it 
with others. That is true sacrifice. Na Karmana Na 
Prajaya Dhanena Thyagenaikena Amrutatthwamanasu 
(Immortality is not attained through action, progeny or 
wealth but it is attained only by sacrifice). Everything 
belongs to God. There is nothing that you can lay 
claim as yours. 


O God, I offer the heart, which you have 
given me. What else can I offer at your Lotus 
Feet? Please accept my salutations. 


(Telugu Poem) 


This is the true offering that one should make 
to God. But the modern man, though highly educated 
and intelligent, is immersed in ignorance. 


In spite of his education and intelligence, 
a foolish man will not know his true Self and a 
mean-minded person will not give up his wicked 
qualities. Modern education leads only to argu- 
mentation, not to total wisdom. What is the use 
of acquiring worldly education if it cannot lead 
you to immortality? Acquire the knowledge that 
will make you immortal. 


(Telugu Poem) 


Today man acquires education only to eke out a 
livelihood. The more he studies, the more he starts 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 283 


doubting God. Such a person cannot be called a human 
being at all. A human being should have a pure heart 
without a trace of doubt. Only then can he understand 
divinity. 

You know why God has given you the eyes? Is 
it to see everything that comes your way? No, no. The 
eyes are given to see God. But there are some people 
who close their eyes and start meditating even while 
sitting in front of God. Such meditation is false piety. 
People who close their eyes in front of God might have 
been blind in their previous births or will certainly 
become blind in the coming births. It is an unhealthy 
and unholy practice to close your eyes in front of God. 
Open your eyes and see Him. Open not only the 
physical eyes, but also the eye of wisdom. 


Why God has given you the tongue? Is it to 
partake of delicious food? No, not merely for that. The 
tongue is given to chant the Divine Name and to talk 
sweetly and softly. Do not talk as you please which 
may hurt the feelings of others. Some people may not 
pay heed to you if you talk softly and sweetly. It is 
their fate. They may listen or not, but you should al- 
ways talk in a pleasing manner. If that is not possible, 
observe silence. When you are silent, there can be no 
conflict. Only those who do not recognise the Divinity, 
act in a foolish manner. In fact, man himself is Divine. 
Only then can he become a perfect human being. 


Whatever you do, do it in a perfect manner. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 284 


There was a person by name Antony, who used to 
make violins for his livelihood. Being a perfectionist, 
he used to take one full year to make one violin. Once 
his friends chided him saying, “Antony, if you take one 
full year to make one violin, how will you be able to 
support your family? We feel you are wasting your 
time.” Antony replied, “Brothers, what I am doing is 
God’s work, who is the embodiment of perfection. So, 
I take care that the violin I make is also a perfect one.” 
That is why Antony’s violin became very famous. 
Whatever you do, do it to satisfy God. Then only you 
will find fulfillment in your work. All your actions 
should be beneficial to one and all. Only then will you 
be dear to Me and I will become your friend. Even if 
you offer a morsel of food, do it in a proper manner. 
Yesterday our boys took great pains and went to far off 
villages to do grama seva. They distributed food 
packets till 10 o’clock in the night. No doubt it is a 
good work, but they did not use their power of dis- 
crimination. The food was prepared in the early hours 
of the day. How can it remain in good condition till 10 
O’clock in the night? Would it not get spoiled by then? 
Is it proper to serve such food to people? If the food 
has gone stale, you should get back and take fresh food 
next day. When this was told to the boys, they realised 
their mistake. In fact, they got involved in food 
distribution so much that they did not realise this 
aspect. The boys should have taken some rest after 
their lunch. It is said “sleep awhile after lunch”. But 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 285 


this was not the case as they set out for seva again, 
going to different villages immediately after their 
lunch. Consequently, some of the boys had stomach 
ache and developed fever. One should exercise one’s 
power of discrimination in whatever one does. God 
always does things perfectly. Whenever I materialise a 
ring for a devotee, it exactly fits his finger. Even a 
goldsmith who takes measurement and makes the ring 
may commit mistake. But God, the life-smith, always 
does things in a perfect manner. Whatever service you 
undertake should be done perfectly. The one who 
serves and the one who is served, both should be 
satisfied. That is real service. The bliss that results out 
of such service cannot be found anywhere else. 


Do Not Be Devalued By Selfishness 
Students - Boys and Girls! 


You are the future citizens and future parents of 
this country. Develop sacred qualities and undertake 
sacred activities. Only then will your lives become sac- 
red. The Upanishads say, human life is most precious. 
The value of man cannot be estimated or compared. 
Who attaches value to gold and diamonds? It is be- 
cause of man that gold and diamonds have acquired 
value. Men are more valuable than all the wealth of 
the world. So, do not lose your value by indulging in 
selfish deeds. Fish is better than selfish. Fish cleans the 
water of its dirt, but the selfish man pollutes the society 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 286 


as he lives in it. Undertake selfless actions. Only then 
are you fit to be called a human being. 


Man has the sacred name manishi. When 
reversed, it reads as shinima (cinema). Today man has 
become a cinema manishi meaning leading an artificial 
life. You should be a true human being. Man has 
another name manava. Ma means ajnana (ignorance); 
na, without; and va, to conduct oneself. So, manava 
means one who conducts oneself without ignorance. 
There lies the fulfillment of your education. 


Students! 


Let your conduct and behaviour be role models 
for the rest of the world. Today the world is plunged 
into utter chaos and confusion. You find misery, sad- 
ness, sin and anger everywhere. In such a situation, it 
is your bounden duty to give peace to the distraught. 
Where is peace? It is within you. You are the embodi- 
ment of peace. In the outside world, there is no peace, 
only pieces. Man’s selfishness is responsible for this. 


In olden days, education and health care were 
provided free of cost. But today the fields of education 
and health care have become business-oriented. Even 
to admit a child in Kindergarten, one is expected to pay 
a donation of twenty to twenty-five thousand rupees. 
One spends 10 crores on a hospital expecting a profit 
of 100 crores. How can the poor afford such costly 
treatment? Today even in the field of spirituality, we 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 287 


find people indulging in business. Spirituality is meant 
to promote love, not business. Everything will be 
spoiled if business finds its way into the field of 
spirituality. Even God’s name will be tarnished. 
Nobody spends anything for My sake nor do I accept 
anything from others. The Madurai devotees have 
spent some money in conducting this function, which 
includes travel expenses, food expenses, etc. They may 
collect as much money as is required for the function, 
but they should not prescribe membership fees. Love is 
the membership fee in the field of spirituality. So, 
share love with others. Do not indulge in business. I 
want our organisations not to collect any fees from 
anybody. All of you are aware that I don’t take even a 
naya paisa from our students. In our hospitals also, 
patients are given costly medicines free and surgeries 
are performed totally free of cost. If your intention is 
good, money comes to you of its own accord. But if 
you have any selfish motive, you will certainly be put 
to loss. Do not crave for money. Money comes and 
goes; but morality comes and grows. So, cultivate 
morality. In spiritual organisations, no fees whatsoever 
should be collected from people. Who can estimate the 
value of the Atma? It is infinite and beyond estimate. 
Only when you understand this principle and act 
accordingly, will the entire world take to the path of 
spirituality. Only then peace will prevail in the world. 
Today we find restlessness and agitation all over the 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 288 


world. Every newspaper stands ample testimony to 
this. Make efforts to transform this country of Bharat 
into one of peace. If you are peaceful, the whole world 
will be peaceful. Lead your lives peacefully and give 
peace to others. Follow the ideal of Antony and let all 
your actions be perfect. Some people make their own 
lives miserable by their wicked qualities and evil 
deeds. Moreover, they argue that they are always right. 
It is utter foolishness. Such an attitude is never going 
to help them. Do good and make everybody happy. 
That is true human life. 


Embodiments of Love! 


Let all your activities, be it studying or doing a 
job, be suffused with love. Lead your lives with love 
and uphold the prestige and honour of your country. 


Paduka Mahotsava Day, 9-10-2001, 
Prasanthi Nilayam 


19 


Good Mothers Are Nation’s Pride 


Was not Savitri who got her husband back to 
life, a woman of India? 

Was not Chandramati who by her steadfast 
adherence to truth put out raging fires, 
a chaste woman of India? 

Was not Sita who demonstrated her purity by 
entering fire, a daughter of this land? 

Was not Damayanti who reduced the wicked 
hunter to ashes, an exemplary woman 
of this land? 

This land of Bharat surrounded by the seven 
seas enshrines in its heart the holy 
principle of chastity and this sacred 
land is the teacher of all nations! 


(Telugu Poem) 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 290 


FROM time immemorial, women of India, by 
their adherence to ideals have bestowed joy on this 
land and so occupy an exalted position, which is higher 
than that of men. Women embody the aspect of Mother 
Nature and the ancient sages found solutions to prob- 
lems in life by recognising this truth. What is the cause 
for misery, conflict and suffering in the world today? It 
is the absence of purity in the hearts of men and 
women. The behaviour of men and women is respon- 
sible for the rise or fall of a nation. The country would 
not lack in anything, if there were men and women 
with pure hearts. But today hearts are completely pol- 
luted. Here is a piece of pure white paper. But what is 
written on one side makes it appear dirty. So too is the 
case with a man’s heart; dirty feelings pollute it. News- 
paper of today becomes a waste paper tomorrow. The 
paper by itself does not have any smell. The same 
paper when used to pack jasmine flowers smells of 
them; it will smell of ‘Pakodas’ or even of dry fish if it 
is used to pack them. When the heart is purified, it 
shines with compassion. Bad feelings and bad thoughts 
pollute the heart of man. 


Women Deserve Greater Honour And Better 
Treatment 


Ever since ancient times, women have main- 
tained their hearts pure. Savitri was one such great 
woman of India. She brought her husband back to life 
by winning over the Lord of Death. There are many 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 291 


such cases of women who have revived their husbands 
from death; but history does not speak of a single man 
reviving his wife from death! Women of such exalted 
character have set great ideals of womanhood in 
Bharat. Today’s society is polluted because there is no 
encouragement for women to cultivate such high 
ideals. In modern times the ways of life are so 
perverted that only evil thoughts, evil feelings and evil 
behaviour rule the roost. In this situation Sri Sathya Sai 
Seva Organisations are encouraging women through 
opportunities in the wings like Mahila Vibhag, to 
develop good ideals of character and propagate them to 
the world at large. Only if the women come up in soci- 
ety, the whole world will turn sacred. The Organi- 
sations of women have achieved many great things, but 
men do not recognise their good work. Women are 
capable of ruling the nations and even the whole world 
if they make up their minds. Men should not consider 
women as mere slaves. Today our country is on the 
downslide because we take our women very lightly. 


There is nothing in this world that women 
cannot achieve. Recognising the nature of such women 
we must encourage them and give them equal oppor- 
tunities in society. No such encouragement is being 
given today. Men do not tolerate women joining to- 
gether for a good cause in an Organisation. Because of 
their own selfish interest, men are unable to recognise 
the good that women can do to the society. Generally 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 292 


the women are selfless. Their hearts are full of 
compassion and love. They take a lot of pains to bring 
up children on the right path, a task that is almost 
impossible for men. Mother plays a very important role 
in shaping the character of the child. The contemporary 
education is largely responsible for the gradual deteri- 
oration of children’s behaviour. In olden days mothers 
initiated their children into studies by chanting sacred 
words like OM NAMAH SIVAYA or OM NAMO 
NARAYANAYA. Thus at a very early age, these 
sacred words got imprinted in the hearts of children. 
But today’s parents initiate their children into educa- 
tion, not by chanting holy or sacred names of God, but 
by rhymes like ‘Baa Baa Black Sheep’ Nowadays 
children are being taught all types of wrong ter- 
minology. In earlier days, children used to welcome 
guests in their homes with humility and reverence, 
whereas these qualities are missing nowadays. Today’s 
children aspire for wealth, power and friendship but 
not for character. What is the use of wealth, power and 
friendship bereft of character? Money comes and goes 
but one must teach them morality and righteousness. 
Earlier, children were taught such sacred values. Today 
parents want their children to pursue higher studies and 
become great, whereas earlier, parents preferred their 
children to be good rather than becoming great. Since 
those parents wanted their children to be good, Bharat 
stood as an ideal to all nations of the world. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 293 


Emulate Ideal Parents Of Yore 


Nowadays students are not being taught good 
qualities. Instead, when they come home, mother 1m- 
mediately puts on the television and the father too joins 
the son to watch the television. Earlier, the moment 
children returned home, parents took them to the Puja 
room and revised whatever was taught to them by 
teachers in the class. Nowadays parents want their 
children to pursue higher studies so that they may get 
rich fathers-in-law. In those days parents never wanted 
a rich father-in-law but wanted a virtuous wife for their 
son. This is the reason why those days were prosperous 
and peaceful. What is the reason for chaos in the world 
today? As there are no ideal parents today at home, 
there are no ideal children also. The first school is the 
home itself. If the home is good, when such children 
enter society, they will learn good qualities there also. 
Today’s students must recognise that whatever knowI- 
edge, wisdom or good qualities they have learnt, were 
taught by the society. So they have to ask themselves 
as to what they are doing for the society after receiving 
so many benefits from it. Students receive lot of 
benefits from the society but they don’t contribute 
anything good in return. Thus, men are becoming 
ungrateful. We must be grateful to those who help us. 
What is the use of all education if we cannot show 
gratitude and respect to our benefactors? All the 
education thus becomes useless. First and foremost we 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 294 


must learn to respect the society because we are born, 
brought up and remain a part of the society till we die. 
Those days mothers used to teach their children that 
they could lead an ideal life only when they respected 
society. 


Take for example the episode of Abhimanyu. 
He prostrated before his mother and sought her 
permission to go to the battlefield. Initially his mother 
hesitated to permit him and said, “The great warrior 
Drona has devised a difficult strategy in today’s battle 
— Padmavyuha (Lotus Formation). Bhishma has joined 
hands with Drona. Your father and uncle are not here. 
Your wife is pregnant. We do not know what can 
happen on the battlefield. Therefore I advise that you 
may not go to war now!” 


He replied, “Mother, this is not what you 
should teach me; you should encourage me to pounce 
into the battlefield like a lion and destroy the Kau- 
ravas. Instead, you are discouraging me. Is it right on 
your part to do so? I pray that you grant your blessings 
to me to be victorious in the war.” Subhadra immedi- 
ately realised her duty in that situation and blessed 
him, “My dear son, may you have a long life, may you 
earn a good name for the family, may you earn the 
blessings of your uncle and father; may the Lord be by 
your side and protect you on the battlefield!” 


It was obligatory for the son to earn good 
reputation for the family. But in these modern times 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 295 


parents do not impart such good teachings to their 
children. Parents distribute sweets as soon as the child 
is born and celebrate the child’s birthday. But in an- 
cient times parents would celebrate the son’s birthday 
only on the day he brought good name to the family. 


“Father does not feel the joy of begetting a son 
merely because the child is born. Only when people 
praise his son for his good deeds and achievements 
does the father feel joyful!” Thus, we find a gulf of 
difference between the cultures of those days and of 
today. Since time immemorial, it is the mothers who 
brought up the children. The lap of the mother is the 
child’s first school. That is why even the Vedas say, 
“May mother be your god, may father be your god, 
may teacher be your god.” Thus, first honour is always 
given to the mother. Let us take for example the names 
of deities, Sita Rama, Radha Krishna and Parvati 
Paramesha; the feminine aspect of God comes first. 


It is the mother who shapes the child’s life. 
Even when she punishes the child for any of its 
mistakes, she does it with love, to lead it on to the right 
path. Today we need such mothers. 


“In this sacred land of Bharat patience is 
our treasure. Among all the vows, adherence to 
truth is the greatest penance. Sweetest of all 


I 


feelings in our land is the love of the mother.’ 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 296 


Easwaramma — The Ideal Mother 


There is nothing more sacred than motherhood. 
We need children who fulfill the aspirations of their 
mothers. We also need women who embody mother- 
hood. In order to foster such lofty ideals we have 
chosen the 19" of November to celebrate as ‘Ladies 


) 


Day’. 


The mother of this body was Easwaramma. She 
was not a scholar. She did not know even alphabets. 
Yet, she always spoke good things in life. Her heart 
was filled with compassion. One day she approached 
Swami and said, “Swami there are so many rich people 
in this region. Yet, the children of our village have to 
walk all the way to Bukkapatnam to attend school. My 
heart grieves to see these little children walk miles. 
Swami, could you please build a small school in our 
village?” I replied, “I don’t have money!” She 
immediately removed the gold chain from her neck, 
gave it to me and said, “Swami, please sell it and build 
a school.” 


I told her, “Don’t be hasty, it is only to test you 
I said so, I will definitely construct a school.” On the 
following day, the foundation was laid, and within a 
short period the school building was ready. Then I 
asked her if she was happy. She did not appear 
completely satisfied. I asked her, “What else bothers 
you?” She replied, “Swami, when children fall ill, their 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 297 


mothers carry them all the way to Bukkapatnam for 
medical treatment and things may go wrong on the 
way. So please build a small hospital in the village.” 
Thus, she always thought of the welfare and happiness 
of others. She used to say; “It is not enough if these 
facilities are available only in our village. They must 
be available to all the villagers around, and everyone 
should be happy.” 


Once I took Easwaramma to Brindavan. It was 
during the Summer Course. Students from colleges all 
over the country were attending the course. There were 
many foreigners also. She was very happy at the noble 
things taught to them in the classes and also Swami’s 
discourses in the evenings. One day I asked her, “Are 
you happy now?” She replied “Swami what more do I 
need. People of so many countries are getting bene- 
fited. This is enough for my happiness.” She had a 
broad mind. Today we see only narrow-mindedness 
everywhere. People desire that only their family and 
children should be happy. But Easwaramma was not 
like that. She wanted everyone to be happy. Even 
though she was not educated she taught such noble 
qualities to everyone. Our country Bharat attained 
great fame because of such mothers. There were men 
and women of character who brought good reputation 
to the nation. One day, after her breakfast, she was 
sitting in the hall; Swami was upstairs; suddenly she 
called out, ‘Swami’ (three times). I told her, “I am 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 298 


coming, don’t go!” Gokak, who was there, was 
surprised why I was saying that. I rushed down. She 
held My hands and said, “I am completely satisfied 
with this Summer Course. It is not only students who 
are getting benefited. Even I have developed a broad 
mind. Swami I am going!” She offered her pranams to 
Me and passed away peacefully. Everyone aspires for a 
peaceful death. People who have evil feeling will not 
die such a death. Easwaramma did not have even a 
trace of evil feeling in her. That is why she was always 
joyful. Even at the age of 96 she used to walk 3 miles 
from Brindavan to the house of Gojimeni family. 
When I asked her, “Why do you want to walk so far? 
Why don’t you go in car?” she would reply, “Swami, I 
desire to see them. I do not feel comfortable in car. I do 
not need a car, I prefer to walk!” She always aspired to 
see others happy. Because of such mothers there was 
great progress and prosperity in society. 


When this body was twelve years old, I was in 
Subbamma’s house. I asked her to stitch a long gown 
for Me. She did not like it. She said, “Why do you 
want to wear a gown? You can wear dhoti.” I replied, 
“No, time has come to do it”. She obeyed Swami’s 
command and stitched a gown for Me. It cost two 
annas at that time. When I put on the gown, she asked 
Easwaramma to come to her house to see Me. She 
came, saw Me, and started shedding tears saying, 
“Swami, did you call me here for seeing this form of 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 299 


Yours?” I told her, “Don’t grieve, I am setting an ideal 
for the whole world. When one wears the ochre robes, 
one’s evil desires will vanish.” They were satisfied to 
hear this. 


Faith Versus Adversity 


Today Jayamma is translating the Discourse. 
She used to look after Easwaramma during those days. 
Easwaramma stayed in Jayamma’s house at the time. 
Jayamma would serve her day and night and listen 
from her about Swami. I do not know what Easwa- 
ramma told her. Jayamma did not like to enter family 
life. But parents prevailed upon her to get married. The 
marriage was arranged. I was in Puttaparthi. Jayamma 
sent a telegram to Swami, which read, “I am going to 
hell today!” I tried to persuade her parents against the 
marriage, but they did not pay heed to My words. Her 
husband was a man of good character. Even Jay- 
amma’s mother was a very good woman. To be as 
virtuous as Easwaramma, was her earnest prayer to 
Swami. Jayamma’s marriage was performed, but 
Swami did not go for the wedding. Her husband’s 
name was Gopinath. He was noble and well educated. 
He had just then returned from America after his 
education. He got his posting in a big company in 
Rajahmundry. When Swami visited Rajahmundry, he 
served Swami by arranging conveyance wherever 
Swami wished to go. Gopinath’s constant prayer was 
that he and Jayamma should find a place at Swami’s 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 300 


Lotus Feet. Swami kept advising him not to be hasty 
and that there was a long life ahead. When Swami 
returned from Rajahmundry there came a telegram that 
Gopinath had expired. Jayamma immediately locked 
her house and rushed to Brindavan. She had smeared 
vibhuti on her forehead and sat under a tree. Swami 
asked her, why she had applied Vibhuti on her fore- 
head and not kumkum. She replied that it was ordained 
by Swami. She informed Swami that her husband was 
no more and said that she would not go anywhere 
away from Swami’s Lotus Feet. Swami then sent 
Karunyananda and Rama Brahmam to Rajahmundry to 
get all her belongings. Swami instructed Jayamma to 
teach in the college at Anantapur. Jayamma had got a 
gold medal for her proficiency in English. She also 
learnt Sanskrit at Maharani College, but still was not 
satisfied. She revealed to Swami her desire to secure a 
doctorate. With Swami’s blessings she got the doctor- 
ate under Gokak’s guidance. Jayamma has strong de- 
termination and she continued to work in the institute 
since then. She used to come to Puttaparthi from Anan- 
tapur every Sunday till Swami instructed her to 
concentrate on her duty without wasting time. Jay- 
amma promptly obeyed Swami’s command. She had 
come to Swami as a child of four years when Swami 
resided in the old Mandir. Wherever Swami went she 
would follow with a towel in her hand. She grew up 
this way with noble feelings. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 301 


God is the embodiment of love. He is com- 
pletely selfless. Those who follow Him should be 
selfless too. When your hearts are filled with divine 
love, you would be able to pursue oneness in the whole 
creation. When this unity pervades our hearts, there 
would be no scope for hatred towards others. The 
eternal love will get established in our hearts with the 
experience of unity of all existence. Therefore, those 
who follow the Divine and inculcate the Divine love 
are truly fortunate. 


Give Up Selfishness, Become Selfless 


There is not even a trace of selfishness in Swa- 
mi. Swami is completely selfless. When you inculcate 
this selfless love, you too become selfless and your 
love exhorts others on the ideal path. There is a trace of 
selfishness and self-interest even in the love of mother, 
father and friends, but divine love is untainted by 
selfishness. Why don’t you crave for such selfless 
love? Today, people go after the physical and worldly 
pleasures and fortunes. All that is worldly constitutes 
the negative. Only God’s love is positive. Only when 
you attain this love, you can be truly powerful and per- 
form ideal deeds. Let people think whatever they wish, 
you need not worry about it. Inculcate divine love. 


Fear of sin and love for God have vanished 
from the heart leading to decline of humanness 
in man. This is the cause for restlessness in the 
world. (Telugu Poem) 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 302 


You should not be misled by others’ words and 
lose sight of the sanctity of divine love. The people are 
like crows and speak whatever they like. But you 
should exercise your discrimination. You should be 
pure at heart and be fearless. People who are jealous 
may concoct several stories. But it cannot harm us. 
Instead it will help us. We should be ready to face any 
difficulty because true happiness springs out of 
hardships. Censure turns into praise if we are deter- 
mined. In fact, criticism adds to the sacred fame of the 
Divine. You should not be bogged down by criticism. 


For those who say yes, it is yes 

For those who say no, it is no 

No and yes are only for you, 

But for SAI, it is always YES, YES, YES! 


(Telugu Poem) 


I never say No. I am always in Bliss. I know 
nothing other than Bliss. We should welcome even 
death happily. Everything happens for our own good. 
Once you are born, can you escape death? Birth and 
death are inseparable twin birds. Till this day, I have 
had no desires except for one. That is, “All should be 
united!” You must recognise the oneness of the 
principle of Atma residing in one and all. Always 
contemplate upon the principle of love. You must have 
reverence for all. Love your parents. 


You may make mistakes knowingly or un- 
knowingly. But brooding over those mistakes is not 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 303 


advisable. Past is past. Forget the past. Future is not 
sure. Present is very important. It is not ordinary 
present. It is Omnipresent. 


So be happy in the present. Swami expects all 
parents to achieve fulfillment in their lives by mould- 
ing their children into virtuous persons. They should 
always aspire for the goodness and well being of their 
children. It is a good boy who becomes a god boy. 


How did the term good boy get modified? 
During the British regime, they used to say good boy. 
Later it became good-bye. Thereafter, the word ‘good’ 
vanished and ‘bye’ has remained. In this way, with the 
passage of time, various words have become perverted. 
But what we should accomplish is, being a good boy. 
Give up selfishness and become selfless. Self is love- 
lessness and love is selflessness. 


Obey the commands of your parents and be- 
come ideal parents in future. Teach the same to your 
children, too. In order to teach these ideals, I have 
proclaimed November 19 as Ladies Day, which is very 
auspicious. The importance of this day lies in propa- 
gating and realising the sanctity of motherhood, which 
is founded on the principle of selfless love. Children 
should be fostered on the principles of piety and virtue. 
This day will be celebrated by posterity for aeons. 


Ladies Day, 19.11.2001, 
Prasanthi Nilayam 


20 


*‘Educare’ Is True Education 


No harm can ever befall a person whose heart 


is full of compassion, whose words are adorned 
by Truth, and whose body is dedicated to the 
welfare of others 


(Telugu Poem) 


Embodiments of Love! 


FIRST and foremost, we must investigate into 
‘panchatantra’ or the five principal aspects of educa- 
tion. These are: 


L 


oe a to 


What is education? 

What type of education should we pursue? 
What is the main aim of education? 

What is the uniqueness of education? 
What are we gaining from present-day 
education? 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 306 


Only when we recognise the inner significance 
of these ‘panchatantras’, can we know what is true 
education. What is education? It is of two types: The 
first type is collection of facts and knowledge about the 
external world and sharing them with students. The 
second type is educare. Educare involves the deep 
understanding of the knowledge that springs from 
within and imparting it to students. But today’s educa- 
tion gives the students knowledge only about the exter- 
nal world. Only culture or refinement can develop 
good personality and not this type of education. So, 
both education and culture are important. Today’s 
education is devoid of culture and is like a counterfeit 
coin. Even a beggar does not accept a counterfeit coin. 
Then how can experienced and intelligent people 
accept such education? So, to satisfy everyone we must 
develop educare. Education without refinement is like 
a dark room. Only bats can live in dark rooms; such 
rooms are filthy. So, by pursuing such education 
devoid of culture, our hearts have become dark rooms 
and hence many animal qualities find their way into it. 
Education without culture is like a kite with a broken 
string. No one knows where it will fall and what 
damage it will cause to others. Therefore, such educa- 
tion does not benefit anyone. 


Proceed From Superficial To Practical Knowledge 


Only if education is blended with culture, it will 
shine forth as true education. What 1s culture? It is the 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 307 


cultivation of discrimination between good and evil, 
sin and merit, and truth and untruth that we experience 
in our daily life. It is also removal of one’s evil 
thoughts, feelings and qualities, and cultivation of 
good thoughts, feelings and good qualities. Not only 
this, culture makes one broad-minded by getting rid of 
one’s narrow-mindedness. This morning, a song “I and 
you are one!” was sung. Even this is also a kind of 
narrow-mindedness. It will be better to say, “All are 
one!” A celestial voice told Jesus, “All are one, my 
dear son, be alike to everyone!” Educare develops such 
broad-mindedness. Today’s education comprises only 
bookish knowledge. It is only superficial knowledge 
and it changes every moment. So we must add 
‘Educare’ to this bookish knowledge. Educare is 
practical knowledge. There are a few steps between the 
superficial knowledge and practical knowledge. From 
superficial knowledge we must proceed to general 
knowledge. After analysing this general knowledge 
one gains discrimination knowledge and knows the 
difference between good and evil. From this discrim- 
ination knowledge we proceed to practical knowledge. 
This practical knowledge is changeless. True and 
eternal education never changes when the heart is filled 
with compassion; it becomes sacred and aspires for the 
welfare of one and all. An educated person should not 
have bad qualities and must not indulge in bad deeds. 
Today’s education imparts only bookish knowledge, 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 308 


which really degrades a person. How long will this 
bookish knowledge last? It lasts as long as we keep it 
in our mind. It is not possible to put bookish knowl- 
edge into practice. We fill our heads with bookish 
knowledge, go to the examination hall, fill our answer 
paper with it and return with empty heads! In effect, 
the head always remains empty. 


To acquire discrimination knowledge one re- 
quires general knowledge, which consists of ordinary 
cleverness and intelligence. Discrimination knowledge 
also has in it common sense. Both are essential for life 
in this world. 


Students and Teachers! 


What we need today is not bookish knowledge 
though we require it to a certain extent to cope up with 
life in this world. But what is essential to us is the 
knowledge of the Atma. Spiritual education is the 
highest education, says the Bhagawadgita. It starts 
with discrimination knowledge, which is like a peren- 
nial river. In perennial rivers the quantity of water may 
vary but not the quality. Thus students should unders- 
tand that quality of education is more important than 
its quantity. Degrees are not important, but the knowI- 
edge accomplished out of education is important. What 
is the meaning of education? ‘Education is not mere 
knowledge, it includes action, too.’ Education, which 
originates from within has a sound basis and is per- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 309 


manent. It is referred to as Sathyam. A step higher than 
Sathyam is Ritam as proclaimed in the Vedas. What we 
normally refer to as truth in daily life is merely a fact. 


Education Is For Life Not For Living 


People mistake bookish knowledge to be true 
education. No one today bothers about the aim of 
education. Education is for life and not for living. 
Today’s education is aimed at merely eking out a 
livelihood. If mere living is the purpose, then how 
birds and beasts live without any education? Even ants 
and mosquitoes, which do not have any education live 
their lives. Is educatation for merely earning one’s 
bread? What is the essence of education? The essence 
of education is the concentration of the mind and not 
the collection of facts. Mere collection of facts will not 
serve any purpose. For example, a washerman in a 
village goes from house to house collecting clothes for 
washing. In each household the number of clothes, 
which are given for washing, are noted down in a 
notebook. But the washerman does not have an 
account. By evening he returns the clothes to the 
respective houses. This is general knowledge. For 
acquiring this general knowledge education is not 
necessary. Even a washerman possesses it. Many 
educated men lack the acumen of even a washerman. 
General knowledge cannot be acquired by mere study. 
It is learnt from the book of life. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 310 


What is the end of eduction? People answer 
this question by saying there is no end to education. 
Definitely there is an end to what we study from 
books. The end of education is character. Education 
without character is useless. Earlier in Gurukulas the 
sages took the students along with them wherever they 
went and taught them without conforming to any time 
schedule. This education was a continuous learning 
process. But today in the schools and colleges educa- 
tion is limited to strict time schedules. Therefore, edu- 
cation has become limited. But true education, which 
moulds character, has no limits. When we learn about 
that which is ‘limitless’ we attain the end of education. 
Our character is reflected in our words, behaviour and 
conduct in daily life. So we should speak pleasantly 
and not hurt others with our harsh words. It is true that 
we cannot always oblige but we can speak obligingly. 


While cooking, ladies select appropriate vessels 
according to the quantity of rice to be cooked. It does 
not make sense if a large vessel is chosen to cook a 
small quantity of rice. Discrimination should be used 
to select the vessel and the intensity of the flame 
required for cooking. In the same way, discrimination 
should be used to enrich one’s charcter. 


Fact, Truth And Absolute Truth 


When elderly guests visit the house, even if one 
cannot offer them anything to eat, one should at least 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 311 


welcome them inside, speak affectionate words and 
make them happy. Instead, if one asks them rudely, 
“Why have you come?”, it is not good. Even when the 
father is at home, one tells them that he is not there. 
This is not proper education. speak good words and tell 
the truth. There are three types of truth. They are fact, 
truth and absolute truth. To say as it is what you have 
seen is a fact. Suppose I see you wearing a white dress 
and say that “you are wearing a white dress”. This 
becomes a fact. Later at home you might wear a blue 
shirt. Then what I had said earlier does not hold good 
anymore. Thus a fact is subject to change. 


Truth, on the other hand, does not change with 
time. A person may change any number of dresses, but 
the person remains the same. Thus truth is the same at 
all times. I often say that you are not one but three. The 
one you think you are: the physical body. The one 
others think you are: the mind. Mind is invisible. One’s 
happiness or misery is based on one’s actions. Ritam 
(absolute truth) transcends both good and evil. This is 
the one you really are, the Atma. You are a combina- 
tion of body, mind, and Atma. Body is subject to 
change. It is Atma, which is eternal. This is referred to 
as Ritam in the Vedas. It is changeless and has no attri- 
butes. It is described as attributeless, pure, eternal 
highest abode, permanent and unsullied. One may say 
that one has acquired three postgraduate degrees. But 
what are these degrees? These are mere certificates. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 312 


Who is the one who has earned all these degrees? It is 
‘IT’. This ‘I’ is the absolute truth. Only when you are 
awake you travel physically, see many sights, eat many 
dishes and experience many things. But in the dream 
state you create yourself! You do your work and travel 
to far off places like Delhi, America, without even 
purchasing a plane ticket. In deep sleep state one does 
not go anywhere. It is a changeless and steady state, 
which remains a witness. The same ‘I’ experiences all 
these three states. In the deep sleep you enjoy bliss. In 
the dream state you create various scenes and experi- 
ence them. But in the wakeful state you experience 
everything physically through the senses. 


Adi Sankara has cautioned us about the truth of 
what we experience through the senses. Vagaries of the 
mind are many. In order to control them, Sankara 
introduced a practice in his ashram. The disciples 
would walk from one end of the ashram to the other 


' 


repeating, “Be careful! Be careful!” Once a feeling 
arose in Sankara’s mind that he was the head of the 
ashram with a large income. At that moment he heard 
the sentinels cautioning, “Be careful! Be careful!” This 


alerted him and brought about a change in his feelings. 
Birth is a misery, old age is a misery, family is a 


misery, the last moments are full of sorrow, so Be 
careful! Be careful! (Telugu Poem) 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 313 


One might consider oneself to be great. As of 
now, one might be enjoying name and fame. But what 
will happen when one is faced with misery towards the 
end of one’s life? Sankara wondered who would come 
to one’s rescue at the fag end of one’s life. 


Neither mother, nor father, nor relatives nor 
brothers, not even wealth or possessions will 
come to your rescue in the last moments. Hence 
be careful ! 


(Telugu Poem) 


In earlier days, this was taught in the Guru- 
kulas to the students by the preceptors. This ancient 
educational system originated from absolute truth. This 
is what is EDUCARE. It is also reflected in the letters 
ABC as ALWAYS BE CAREFUL. Sankara preached 
the same principle. So, it is necessary to impart spiri- 
tual education along with secular education. General 
knowledge devoid of spiritual education is negative. 
General knowledge is like the bulb and spiritual 
knowledge is like the current flowing through it. Only 
when positive and negative meet is darkness dispelled. 
So, we must develop positive along with negative. 


It would be enough if we have only positive 
aspects. The divine power is latent in every being, 
which is positive. Man today accumulates negative as- 
pects in excess. Birth, growth, sustenance, and death 
are all negative. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 314 


He is the Eternal One with no birth and death, 
He who is the Primordial One does not have a 
beginning or an end, 
He is neither born, nor does He die, nor is He 
slain by anyone. He is the Atma, which is the 
Eternal Witness. 

(Telugu Poem) 


Spiritual Knowledge Is Foremost And Fundamental 


Hence, the path of spirituality forms the basis 
for all forms of knowledge. The fundamental knowl- 
edge, which comprises spiritual knowledge, is greater 
than both practical knowledge and general knowledge. 
So, this should be imparted along with the secular 
education. How long can we lead a truthful and ideal 
life in the world without trying to discover the Abso- 
lute Truth (Ritam)? 


We are making a mistake by identifying 
ourselves with the body. For example, a mother died 
leaving behind her fifteen-year-old son. The son was 
grief-stricken since there was none to look after him. 
The body of the mother was right in front of him; then 
why was he sad? It was because life had left the body 
of his mother. So, mother is not the body but the life 
principle. Life principle has no death. Body is like the 
dress; death is like change of dress. Everything in this 
world undergoes change. But there is one thing that is 
changeless. That is the Fundamental Truth. We should 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 315 


learn that fundamental education. Once you have 
mastered it, it follows you wherever you go. Gradually 
you should get rid of attachment to the body and 
develop Atmic consciousness. 


You are pursuing different types of education 
in different countries. But ultimately education should 
converge into educare. That can be achieved gradually. 
Therefore, mere acquaintance with books and what is 
written on the black-board cannot constitute education. 
True education throws open the doors of the mind. 
How can you enter a house with the doors closed? You 
desire many comforts and pleasures, and also aspire for 
virtues. For that you have to open the doors of your 
mind first. Only then absolute truth will manifest in us. 
This obsolute truth is all pervasive. 


In our organisation, we should not only wear a 
uniform dress, we should also develop uniform mind. 
The basic thing to be achieved is purity of mind. 


Embodiments of Love! 


There are many aspects in modern educational 
system that we must understand. But we are not learn- 
ing what we ought to. Instead we are gathering irrele- 
vant information. Mere learning of the contents of a 
book constitutes secular education. Education must be 
combined with educare. Only then will you experience 
the bliss. What is the difference between ‘education’ 
and ‘educare’? Education is like insipid water, educare 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 316 


is like sugar. Merely adding sugar to water does not 
make it sweet. It is only on stirring, does the sugar mix 
with the water making it sweet. The heart is the 
tumbler, divinity is the sugar, and secular education is 
tasteless water. With intelligence as the spoon and 
enquiry as the process of stirring, we experience the 
all-pervasive divinity. That is true wisdom, which 
enables us to recognise the unity of all creation. 


This is a cloth. It is not just cloth. It is a bundle 
of threads and more fundamentally it is cotton. The 
cotton, thread and cloth are one and the same. Without 
cotton, there 1s no thread and without thread there is no 
cloth. Recognition of the unity in multiplicity is the 
ultimate goal of education. 


You should learn to face adversities boldly 
without blaming God. God would have planned to 
grant you some benefit through the hardship. You 
should accept both pain and pleasure as gifts of God, 
and develop the attitude, “whatever God does is for my 
own good!” 


You will have many discussions in the con- 
ference. Let the discussions be filled with love and not 
with criticism. You should not criticise any religion, 
because it is the same God whom you worship, be it in 
a church, a temple or a mosque. A true devotee of God 
will not criticise anyone. Share your love equally with 
everyone. Tomorrow I shall answer any doubts or 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 317 


questions that may arise in your discussions today. 


First Conference of Sri Sathya Sai Schools, 
20.11.2001, Prasanthi Nilayam 


21 


Pari Prashna -The Divine Answers 


(Bhagawan answered the questions raised by 
the delegates of the conference) 


When things go wrong in ventures that one 
undertakes, If one is undeterred and unshaken 
and welcomes everything with a smile giving 
up all worry, The heart of such a one is filled 
with wisdom 


(Telugu Poem) 


Q1 What is the relation between religion, 
spirituality and educare? 


Embodiments of Love! 


IT is surprising to me to note that you have 
been unable to recognise the relation between religion, 
spirituality and educare. First and foremost understand 
what religion is - ‘Religion is realisation’. Only when 
you realise the truth about yourself, will you under- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 320 


stand what religion is. Spirituality is not merely sing- 
ing bhajans, performing worship, going to temples or 
on pilgrimages or undertaking any other good activity. 
Spirituality is recognising oneness of all beings. Here 
is an example. When we close our eyes we cannot see 
anybody. But the moment we open them we can see 
thousands of heads in this hall. Where have these 
heads come from? If you enquire into the truth, you 
will recognise that your eyes notice all heads. They 
have not come from anywhere outside. 


To recognise unity in diversity is spirituality. 
The basic truth to be recognised is that there is only 
one Atma in all beings. The questions and doubts arise 
when you see multiplicity in unity. The entire creation 
has emerged from love. Therefore, there is no differ- 
ence between religion, spirituality and educare. 


Religion is realisation of your Self. Spirituality 
also is discovering who you really are. For example 
you say, “This is my handkerchief, this is my plate this 
is my hand and this is my body”. Then who are you? 
There must be someone to say that he owns the 
tumbler, plate, hand and the body. When you enquire 
into this truth you will realise that you are separate 
from all these and in fact, you are the master of all 
these. That master is the Atma. 


The next aspect is educare. How can you call 
yourselves educated if you do not understand what 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 321 


educare is? The word ‘education’ is derived from the 
Latin root ‘educare’. While education refers to 
collection of worldly facts, educare is to bring out from 
within. Education is for a living while educare is for 
life. Education is for ‘Jeevana Upadihi’ (livelihood). 
Educare is for ‘Jeevitha Paramavadhi’ (the ultimate 
goal of life). It is easy for us to recognise things 
outside us and difficult to look within. There are many 
things inside us, which are not manifest. When you 
join the three letters G, O, D, we get the word GOD. 
When you look at the letters individually they have no 
meaning of their own. Our effort lies in putting to- 
gether these letters to get the meaning. This is educare. 
Educare means to bring out from within. The Atma is 
our innermost reality. That is what educare should 
bring out. Therefore, there is actually no difference 
between the three—religion, spirituality and educare. 


Whatever we see in others is only a reflection 
of our own self. If we accuse somebody as bad, it is 
just that our feeling toward that person is bad. 
Whatever impression we have about others is a reflec- 
tion of our feeling towards them. Everything is just 
reflection, reaction and resound. Therefore, you should 
not find fault with others. You do not have the right to 
find fault because your assessment of a person is lim- 
ited to your experience with him. There are so many 
aspects of the personality of that person you do not 
know. For example, you look at Anil Kumar, you will 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 322 


know only his dress, his complexion, his height and 
weight. But Anil Kumar is not merely what you see. 
There are so many qualities like love, compassion or 
anger, which are in him that you cannot see. Therefore, 
if you want to know a person completely you should 
investigate into all the aspects of his personality. In 
modern times, people go by the physical appearance 
and judge people based on their external actions. This 
is wrong. Hence, defect lies in the vision and not in the 
creation. When you put on red glasses everything 
appears red and when you put on blue glasses every- 
thing appears blue. Only those foolish people who fail 
to recognise this truth resort to criticism. Even in the 
case of an ordinary human being your assessment is 
wrong, then how can you assess God? 


God has many invaluable things in His store. 
But you come and ask, “Swami, give me a locket.” 
You ask Him for a locket because you do not know 
what precious gifts He can bestow upon you. There is 
no dearth of anything in His store. Therefore, you 
should not ask God for anything in specific. When 
time is ripe, He will give you. God knows and acts 
appropriately, based on the right time, place and situa- 
tion. That is why you find sometimes that He Himself 
comes and gives you things unasked. It is therefore 
very difficult to understand God. An ignoramus, who 
fails to understand this principle, often misinterprets it. 
But you should not fall prey to such calumny. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 323 


Thus educare, spirituality and religion are not 
different from one another. Here is a ring, a chain and 
the earrings - all these are different forms of the same 
gold. If one realises this unifying truth then where is 
the scope for multiplicity? Therefore, God is One 
though He may appear to you in different forms. The 
fundamental basis for everything is love. This 1s what 
you should aspire for. Do not worry about religion. 
There is only one religion, the religion of love. 
Educare means to bring out the divine love latent in 
man. that is why it is said, Love is God, live in Love. 
Then there would be no conflict in the world and all 
would live together happily. Only when there are dif- 
ferences, there is conflict. Push aside these differences 
and live with the feeling of oneness. 


There is only one language, the language of the 
heart; there is only one religion, the religion of love; 
there is only one caste, the caste of humanity. 


Religions are many but the path is only one and 
we need to discover this path. “O heroic sons of 
Bharat! No religion is bad for the one who has a good 
sense of understanding”. It is incorrect to see dif- 
ferences among religions. In our daily life, we need to 
realise the limitations of education. What you read for 
the first time may look new to you but when you read 
it again and again it is no more new. Here is an 
example. Once God wanted to grant liberation to a 
person and sent Yama, the God of death, to him. When 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 324 


Yama approached this devotee, he questioned whether 
the devotee knew him. But the devotee answered that 
he (Yama) was a stranger to him. Then Lord Yama 
told him that he would return to him only when he 
could recognise Yama. When Yama returned after 
three days the same question was posed to him. Now 
the devotee answered that Yama was no longer a 
stranger to him because he had already seen him. 
Everything appears strange and new before acquain- 
tance. But once we acquaint ourselves we tend to shed 
differences. 


Basically, you have to get rid of the sense of 
differences and develop the sense of oneness. Then 
you will know that religion, educare and spirituality 
are one and the same. 


Q2 What relationship should Sri Sathya 
Sai Schools have with Government? 


Sri Sathya Sai education and Government 
education are two separate entities. Nevertheless, 
Sathya Sai Schools should have good relationship with 
the government. Sai belongs to everybody but govern- 
ment does not belong to everybody. Sri Sathya Sai 
Schools should obey all rules of the government, but 
with Sai, the only rule is Love. In Sri Sathya Sai 
Schools we follow all rules of discipline with love. The 
Government enforces its rules, therefore it is ‘force’, 
but Sai’s method is from the ‘source’. One can pursue 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 325 


Sri Sathya Sai education along with government edu- 
cation. Sri Sathya Sai education imparts human values. 
Follow these values, and at the same time pursue 
government education. But do not split them into 
artificial divisions. Everyday we have 24 hours at our 
disposal. At the most we spend 6 hours — 3 hours in the 
morning and 3 hours in the afternoon in schools. We 
still have 18 hours at our disposal. Allocate 6 hours for 
your sleep, 6 hours for personal activities and the 
remaining 6 hours can be utilised for spiritual pursuits 
and developing human values. Sri Sathya Sai educa- 
tion imparts practical knowledge while the government 
educaion teaches only bookish knowledge. But do not 
ignore bookish knowledge also, because the former 
grants us spiritual happiness and the latter, worldly 
happiness. Government education gives us the means 
of livelihood whereas Sri Sathya Sai education leads us 
to the ultimate goal of life. The two constitute the two 
sides of the same coin. 


Q3 As teachers how can we understand the 
minds of students? 


The teacher must first have a thorough under- 
standing of his own mind before trying to understand 
the minds of the students. If the teacher’s mind is 
good, the students will reflect it in their behaviour. 
Since the teacher cannot see the student’s mind, he has 
to understand it only by observing the student’s behav- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 326 


iour with his parents, his friends and his fellow 
students. Basing on this, he will be able to lead the 
student on to the right path. 


Sometimes, parents give too much freedom to 
the children and children in turn misuse this freedom to 
interact with their friends with laxity in behaviour. At 
school his freedom is curtailed. He must be taught to 
strike a balance between freedom and discipline. The 
teacher cannot interfere in the student’s family affairs, 
for, parents give freedom to their children out of their 
love. Nevertheless, the teachers must keep in touch 
with the student’s activities at home. But the sad plight 
of the modern age is that the parents are ninety-nine 
percent responsible for their children getting into bad 
ways, by providing them with excess of money and 
freedom. The parents are misguided by imagining that 
their children would be hurt if their freedom is cur- 
tailed. But they feel dejected if the child gets perverted 
and runs into bad ways. The child must be groomed 
well right from the beginning itself. Just as speed 
breakers control the speed of vehicles on the road to 
ensure safety, so too restrictions must be enforced 
upon children’s freedom for their safety. The child 
should be given freedom in areas related to right 
conduct and must be punished when it errs. When the 
parents give freedom to their children, they should 
watch carefully as to how the children behave. It is 
then that the child will tread the right path. The first 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 32) 


responsibility rests with the mother for the child to 
tread on the right path. Generally, if the daughter in the 
family is spoiled, mother is responsible and if the son 
goes astray, father is responsible for it. 


It is in order to ensure that unlimited freedom is 
not given to children that the institution called school 
has come into existence. It is here that teachers should 
strike a balance between freedom and restriction in 
student’s life. The teacher must advise the student 
regularly that his conduct will be responsible for the 
name he earns for his parents and the school. 


In some countries the concept of kindness and 
respect for elders is not stressed. The teachers of Sath- 
ya Sai Schools must advise the students in the right 
way. The teacher must advise the student that he is 
born as a human, and that he is neither a ‘wild animal’ 
to strike terror in the hearts of people nor a ‘domestic 
animal’ (docile person) to be afraid of others. He has 
no cause to fear nor should he cause fear in others. In 
this manner, the teacher must lead the students on the 
right path. Life is a long journey and must not be 
dismissed in a trivial manner. It must be spent in the 
most auspicious manner possible. We should aspire for 
a divine life and not long life. It is possible to bring 
about a change in students by such good advice. 


You are Acharya and not merely a teacher. 
Acharya is one who first practises and then teaches the 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 328 


same to his students. So when you want to teach good 
principles to students, first you practise and then set an 
example. For example, if you smoke in the class, 
students will also emulate you and start smoking. If 
you try to correct them by saying, smoking is bad for 
health, the students will in turn ask you, “Sir, then why 
are you smoking?” The true characteristic of good 
education is good teaching. Good teaching brings 
about transformation in students. It makes students 
confess their mistakes before the teacher. I know this 
very well. Sometimes I punish My students for their 
mistakes and am strict toward them. Yet, I love them 
and give them what they need. This transforms their 
hearts. They come and pray to Me, “Swami please 
forgive us. It is our mistake that we did not conduct 
ourselves according to Your words. Now we have 
realised it. Swami, we will never repeat such mistakes 
again”. Words that come out of true repentance melt 
Swami’s heart and Swami forgives them, “My dear 
son, whatever I do is for your good.” All teachers can 
learn to emulate this example. 


Q4 What is the most important quality a 
good teacher must have? 


This is a very important question. Teachers 
should practise what is good and teach the same to 
students. Teachers should lead an exemplary life. Here 
is an example; when I was studying in third Form in 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 529 


Kamalapuram, we had a teacher by name H. Iyengar. 
Students were very afraid of him and would often 
avoid meeting him. I had great respect for my teacher. 
One day Iyengar got angry because he observed Me 
going into a lane when he was coming from the 
opposite direction of the road. Next day, I went to the 
class. I was the class monitor and had to get a bundle 
of sticks with which he would punish students. When 
he came to the class he was angry with Me for not 
meeting him on the road. He asked Me, “Why did You 
not meet and greet me?” I replied, “Sir, I did not see 
you. I was going to My friend’s house to take My 
notebook from him.” He shouted, “So You did not see 
me!” I replied, “No I did not see you.” He threatened 
to punish Me. I told him, “Sir I am speaking the truth. 
If you wish to punish Me, you can do so.” This answer 
melted his heart and he shed tears. He called Me near 
and said, “Raju I knew that You would never commit 
such a mistake. It is my mistake to get angry with You. 
I have a request, would you please come to my house 
tomorrow evening?” As instructed by H. Iyengar, I 
went to his house. Iyengar had great love for Me. He 
gave Pakodas in an aluminum plate. He said, “I made a 
mistake by thinking of punishing You. As an act of 
repentance, I want to cultivate friendship with you.” 
Our goodness, our truthfulness and our sacred qualities 
will transform any person. I said, “Sir your position is 
much higher than Mine. Friendship is possible only 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 330 


between equals.” He replied, “You may look at it that 
way. But, one’s age and education are not important, 
what is important is one’s heart. You have a good 
heart.” He further enquired, whether I was studying 
well. I told him, “Yes Sir’. He cautioned Me that 
exams were fast approaching and wanted Me to study 
well. I appeared for the examination. The examination 
was for two hours duration, but I finished answering 
the paper within half an hour. I handed over the answer 
script to the Invigilator and came out. He kept 
watching Me. He quipped, “Raju! You don’t seem to 
have written anything!” I replied, “Sir! You will see it 
for yourself tomorrow. I have written everything 
correctly. I do not write or speak untruth.” Next day, 
from the pile of answer scripts, he picked up My 
answer script first. He checked My answers one by one 
and found that there were some answers which were 
not known even to him. So, he wrote very, very, very, 
very good on my paper. In those days, the teacher 
retained the answer scripts. The next day, he asked his 
wife to prepare some snacks and invited Me to his 
house. He told Me, “Raju! Have a cup of coffee.” I 
said, “Sir! I do not drink coffee. I don’t have that 
habit.” “At least have a dosa”, he requested. I replied, 
“But I do not have the habit of eating at odd times”. 
Please eat at least for my satisfaction,” he pleaded. To 
satisfy him, I partook of it. Likewise, students have 
many opportunities to make their teachers happy. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 331 


Though the students were afraid of our teachers, I was 
not. The reason was that I never committed any mis- 
takes. I used to talk very sweetly. Because of this, my 
English teacher, Mahboob Khan, was very eager to 
come to My class. If any other teacher continued to be 
in the class even after the bell, he would ask him to 
leave. In the class, all other students would tease Me 
by saying, “Raju, go to the front!” Mahboob Khan 
loved Me very much. He used to caress My hair, 
fondle Me and pinch My cheeks. He was 50 years old 
and had no children. 


He would ask Me to visit his house frequently. 
He was very devoted to Me. At the age of 11, I left that 
school. Till that time, I used to lead the prayers at the 
school. Mahboob Khan was looking after the prayer 
arrangements and he asked Me to lead the prayers 
saying, “Your prayers melt our hearts. You compose a 
prayer song and sing it.” “How can I compose a prayer 
song?”, I asked. He said, “You can do it!” I composed 
a song and sang at the prayer meetings. In that song I 
had incorporated the idea of unity of religions even at 
that age. 


After listening to that song, all were surprised. 
After sometime, I left the school, declaring, “I am Sai. 
No one however great can ever understand Me. Give 
up your attempts to retain Me with you. I belong to the 
whole world!” 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 332 


All were bewildered. They came behind Me 
crying, “Raju! Raju.” Without answering anybody, I 
went straight to Anjaneyulu’s garden. I sat on a rock 
and started preaching, Manasa Bhajare Guru Chara- 
nam Dustara Bhava Sagara Taranam (Contemplate on 
the feet of the Divine Master who alone can help you 
to cross over the ocean of life and death).” The next 
day, the Telugu teacher and Mahboob Khan resigned 
their teaching posts. They loved Me so much that they 
did not want to teach in the school without Me. Many 
other teachers followed their example. A Muslim boy 
was asked to go on the stage to lead the prayers. After 
coming on to the stage, he broke down thinking of Me. 
He could not sing the prayer. Others also started 
crying. From that day onward, prayers were stopped. 


There is a bond of pure love between teachers 
and students. Students can win over any teacher’s heart 
and a teacher can win over students’ hearts. If you 
want to be loved, you have to love others first. First 
and foremost, we should aspire for truth. The basis of 
Indian culture is, “Speak truth, practise right conduct.” 
I was always very humble. Now also, I teach the same 
thing to students. You cannot always oblige, but you 
can speak always obligingly! But sometimes, one 
needs to be strict. That is what I do. I can be harder 
than diamond when the situation demands. Otherwise, 
I am softer than butter. Teachers understood this nature 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 333 


of Mine. Teachers! If you want to take students into 
your confidence, you have to approach them with love. 
You have to point out their mistakes and lead them on 
the right path. Only then will they follow the right 
path and accept their mistakes. For the progress and 
prosperity of the nation, teachers should develop love 
for students and mould their character. Then the 
society will get many good citizens 


Q5 How to implement educare in the case 
of children from slum areas? 


In order to mould the character of such children 
through educare programme, we have to visit their 
houses and help the people living there by taking up 
social service projects like cleaning and sanitation. 
Then they would develop the sense of cleanliness and 
keep their places clean. You can also take the help of 
Seva Dal members in such service projects. 


Even students from schools can be taken to 
those areas and told to involve in service activities. 
Thereby the students would develop a liking for 
service activities. 


Q6 How do you motivate children in edu- 
care programme? 


It is not possible to make small children under- 
stand the essence of educare. They are too young to 
understand it. It can be introduced at the college level. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 334 


But at school level, we can cultivate good thoughts and 
good habits among students. We can also inspire their 
young hearts by narrating the stories of great persons 
of their respective lands, and exhorting them to follow 
the ideals set by them. For example, the life of Hari- 
schandra is a great ideal in adherence to truth. 


Q7 How can we attract children of non- 
devotees to Sathya Sai schools? 


This is a very important question. Our students 
are our spokesmen. We have to reform the students so 
that they will attract the attention of their parents and 
bring about a good change in them. The parents may 
not know about Sai Baba. But when they see the good 
behaviour of their children because of the practising of 
the principles of Sai Baba, they will naturally change 
their minds. Students can also tell their parents that all 
their good behaviour is because of their joining the 
Sathya Sai schools. This will also attract other children 
to the Sathya Sai schools. 


Let us take for example the good practice of the 
students chanting Brahmarpanam before partaking of 
food. Even the parents will be surprised at their devo- 
tion to God. If children explain to the parents the 
meaning of the prayer saying, “Food is given to us by 
God. Therefore, we must offer it to Him before partak- 
ing of it. Then the food becomes Prasadam and will 
not be tainted by impurities.” Thus even the parents 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 335 


will learn to pray. This is the way to bring the parents 
on the right path through their children. Whatever we 
do, we must do it properly. If any guests visit our 
house, we must speak to them courteously. We must 
offer them seats, make them comfortable and tell them, 
“Please be seated. Father will meet you in a few 
moments.” Such behaviour will make the guests happy 
and will naturally appeal to the good sense of the 
guests, whether they are devotees or not. This is how 
we have to train our students so that they will attract 
others and be examples to them. 


Q8 How do we deal with parents who do 
not follow Sai’s teachings? 


We must bring about a change in the parents 
through their children studying in our schools. For ex- 
ample, the parents of a student may be non-vege- 
tarians. When the student goes home for vacation, he 
can bring about a change in his parents by narrating to 
them with humility the sanctity of eating vegetarian 
food. The student can tell his parent, “Mother, I cannot 
feed myself by killing another being. This is not good 
for me. This body, which is made up of flesh, should 
not be fed with flesh. Our body must be fed with nectar 
and not with flesh. Eating of flesh will induce in me 
animal feelings. We should eat only vegetarian food 
which God has provided for us.” Thus, we can teach 
parents through students. And in course of time even 
the parents will stop eating non-vegetarian food. Many 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 336 


families have stopped eating non-vegetarian food after 
their children joined our institutions. Thus, it is easy to 
bring about transformation in parents through students. 


Q9 How to actively involve parents in 
educare programme? 


It is very difficult to directly involve parents in 
the educare programme. Hence, educare must be 
taught to the parents through their children. Parents do 
not know what educare is. What will they understand if 
you speak about educare to them. Since you under- 
stand what educare is, you should teach them about it 
through your actions. 


Q10 What is the role of technology like 
computers in education? 


For Me technology appears to be ‘Trick-knowl- 
edge’. I don’t have any computers. Swami has been 
saying this for the past five years. Now computers are 
also getting virus attacks like human beings. You 
should become a ‘composer’ and not a ‘computer’. 
When does a computer get spoiled? It happens when 
something goes wrong in the head of the composer. 
You may use this technology to develop science. 
Firstly, set right the computer that God has given you. 
That is your head itself. Today, one uses computer for 
every small calculation. It looks ridiculous. God has 
given us a better calculator, our brain. Make use of its 
services. Of course, there are certain benefits accruing 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 337 


from computers. I do not deny it. You should use it 
depending on the need. You are all fascinated by the 
computer because of its novelty. But what has com- 
puter done to our society? It has developed easy-going 
nature in us and caused unemployment. Unemploy- 
ment leads to rise in crimes. We should discard such 
machinery that render many people jobless. Instead of 
that, you should encourage domestic industries, which 
will provide jobs to people in the home itself. 


Q11 How to go about starting the first Sri 
Sathya Sai School in a country? 


It is not possible for all to start schools, as all 
may not have the resources to do so. But they can start 
imparting educare through the Bal Vikas programme. 
Gradually, it can be upgraded into a school. Here I 
have an important point to make The good work done 
by women in this field is highly appreciable. Men lag 
far behind in this aspect. Women are somehow finding 
time for Bal Vikas in spite of their daily chores. In this 
Kali Age, it is a good blessing for both women and 
children. Men too should come forward to participate 
in such work. Only then can the nation progress. Big 
schools and buildings can land us in worries when we 
lack resources. Let it be in a small scale. 


Q.12 What is Sai Baba’s vision of the future 
of Sri Sathya Sai Schools around the 
world? 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 338 


There is no need to worry about what awaits us 
in future. Do whatever you are supposed to, in the best 
way you can. This will lead you to a brighter future. 
Future is not sure, it is not in our hands. Present is im- 
portant. Present is not ordinary present; it is omni- 
present. Take care of the present, the future will take 
care of itself. Did you ever think in the past that you 
could grow to the present state of attending the 
conference? When you do good work that itself will 
bestow upon you a good future. 


Q.13 Can the children be recruited to higher 
classes in Sri Sathya Sai Schools 
directly or should they be admitted to 
only kindergarten classes? 


There is no hard and fast rule that children 
should be admitted only to the lowest class. Depending 
on the situation you can even admit them to a higher 
class. There is nothing wrong about it. 


Q.14 Should Gayatri Mantra be chanted in 
Western Sathya Sai Schools? 


You can do as per the dictates of your heart. If 
you feel its chanting bestows upon you benefits, you 
can do it. Gayatri is not a woman nor does this Mantra 
belong to any particular religion or country. It is only 
the name and the form of a deity. It represents the three 
aspects of materalisation, vibration and radiation. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 339 


These three are present in everyone irrespective of 
one’s country and religion. In this Mantra, one prays 
for inspiration and stimulation of one’s intelligence. I 
do not force anyone either to chant it or not to chant it. 
Mine is not ‘force’ but only ‘source’. You can do 
whatever gives you joy. 

I have answered your questions in brief. Purify 
your hearts and follow the Divine command. You can 
pray to God — Allah, Jesus, Krishna or Zoroastra. It 
does not make any difference. Develop virtues and get 
rid of vices. Sathya Sai is absolutely selfless; whatever 
I say, follow it implicitly. It will be good for you. At- 
tain happiness and share it with others. 


First Conference of Sri Sathya Sai Schools, Valedictory 
Address, 21-11-2001, Prasanthi Nilayam 


Ze 


Humility And Character Are The 
Hallmarks Of True Education 


He alone is truly educated who is engaged in 
the service of all beings, who is the master of 
all forms of knowledge and who is the paragon 
of all virtues. 


(Sanskrit Sloka) 


Embodiments of Love! 


EDUCATION which is not used for the wel- 
fare of society is no education at all. You can be called 
truly educated only when your education benefits peo- 
ple at large and you become recipient of their love. It is 
not enough if you merely acquire bookish knowledge. 
You should attain supreme wisdom and cultivate vir- 
tues. True education is that which bestows on man the 
wealth of morality, spirituality and character. The 
purpose of education is not merely to sustain the body; 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 342 


it should broaden man’s mind and make him an ideal 
and virtuous person. 


Character—Need Of The Hour 


If one enquires deeply, one will find a lot of 
confusion in the modern system of education. Under 
these circumstances, students have to understand the 
purpose of education, put their knowledge into practice 
and experience bliss therefrom. Man today has made 
great progress in the field of science but that should 
not make him egoistic. Science is related to worldly 
education. What man needs is good character. Worldly 
education cannot foster virtues in man. One who sets 
an ideal to society by his virtues and conduct alone is 
truly educated. Modern students are trying to master 
various forms of knowledge but they are unable to 
understand the nature of their body and the mind. The 
same was said by Winston Churchill once: “Man has 
conquered all, but he has not conquered himself.” 
Modern man knows everything except himself. To 
know one’s own self is positive and to know about the 
world is negative. It is not the quality of a true student 
to acquire degrees merely to seek a job. A true student 
is one who shares his knowledge with his fellow 
beings and leads an exemplary life. 


“One may master all forms of knowledge, 
One may vanquish one’s adversaries in de 
bate, 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 343 


One may fight with valour and courage in 
the battlefield, 

One may be an emperor reigning over vast 
kingdoms, 

One may offer cows and gold as an act of 
charity, 

One may count the countless stars in the sky, 

One may tell the names of different living 
creatures on the earth, 

But it is impossible to control the body, 
mind and senses. 
Turn the vision inward and achieve the 
supreme state of equanimity of the mind.” 


(Telugu Poem) 


Man has traveled lakhs of miles into space and 
reached the moon but he is yet to travel even half an 
inch inward. An educated person should investigate in- 
to his true nature. Ravana was in no way inferior to 
Rama in terms of knowledge but sage Valmiki, the 
composer of Ramayana, described Ravana as a fool 
and extolled Rama as one of wisdom. The reason was 
that Rama put His knowledge into practice and led an 
exemplary life. On the other hand, Ravana did not 
practise the knowledge he acquired, became a slave to 
his senses and thus ruined himself, his kingdom, and 
his entire clan. Education is meant not to satisfy the 
senses but to make one transcend the senses and set an 
ideal to society. This is most essential for modern stu- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 344 


dents. Our country can attain its pristine glory only 
when we have such ideal students. But alas! Students 
today do not think on these sacred lines. 


All the ancient and eternal teachings are being 
misinterpreted. Sacred qualities are fast disap- 
pearing among people. Righteousness and 
compassion are no longer practised. The sa- 
cred teachings of the Vedas are forgotten and 
wickedness is on the rise. 


(Telugu Poem) 


This is the appalling state of affairs today. All 
the remedial measures that are being undertaken are 
only making matters worse. True education is that 
which destroys narrow-mindedness, develops equality 
and ultimately leads to world peace. Students should 
acquire such education and serve the country. People 
say that they are serving the country, but most of them 
are craving for their own selfish gains. Man today is 
immersed in selfishness and is wasting his life in futile 
pursuits. He wants to possess everything in this world. 
His craving for more and more things is to satisfy his 
unlimited desires and not to fulfil his real needs. In this 
manner, man is getting immersed in sensual pleasures. 
He has become a slave of his senses. He can be called 
truly educated only when he controls his senses. Mod- 
ern students behave and act as they please. What are 
the qualities that are expected of a student? “Students 
should pursue such education which confers on them 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 345 


the sacred qualities like good character, adherence to 
truth, devotion, discipline and duty. (Telugu Poem) 
This is what we have to learn today. 


Practical Knowledge Leads To The Understanding 
Of The Atma 


Embodiments of Love! 


You are all very virtuous and intelligent. You 
are endowed with a sacred heart. Fill your heart with 
love and compassion. That which is filled with Daya 
(compassion) 1s Hridaya (heart). However, today love 
and compassion find no place in human heart. 
Consequently, wicked qualities are finding their way 
into it. Whatever you experience outside is nothing but 
the reflection, reaction and resound of what is in your 
heart. Today negative qualities are prevalent in the 
world. What is the reason? The reason is that man’s 
heart today is full of negative feelings. All that is 
witnessed in the world is the reflection of man’s heart. 
Man should purify his heart to receive divine grace. 


A deep enquiry into the principles of science 
and spirituality will reveal that atom is the basis of 
everything in this world. This flower, this cloth are 
nothing but different combinations of atoms. Even the 
food we eat, the water we drink, the air we breathe, are 
all constituted by atoms. In fact, all objects are consti- 
tuted by atoms. But there is something more subtle and 
fundamental than even atom. Everything has originated 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 346 


from fundamental principle. Instead of trying to know 
the fundamental principle, man is getting carried away 
by trivialities. 
Subtler than the atom, vaster than the cosmos, 
Divinity is present all over as the eternal wit- 
ness. 


(Telugu Poem) 
Try to experience the principle of the Atma 
which transcends everything. In order to experience the 
Atma, you should pursue spiritual education along 
with secular education. Worldly education imparts 
only bookish knowledge. What we require is not super- 
ficial knowledge but practical knowledge. Can you 
know the taste of sweets like Laddu, Jilebi, etc., by 
merely reading their names in books? Only when you 
put them on your tongue will you experience their 
sweetness. Likewise, you can experience bliss only by 
practising what you have learnt. That is practical 
knowledge. Modern system of education is based only 
on bookish knowledge. There are many so-called edu- 
cated people in our country. What is the help they are 
rendering to the country? Are they involving them- 
selves in any activity that would benefit society and 
make people happy? No. They are leading such mis- 
erable lives that neither they are happy nor do they 
make others happy. Of what use is their education? 


In spite of his education and intelligence, a 
foolish man will not know his true Self and a 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 347 


mean-minded person will not give up his 
wicked qualities. Modern education leads only 
to argumentation, not to total wisdom. What is 
the use of acquiring worldly education if it 
cannot lead you to immortality? Acquire the 
knowledge that will make you immortal. 


(Telugu Poem) 


You should pursue such education which will 
benefit you and also society at large. There are num- 
erous unfortunate people who are suffering. Enquire, 
whether you are making any effort to alleviate the suf- 
fering of at least one of them. Your education is mean- 
ingless if it does not confer happiness to you and your 
fellow beings. 


Today students are acquiring various degrees 
like M.Sc., M.B.A., Ph.D., etc., But are they using 
their education for the welfare of society? They merely 
fill their heads with bookish knowledge, go to the 
examination hall and empty their heads. No one is 
making any effort to know the purpose of education 
and its inner significance. No doubt, the students are 
intelligent and noble-hearted. But they are taking to 
wrong ways for lack of proper guidance. It is the duty 
of the parents as well as the teachers to show them the 
correct path. Some parents may not be educated so as 
to guide the students on the right path. What about the 
teachers in school? They concentrate on imparting 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 348 


bookish knowledge and do not make any effort to 
foster purity among the students. We should therefore 
understand the essence of education, put it into practice 
and experience bliss. 


Ishwarchandra Vidyasagar showed how educa- 
tion should be utilised for the service of others. Born in 
a village near Kolkata in a poor family, Ishwarchandra 
Vidyasagar acquired knowledge by dint of his hard 
work. True to his name, he was an ocean of knowl- 
edge. In his school days, he studied under street lights 
at night as there was no electricity in his home. His 
mother used to shed tears seeing her son’s ordeals. He 
would console her, saying, “Mother, if I work today, I 
will be happy later”. Na Sukhat Labhyate Sukham (one 
cannot derive happiness out of happiness). It is only 
out of difficulties that one can derive happiness. He 
worked hard and completed his education. As he was 
reputed for his oratorial skill, people would gather in 
large numbers to listen to his speeches. All that he 
spoke had a great impact on the people because he had 
a pure and compassionate heart. 


Once he was invited to make a speech in a col- 
lege. An I.C.S. officer was also traveling. Both of them 
got down at the same station. The officer started look- 
ing for a coolie to carry his suitcase. Seeing this, Vid- 
yasagar volunteered to carry it. The officer handed 
over his suitcase to him. Vidyasagar was happy that he 
got an opportunity to serve. He asked him, “Sir, where 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 349 


should we go?” The officer replied, “Take me to where 
Vidyasagar is going to address a meeting today. I came 
all the way to listen to him.” Vidyasagar smiled and 
took him to the meeting place. The officer offered him 
some money but Vidyasagar politely refused, “Sir, I 
carried your suitcase only to help you, not for money.” 
The meeting was about to commence. Everybody was 
eagerly awaiting Vidyasagar’s arrival. As soon as Vi1- 
dyasagar arrived, he was garlanded and was given a 
grand welcome. The I.C.S. officer instantly recognised 
Vidyasagar as the one who had carried his suitcase. He 
repented and thought to himself, “Though he is highly 
educated, how simple and humble he is!” 


One who has ego will not be respected even by 
his own wife and children. Vidyasagar had no trace of 
ego in him. He held the audience spellbound with his 
speech. Time and again they clapped and expressed 
their appreciation. He did not exhibit his scholarship. 
He spoke from the depths of his heart and made a last- 
ing impression on the people. His speech was based on 
his experiences in life and not on bookish knowledge. 


Students Should Revive The Ancient Glory Of 
Bharat 


Even today there are many such noble person- 
alities. Bharat is a very sacred land but, unfortunately, 
the Bharatiyas themselves are not able to understand 
and appreciate the greatness of Bharat. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 350 


Due to the absence of fear of sin and love for 
God, humanness has declined in human beings. 
This is detrimental to universal peace. 


(Telugu Poem) 


Forbearance is the real beauty in this sacred 
land of Bharat. Of all the rituals, adherence to 
truth is the greatest penance. The nectarean 
feeling in this country is the feeling of love to- 
ward one’s mother. Character is valued far 
higher than the very life itself. People have for- 
gotten the basic principles of this great culture 
and are imitating Western culture today. Alas! 
What has happened to this country? 


(Telugu Poem) 


What an ideal and sacred country our Bharat is! 
But today it is facing hardships as the Bharatiyas 
themselves have not understood their culture and are 
unable to adhere to its principles. 


Students! Boys and Girls! 


Remember the glorious history of Bharat and 
its rich cultural heritage. People from other lands 
visited this sacred land in the past and admired its 
greatness. 


Fill your hearts with compassion. Spare no 
effort to alleviate the suffering of your fellow beings. 
You may not be in a position to help everybody but 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 351 


alleviate the suffering of at least a few and experience 
bliss. If you have ten rupees in your pocket, give at 
least one rupee to the needy. The culture of Bharat 
teaches: Na Karmana Na Prajaya Dhanena Thyage- 
naikena Amrutatthwamanasu (immortality is not at- 
tained through action, progeny or wealth; it is attained 
only by sacrifice). Help everyone to the extent pos- 
sible. Charity is the true ornament for the hand, truth is 
the true necklace. These are the true ornaments that 
one should aspire to possess. When you become the 
possessors of these precious jewels, there is no need 
for any other jewels. 


Develop compassion and spirit of sacrifice and 
earn a good name. Do away with all evil qualities like 
anger, pride, hatred and jealousy. Any act of charity or 
service that you undertake will prove futile if you do 
not give up bad qualities. Develop love, share it with 
others, and make them happy. Only then will your edu- 
cation become meaningful. This is the service that you 
are expected to render to your motherland. You don’t 
need to undertake gigantic service projects or construct 
big schools. Serve society as per your capacity. 
Whatever activity you undertake, let it be suffused 
with love. There is no wealth greater than love. 


Benedictory address, 20th Convocation of SSSTHL 
22.11.2001, Prasanthi Nilayam 


23 


Self-confidence And Equanimity Lead 
To Divine Bliss 


The entire universe is under the control of God. 
God can be easily won over by Truth. Truth is 
the might of the noble and therefore in this 
world the noble ones verily embody the su- 
preme God. 


(Sanskrit Verse) 


Embodiments of Divine Love! 


EVERY man aspires for happiness and wants 
to avoid sorrow. But in this world, truth and untruth, 
righteousness and unrighteousness, justice and injus- 
tice pass and change with time. Man should have faith 
in the ultimate principle out of which both good and 
evil arise. Everyday man experiences happiness and 
sorrow, welcomes affections and aversions and invites 
worries and misery. How can man be at peace under 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 354 


these conditions? The true man is one who believes in 
equanimity in both pain and pleasure. In the same way 
as one welcomes happiness, he should be able to 
welcome sorrows also. You should trust the Divine and 
experience His love in your hearts. If you want to be 
respected by everyone, you should respect everyone. 
Whether one is rich or poor, noble or ignoble, every- 
one has self-respect. One should put in effort to 
safeguard one’s self-respect. One who has true self- 
respect respects everyone. 


(Sanskrit Verse) 


There is nothing new that I can tell you today. 
Everyone should attain bliss. Everyone should conquer 
sorrow and develop true love, and experience divinity. 
This is My principal message to you today. 


Recognise The Principle Of Ardhanareeswara 


Man is not only invaluable, he is a noble being 
too. His heart is very valuable; his mind is sweet and 
his life-principle is eternal. Everyone should recognise 
this truth and develop sweetness in heart. The most 
important fortune that you have to aspire for today, is 
love. 


You do not know the greatness of human life. 
God Himself comes down in human form. In every 
man there is divinity. The name, ‘Bhavani Sankara’ 
signifies this truth. ‘Bhavani Sankara’ stands for the 
embodiment of Siva and Sakthi. ‘Bhavani’ symbolises 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 355 


Sraddha (sincerity of purpose) and ‘Sankara’ sym- 
bolises Viswasa (faith). When Goddess Bhavani 
symbolising Sraddha is present, there dances Siva who 
stands for faith. Life becomes useless without sincerity 
of purpose and faith. But today man lacks faith though 
both ‘Bhavani’ and ‘Sankara’ reside in him. The entire 
creation is the principle of Ardhanareeswara the 
embodiment of both masculine and feminine principles. 
Every person should try to recognise the divinity 
within himself. There is no spirituality higher than this. 
Adoring this ‘Bhavani Sankara’ principle is the 
primary duty of every man. 


If a man today is under the sway of sorrow and 
misery, his mind is responsible for it. Happiness and 
sorrow, affections and aversions, and the sensual 
pleasures that man experiences today arise out of his 
mind. Since the mind is filled with the sense of duality 
you suffer all these. When the mind is trained to see 
the oneness of all creation, there will not be perver- 
sions of any kind. In this dual world, the gain from 
sorrow is more than that out of happiness. The saints 
and the sages of ancient times, who have become 
immortal in history, aspired for hardships rather than 
happiness. The joy that arises out of hardships is more 
lasting than that gained from happiness. We should not 
be averse to sorrow. We should not look for happiness 
alone. Eternal bliss is our true friend and not ephem- 
eral happiness. In the great epic Mahabharata, when 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 356 


Kunthi fell at the feet of Krishna, He asked her, 
“Mother, what do you want?” She answered, “Krishna, 
always bestow upon me only adversities. I loved and 
adored you more intensely only during my hardships. 
In fact, when I was the queen of King Pandu I never 
thought of You. Only from the time my sons went into 
a life of exile in the forest and suffered various pri- 
vations, my love and faith grew in strength. Kindly 
grant me only difficulties.” We have to develop equa- 
nimity in both joy and sorrow. It is the true sign of 
wisdom. 


Embodiments of Love! 


There are many persons in the world who have 
made history. All of them always welcomed trials and 
tribulations whereas others aspired only for happiness. 
Since sorrows are more beneficial to man than 
happiness, God has created both. 


What does the word ‘Bhagawan’ mean? ‘Bha’ 
represents effulgence. “Ga’ signifies the one who 
radiates effulgence and ‘Va’ symbolises the power to 
propagate effulgence. Therefore, ‘Bhagawan’ is one 
who spreads the shine of effulgence everywhere. He 
has no form of any kind. He is subtler than space and 
the atom. How can you attribute any form to such a 
One? He fills the entire universe, but is not attached to 
anything. ‘Brahma’ - God is in you and you are in 
‘Brahma.’ Since we see duality in such non-dualistic 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 357 


principle, we suffer many sorrows. Though He has no 
particular form, all forms are His. 


God Is Not Separate From You 


The whole of creation emerges from truth and 
merges back into it. There is no place devoid of truth. 
That is the glory of unsullied truth. Likewise God is 
all-pervasive. That is why Bhagawadgita declares, All 
hands and feet are His, all heads and eyes are His, all 
ears are His and He permeates and transcends 
everything. Man has to find and adore God within. But 
man does not recognise this truth; he thinks that God is 
separate from him and wastes his time and life in futile 
activities. Indian culture embodies the principle that 
does not change with time, even when aeons pass, and 
it is beginningless and endless. This principle neither 
waxes nor wanes with time; is neither created nor 
destroyed, and is imperishable. He is the eternal one 
with no birth and death. He has neither beginning nor 
end. Neither can He be slain, nor is He diminishable. 
He is the eternal Atma who resides in everyone. How 
should we worship such God? We should worship Him 
as our own Self. We should set aside the feeling that 
God is different from us. There is no temple dearer to 
God than the human heart. He loves this abode of 
heart. This is His true residence. We should not look 
for Him outside us. 


When I was coming here this morning, every- 
one wished me “Happy Birthday!” I am always happy. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 358 


You have to wish a Happy Birthday to one who does 
not have happiness. I do not need it. If you want to 
attain happiness, you should understand that happi- 
ness is union with God. Every human being imagines 
that happiness is somewhere outside him and strives to 
attain it through various activities. How did the ancient 
sages adore God? They worshipped Him with the 
flower of sacrifice and offered their love to Him. They 
welcomed God as the embodiment of truth. They 
believed in love, kindness and oneness. They offered 
Him the throne of their hearts. Only through such 
sublime adoration, they attained Divinity. Therefore, 
even today’s man is ought to install God in the altar of 
his heart and adore Him there. 


Face Ups And Downs With Equanimity 


You should face everything in life with a smile 
of happiness. In this dualistic world, it is natural that 
gain and pain alternate. You cannot avoid it. Do not 
despair when adversities confront you nor exult when 
success blesses you. Any adversity is a stepping-stone 
to eternal bliss. Only when the Pandavas suffered 
many hardships during the thirteen years of their exile, 
they could secure the grace of Krishna and the Lord 
was always with them everywhere. The Pandavas had 
correct priorities in their lives. God was first to them, 
then came the world, and ‘I’ came last. But the Kau- 
ravas had their priorities the other way. They placed ‘I’ 
first, world next and God last. That is why they lost the 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 359 


battle of life. Bliss eluded them. One who has won the 
proximity to God is always blissful. 


Embodiments of love! 


The rind of bitterness of sorrow covers the 
sweet juice of joy in the orange fruit of life. When you 
peel out the rind, you get the sweet juice. God is the 
very essence of joy—Raso Vai Saha. 


When Lincoln was young, he led a poor life. 
He could not afford even proper clothes. His affluent 
friends in school teased and ridiculed him over his 
poverty. One day, unable to bear the ridicule, he 
poured out his heart to his mother and explained to her 
how he was being insulted and humiliated. His mother 
consoled him saying, “My dear son, all this will do you 
good. This should not deter you from developing self- 
respect. Self respect is your treasure and God!” These 
words of encouragement inspired Lincoln and gave 
him strength to face the ups and downs of life with 
equanimity. After he passed out of the university, his 
admirers and well-wishers who had recognised the 
strength of his character enthused him to contest the 
elections. Lincoln, being a man of great humility, 
hesitated initially. But he remembered the words of 
encouragement tendered to him by his mother when he 
was young. Finally, he contested the elections, 
emerged victorious and became the President of 
America. Self-confidence and self-respect in him, 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 360 


developed by his mother, were responsible for his rise 
to the highest position of authority in the country. A 
person without self-confidence, even if thrust into 
exalted position, is bound to slip down. 


Students! 


You should consider self-confidence as the 
most important asset in life. Without self-confidence 
you can never attain bliss. Therefore, try to develop 
self-confidence in order to lead a good life. You are 
God yourself, God is the eternal resident of your heart. 
Therefore, there is nothing greater than your own heart. 
You should love everyone and hate none. They may 
hate you but you should not hate others. That is what I 
demonstrate in my life. My life is My message. Some 
people may hate and criticise Me, but I will not hate or 
criticise anyone. When you practise this principle, you 
can also attain the Divine that Sai Baba is. Jf Sai has 
attained such fame and reputation, what is responsible 
for it? It is His Love Principle alone. This Love is My 
real property and treasure. You should also set ideals 
in the society by developing self-confidence and by 
sharing your love with others. 


Be always happy and strive for national welfare 
and aspire for the well being of all nations. May every- 
one be happy and peaceful - Loka Samastha Sukhino 
Bhavantu. Only then will you attain bliss. Develop 
broad-mindedness and put aside narrow-mindedness. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 361 


Even if others trouble you and pose problems for you, 
bear it with patience believing that it will do you only 
good. The body, which is made up of five elements, has 
to fall and perish one day or the other. The indweller 
of the body is eternal, is birthless and deathless and is 
not bound by any chains of bondage. I fact, this 
indweller is God Himself! When a beggar begs for 
food, he utters, Bhavati Bhiksham Dehi! He is really 
begging from the ‘Dehi’ — the indweller and not you. 
Recognise the truth that he is praying to God in you for 
alms. It is your ignorance if you think that he is beg- 
ging from you. It amounts to arrogance. Divinity re- 
sides in everyone irrespective of whether one is a 
prince or a pauper. You have to adore this divine prin- 
ciple in everyone and love them, but love should be 
selfless. Love bereft of attachment to body flows 
equally towards everyone. Body consciousness leads to 
narrow-mindedness. Your relationship with God is 
from heart to heart and love to love!’ 


Love And Be Loved 


I never invited anyone here for this function; in 
fact, no invitation was printed. If so many people have 
gathered here, the reason is their love for Me. It is a 
matter of great bliss to be loved by so many. There are 
many who cannot even win the love of parents. To win 
over the hearts of so many is itself a sign of Divinity. I 
love everyone and everyone loves Me. Those who love 
Me are not only the ones present here but there are 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 362 


crores of people spread all over the world. Young and 
old love Me alike. This morning devotees gathered in 
large numbers even at 3 O’ clock seeking entry into 
Sai Kulwant Hall. Their enthusiasm was boundless. 
There may be people who queue up to enter a theatre 
or to get into a bus. But here, their love and attraction 
for Swami is so much that they do not bother about any 
hardships and inconveniences, to have the darshan of 
Swami. This type of love cannot be earned even by 
many years of penance. You have the fortune today of 
enjoying bliss in the Divine presence. You must have 
done many lives of penance, performed many sacri- 
fices and undertaken varied spiritual austerities in 
order to secure this divine bliss. It is My love which 
attracts so much of love from others. Therefore, do not 
hurt anyone by your harsh words and do not enter into 
any evil paths. Recognise the truth that God pervades 
everything from microcosm to macrocosm. This truth 
dwells in you but you are not aware of it. That is your 
mistake. You are the embodiment of ‘Bhavani San- 
kara’— Sraddha and Viswasa (sincerity of purpose and 
faith). With self-confidence, you can achieve anything 
in the world. 


You need not undertake any difficult spiritual 
practices to attain Divinity. You need not fast or do 
any chanting or meditation. Love Him from the depths 
of your heart. Devotees want to offer many types of 
service to God. These are the characteristics of faith. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 363 


When you have such faith, you should not sully your 
sacred body by partaking of wrong food. Gradually, 
you should intensify your love for God, fear of sin and 
morality in society. Morality rules the society only 
when people have love for God since fear of sin fol- 
lows it. Today people without such fear of sin commit 
heinous acts. This contradicts the very human nature. 
There are twelve types of worries that haunt man start- 
ing from birth to death. Then how can he lead a life 
without worries? All these worries are related to the 
body and arise from the mind. If you master the mind, 
there is no scope for any worry. 


Thyagaraja said, “For a man who has con- 
quered his mind, is there any need for Mantra and 
Tantra —any strategies for attaining salvation?” As said 
many times by Swami, Oh, people of the world, 
develop love for Sai, which will destroy all your wor- 
ries. Such love can help others also to win over their 
sorrows. Do not be bogged down by worries. With 
prayer to God, you can achieve anything. It is not only 
true of Indians but there are many men and women of 
other countries who have achieved this. There are 
many who have attained fulfilment in life by practising 
the dicta of their mothers. Therefore, love your mother 
first and foremost. Then you will automatically love 
your father and also your teacher. Before you love your 
mother, you have to love your self. One who does not 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 364 


believe in oneself cannot believe one’s mother also. 
Faith in yourself and faith in God is the secret of 
greatness. 


Embodiments of Love! 


There are many birthday programmes in the 
evening also. You have been sitting here for a long 
time. You need rest and also food. Therefore, let us 
bring an end to this morning’s programme. Keep 
ruminating over what you have heard from Swami. 
Follow Swami’s commands and you can attain every- 
thing and be victorious in all your endeavours. Take an 
oath today that you will develop self-confidence. 


Birthday Message, 23.11.2001, 
Prasanthi Nilayam 


24 


God Never Forsakes His Devotees 


It is only when people banish hatred and 
violence, develop love and realise that all are 
one can the earth be transformed into heaven. 


(Telugu Poem) 


Embodiments of Love! 


Sathyam Bruyath, Priyam Bruyath, Na Bruyath 
Sathyamapriyvam. 


SPEAK the truth, speak pleasantly and do not 
speak unpalatable truth. These three correspond to 
moral, righteous, and spiritual values, respectively. 
Man is the combination of these three values. Without 
waves, there can be no ocean. Without rays, there can 
be no sun. Likewise, one without love cannot be called 
a human being. Just as waves are for ocean, rays are 
for sun, so also love is for man. Hence, man should fill 
his life with love. He should neither hate anyone nor 
indulge in violence. He should fill his heart with com- 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 366 


passion. One with Daya (compassion) is Hridaya 
(heart). Ego and unlimited desires are responsible for 
wicked qualities in man. One with ego cannot have 
compassion in his heart. 


One should not lead a life of selfishness and 
self-interest. One should keep in mind the prevailing 
situation in the country and act accordingly. Man 
cannot lead a totally independent life. He has to 
depend on society. prakriti (nature) is a combination of 
vyashti (individual), samashti (society), srushti (crea- 
tion) and Parameshti (God). Vyashti should serve 
samashti and try to visualise Parameshti in srushti. 
Jesus said that the life of an individual was useless if 
he did not realise his duties toward society. Where 
there is unity there is purity, where there is purity there 
is divinity, where there is divinity there is bliss. People 
should recognise the intimate and inseparable relation- 
ship that exists between unity, purity and divinity. 


When Jesus was born, three Arabian kings 
visited him to pay their respects. One of them felt that 
the child would be a lover of God. The second one said 
that he would be the beloved of God and the third one 
felt that he was verily God. Opinions vary from person 
to person as each is different from the other. Our 
ancients visualised unity in diversity, whereas the 
modern man, due to the impact of Kali Age, fragments 
unity into diversity. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 367 


The Changeless Atma Envelops The Universe 


According to Vedanta, man is a combination of 
bhutakasa, chitthakasa and chidakasa. Bhutakasa 
corresponds to the body and all that is seen by the 
naked eye. All that is seen is bound to disappear, 
which means bhutakasa is transient and ephemeral. 
The sun, the stars and the milky way which are crores 
of miles away from earth, also come under bhutakasa. 
It constitutes all Bhutas (elements) and living beings. 
Such a vast bhutakasa is engulfed by chitthakasa. You 
can very well imagine the vastness of chitthakasa. 
Bhutakasa, consisting of sun, stars, rivers, oceans, etc., 
forms a tiny part of chitthakasa. You may wonder how 
it is possible. Whatever you see, for example, the sun, 
the stars, the oceans, the mountains, etc., get imprinted 
in your chittha. Likewise, the apparent world is con- 
tained in you as a small entity. Bhutakasa and chit- 
thakasa relate to the body and mind, respectively. 
There is a fundamental basis for these two, which is 
referred to as chidakasa by the Vedanta. This corres- 
ponds to the Atma. Human being is a combination of 
these three bhutakasa (body), chitthakasa (mind) and 
Chidakasa (Atma). The first refers to the one you think 
you are, the second, the one others think you are and 
the third, the one you really are. 


Man’s nature is infinite and immortal. Such a 
human life is looked down upon as low and mean. 
People deny the existence of the Atma as it cannot be 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 368 


perceived. Chidakasa symbolizes the Atma. It has no 
form. It is changeless and transcends time and space. 
The Vedanta describes this as Nirgunam, Niranjanam, 
Sanathana Niketanam, Nitya, Suddha, Buddha, Mukta, 
Nirmala Swarupinam (attributeless, pure, final abode, 
eternal, unsullied, enlightened, free and embodiment of 
sacredness). Bhutakasa corresponds to jagrat (waking 
state), chitthakasa to swapna (dream state) and 
chidakasa to sushupti (deep sleep). In chidakasa, one 
experiences only bliss. This can be understood by the 
fact that you experience peace when you have a good 
sleep at night. 


When you say, it is my body and my mind, it 
means that you are different from them. In fact, you 
are the master (Atma). Master the mind and be a mas- 
termind. How can man, being the master of everything, 
consider himself low and weak? Chidakasa is the true 
form of man. Bhutakasa, chitthakasa and chidakasa 
correspond to pratyaksham (direct), paroksham (indi- 
rect) and pavitram (sacred). Chidakasa transcends 
name and form. It is described as Sabda Brahmamayi, 
Charachamayi, Jyothirmayi, Vangmayi, Nityananda- 
mayi, Paratparamayi, Mayamayi and Sreemayi (God is 
the embodiment of sound, mobility and immobility, 
light, speech, eternal bliss, supreme majesty, delusion 
and wealth). 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 369 


Only The Body Dies, Not The Atma 


The Atma trascends the limitations of form. 
Buddha and Jesus made concerted efforts to have the 
vision of the Atma. Buddha realised that names, forms 
and physical relationships are transient. He said one 
should not get deluded by them. Yad Drishyam Than- 
nasyam (all that is seen is bound to perish). He studied 
various sacred texts and had an audience with many 
scholars but he was not satisfied. Ultimately, he came 
to the conclusion that one could attain Nirvana only 
through proper use of the five senses. No spiritual 
practice can yield the desired result if the senses are 
misused. Have sacred vision. Speak good words. Hear 
only what is good. Entertain noble thoughts. There is 
no greater spiritual practice than this. This was the 
teaching of Buddha. The same was taught by Jesus. 


The fishermen wanted Jesus to fulfill their 
worldly desires. Peter wanted more fish. But ultimate- 
ly, he realised the futility of worldly desires. He want- 
ed to go beyond the level of body and the mind as per 
Jesus’ teachings. Jesus told them to give up hatred and 
to love all and serve all. He exhorted them to develop 
faith in the principle of unity. Many disciples of Jesus 
interpreted his teachings in their own way. 


When he was being crucified, he heard an 
ethereal voice, “All are one my dear son, be alike to 
everyone”. When Mother Mary was shedding tears, 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 370 


Jesus told her, “death is the dress of life.’’ Death is like 
changing of dress. Do you find anybody wearing the 
same dress every day? Just as you change your dress 
every day, you change the body from birth to birth. 
The body has death, not the life principle. The Spirit is 
immortal and non-dual. To realise the non-dualistic 
nature of the Spirit was true wisdom, said Jesus. 
Advaita Darshanam Jnanam (Perception of the One 
without a second is true wisdom). 


Ekam Eva Adviteeyam Brahma (God 1s one 
without a second). Man attributes names and forms to 
God because of his worldly feelings and external 
tendencies (pravritti). Truly speaking, there is only one 
God. We sing in our Bhajans, Ek Prabhu Ke Anek Nam 
(one God has many names). Give up body attachment. 
Only then can you develop attachment toward the 
Atma. As you are endowed with a physical body, you 
have to discharge your duties diligently. However, do 
not be deluded with the feeling that this is permanent. 
All the physical relationships are like passing clouds 
and are subject to change. Truth alone is that which 
does not undergo change. That is chidakasa, the prin- 
ciple of Atma. 


Forms May Vary, But The Spirit Is One 


A mother has four sons. The first son asks her 
for red colour juice, the second for green colour juice, 
the third for black colour juice and the fourth for white 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 371 


colour juice. Then what does the mother do? Being an 
intelligent mother, she pours the same juice in red, 
green, black and white colour glasses to satisfy her 
sons. Our bodies are like those glasses. We should not 
go by differences in bodies. We should realise the 
oneness of the spirit within. The cups and colours may 
be different but the juice (Atma) is the same in all. 
Body is bound to perish one day or the other. You will 
have to face misery if you are attached to the body. In 
order to attain immortality and experience bliss, you 
have to transcend name and form. So long as you have 
a body, you have to take care of it. But you should not 
be unduly attached to it or worried about it. Ignorance 
is the root cause of worry. Whatever has to happen will 
happen. So, never give scope to worry. Develop faith 
in the principle of Atma. This was the main teaching of 
Jesus. 


Mathew was one of the twelve disciples of 
Jesus. He was an income tax collector by profession 
and used to meet the fishermen to collect taxes. Jesus 
used to impart sacred teachings to the fishermen every 
day. Mathew noted down all His teachings and wrote 
the Holy Bible. Later on, many others wrote the Bible 
based on their own feelings. Nowhere has Jesus ever 
stated that he was God or the Master. He always 
addressed God as his Father. He has shown the path to 
experience unity. He never gave scope for multiplicity. 
He always said that all were divine. 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 3/2 


Hundreds of years ago, in North India, there 
lived a person who used to constantly repeat, “I am 
God”. People used to wonder at this declaration and 
considered him to be a mad person. But, some scholars 
developed hatred toward him. They felt that even after 
studying various texts and acquiring knowledge, they 
did not dare make such a claim. They approached the 
king and lodged a complaint against him. Who is a true 
scholar? Pandita Samadarshanaha (one with equal- 
mindedness alone is a true scholar). But those scholars 
lacked equal-mindedness and threatened the king that 
they would leave the country if that person was not 
punished. The king asked the scholars as to what could 
be done. At the behest of the Pandits, the king ordered 
that his legs be cut off. Even when his legs were being 
amputated, he did not feel the pain. He was saying, “I 
am God, I am God.” Even the blood oozing from his 
tortured limb was proclaiming, “I am God. I am God”. 
Then the king felt repentant for having paid heed to the 
words of foolish scholars. 


Love And Unity Were The Essence Of Jesus’ 
Teachings 


From the beginning, Jesus never said that he 
was God. He only said that God was his father. He 
taught people that there was only one God and all were 
his children. His critics complained to the head priest 
against Jesus. The Priest knew that Jesus was speaking 
the truth. But they did not support Jesus in order to 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 373 


safeguard their own position. It was decided that Jesus 
should be crucified. The Governor issued the orders, 
but later he repented. When Jesus rose from the cross, 
he went on propagating the glory of Jesus. 


The Romans addressed Jesus as ‘persona’ 
meaning one of sacredness. The English word person 
has been derived from this. It means that there is 
divinity in everyone. That is why I address you as 
embodiments of divinity. I and you are one. There is 
divine spirit in everybody. The very self is called 
“persona”. There is no life principle without divinity. 
Sarvatah Panipadam Tat Sarvathokshi Siromukham, 
Sarvata Sruthimalloke Sarvamavruthya Thisthati (with 
hands, feet, eyes heads, mouth and ears pervading 
everything, He permeates the entire universe). Divinity 
pervades all forms. The Bible and the Quoran contain 
many sacred teachings. But foolish people who do not 
understand their teachings are taking to wrong ways. 


He who is known as Allah by Muslims, 

As Jehovah by Christian aspirants, 

As the Lotus-eyed Lord by the 
worshippers of Vishnu, 

As Sambhu, by those who revere Siva, 

Howsoever He is worshipped, He gladly 
responds, 

Grants the grace of fame and fortune. 

And showers happiness and joy. He is the 
One, 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 374 


The Supreme Self. Know Him as 
Paramatma. 


(Telugu Poem) 


You are attributing various names and forms to 
God for your own satisfaction, but God is essentially 
one. Be He Rama, Krishna, Allah or Jesus, all their 
teachings are meant for the emancipation of man. No 
religion preaches violence or to harm anybody. Some 
evil-minded people are misinterpreting the sacred 
teachings and are indulging in wicked deeds. All the 
noble souls have taught sacred things. They said, 
“Love all”. They did not preach hatred. God never tells 
anybody to kill others. No one has any right to kill the 
other because the same Atma is present in all. In the 
name of God, people are committing heinous crimes. It 
is not good for anybody. Love all, Serve all. You can- 
not always oblige but you can speak always obligingly. 
There is no God greater than love. Love is God, God is 
love. Live in love. Destroy wicked qualities. The mean- 
minded people try to attribute their meanness to God. 
It is a sign of ignorance. Do not pay heed to such 
people. Have faith in your own Self. Otherwise, you 
cannot have love for God. Due to defects in modern 
education system, love is diminishing in man day by 
day. Hatred is on the rise. Man is forgetting yathartha 
(truth) and thereby subjecting himself to anartha 
(danger). He has forgotten manavatva (humanness) by 
developing pashutva (animal tendency). True 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 375 


spirituality lies in destroying pashutva and trans- 
forming manavatva into Daivatva (Divinity). It is not 
possible to attain Divinity without getting rid of ani- 
mality. Today man is behaving like an animal because 
of his selfish love. Such a person can never enjoy 
happiness. He will always be immersed in misery. The 
more you love others, the greater will be the joy you 
experience. The more you develop hatred, the more 
miserable your life will be. 


Embodiments of Love! 
Jesus Maintained Equality Always 


Understand that God is the embodiment of 
Love and so also is man. Daivam Manusha Rupena 
(God takes the form of man). So, you are God. There is 
divinity even in animals. One hears cows and buffaloes 
mooing, Amba (Divine Mother). It only proves the 
existence of Divinity in them. 


When Jesus was a small boy, his parents took 
him to Jerusalem. After some time, mother Mary, not 
finding her son Jesus by her side, thought that he had 
lost his way in the crowd and searched for him 
frantically. Ultimately, she found him listening with 
rapt attention to the sermon of a priest in a synagogue. 
She hugged him and shed tears of joy. Then Jesus said, 
“Mother, why should you be worried when I am in the 
company of God, my Father.” In those days, people 
used to sacrifice pigeons in the temple of Jerusalem 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 376 


thinking that God would be pleased. Jesus sought to 
put an end to these cruel practices. Like Buddha, he 
preached non-violence. He went to the place where 
pigeons were sold and let them all free. The affected 
persons turned against him. But Jesus carried on 
regardless of their hostility. He did not attach any 
importance to praise or blame as they pertained to the 
body, not the Self. 


The same is stated in the Mahabharatha. When 
Krishna was given the Agratambulam (Prime honour) 
by the Pandavas, the wicked Sisupala started show- 
ering abuses on Krishna. He said to Krishna: 


Do you think that you deserve this honour 
because you stole the Saris of the Gopikas 
when they were having a bath? Do not indulge 
in self agrandisement, shut up! 


(Telugu Poem) 


Hearing Sisupala abusing Krishna in this 
manner, Dharmaraja shed tears. Krishna hurled the 
very plate in which the offering was made to Him at 
Sisupala which turned into a discus and beheaded him. 
At that moment the blood of Sisupala splashed at the 
feet of Krishna. Seeing this, Dharmaraja became per- 
plexed. He said, “Krishna, Sisupala abused You to no 
end. How is it that his blood fell at Your feet?” Smi- 
lingly Krishna replied, “Dharmaraja, praise or blame 
relates to the body and not to the Atma. Moreover, 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 377 


Sisupala was thinking of Me and repeating My name 
all along. He might have done it with hatred but I am 
not concerned about it.” 


In the Kali Age, chanting of the Lord’s Name is 
the only way to liberation. 


(Sanskrit Verse) 


Any mighty task can be achieved by chanting 
the Divine Name. For spiritual practices like medita- 
tion and penance, a specific time and place are 
required. But for chanting the Divine Name, no such 
restriction need to be followed. Wherever you are, 
whatever you may be doing, you can chant the Divine 
Name. Sarvada Sarva Kaleshu Sarvatra Hari Chin- 
tanam (everywhere, at all times, under all circum- 
stances contemplate on Hari (God). 


One of the previous speakers, a member of the 
Messengers of Sathya Sai, prayed that Swami should 
never forget them. To think that God would forget 
anybody is only your imagination, the reflection, reac- 
tion and resound of your inner feelings. God never 
forgets anybody. It is only the devotees who remember 
or forget God. God loves all equally. So, develop love. 
Eschew all evil tendencies. 


The modern education system is giving rise to 
bad qualities in students. One with bad qualities cannot 
be called a student at all. As Srinivasan said, Sai 
students are not like that. Some people pose to be Sai 


Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 378 


students and indulge in wicked activities. But our 
students are highly sacred and virtuous. None can point 
an accusing finger at them. Today many people are 
misusing the name of Sai for their own selfish gains. I 
am happy even with such people because any way they 
are chanting the Divine Name. Only repetition of 
God’s name will liberate you. Do not give scope to any 
evil qualities. Never give a chance for accusation. Lead 
your lives suffused with love. Consider love as God. 
There is nothing greater than love. 


Christmas Message, 25-12-2001 
Prasanthi Nilayam 


